{"id": "54957", "revid": "49566734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54957", "title": "Younger Dryas", "text": "Time period c. 12,900\u201311,700 years ago\nThe Younger Dryas (YD, Greenland Stadial GS-1) was a period in Earth's geologic history that occurred circa 12,900 to 11,700 years Before Present (BP). It is primarily known for the sudden or \"abrupt\" cooling in the Northern Hemisphere, when the North Atlantic Ocean cooled and annual air temperatures decreased by ~ over North America, in Europe and up to in Greenland, in a few decades. Cooling in Greenland was particularly rapid, taking place over just 3 years or less. At the same time, the Southern Hemisphere experienced warming. This period ended as rapidly as it began, with dramatic warming over ~50 years, the transition from the glacial Pleistocene epoch into the current Holocene. \nThe Younger Dryas onset was not fully synchronized; in the tropics, the cooling was spread out over several centuries, and the same was true of the early-Holocene warming. Even in the Northern Hemisphere, temperature change was highly seasonal, with much colder winters, cooler springs, yet no change or even slight warming during the summer. Substantial changes in precipitation also took place, with cooler areas experiencing substantially lower rainfall, while warmer areas received more of it. In the Northern Hemisphere, the length of the growing season declined. Land ice cover experienced little net change, but sea ice extent had increased, contributing to ice\u2013albedo feedback. This increase in albedo was the main reason for net global cooling of . \nDuring the preceding period, the B\u00f8lling\u2013Aller\u00f8d Interstadial, rapid warming in the Northern Hemisphere was offset by the equivalent cooling in the Southern Hemisphere. This \"polar seesaw\" pattern is consistent with changes in thermohaline circulation (particularly the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation or AMOC), which greatly affects how much heat is able to go from the Southern Hemisphere to the North. The Southern Hemisphere cools and the Northern Hemisphere warms when the AMOC is strong, and the opposite happens when it is weak. The scientific consensus is that severe AMOC weakening explains the climatic effects of the Younger Dryas.1148 It also explains why the Holocene warming had proceeded so rapidly once the AMOC change was no longer counteracting the increase in carbon dioxide levels.\nAMOC weakening causing polar seesaw effects is also consistent with the accepted explanation for Dansgaard\u2013Oeschger events, with YD likely to have been the last and the strongest of these events. However, there is some debate over what caused the AMOC to become so weak in the first place. The hypothesis historically most supported by scientists was an interruption from an influx of fresh, cold water from North America's Lake Agassiz into the Atlantic Ocean. While there is evidence of meltwater travelling via the Mackenzie River, this hypothesis may not be consistent with the lack of sea level rise during this period, so other theories have also emerged. Another proposed explanation is an extraterrestrial impact, but this is rejected by most experts. A volcanic eruption as an initial trigger for cooling and sea ice growth has been proposed more recently, and the presence of anomalously high levels of volcanism immediately preceding the onset of the Younger Dryas has been confirmed in both ice cores and cave deposits. \nEtymology.\nThe Younger Dryas is named after the alpine\u2013tundra wildflower \"Dryas octopetala\", because its fossils are abundant in the European (particularly Scandinavian) sediments dating to this timeframe. The two earlier geologic time intervals where this flower was abundant in Europe are the Oldest Dryas (approx. 18,500-14,000 BP) and Older Dryas (~14,050\u201313,900 BP), respectively. On the contrary, \"Dryas octopetala\" was rare during the B\u00f8lling\u2013Aller\u00f8d Interstadial. Instead, European temperatures were warm enough to support trees in Scandinavia, as seen at the B\u00f8lling and Aller\u00f8d sites in Denmark.\nIn Ireland, the Younger Dryas has also been known as the Nahanagan Stadial, and in Great Britain it has been called the Loch Lomond Stadial. In the Greenland Summit ice core chronology, the Younger Dryas corresponds to Greenland Stadial 1 (GS-1). The preceding Aller\u00f8d warm period (interstadial) is subdivided into three events: Greenland Interstadial-1c to 1a (GI-1c to GI-1a).\nClimate.\nAs with the other geologic periods, paleoclimate during the Younger Dryas is reconstructed through proxy data such as traces of pollen, ice cores and layers of marine and lake sediments. Collectively, this evidence shows that significant cooling across the Northern Hemisphere began around 12,870 \u00b1 30 years BP. It was particularly severe in Greenland, where temperatures declined by , in an abrupt fashion. Temperatures at the Greenland summit were up to colder than at the start of the 21st century. \nStrong cooling of around had also taken place in Europe. Icefields and glaciers formed in upland areas of Great Britain, while many lowland areas developed permafrost, implying a cooling of and a mean annual temperature no higher than . North America also became colder, particularly in the eastern and central areas. While the Pacific Northwest region cooled by , cooling in western North America was generally less intense. While the Orca Basin in the Gulf of Mexico still experienced a drop in sea surface temperature of 2.4 \u00b1 0.6\u00b0C, land areas closer to it, such as Texas, the Grand Canyon area and New Mexico, ultimately did not cool as much as the continental interior. The Southeastern United States became warmer and wetter than before. There was warming in and around the Caribbean Sea, and in West Africa.\nIt was once believed that the Younger Dryas cooling started at around the same time across the Northern Hemisphere. However, varve (sedimentary rock) analysis carried out in 2015 suggested that the cooling proceeded in two stages: first along latitude 56\u201354\u00b0N, 12,900\u201313,100\u00a0years ago, and then further north, 12,600\u201312,750\u00a0years ago. Evidence from Lake Suigetsu cores in Japan and the Puerto Princesa cave complex in the Philippines shows that the onset of the Younger Dryas in East Asia was delayed by several hundred years relative to the North Atlantic. Further, the cooling was uniform throughout the year, but had a distinct seasonal pattern. In most places in the Northern Hemisphere, winters became much colder than before, but springs cooled by less, while there was either no temperature change or even slight warming during the summer. An exception appears to have taken place in what is now Maine, where winter temperatures remained stable, yet summer temperatures decreased by up to . \nWhile the Northern Hemisphere cooled, considerable warming occurred in the Southern Hemisphere. Sea surface temperatures were warmer by , and Antarctica, South America (south of Venezuela) and New Zealand all experienced warming. The net temperature change was a relatively modest cooling of . Temperature changes of the Younger Dryas lasted 1,150\u20131,300\u00a0years. According to the International Commission on Stratigraphy, the Younger Dryas ended around 11,700\u00a0years ago, although some research places it closer to 11,550\u00a0years ago. \nThe end of Younger Dryas was also abrupt: in previously cooled areas, warming to previous levels took place over 50\u201360 years. The tropics experienced more gradual temperature recovery over several centuries; the exception was in tropical Atlantic areas such as Costa Rica, where temperature change was similar to Greenland's. The Holocene warming then proceeded across the globe, following an increase in carbon dioxide levels during the YD period (from ~210 ppm to ~275 ppm). \nIce cover.\nYounger Dryas cooling was often accompanied by glacier advance and lowering of the regional snow line, with evidence found in areas such as Scandinavia, the Swiss Alps and the Dinaric Alps in the Balkans, northern ranges of North America's Rocky Mountains, Two Creeks Buried Forest in Wisconsin and western parts of the New York State, and in the Pacific Northwest, including the Cascade Range. The entire Laurentide ice sheet had advanced between west Lake Superior and southeast Quebec, leaving behind a layer of rock debris (moraine) dated to this period. Southeastern Alaska appears to have escaped glaciation; speleothem calcite deposition continued in the region despite being retarded, indicating the absence of permafrost and glaciation. \nOn the other hand, the warming of the Southern Hemisphere led to ice loss in Antarctica, South America and New Zealand. Moreover, while Greenland as a whole had cooled, glaciers had only grown in the north of the island, and they had retreated from the rest of Greenland's coasts. This was likely driven by the strengthened Irminger Current. The Jabllanica mountain range in the Balkans also experienced ice loss and glacial retreat: this was likely caused by the drop in annual precipitation, which would have otherwise frozen and helped to maintain the glaciers. Unlike now, the glaciers were still present in northern Scotland, but they had thinned during the Younger Dryas.\nThe amount of water contained within glaciers directly influences global sea levels - sea level rise occurs if the glaciers retreat, and it drops if glaciers grow. Altogether, there appears to have been little change in sea level throughout the Younger Dryas. This is in contrast to rapid increases before and after, such as the Meltwater Pulse 1A. On the coasts, glacier advance and retreat also affects relative sea level. Western Norway experienced a relative sea level rise of as the Scandinavian ice sheet advanced. Notably, ice sheet advance in this area appears to have begun about 600 years before the global onset of the Younger Dryas. Underwater, the deposits of methane clathrate - methane frozen into ice - remained stable throughout the Younger Dryas, including during the rapid warming as it ended.\nWeather systems.\nAs the Northern Hemisphere cooled and the Southern Hemisphere warmed, the thermal equator would have shifted to the south. Because trade winds from either hemisphere cancel each other out above the thermal equator in a calm, heavily clouded area known as the Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ), a change in its position affects wind patterns elsewhere. For instance, in East Africa, the sediments of Lake Tanganyika were mixed less strongly during this period, indicating weaker wind systems in this area. Shifts in atmospheric patterns are believed to be the main reason why Northern Hemisphere summers generally did not cool during the Younger Dryas.\nSince winds carry moisture in the form of clouds, these changes also affect precipitation. Thus, evidence from the pollen record shows that some areas have become very arid, including Scotland, the North American Midwest, Anatolia and southern China. As North Africa, including the Sahara Desert, became drier, the amount of dust blown by wind had also increased. Other areas became wetter including northern China (possibly excepting the Shanxi region)\nBiosphere.\nThe Younger Dryas was initially discovered around the start of the 20th century, through paleobotanical and lithostratigraphic studies of Swedish and Danish bog and lake sites, particularly the Aller\u00f8d clay pit in Denmark. The analysis of fossilized pollen had consistently shown how \"Dryas octopetala\", a plant which only thrives in glacial conditions, began to dominate where forests were able to grow during the preceding B-A Interstadial. This makes the Younger Dryas a key example of how biota responded to abrupt climate change.\nFor instance, in what is now New England, cool summers, combined with cold winters and low precipitation, resulted in a treeless tundra up to the onset of the Holocene, when the boreal forests shifted north. Along the southern margins of the Great Lakes, spruce dropped rapidly, while pine increased, and herbaceous prairie vegetation decreased in abundance, but increased west of the region. The central Appalachian Mountains remained forested during the Younger Dryas, but they were covered in spruce and tamarack boreal forests, switching to temperate broadleaf and mixed forests during the Holocene. Conversely, pollen and macrofossil evidence from near Lake Ontario indicates that cool, boreal forests persisted into the early Holocene. \nAn increase of pine pollen indicates cooler winters within the central Cascades. Speleothems from the Oregon Caves National Monument and Preserve in southern Oregon's Klamath Mountains yield evidence of climatic cooling contemporaneous to the Younger Dryas. On the Olympic Peninsula, a mid-elevation site recorded a decrease in fire, but forest persisted and erosion increased during the Younger Dryas, which suggests cool and wet conditions. Speleothem records indicate an increase in precipitation in southern Oregon, the timing of which coincides with increased sizes of pluvial lakes in the northern Great Basin. Pollen record from the Siskiyou Mountains suggests a lag in timing of the Younger Dryas, indicating a greater influence of warmer Pacific conditions on that range.\nEffects in the Rocky Mountain region were varied. Several sites show little to no changes in vegetation. In the northern Rockies, a significant increase in pines and firs suggests warmer conditions than before and a shift to subalpine parkland in places. That is hypothesized to be the result of a northward shift in the jet stream, combined with an increase in summer insolation as well as a winter snow pack that was higher than today, with prolonged and wetter spring seasons. \nHuman societies.\nNorthwestern Europe faced a significant population reduction during the first half of the Younger Dryas.\nThe Younger Dryas is often linked to the Neolithic Revolution, with the adoption of agriculture in the Levant. The cold and dry Younger Dryas arguably lowered the carrying capacity of the area and forced the sedentary early Natufian population into a more mobile subsistence pattern. Further climatic deterioration is thought to have brought about cereal cultivation. While relative consensus exists regarding the role of the Younger Dryas in the changing subsistence patterns during the Natufian, its connection to the beginning of agriculture at the end of the period is still being debated.\nCause.\nThe scientific consensus links the Younger Dryas with a significant reduction or shutdown of the thermohaline circulation, which circulates warm tropical waters northward through the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation (AMOC).1148 This is consistent with climate model simulations, as well as a range of proxy evidence, such as the decreased ventilation (exposure to oxygen from the surface) of the lowest layers of North Atlantic water. Cores from the western subtropical North Atlantic show that the \"bottom water\" lingered there for 1,000 years, twice the age of Late Holocene bottom waters from the same site around 1,500 BP. Further, the otherwise anomalous warming of the southeastern United States matches the hypothesis that as the AMOC weakened and transported less heat from the Caribbean towards Europe through the North Atlantic Gyre, more of it would stay trapped in the coastal waters.\nIt was originally hypothesized that the massive outburst from paleohistorical Lake Agassiz had flooded the North Atlantic via the Saint Lawrence Seaway, but little geological evidence for this hypothesis has been found. For instance, the salinity in the Saint Lawrence Seaway did not decline, as would have been expected from massive quantities of meltwater. More recent research instead shows that floodwaters followed a pathway along the Mackenzie River in present-day Canada, and sediment cores show that the strongest outburst had occurred right before the onset of Younger Dryas.\nOther factors are also likely to have played a major role in the Younger Dryas climate. For instance, some research suggests climate in Greenland was primarily affected by the melting of then-present Fennoscandian ice sheet, which could explain why Greenland experienced the most abrupt climatic changes during the YD. Climate models also indicate that a single freshwater outburst, no matter how large, would not have been able to weaken the AMOC for over 1,000 years, as required by the Younger Dryas timeline, unless other factors were also involved. Some modelling explains this by showing that the melting of Laurentide Ice Sheet led to greater rainfall over the Atlantic Ocean, freshening it and so helping to weaken the AMOC. Once the Younger Dryas began, lowered temperatures would have elevated snowfall across the Northern Hemisphere, increasing the ice-albedo feedback. Further, melting snow would be more likely to flood back into the North Atlantic than rainfall would, as less water would be absorbed into the frozen ground. Other modelling shows that sea ice in the Arctic Ocean could have been tens of meters thick by the onset of the Younger Dryas, so that it would have been able to shed icebergs into the North Atlantic, which would have been able to weaken the circulation consistently. Notably, changes in sea ice cover would have had no impact on sea levels, which is consistent with the absence of significant sea level rise during the Younger Dryas, and particularly during its onset. \nSome scientists also explain the lack of sea level rise during the Younger Dryas onset by connecting it with a volcanic eruption. Eruptions often deposit large quantities of sulfur dioxide particles in the atmosphere, where they are known as aerosols, and can have a large cooling effect by reflecting sunlight. This phenomenon can also be caused by anthropogenic sulfur pollution, where it is known as global dimming. Cooling from a high latitude volcanic eruption could have accelerated North Atlantic sea ice growth, finally tipping the AMOC sufficiently to cause the Younger Dryas. Cave deposits and glacial ice cores both contain evidence of at least one major volcanic eruption taking place in the northern hemisphere at a time close to Younger Dryas onset, perhaps even completely matching the stalagmite-derived date for the onset of the Younger Dryas event. It has been suggested that this eruption would have been stronger than any during the Common Era, some of which have been able to cause several decades of cooling. \nAccording to 1990s research, the Laacher See eruption (present-day volcanic lake in Rhineland-Palatinate, Germany) would have matched the criteria, but radiocarbon dating done in 2021 pushes the date of the eruption back to 13,006 years BP, or over a century before the Younger Dryas began. This analysis was also challenged in 2023, with some researchers suggesting that the radiocarbon analysis was tainted by magmatic carbon dioxide. For now, the debate continues without a conclusive proof or rejection of the volcanic hypothesis.\nYounger Dryas impact hypothesis.\nThe Younger Dryas impact hypothesis (YDIH) attributes the cooling to the impact of a disintegrating comet or asteroid. Because there is no impact crater dating to the Younger Dryas period, the proponents usually suggest the impact had struck the Laurentide ice sheet, so that the crater would have disappeared when the ice sheet melted during the Holocene, or that it was an airburst, which would only leave micro- and nanoparticles behind as evidence. Most experts reject the hypothesis, and argue that all of the microparticles are adequately explained by the terrestrial processes. For instance, mineral inclusions from YD-period sediments in Hall's Cave, Texas, have been interpreted by YDIH proponents as extraterrestrial in origin, while a paper published in 2020 argues that they are more likely to be volcanic. Opponents argue that there is no evidence for the massive wildfires which they assert would have been caused by an airburst of sufficient size to affect the thermohaline circulation, nor any mineralogical or geochemical evidence for the simultaneous human population declines and mass animal extinctions that would ensue from such an impact.\nSimilar events.\nStatistical analysis shows that the Younger Dryas is merely the last of 25 or 26 Dansgaard\u2013Oeschger events (D\u2013O events) over the past 120,000 years. These episodes are characterized by abrupt changes in the AMOC on timescales of decades or centuries. The Younger Dryas is the best known and best understood because it is the most recent, but it is fundamentally similar to the previous cold phases over the past 120,000 years. This similarity makes the impact hypothesis very unlikely, and it may also contradict the Lake Agassiz hypothesis. On the other hand, some research links volcanism with D\u2013O events, potentially supporting the volcanic hypothesis. \nEvents similar to the Younger Dryas appear to have occurred during the other terminations - a term used to describe a comparatively rapid transition from cold glacial conditions to warm interglacials. The analysis of lake and marine sediments can reconstruct past temperatures from the presence or absence of certain lipids and long chain alkenones, as these molecules are very sensitive to temperature. This analysis provides evidence for YD-like events during Termination\u00a0II (the end of the Marine Isotope Stage 6, ~130,000 years BP), III (the end of Marine Isotope Stage 8, ~243,000 years BP) and Termination\u00a0IV (the end of Marine Isotope Stage 10, ~337,000 years BP. When combined with additional evidence from ice cores and paleobotanical data, some have argued that YD-like events inevitably occur during every deglaciation.\nIn popular culture.\nThe 2004 film, \"The Day After Tomorrow\" depicts catastrophic climatic effects following the disruption of the North Atlantic Ocean circulation that results in a series of extreme weather events that create an abrupt climate change that leads to a new ice age.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54958", "revid": "15055814", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54958", "title": "Fats Waller", "text": "American jazz pianist and composer (1904\u20131943)\nThomas Wright \"Fats\" Waller (May 21, 1904\u00a0\u2013 December 15, 1943) was an American jazz pianist, organist, composer, and singer. His innovations in the Harlem stride style laid much of the basis for modern jazz piano. A widely popular star in the jazz and swing eras, he toured internationally, achieving critical and commercial success in the United States and Europe. His best-known compositions, \"Ain't Misbehavin'\" and \"Honeysuckle Rose\", were inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame in 1984 and 1999, respectively.\nWaller copyrighted over 400 songs, many of them co-written with his closest collaborator, Andy Razaf. Razaf described his partner as \"the soul of melody... a man who made the piano sing... both big in body and in mind... known for his generosity... a bubbling bundle of joy\". It is likely that he composed many more popular songs than he has been credited with. When in financial difficulties, he had a habit of selling songs to other writers and performers who claimed them as their own. He died from pneumonia, aged 39.\nEarly life.\nThomas Wright Waller was born in New York City on May 21, 1904, the seventh child of eleven (five of whom survived childhood). His parents were Adeline Waller (n\u00e9e\u00a0Lockett), a musician, and Edward Martin Waller, a Baptist lay preacher and teamster; they originated from rural Virginia but moved to New York after marrying at the age of 16 in the hope of better employment, housing and education prospects. Thomas Waller started playing the piano at the age of six, and later played the reed organ at his father's open-air services. He also studied the double bass and violin, paying for music lessons by working in a grocery store. From an early age he proved adept at playing by ear, and was inspired by hearing Ignacy Jan Paderewski perform at Carnegie Hall. The nickname \"Fats\" dates from around this time, on account of his being overweight.\nWaller's mother Adeline developed diabetes, which made her weak; consequently the family moved to an apartment with fewer stairs, in central Harlem. The post-war period saw Harlem become populated with bars and clubs which featured live music, fuelling Waller's artistic aspirations. Waller attended DeWitt Clinton High School for a short period of time, but left to pursue his ambition to become a professional musician. He briefly worked polishing jewel boxes and delivering illicit alcoholic drinks during prohibition, with the wages allowing him to afford piano lessons, and at the age of 15 he became an organist at the Lincoln Theatre, where he earned $32 a week. This position allowed him to practise his stagecraft and improvisation.\nEdward Waller disapproved of his son's career in music due to his strict religious beliefs, which was a continual source of tension between them. Waller's mother Adeline, who encouraged his aspirations, acted as a mediating influence, but she died on November 10, 1920, from a stroke due to her diabetes. Shortly thereafter Waller moved out to live with a friend, who also knew pianist James P. Johnson, a leading figure of the burgeoning Harlem stride style. The two first met when Waller was aged 16, and Johnson began to teach Waller piano and introduce him to important figures on the Harlem music scene such as Eubie Blake, Willie Gant, Cliff Jackson, Duke Ellington and Willie \"the Lion\" Smith, bringing him to rent parties where they would perform. Johnson continued to be a friend and mentor throughout Waller's life.\nCareer.\n1920s.\nIn 1921 Waller was invited to accompany the vaudeville group Liza and Her Shufflin' Six on a tour of the northeast of the U.S., having impressed Liza with his organ playing at the Lincoln Theatre. While in Boston he met Count Basie, who asked for organ lessons\u00a0\u2013 these took place back in New York, in the Lincoln. After his return Waller played his first rent party, having improved dramatically from practise and his lessons with James P. Johnson, and he continued to perform at these, as well as undertake short-term contracts at nightclubs and cabarets. Waller's steady job at the Lincoln Theatre transferred to the Lafayette Theatre after a change of management.\nVia his friend Clarence Williams, a Tin Pan Alley music publisher, Waller became involved with the new recording label Okeh Records. He was originally slated to accompany Sara Martin in \"Sugar Blues\", but failed to attend the recording session; Williams played instead, which launched his performing career. Williams convinced Fred Hager, the head of artists and repertoire for Okeh, to try Waller again, and his first recordings were \"Muscle Shoals Blues\" and \"Birmingham Blues\" in October 1922. In December he accompanied Martin in \"Mama's Got the Blues\" and \"Last Go Round Blues\". James P. Johnson got Waller work recording piano rolls for QRS, the first of which was \"Got to Cool My Doggies Now\", recorded in March 1923. In the summer of that year Waller began composing original pieces, his first being \"Wildcat Blues\", with lyrics by Williams. The pair collaborated on over 70 songs during the subsequent five years, including \"Squeeze Me\".\nWaller continued to accompany blues singers in recordings, play rent parties, and perform at nightclubs, gaining exposure. During this period he met Andy Razaf, a lyricist with whom he collaborated extensively, and who encouraged him to sing as well as play the piano. He met J. C. Johnson in 1923, and began collaborating with him as well. Waller became known for his prolific output of catchy songs, although did not copyright any of them, instead selling them outright to publishers or performing them without getting them published. In 1926 he composed for two revues with Spencer Williams.\nIn 1926, Waller began his association with the Victor Talking Machine Company (later RCA Victor) after being contacted by Ralph Peer. On November 17, 1926, he recorded \"St. Louis Blues\" and his composition \"Lenox Avenue Blues\", his first solo recordings, and on December 1, 1927, he recorded \"Red Hot Dan\" with Thomas Morris, the first recording of Waller singing.\n1929 saw the composition of some of Waller's most highly-regarded songs, such as \"Ain't Misbehavin'\" (for the revue \"Hot Chocolates\"), \"I've Got a Feeling I'm Falling\", \"Honeysuckle Rose\" (for the revue \"Load of Coal\"), and \"Black and Blue\". To avoid having to pay more in child support to Edith, whom he had divorced in 1923, Waller sold the rights for twenty of his songs (including \"Ain't Misbehavin'\") to Irving Mills for $500. This was a small fraction of their value. As a consequence he earned only the musician's share of the royalties from the subsequent recordings.\n1930s.\nWaller's radio career began in December 1930, when he featured on a new show for CBS playing the piano and, unusually until this point, singing. Joe Davis, who had become Waller's publisher and manager after the sale of his material to Irving Mills, began to market Waller as a singer as well as a pianist, and he recorded the solo songs \"I'm Crazy about My Baby\" and \"Draggin' My Heart Around\" on March 31, 1931.\nWaller began to play regularly at the Hot Feet Club, where he developed his storytelling asides and style as a raconteur: \"the cocked eye brow, the finger punctuating the air for emphasis, and eyes rolling heavenward whenever he said something blue\". In the summer of 1931 he visited Paris with Spencer Williams, playing in the city's nightclubs and enjoying the much lower levels of racial discrimination and absence of prohibition. Davis appointed Marty Bloom as Waller's manager after Waller's return, but Bloom resigned the position shortly thereafter and it was taken by Phil Ponce, who was experienced in showbusiness and had established and managed the Ponce Sisters.\nPonce decided to focus on Waller's radio career, and secured a two-year contract with WLW in Cincinnati, where he was given his own program, \"Fats Waller's Rhythm Club\". Waller also played for their show \"Moon River\", but was not credited due to his own show's \"raucous and comedic reputation\". After the contract ended in late 1933, Waller moved back to New York. A sequence of CBS radio performances in March and April of 1934 provided extensive publicity, and led to his own regular show, \"The Rhythm Club\", as well as regular appearances on other CBS programs.\nThis radio success led to RCA Victor offering a recording contract, assuming that the records would at least sell well in the black community, but they unexpectedly proved to have wide appeal, and became bestsellers. Victor arranged for tours for Waller and a group of musicians as the Fats Waller Band in 1935, and while back in New York during breaks between fixtures the group recorded a number of songs, the most popular of which was \"I'm Gonna Sit Right Down and Write Myself a Letter\". Part of the tour involved promoting the release of the film \"Hooray for Love\", in which Waller had appeared earlier that year, and the success of this publicity activity led to him featuring in \"King of Burlesque\".\nThe band continued to tour and record over the next few years, but Waller's drinking became heavier and his behavior more erratic, and interest from promoters declined after a racially-motivated boycott led to poorly-attended events in South Carolina and Florida in 1937. Ed Kirkeby had taken over as manager in 1935 due to Ponce's ill health, and he attempted to revive domestic interest in Waller by arranging a tour of Britain and Scandinavia in 1938, where jazz was increasing in popularity. The tour was a great success, with Waller recording for HMV and appearing on the new medium of television in addition to his live performances, but it was curtailed due to the threat of invasion from Nazi Germany. Waller had been developing his interest in composition and classical music, inspired by George Gershwin's \"Rhapsody in Blue\" and \"Concerto in F\". He began to incorporate more classical themes into his music, and took up the violin. While in London he composed the impressionist \"London Suite\", representing different areas of the city he had visited, and this was recorded by HMV.\n1940s.\nThe tour in Europe revived Waller's career in the US. He was in high demand as an accompanist on recordings, but the Victor contract was exclusive, so he was credited as \"Maurice Waller\", his son's name. Victor marketed Waller as a comic performer, with songs such as \"You Run Your Mouth, I'll Run My Business\". In 1941 he recorded four Soundies\u00a0\u2013 short musical films of \"Ain't Misbehavin'\", \"Honeysuckle Rose,\" \"Your Feet's Too Big,\" and \"The Joint Is Jumpin'\". He toured the US, often staging surprise concerts to entertain the troops at the local military post.\nWaller's interest in more \"serious\" music continued, and on January 14, 1942 he staged a concert in Carnegie Hall in an attempt to make audiences take jazz more seriously. The concert was received well by the audience, although at least one critic gave it a mixed review, possibly because Waller had become drunk during the interval.\nIrving Mills had become a film producer, and in early 1943 engaged Waller to perform songs including \"Ain't Misbehavin'\" (which he owned the rights to) in \"Stormy Weather\". Upon returning to New York, he began to compose for the musical \"Early to Bed\", which premiered in Boston on May 24, 1943. It received positive reviews, and was staged at the Broadhurst Theatre on Broadway on June 17. Waller was the first black composer to write a Broadway show for a white cast.\nCompositions.\nWaller is believed to have composed many songs in the 1920s and 1930s and sold them for small sums, attributed to another composer and lyricist.\nStandards attributed to Waller, sometimes controversially, include \"I Can't Give You Anything but Love, Baby\". The song was made famous by Adelaide Hall in the Broadway show \"Blackbirds of 1928\". Biographer Barry Singer offered circumstantial evidence that this song was written by Waller and lyricist Andy Razaf and provided a description of the sale given by Waller to the \"New York Post\" in 1929\u00a0\u2013 he sold the song for $500 to a white songwriter for use in a financially successful show (consistent with Jimmy McHugh's contributions to \"Harry Delmar's Revels\", 1927, and then to \"Blackbirds of 1928\"). He noted that early handwritten manuscripts in the Dana Library Institute of Jazz Studies of \"Spreadin' Rhythm Around\" (Jimmy McHugh 1935) are in Waller's hand. Jazz historian Paul S. Machlin commented that the Singer conjecture has \"considerable [historical] justification\". According to a biography by Waller's son Maurice, Waller told his son never to play the song within earshot because he had to sell it when he needed money. Maurice Waller wrote that his father objected to hearing \"On the Sunny Side of the Street\" on the radio.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1920, Waller married Edith Hatch, and the couple moved in with Edith's parents as they were unable to afford their own home. Edith's parents disapproved of Waller's career as a musician, considering it unfit for a newly-married man. They found their own apartment, and Edith gave birth to a son, Thomas Waller Jr., in 1921. She was unhappy being married to a working musician, with its financial insecurity and unsociable hours, and felt that she and their son deserved more of Waller's time and attention. In 1923 they divorced, with an agreement for Waller to pay $35 per week in child support and alimony. Waller persistently failed to pay this, prompting Edith to take him to court several times, and he spent time in jail on Welfare Island. His will left her the minimum amount allowed by law, with the stipulation that this should be reduced to nothing in the event that the law change to permit this between the time of writing and his death.\nWaller married Anita Rutherford, whom he knew in childhood and met again while playing at the Lincoln Theatre, in 1926. They had a son, Maurice Thomas Waller, born on September 10, 1927. In 1928, Waller and Rutherford had their second son, Ronald Waller.\nIn 1938, Waller was one of the first African Americans to purchase a home in the Addisleigh Park section of St. Albans, Queens, a New York City community with racially restrictive covenants. After his purchase, and litigation in the New York State courts, many prosperous African Americans followed, including many jazz artists, such as Count Basie, Lena Horne, Ella Fitzgerald, and Milt Hinton.\nDeath.\nWaller's health began to decline in 1939 or 1940, with heavy alcohol drinking, working late hours, and excessive food consumption being contributing factors (he reportedly weighed about at the time of his death). He contracted influenza while playing a series of events at the Zanzibar Room in Hollywood in October 1943, but disregarded a doctor's recommendation to go to hospital and stop drinking.\nWaller died of pneumonia in the early morning of December 15, 1943, while returning to New York on the Santa Fe Chief, as the train was stopped at Kansas City Union Station. His funeral took place at Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem, the church his parents had joined after first moving to the city from Virginia. More than 4,200 people were estimated to have attended, which prompted Adam Clayton Powell\u00a0Jr., who delivered the eulogy, to observe that Waller \"always played to a packed house\". Afterwards he was cremated, and his ashes were scattered over Harlem from an airplane piloted by a World War\u00a0I and Spanish Civil War pilot known as the \"Black Ace\".\nInfluence.\nWaller had many admirers, during and after his heyday. In 1939, while nightclubbing in Harlem, Waller discovered a white stride pianist playing Waller tunes\u00a0\u2013 the young Harry Gibson. Waller tipped him handsomely and then hired him to be his relief pianist during his own performances.\nWaller also had contemporaries in recording studios. Waller recorded for Victor, so Decca Records hired singer-pianist Bob Howard for recordings aimed at Waller's audience, and Columbia Records followed suit with Putney Dandridge.\nProbably the most talented pianist to keep the music of Waller alive in the years after his death was Ralph Sutton, who focused his career on playing stride piano. Sutton was a great admirer of Waller, saying, \"I've never heard a piano man swing any better than Fats \u2013 or swing a band better than he could. I never get tired of him. Fats has been with me from the first, and he'll be with me as long as I live.\"\nActor and bandleader Conrad Janis also did a lot to keep the stride piano music of Waller and James P. Johnson alive. In 1949, as an 18-year-old, Janis put together a band of aging jazz greats, consisting of James P. Johnson (piano), Henry Goodwin (trumpet), Edmond Hall (clarinet), Pops Foster (bass), and Baby Dodds (drums), with Janis on trombone.\nA Broadway musical showcasing Waller tunes entitled \"Ain't Misbehavin\"' was produced in 1978 and featured Nell Carter, Andre de Shields, Armelia McQueen, Ken Page, and Charlaine Woodard. (The show and Nell Carter won Tony Awards.) The show opened at the Longacre Theatre and ran for more than 1600 performances. It was revived on Broadway in 1988 at the Ambassador Theatre with the original Broadway Cast. Performed by five African-American actors, the show included such songs as \"Honeysuckle Rose,\" \"This Joint Is Jumpin'\", and \"Ain't Misbehavin'.\"\nIn 1981, Thin Lizzy released the album \"Renegade\", which contained the song \"Fats\", co-written by Phil Lynott and Snowy White as a tribute to Waller.\nRecognition and awards.\nWaller's recordings were inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame, a special Grammy Award established in 1973 to honour recordings that are at least 25 years old and that have \"qualitative or historical significance.\"\nSelected works.\nRecordings.\nWaller features in hundreds of recordings. JSP Records released a complete collection of the known extant recordings:\nInstrumental.\nPiano solo.\nSource:\nOrgan solo.\nSource:\nSongs.\nSource:\nStage.\nSource:\nFilm.\nSource:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54959", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54959", "title": "Slave rebellion", "text": "Armed uprising by slaves\nA slave rebellion is an armed uprising by slaves, as a way of fighting for their freedom. Rebellions of slaves have occurred in nearly all societies that practice slavery or have practiced slavery in the past. A desire for freedom and the dream of successful rebellion is often the greatest object of song, art, and culture amongst the enslaved population. These events, however, are often violently opposed and suppressed by slaveholders.\nAncient Sparta had a special type of serf called \"helots\" who were often treated harshly, leading them to rebel. According to Herodotus (IX, 28\u201329), helots were seven times as numerous as Spartans. Every autumn, according to Plutarch (\"Life of Lycurgus\", 28, 3\u20137), the Spartan ephors would pro forma declare war on the helot population so that any Spartan citizen could kill a helot without fear of blood or guilt in order to keep them in line (\"crypteia\"). In the Roman Empire, though the heterogeneous nature of the slave population worked against a strong sense of solidarity, slave revolts did occur and were severely punished. The most famous slave rebellion in Europe was led by Spartacus in Roman Italy, the Third Servile War. This war resulted in the 6,000 surviving rebel slaves being crucified along the main roads leading into Rome. This was the third in a series of unrelated Servile Wars fought by slaves against the Romans.\nIn Russia, the slaves were usually classified as kholops. A kholop's master had unlimited power over his life. Slavery remained a major institution in Russia until 1723, when Peter the Great converted the household slaves into house serfs. Russian agricultural slaves were formally converted into serfs earlier in 1679. During the 16th and 17th centuries, runaway serfs and kholops known as Cossacks, (\"outlaws\") formed autonomous communities in the southern steppes. There were numerous rebellions against slavery and serfdom, most often in conjunction with Cossack uprisings, such as the uprisings of Ivan Bolotnikov (1606\u20131607), Stenka Razin (1667\u20131671), Kondraty Bulavin (1707\u20131709), and Yemelyan Pugachev (1773\u20131775), often involving hundreds of thousands and sometimes millions. Between the end of the Pugachev rebellion and the beginning of the 19th century, there were hundreds of outbreaks across Russia.\nOne of the most successful slave rebellions in history was the Haitian Revolution, which saw self-emancipated slaves in the French colony of Saint-Domingue overthrow the colonial government and repulse invasion attempts by the French, Spanish and British to establish the independent state of Haiti. In the 9th century, the poet Ali bin Muhammad led imported East African slaves against the Abbasid Caliphate in Iraq during the Zanj Rebellion. Nanny of the Maroons was an 18th-century leader of the Jamaican Maroons who led them to victory in the First Maroon War. The Quilombo dos Palmares of Brazil flourished under Ganga Zumba. In the United States, the 1811 German Coast Uprising in the Territory of Orleans was the largest rebellion in the continental United States; Denmark Vesey and Madison Washington both launched slave rebellions in the U.S. as well.\nAfrica.\nIn 1808 and 1825, there were slave rebellions in the Cape Colony, newly acquired by the British. Although the slave trade was officially abolished in the British Empire by the Slave Trade Act 1807, and slavery itself a generation later with the Slavery Abolition Act 1833, it took until 1850 to be halted in the territories which were to become South Africa.\nS\u00e3o Tom\u00e9 and Pr\u00edncipe.\nOn 9 July 1595, Rei Amador, and his people, the Angolars, allied with other enslaved Africans of its plantations, marched into the interior woods and battled against the Portuguese. It is said that day, Rei Amador and his followers raised a flag in front of the settlers and proclaimed Rei Amador as king of S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9 and Pr\u00edncipe, making himself as \"Rei Amador, liberator of all the black people\".\nBetween 1595 and 1596, part of the island of S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9 was ruled by the Angolars, under the command of Rei Amador. On 4 January 1596, he was captured, sent to prison and was later executed by the Portuguese. Still today, they remember him fondly and consider him a national hero of the islands.\nIn the first decades of the 17th century, there were frequent slave revolts in the Portuguese colony of S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9 and Pr\u00edncipe, off the African shore, which damaged the sugar crop cultivation there.\nAsia.\nThe Zanj Rebellion against the slavery in the Abbasid Caliphate was the culmination of a series of small revolts. It took place near the city of Basra, in southern Iraq over fifteen years (869\u2212883 AD). It grew to involve over 500,100 slaves, who were imported from across the Muslim empire.\nWhen the Russian general Konstantin Petrovich von Kaufmann and his army approached the city of Khiva during the Khivan campaign of 1873, the Khan Muhammad Rahim Khan II of Khiva fled to hide among the Yomuts, and the slaves in Khiva rebelled, informed about the imminent downfall of the city, resulting in the Khivan slave uprising. When Kaufmann's Russian army entered Khiva on 28 March, he was approached by Khivans who begged him to put down the ongoing slave uprising, during which slaves avenged themselves on their former enslavers. When the Khan returned to his capital after the Russian conquest, the Russian General Kaufmann presented him with a demand to abolish the Khivan slave trade and slavery, which he did.\nEurope.\nIn the 3rd century BCE, Drimakos (or Drimachus) led a slave revolt on the slave entrepot of Chios, took to the hills and directed a band of runaways in operations against their ex-masters.\nThe Servile Wars (135 to 71 BCE) were a series of slave revolts within the Roman Republic.\nAccording to the Icelandic sagas, occurred at some time between the 5th and 6th centuries, and resulted in the Swedish king Ongentheow being deposed. These large-scale slave revolts were reportedly led by a thrall known as Tunni. According to the sagas, it resulted in the Swedish king Ongentheow being deposed. Tunni subsequently became king of Svealand after defeating the Swedish king.\nA number of slave revolts occurred in the Mediterranean area during the early modern period:\nNorth America.\nNumerous slave rebellions and insurrections took place in North America during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries. There is documentary evidence of more than 250 uprisings or attempted uprisings involving ten or more slaves. One of the first was at San Miguel de Gualdape, the first European settlement in what would become the United States. Three of the best known in the United States during the 19th century are the revolts by Gabriel Prosser in Virginia in 1800, Denmark Vesey in Charleston, South Carolina in 1822, and Nat Turner's Rebellion in Southampton County, Virginia, in 1831.\nDrapetomania was a supposed mental illness invented by American physician Samuel A. Cartwright in 1851 that allegedly caused black slaves to run away. Today, drapetomania is considered an example of pseudoscience, and part of the edifice of scientific racism.\nSlave resistance in the antebellum South did not gain the attention of academic historians until the 1940s, when historian Herbert Aptheker started publishing the first serious scholarly work on the subject. Aptheker stressed how rebellions were rooted in the exploitative conditions of the Southern slave system. He traversed libraries and archives throughout the South, managing to uncover roughly 250 similar instances.\nThe 1811 German Coast Uprising, which took place in rural southeast Louisiana, at that time the Territory of Orleans, early in 1811, involved up to 500 insurgent slaves. It was suppressed by local militias and a detachment of the United States Army. In retaliation for the deaths of two white men and the destruction of property, the authorities killed at least 40 black men in a violent confrontation (the numbers cited are inconsistent); at least 29 more were executed (combined figures from two jurisdictions, St. Charles Parish and Orleans Parish). There was a third jurisdiction for a tribunal and what amounted to summary judgments against the accused, St. John the Baptist Parish. Fewer than 20 men are said to have escaped; some of those were later caught and killed, on their way to freedom.\nAlthough only involving about seventy slaves and free blacks, Turner's 1831 rebellion is considered to be a significant event in American history. The rebellion caused the slave-holding South to go into a panic. Fifty-five men, women, and children were killed, and enslaved blacks were freed on multiple plantations in Southampton County, Virginia, as Turner and his fellow rebels attacked the white institution of plantation slavery. Turner and the other rebels were eventually stopped by state militias. The rebellion resulted in the hanging of about 56 slaves, including Nat Turner himself. Up to 200 other blacks were killed during the hysteria that followed, few of whom likely had anything to do with the uprising. White fear led to new legislation passed by Southern states prohibiting the movement, assembly, and education of slaves, and reducing the rights of free people of color. In 1831\u201332, the Virginia legislature considered a gradual emancipation law to prevent future rebellions. In a close vote, however, the state decided to keep slaves.\nThe abolitionist John Brown had already fought against pro-slavery forces in Bleeding Kansas for several years when he decided to lead a raid on a Federal arsenal in Harpers Ferry, Virginia. This raid was a joint attack by freed blacks and white men who had corresponded with slaves on plantations in order to create a general uprising among slaves. Brown carried hundreds of copies of the constitution for a new republic of former slaves in the Appalachians. But they were never distributed, and the slave uprisings that were to have helped Brown did not happen. Some believe that he knew the raid was doomed but went ahead anyway, because of the support for abolition it would (and did) generate. The U.S. military, led by Lieutenant Colonel Robert E. Lee, easily overwhelmed Brown's forces. But directly following this, slave disobedience and the number of runaways increased markedly in Virginia.\nThe historian Steven Hahn proposes that the self-organized involvement of slaves in the Union Army during the American Civil War composed a slave rebellion that dwarfed all others. Similarly, tens of thousands of slaves joined British forces or escaped to British lines during the American Revolution, sometimes using the disruption of war to gain freedom. For instance, when the British evacuated from Charleston and Savannah, they took 10,000 freed slaves with them. They also evacuated slaves from New York, taking more than 3,000 for resettlement to Nova Scotia, where they were recorded as Black Loyalists and given land grants.\nSlave ship revolts.\nThere are 485 recorded instances of slaves revolting on board slave ships. A few of these ships endured more than one uprising during their career.\nMost accounts of revolts aboard slave ships are given by Europeans. There are few examples of accounts by slaves themselves. William Snelgrave reported that the slaves who revolted on the British ship \"Henry\" in 1721 claimed that those who had captured them were \"Rogues to buy them\" and that they were bent on regaining their liberty. Another example that Richardson gives is that of James Towne who gives the account of slaves stating that Europeans did not have the right to enslave and take them away from their homeland and \"wives and children\".\nRichardson compares several factors that contributed to slave revolts on board ships: conditions on the ships, geographical location, and proximity to the shore. He suggests that revolts were more likely to occur when a ship was still in sight of the shore. The threat of attack from the shore by other Africans was also a concern. If the ship was hit by disease and a large portion of the crew had been killed, the chances of insurrection were higher. Where the slaves were captured also had an effect on the number of insurrections. In many places, such as the Bight of Benin and the Bight of Biafra, the percentage of revolts and the percentage of the slave trade match up. Yet ships taking slaves from Senegambia experienced 22 percent of shipboard revolts while only contributing to four and a half percent of the slave trade. Slaves coming from West Central Africa accounted for 44 percent of the trade while only experiencing 11 percent of total revolts. \nLorenzo J. Greene gives many accounts of slave revolts on ships coming out of New England. These ships belonged to Puritans who controlled much of the slave trade in New England. Most revolts on board ships were unsuccessful. The crews of these ships, while outnumbered, were disciplined, well fed, and armed with muskets, swords, and sometimes cannons, and they were always on guard for resistance. The slaves on the other hand were the opposite, armed only with bits of wood and the chains that bound them.\nHowever, some captives were able to take over the ships that were their prisons and regain their freedom. On October 5, 1764 the New Hampshire ship \"Adventure\" captained by John Millar was successfully taken by the enslaved aboard. The slaves on board revolted while the ship was anchored off the coast and all but two of the crew, including Captain Millar, had succumbed to disease. Another successful slave revolt occurred six days after the ship \"Little George\" had left the Guinea coast. The ship carried ninety-six slaves, thirty-five of which were male. The slaves attacked in the early hours of the morning, easily overpowering the two men on guard. The slaves were able to load one of the cannons on board and fire it at the crew. After taking control of the ship they sailed it up the Sierra Leone River and escaped. After having defended themselves with muskets for several days below decks the crew lowered a small boat into the river to escape. After nine days of living on raw rice they were rescued.\nMariana P. Candido notes that enslaved Africans worked on the ships that transported other Africans into slavery. These men, 230 in all, were used onboard slave ships for their ability to communicate with the slaves being brought on board and to translate between Captain and slaver. Enslaved sailors were able to alleviate some of the fears that newly boarded slaves had, such as fear of being eaten. This was a double-edged sword. The enslaved sailors sometimes joined other slaves in the revolts against the captain they served. In 1812 enslaved sailors joined a revolt on board the Portuguese ship \"Feliz Eugenia\" just off the coast of Benguela. The revolt took place below decks. The sailors, along with many of the children who were on board, were able to escape using small boats.\nSouth America and the Caribbean.\nDecember 25, 1521 rebellion in Diego Col\u00f3n de Toledo's plantation in what is known today as Dominican Republic is the first known slave rebellion of the region. Despite the suppression of this revolt, many of the slaves successfully escaped, which led to the establishment of the first Maroon communities of the Americas. It would also open the doors for more slave revolts to transpire in the region. In 1532, Sebasti\u00e1n Lemba, of the Lemba tribe, rebelled against the Spanish colonists and for the next 15 years, attacked various other villages on the island liberating other slaves and ransacking from the Spaniards. Other leaders such as Juan Vaquero, Diego del Guzm\u00e1n, Fernando Montoro, Juan Criollo, and Diego del Ocampo followed in Lemba's footsteps. Dominican slave revolts continued throughout the 18th and 19th century such as the slave insurrections of Hincha and Saman\u00e1 in the spring of 1795, the Boca de Nigua revolt in 1796, the Gambia revolt of 1802, and the revolt led by Jos\u00e9 Leocadio, Pedro de Seda, and Pedro Henr\u00edquez in 1812.\nIn 1552 Miguel de Bur\u00eda a former slave in San Juan, Puerto Rico, reigned as the King of Bur\u00eda Golden mines in the modern-day state of Lara, Venezuela, after leading the first African rebellion in the country's history. His incumbency began in 1552 and lasted until 1554 after a failed attempt to take Barquisimeto city was killed by Spanish forces.\nBetween 1538 and 1542, a Guaran\u00ed slave from present-day Paraguay named Juliana killed her Spanish master and urged other indigenous women to do the same, ending up executed by order of \u00c1lvar N\u00fa\u00f1ez Cabeza de Vaca. Her rebellion is regarded as one of the earliest recorded indigenous uprisings against the Spanish colonization of the Americas.\nQuilombo dos Palmares in Brazil, 1605 to 1694, led by Zumbi dos Palmar\u00e9s.\nSan Basilio de Palenque in Colombia, 16th century to the present, led by Benkos Bioh\u00f3.\nSt. John, 1733, in what was then the Danish West Indies. The St. John's Slave Rebellion is one of the earliest and longest lasting slave rebellions in the Americas. It ended with defeat, however, and many rebels, including one of the leaders Breffu, committed suicide rather than being recaptured.\nThe most successful slave uprising was the Haitian Revolution, which began in 1791 and was eventually led by Toussaint L'Ouverture, culminating in the independent black republic of Haiti.\nPanama also has an extensive history of slave rebellions going back to the 16th century. Slaves were brought to the isthmus from many regions in Africa, including the modern day countries of the Congo, Senegal, Guinea, and Mozambique. Immediately before their arrival on shore, or very soon after, many enslaved Africans revolted against their captors or participated in mass maroonage or desertion. The freed Africans founded communities in the forests and mountains, organized guerrilla bands known as Cimarrones. They began a long guerrilla war against the Spanish Conquistadores, sometimes in conjunction with nearby indigenous communities like the Guna and the Guaym\u00ed. Despite massacres by the Spanish, the rebels fought until the Spanish crown was forced to concede to treaties that granted the Africans a life without Spanish violence and incursions. The leaders of the guerrilla revolts included Felipillo, Bayano, Juan de Dioso, Domingo Congo, Ant\u00f3n Mandinga, and Luis de Mozambique.\nThe Suriname slave rebellion was marked by constant guerrilla warfare by Maroons and in 1765\u20131793 by the Aluku. This rebellion was led by Boni.\nThe Berbice Slave Rebellion in Guyana in 1763 was led by Cuffy.\nRevolts on the Caribbean Islands.\nIn the 1730s, the militias of the Colony of Jamaica fought the Jamaican Maroons for a decade, before agreeing to sign peace treaties in 1739 and 1740, which recognised their freedom in five separate Maroon Towns.\nTacky's War (1760) was a slave uprising in Jamaica, which ran from May to July before it was put down by the British colonial government.\nVincent Brown, a professor of History and of African and African-American Studies at Harvard, has made a study of the Transatlantic Slave Trade. In 2013, Brown teamed up with Axis Maps to create an interactive map of Jamaican slave uprisings in the 18th century called, \"Slave Revolt in Jamaica, 1760\u20131761, A Cartographic Narrative\". Brown's efforts have shown that the slave insurrection in Jamaica in 1760-61 was a carefully planned affair and not a spontaneous, chaotic eruption, as was often argued (due in large part to the lack of written records produced by the insurgents). Tacky's War was a widespread slave uprising across Jamaica in the 1760s.\nLater, in 1795, several slave rebellions broke out across the Caribbean, some of which may have been influenced by the Haitian Revolution: \nCuba had slave revolts in 1795, 1798, 1802, 1805, 1812 (the Aponte revolt), 1825, 1827, 1829, 1833, 1834, 1835, 1838, 1839\u201343 and 1844 (the La Escalera conspiracy and revolt).\nBrazil.\nMany slave rebellions occurred in Brazil, most famously the Mal\u00ea Revolt of 1835 by the predominantly Muslim West African slaves at the time. The term \"mal\u00ea\" was commonly used to refer to Muslims at the time from the Yoruba word \"imale\".\nReferences and notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54960", "revid": "50771631", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54960", "title": "Nat Turner", "text": "American slave rebellion leader (1800\u20131831)\nNat Turner (October 2, 1800\u00a0\u2013 November 11, 1831) was an enslaved Black carpenter and preacher who led a four-day rebellion of both enslaved and free Black people in Southampton County, Virginia, in August 1831.\nNat Turner's Rebellion resulted in the death of 55 White men, women, and children before state militias suppressed the uprising. At the same time, 120 Black men, women, and children, many of whom were not involved in the revolt, were killed by soldiers and local mobs in retaliation. Turner was captured in October 1831 and, after a trial, was executed in November. Before his execution, he told his story to attorney Thomas Ruffin Gray, who published \"The Confessions of Nat Turner\" in November 1831.\nIn 2002, scholar Molefi Kete Asante included Nat Turner on his list of 100 Greatest African Americans. Turner has been depicted in films, literature, and plays, as well as many scholarly works.\nEarly life.\nTurner was born into slavery on October 2, 1800, in Southampton County, Virginia. Southampton County was a rural plantation area with more Black people than White. Benjamin Turner, the man who held Nat and his family as slaves, called the infant Nat in his records. Even when grown, the young man was known simply as Nat, but after the 1831 rebellion, he was widely referred to as Nat Turner.\nTurner knew little about the background of his father, who was believed to have escaped from slavery when Turner was a child. However, Turner grew up \"much attached to his grandmother\".\nTurner learned to read and write at a young age. He was identified as having \"natural intelligence and quickness of apprehension, surpassed by few\". He grew up deeply religious and was often seen fasting, praying, or immersed in reading the stories of the Bible.\nBenjamin Turner died in 1810, and his son Samuel inherited Nat. When he was 21, Nat Turner escaped from Samuel Turner; but he returned a month later after receiving a vision in which the Spirit appeared to him and told him that he \"had [his] wishes directed to the things of this world, and not to the kingdom of Heaven, and that [he] should return to the service of [his] earthly master\". In 1830, Joseph Travis purchased Turner; Turner later recalled that Travis was \"a kind master\" who \"placed the greatest confidence\" in him.\nAn 1831 reward notice described Turner as:5 feet 6 or 8 inches [168\u2013173 cm] high, weighs between 150 and 160 pounds [68\u201373 kg], rather \"bright\" [light-colored] complexion, but not a mulatto, broad shoulders, larger flat nose, large eyes, broad flat feet, rather knockneed [\"sic\"], walks brisk and active, hair on the top of the head very thin, no beard, except on the upper lip and the top of the chin, a scar on one of his temples, also one on the back of his neck, a large knot on one of the bones of his right arm, near the wrist, produced by a blow.\nVisions and religious activities.\nTurner often conducted religious services, preaching the Bible to his fellow slaves, who dubbed him \"The Prophet\". In addition to Blacks, Turner garnered some white followers such as Ethelred T. Brantley, whom Turner baptized after convincing him to \"cease from his wickedness\".\nTurner had visions that he interpreted as messages from God, which influenced his life. The historian Patrick Breen stated, \"Nat Turner thought that God used the natural world as a backdrop in front of which he placed signs and omens.\" Breen further states that Turner claimed to possess a gift of prophecy and could interpret these divine revelations. His deep spiritual commitment served as a significant influence on slaves within the surrounding plantations in Virginia.\nHistorian David Allmendinger notes that Turner had ten different supernatural experiences between 1822 and 1828. These included appearances of both the Spirit communicating through a religious language and scripture along with the visions of the Holy Ghost. While working in Moore's field on May 12, Turner said he \"heard a loud noise in the heavens...and the Spirit instantly appeared to me and said the Serpent was loosened, and Christ had laid down the yoke he had borne for the sins of men, and that I should take it on and fight against the Serpent, for the time was fast approaching when the first should be last and the last should be first\". In 1824, Turner had a second vision while working in the fields for Thomas Moore, recalling, \"The Saviour was about to lay down the yoke he had borne for the sins of men, and the great day of judgment was at hand\". By the spring of 1828, Turner was convinced that he \"was ordained for some great purpose in the hands of the Almighty\".\nTurner was motivated by strong convictions, at least partly inspired by his religious beliefs, to organize his fellow slaves against enslavement. Historian and theologian Joseph Dreis says, \"In connecting this vision to the motivation for his rebellion, Turner makes it clear that he sees himself as participating in the confrontation between God's Kingdom and the anti-Kingdom that characterized his social-historical context.\" After Turner viewed the solar eclipse in 1831, he was certain that God wanted the revolt to commence.\nHistorian Jean W. Cash notes that despite Turner\u2019s revelations being dismissed by some historians for appearing delusional or incoherent, they fit a pattern of leadership focused on a biblical interpretation of prophetic divine wrath. According to Cash, Turner's visions appear to be rooted in his understanding of apocalyptic Christian theology, where Old Testament themes of revolutionary reform and divine justice are prevalent. Cash notes that Turner\u2019s self-conception as a prophet was a product of a coherent religious world view at that time, as opposed to him having mental instability.\nRebellion.\nOver approximately a decade, Turner built up support for his cause, culminating in an anti-slavery uprising that served as a source of inspiration for later abolitionist organizers and rebels. The four-day rebellion started on August 21, 1831.\nNat Turner's Rebellion resulted in the death of 55 white men, women, and children. This is considered the \"most deadly slave revolt\" in United States history. The state militia and local troops quickly suppressed the uprising; between 36 and 120 Black men, women, and children, many of whom were not involved in the revolt, were killed by soldiers and local mobs in retaliation.\nTurner eluded capture but remained in Southampton County, in hiding. Slaves from a nearby house provided him with food. On October 30, a farmer named Benjamin Phipps discovered Turner hiding in a depression in the earth, created by a large, fallen tree covered with fence rails. This was referred to locally as Nat Turner's cave, although it was not a natural cave. Around 1 p.m. on October 31, Turner arrived at the prison in the county seat of Jerusalem, Virginia (now Courtland). According to Thomas Wentworth Higginson, writing in 1861, Turner was found \"emaciated, ragged, a mere scarecrow.\"\nTrial and execution.\nTurner was tried on November 5, 1831, for \"conspiring to rebel and making insurrection\". He pled not guilty; however, his lawyer made no arguments to defend Turner and called no witnesses. Turner was convicted and sentenced to death. His attorney was James Strange French, and James Trezvant served on the jury for Turner's trial. Before his execution, Turner told his story to attorney Thomas R. Grey, who published \"The Confessions of Nat Turner\" in November 1831. When Gray asked him if he had been mistaken, after hearing Turner's account of the Spirit's telling him that \"the time was fast approaching when the first should be last and the last should be first,\" Turner responded, \"Was not Christ crucified?\"\nTurner was hanged on November 11, 1831, in Jerusalem. According to some sources, he was beheaded as an example to frighten other would-be rebels. Historian Adam Thomas found an alternative account of Turner's death within the Black community: Percy Claud stated that his mother, Elizabeth, said Turner was \u201cdragged and whipped to death\u201d through multiple towns. Thomas notes this memory originated with Black Virginians and was built from generational memory and trauma, with Turner\u2019s execution being recalled as a lynching, similar to the treatment of the Blacks during that time.\nAfter his execution, Turner's body was dissected and flayed, with his skin being used to make souvenir purses. In October 1897, Virginia newspapers ran a story about Nat Turner's skeleton being used as a medical specimen by Dr. H. U. Stephenson of Toana, Virginia. Stephenson acquired the skeleton from a son of Dr. S. B. Kellar; Dr. Kellar claimed to have paid Turner $10 for his body while he was in jail. After the execution, Kellar had Turner's bones scraped and hung as a medical specimen.\nIn 2002, a skull said to have been Turner's was given to Richard G. Hatcher, the former mayor of Gary, Indiana, for the collection of a civil rights museum he planned to build there. In 2016, Hatcher returned the skull to two of Turner's descendants. Since receiving the skull, the family has temporarily placed it with the Smithsonian Institution, where DNA testing will be done to determine whether it is the authentic remains of Nat Turner. If the test renders positive results, the family plans to bury his remains next to his descendants.\nAnother skull said to have been Turner's was contributed to the College of Wooster in Ohio upon its incorporation in 1866. When the school's only academic building burned down in 1901, the skull was saved by Dr. H. N. Mateer. Visitors recalled seeing a certificate, signed by a physician in Southampton County in 1866, that attested to the authenticity of the skull. The skull was eventually misplaced.\nMarriage and children.\nTurner married an enslaved woman named Cherry, also spelled Chary. It is thought that Turner and Cherry met and were married at Samuel Turner's plantation in the early 1820s. The couple had children; historians vary in believing that there were one, two, or three children (a daughter and possibly one or two sons, including one named Riddick).\nThe family was separated after Samuel Turner died in 1823, when Turner was sold to Thomas Moore and his family was sold to Giles Reese. By 1831, his son was enslaved by Piety Reese and lived on a farm that was near the Travis farm where Turner was enslaved. However, in February 1831, Reese's son John used Turner's son as collateral for a family debt. One historian notes that Turner approached his conspirators for the rebellion days after his son was used as collateral.\nAfter the rebellion, the authorities beat and tortured Cherry Turner in hopes of finding her husband. On September 26, 1831, the \"Richmond Constitutional Whig\" published a story about the raiding of Reese plantation stating that, \"some papers [were] given up by his wife, under the lash.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54961", "revid": "38588864", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54961", "title": "Gin rummy", "text": "Card game\nGin Rummy, or simply Gin, is a two-player card game variant of Rummy. It has enjoyed widespread popularity as both a social and a gambling game, especially during the mid twentieth century, and remains today one of the most widely played two-player card games.\nHistory.\nGin Rummy was created in 1909 by Elwood T. Baker and his son C. Graham Baker. The game remained local to New York until 1941, when it was publicized throughout the United States after becoming a Hollywood fad. In 1947, a survey by an association of U.S. playing card manufacturers concluded that the number of people who learned Gin Rummy during World War II was equal to the number that learned to play pinochle, cribbage, poker, and bridge combined.\nMagician and writer John Scarne believed Gin Rummy to have evolved from 19th-century whiskey poker (a game similar to Commerce, with players forming poker combinations) and to have been created with the intention of being faster than standard Rummy but less spontaneous than knock Rummy. Card game historian David Parlett finds Scarne's theory to be \"highly implausible\", and considers the game of Conquian to be Gin Rummy's forerunner.\nDeck.\nGin Rummy is played using a standard deck of 52 cards. The ranking from high to low is King, Queen, Jack, 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, Ace.\nObjective.\nThe objective in Gin Rummy is to be the first to reach an agreed-upon score, usually 100 points.\nThe basic game strategy is to improve one's hand by \"melds\" and eliminating \"deadwood\". Gin has two types of meld: \"Sets\" of three or four cards sharing the same rank, e.g. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;8h\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;8d\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;8s; and \"runs\" or sequences of three or more cards in the same suit, such as &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;3h\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;4h\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;5h or more. Deadwood cards are those not in any meld. Aces are considered low\u2014they can form a set with other aces but only the low end of runs (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;As\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;2s\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;3s is a legal run but &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;Qs\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;Ks\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;As is not). A player can form any combination of melds within their hand; all sets, all runs, or some sets and some runs.\nDeal.\nDealership alternates from round to round, with the first dealer chosen by any agreed upon method. The dealer deals ten cards to each player one at a time starting with their opponent, and then places the next card in the deck face up. This begins the \"discard pile\". The face down pile is known as the \"stock pile\".\nPlay.\nOn the first turn of the round, the non-dealer has first option of taking the upcard on the discard pile or passing. If the non-dealer takes the upcard, they must then discard a different card to the discard pile. The player acting second can take the top card from the pile of their choice. However, if the non-dealer passes the upcard, the dealer is given the opportunity to take the upcard or pass. If the dealer also passes, the non-dealer must draw from the stock pile, then the next turn and after, players can draw from the pile of their choice.\nOn each subsequent turn, a player must draw either the (face-up) top card of the discard pile, or the (face-down) top card from the stock pile, and discard one card from their hand onto the discard pile. If a player chooses to draw face-up card (from the discard pile) the discarded card cannot be the just drawn card.\nPlayers alternate taking turns until one player ends the round by declaring the hand over (\"knocking\"), or until only two cards remain in the stock pile, in which case the round ends in a draw and no points are awarded. The game ends when a player reaches 100 or more points (or another established amount). In tournament rules the game is played in best of five with 250 points per game.\nKnocking.\nIn standard Gin, a player with 10 or fewer points of deadwood may \"knock\", immediately ending the hand without giving the opponent a chance to play. Knocking with no deadwood is known as \"going Gin\" or having a \"Gin hand\", while knocking with deadwood points is known as \"going down\".\nWhen discarding to end a turn, a player who wishes to knock must clearly indicate their intent; this is generally shown by laying the discard face down, but can also be done through a verbal declaration or by tapping the playing surface. The player then lays out their hand, organized into melds and with any deadwood separated from them. The opponent, or \"defending\" player, shows their melds and is entitled to \"lay off\" any deadwood cards that fit into the knocking player's melds, provided that the knocking player does not go Gin.\nThe \"deadwood count\" is the sum of the point values of the deadwood cards. Aces are scored at one point, face cards at 10, and others according to their numerical values. Intersecting melds are not allowed; if a player has a three-card set \"and\" a three-card run sharing a common card, only one of the melds counts, and the other two cards count as deadwood. For example; within the five cards &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;7c\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;7s\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;7d\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;8d\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;9d, the seven of diamonds can be included in the set (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;7c\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;7s\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;7d) or included in the run (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;7d\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;8d\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;9d), but it cannot be included in both.\nFor example, suppose that the knocking player has a meld of three Kings. If the defending player is holding the fourth King as deadwood, they may lay it off by adding it to the meld and thus reduce their deadwood count by 10. \nThe difference in the two players' deadwood counts determines the score for the hand as follows.\nThe knocking player can never lay off their deadwood into the defending player's melds.\nA player who goes Gin (i.e. has no deadwood) gets a bonus (typically 25 points).\nBig Gin.\nA player holding a Gin hand may also choose to continue the round instead of revealing it, in hopes of attaining an 11-card \"Big Gin\" hand as follows.\nIf a player draws or takes a card that can be used to form melds with the 10 cards already held, the player declares Big Gin and the hand ends. That player scores a Big Gin bonus (typically 31 points) plus the defending player's deadwood count; that player may not lay off any cards.\nScoring.\nAces are scored at 1 point, face cards at 10, and all other cards are scored at their numerical values. The number of points awarded for bonuses may vary from region to region.\nIn some variations, if a match ends with one player in the lead by exactly 50 points, that player automatically loses.\nVariations.\nStraight Gin.\nIn straight Gin, players are required to play until one of them can go Gin. Knocking is not allowed. Scoring and rules remain the same as standard Gin Rummy.\nMahjong Gin.\nSimilar to straight Gin, knocking is not allowed. However, more than one card may be taken, in order, from the top of the discard pile. If more than one card is taken, the lowest position card taken must be used in a hand: e.g. &lt;bottom&gt; &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;8s\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;3h\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;5h &lt;top of discard&gt; &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;8s is the lowest position card and must be used in a hand; continue with one discard. Cards are shown to the table, with opponents being able to add on to straights of the same suit or finish a three of a kind with the fourth card for points. After a player has Gin, points are added, with cards on the table being added up and cards in hand being subtracted. The player who Gins receives 25 additional points, 2 through 9 = 5 points, 10 through K = 10 points, A = 15 points.\nOklahoma Gin.\nIn this version of Gin Rummy, the value of the first upcard is used to determine the maximum count at which players can knock. If the upcard is a spade, the hand will count double. So if the first upcard was a 4, you can knock and go out with only 4 or fewer points in your hand; and if the card was &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;4s, you would get double points that hand. In this variation it is possible to knock any of cards from the discard pile so as long as you put down a suit or pair.\nAnother version in this variation (mostly in match play) and in Hollywood Gin (see below), a second deck of cards will be used to determine the knock value of a hand. The knock value card will be dealt from the bottom and turned over on top. Above rules apply but both players are dealt ten cards with the last hand winner picking first from the deck.\nHollywood Gin.\nIn the 1942 laws of Gin Rummy published in New York by Ely Culbertson's Bridge World and prepared by a rules committee of bridge players, the scoring format for Hollywood Gin was published as a way to play \"simultaneous games\". This is a scoring style, not a rules change to the game of Gin. \nIn Hollywood Gin, scoring is kept for three different games at the same time. A player's first win will be recorded in their column in Game One. A player's second win will be recorded in their columns for both Game One and Game Two. Their third win will be recorded in their column for all three games. Every game after that is scored in all three columns after that Game 1, Game 2 &amp; Game 3. Once a game (column) is finished bonus are added to that game and hands are played until all three games are finished. Once all three games are finished the totals are added together for a total score. \nTedesco Gin.\nSimilar to Oklahoma Gin, except aces can be used high or low, and runs can be formed \"around the corner\" (such as &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;Ks\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;As\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;2s). If you are caught with an unmelded ace, it counts as 15 points against you. Hollywood scoring of three games to 200 when playing head-to-head or with two-person teams. Three-person teams play to 300, 25 points extra if all three teammates win. 50 points for four-person team, etc. This is a more complex Gin game for all levels of player.\nSingle match.\nWhen a single match is to be played, the players will continue to play rounds until one player has 100 points or more. This player wins the match.\nMulti-match.\nIn multi-match games, match scores are reset to zero with the start of each match, while game scores accumulate until a predetermined winning score is reached, perhaps 500 or higher. Each individual match ends when one player scores 100 match points. At the end of the match, players' match scores are credited toward their game scores, as well as:\nDigital Adaptation.\nIn the digital era, \"Gin Rummy\" evolved from a social parlor game into a lucrative segment of the mobile gaming market. The game's commercial viability was highlighted in 2017 when Zynga acquired the mobile card game portfolio of Peak Games for $100 million, a deal explicitly driven by the massive user base of \"Gin Rummy Plus\", which was the largest mobile version of the game in the world at the time. \nBeyond commercial apps, the game serves as a notable testbed for artificial intelligence research. Unlike \"perfect information\" games like Chess, \"Gin Rummy\" requires AI agents to utilize \"imperfect information\" strategies, such as calculating probabilities based on the opponent's discards and pickups. Peer-reviewed research presented at the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence has utilized the game to benchmark how heuristic algorithms compete against human decision-making patterns. This algorithmic efficiency has also enabled the game to be widely syndicated on browser-based web portals like CrazyGames, where it can be played instantly without the need for downloads or human opponents.\nDue to its widespread adaptation across different digital formats, ranging from mobile apps displayed on the biggest app stores to accessible web browser versions the game sustained relevant across the 21st century. This digital ubiquity, combined with its enduring status as a subject for artificial intelligence research , has ensured \"Gin Rummy\" remains a culturally significant and widely played title globally.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54962", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54962", "title": "Geophysics", "text": "Physics of the Earth and its vicinity\nGeophysics () is a subject of natural science concerned with the physical processes and properties of Earth and its surrounding space environment, and the use of quantitative methods for their analysis. Geophysicists conduct investigations across a wide range of scientific disciplines. The term \"geophysics\" classically refers to solid earth applications: Earth's shape; its gravitational, magnetic, and electromagnetic fields; its internal structure and composition; its dynamics and their surface expression in plate tectonics, the generation of magmas, volcanism and rock formation. However, modern geophysics organizations and pure scientists use a broader definition that includes the water cycle including snow and ice; fluid dynamics of the oceans and the atmosphere; electricity and magnetism in the ionosphere and magnetosphere and solar-terrestrial physics; and analogous problems associated with the Moon and other planets.\nAlthough geophysics was only recognized as a separate discipline in the 19th century, its origins date back to ancient times. The first magnetic compasses were made from lodestones, while more modern magnetic compasses played an important role in the history of navigation. The first seismic instrument was built in 132 AD. Isaac Newton applied his theory of mechanics to the tides and the precession of the equinox; and instruments were developed to measure the Earth's shape, density and gravity field, as well as the components of the water cycle. In the 20th century, geophysical methods were developed for remote exploration of the solid Earth and the ocean, and geophysics played an essential role in the development of the theory of plate tectonics.\nGeophysics is pursued for fundamental understanding of the Earth and its space environment. Geophysics often addresses societal needs, such as mineral resources, assessment and mitigation of natural hazards and environmental impact assessment. In exploration geophysics, geophysical survey data are used to analyze potential petroleum reservoirs and mineral deposits, locate groundwater, find archaeological remains, determine the thickness of glaciers and soils, and assess sites for environmental remediation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPhysical phenomena.\nGeophysics is a highly interdisciplinary subject, and geophysicists contribute to every area of the Earth sciences, while some geophysicists conduct research in the planetary sciences. To provide a more clear idea on what constitutes geophysics, this section describes phenomena that are studied in physics and how they relate to the Earth and its surroundings. Geophysicists also investigate the physical processes and properties of the Earth, its fluid layers, and magnetic field along with the near-Earth environment in the Solar System, which includes other planetary bodies.\nGravity.\nThe gravitational pull of the Moon and Sun gives rise to two high tides and two low tides every lunar day, or every 24 hours and 50 minutes. Therefore, there is a gap of 12 hours and 25 minutes between every high tide and between every low tide.\nGravitational forces make rocks press down on deeper rocks, increasing their density as the depth increases. Measurements of gravitational acceleration and gravitational potential at the Earth's surface and above it can be used to look for mineral deposits (see gravity anomaly and gravimetry). The surface gravitational field provides information on the dynamics of tectonic plates. The geopotential surface called the geoid is one definition of the shape of the Earth. The geoid would be the global mean sea level if the oceans were in equilibrium and could be extended through the continents (such as with very narrow canals).\nVibrations.\nSeismic waves are vibrations that travel through the Earth's interior or along its surface. The entire Earth can also oscillate in forms that are called normal modes or free oscillations of the Earth. Ground motions from waves or normal modes are measured using seismographs. If the waves come from a localized source such as an earthquake or explosion, measurements at more than one location can be used to locate the source. The locations of earthquakes provide information on plate tectonics and mantle convection.\nRecording of seismic waves from controlled sources provides information on the region that the waves travel through. If the density or composition of the rock changes, waves are reflected. Reflections recorded using Reflection Seismology can provide a wealth of information on the structure of the earth up to several kilometers deep and are used to increase our understanding of the geology as well as to explore for oil and gas. Changes in the travel direction, called refraction, can be used to infer the deep structure of the Earth.\nEarthquakes pose a risk to humans. Understanding their mechanisms, which depend on the type of earthquake (e.g., intraplate or deep focus), can lead to better estimates of earthquake risk and improvements in earthquake engineering.\nElectricity.\nAlthough we mainly notice electricity during thunderstorms, there is always a downward electric field near the surface that averages 120 volts per meter. Relative to the solid Earth, the ionization of the planet's atmosphere is a result of the galactic cosmic rays penetrating it, which leaves it with a net positive charge. A current of about 1800 amperes flows in the global circuit. It flows downward from the ionosphere over most of the Earth and back upwards through thunderstorms. The flow is manifested by lightning below the clouds and sprites above.\nA variety of electric methods are used in geophysical survey. Some measure spontaneous potential, a potential that arises in the ground because of human-made or natural disturbances. Telluric currents flow in Earth and the oceans. They have two causes: electromagnetic induction by the time-varying, external-origin geomagnetic field and motion of conducting bodies (such as seawater) across the Earth's permanent magnetic field. The distribution of telluric current density can be used to detect variations in electrical resistivity of underground structures. Geophysicists can also provide the electric current themselves (see induced polarization and electrical resistivity tomography).\nElectromagnetic waves.\nElectromagnetic waves occur in the ionosphere and magnetosphere as well as in Earth's outer core. Dawn chorus is believed to be caused by high-energy electrons that get caught in the Van Allen radiation belt. Whistlers are produced by lightning strikes. Hiss may be generated by both. Electromagnetic waves may also be generated by earthquakes (see seismo-electromagnetics).\nIn the highly conductive liquid iron of the outer core, magnetic fields are generated by electric currents through electromagnetic induction. Alfv\u00e9n waves are magnetohydrodynamic waves in the magnetosphere or the Earth's core. In the core, they probably have little observable effect on the Earth's magnetic field, but slower waves such as magnetic Rossby waves may be one source of geomagnetic secular variation.\nElectromagnetic methods that are used for geophysical survey include transient electromagnetics, magnetotellurics, surface nuclear magnetic resonance and electromagnetic seabed logging.\nMagnetism.\nThe Earth's magnetic field protects the Earth from the deadly solar wind and has long been used for navigation. It originates in the fluid motions of the outer core. The magnetic field in the upper atmosphere gives rise to the auroras.\nThe Earth's field is roughly like a tilted dipole, but it changes over time (a phenomenon called geomagnetic secular variation). Mostly the geomagnetic pole stays near the geographic pole, but at random intervals averaging 440,000 to a million years or so, the polarity of the Earth's field reverses. These geomagnetic reversals, analyzed within a Geomagnetic Polarity Time Scale, contain 184 polarity intervals in the last 83 million years, with change in frequency over time, with the most recent brief complete reversal of the Laschamp event occurring 41,000 years ago during the last glacial period. Geologists observed geomagnetic reversal recorded in volcanic rocks, through magnetostratigraphy correlation (see natural remanent magnetization) and their signature can be seen as parallel linear magnetic anomaly stripes on the seafloor. These stripes provide quantitative information on seafloor spreading, a part of plate tectonics. They are the basis of magnetostratigraphy, which correlates magnetic reversals with other stratigraphies to construct geologic time scales. In addition, the magnetization in rocks can be used to measure the motion of continents.\nRadioactivity.\nRadioactive decay accounts for about 80% of the Earth's internal heat, powering the geodynamo and plate tectonics. The main heat-producing isotopes are potassium-40, uranium-238, uranium-235, and thorium-232.\nRadioactive elements are used for radiometric dating, the primary method for establishing an absolute time scale in geochronology.\nUnstable isotopes decay at predictable rates, and the decay rates of different isotopes cover several orders of magnitude, so radioactive decay can be used to accurately date both recent events and events in past geologic eras. Radiometric mapping using ground and airborne gamma spectrometry can be used to map the concentration and distribution of radioisotopes near the Earth's surface, which is useful for mapping lithology and alteration.\nFluid dynamics.\nFluid motions occur in the magnetosphere, atmosphere, ocean, mantle and core. Even the mantle, though it has an enormous viscosity, flows like a fluid over long time intervals. This flow is reflected in phenomena such as isostasy, post-glacial rebound and mantle plumes. The mantle flow drives plate tectonics and the flow in the Earth's core drives the geodynamo.\nGeophysical fluid dynamics is a primary tool in physical oceanography and meteorology. The rotation of the Earth has profound effects on the Earth's fluid dynamics, often due to the Coriolis effect. In the atmosphere, it gives rise to large-scale patterns like Rossby waves and determines the basic circulation patterns of storms. In the ocean, they drive large-scale circulation patterns as well as Kelvin waves and Ekman spirals at the ocean surface. In the Earth's core, the circulation of the molten iron is structured by Taylor columns.\nWaves and other phenomena in the magnetosphere can be modeled using magnetohydrodynamics.\nHeat flow.\nThe Earth is cooling, and the resulting heat flow generates the Earth's magnetic field through the geodynamo and plate tectonics through mantle convection. The main sources of heat are: primordial heat due to Earth's cooling and radioactivity in the planets upper crust. There is also some contributions from phase transitions. Heat is mostly carried to the surface by thermal convection, although there are two thermal boundary layers \u2013 the core\u2013mantle boundary and the lithosphere \u2013 in which heat is transported by conduction. Some heat is carried up from the bottom of the mantle by mantle plumes. The heat flow at the Earth's surface is about 4.2 \u00d7 1013 W, and it is a potential source of geothermal energy.\nMineral physics.\nThe physical properties of minerals must be understood to infer the composition of the Earth's interior from seismology, the geothermal gradient and other sources of information. Mineral physicists study the elastic properties of minerals; their high-pressure phase diagrams, melting points and equations of state at high pressure; and the rheological properties of rocks, or their ability to flow. Deformation of rocks by creep make flow possible, although over short times the rocks are brittle. The viscosity of rocks is affected by temperature and pressure, and in turn, determines the rates at which tectonic plates move.\nWater is a very complex substance and its unique properties are essential for life. Its physical properties shape the hydrosphere and are an essential part of the water cycle and climate. Its thermodynamic properties determine evaporation and the thermal gradient in the atmosphere. The many types of precipitation involve a complex mixture of processes such as coalescence, supercooling and supersaturation. Some precipitated water becomes groundwater, and groundwater flow includes phenomena such as percolation, while the conductivity of water makes electrical and electromagnetic methods useful for tracking groundwater flow. Physical properties of water such as salinity have a large effect on its motion in the oceans.\nThe many phases of ice form the cryosphere and come in forms like ice sheets, glaciers, sea ice, freshwater ice, snow, and frozen ground (or permafrost).\nRegions of the Earth.\nSize and form of the Earth.\nContrary to popular belief, the earth is not entirely spherical but instead generally exhibits an ellipsoid shape- which is a result of the centrifugal forces the planet generates due to its constant motion. These forces cause the planets diameter to bulge towards the Equator and results in the ellipsoid shape. Earth's shape is constantly changing, and different factors including glacial isostatic rebound (large ice sheets melting causing the Earth's crust to the rebound due to the release of the pressure), geological features such as mountains or ocean trenches, tectonic plate dynamics, and natural disasters can further distort the planet's shape.\nStructure of the interior.\nEvidence from seismology, heat flow at the surface, and mineral physics is combined with the Earth's mass and moment of inertia to infer models of the Earth's interior \u2013 its composition, density, temperature, pressure. For example, the Earth's mean specific gravity (5.515) is far higher than the typical specific gravity of rocks at the surface (2.7\u20133.3), implying that the deeper material is denser. This is also implied by its low moment of inertia (0.33 M R2, compared to 0.4 M R2 for a sphere of constant density). However, some of the density increase is compression under the enormous pressures inside the Earth. The effect of pressure can be calculated using the Adams\u2013Williamson equation. The conclusion is that pressure alone cannot account for the increase in density. Instead, we know that the Earth's core is composed of an alloy of iron and other minerals.\nReconstructions of seismic waves in the deep interior of the Earth show that there are no S-waves in the outer core. This indicates that the outer core is liquid, because liquids cannot support shear. The outer core is liquid, and the motion of this highly conductive fluid generates the Earth's field. Earth's inner core, however, is solid because of the enormous pressure.\nReconstruction of seismic reflections in the deep interior indicates some major discontinuities in seismic velocities that demarcate the major zones of the Earth: inner core, outer core, mantle, lithosphere and crust. The mantle itself is divided into the upper mantle, transition zone, lower mantle and \"D\u2032\u2032\" layer. Between the crust and the mantle is the Mohorovi\u010di\u0107 discontinuity.\nThe seismic model of the Earth does not by itself determine the composition of the layers. For a complete model of the Earth, mineral physics is needed to interpret seismic velocities in terms of composition. The mineral properties are temperature-dependent, so the geotherm must also be determined. This requires physical theory for thermal conduction and convection and the heat contribution of radioactive elements. The main model for the radial structure of the interior of the Earth is the preliminary reference Earth model (PREM). Some parts of this model have been updated by recent findings in mineral physics (see post-perovskite) and supplemented by seismic tomography. The mantle is mainly composed of silicates, and the boundaries between layers of the mantle are consistent with phase transitions.\nThe mantle acts as a solid for seismic waves, but under high pressures and temperatures, it deforms so that over millions of years it acts like a liquid. This makes plate tectonics possible.\nMagnetosphere.\nIf a planet's magnetic field is strong enough, its interaction with the solar wind forms a magnetosphere. Early space probes mapped out the gross dimensions of the Earth's magnetic field, which extends about 10 Earth radii towards the Sun. The solar wind, a stream of charged particles, streams out and around the terrestrial magnetic field, and continues behind the magnetic tail, hundreds of Earth radii downstream. Inside the magnetosphere, there are relatively dense regions of solar wind particles called the Van Allen radiation belts.\nMethods.\nGeodesy.\nGeophysical measurements are generally at a particular time and place. Accurate measurements of position, along with earth deformation and gravity, are the province of geodesy. While geodesy and geophysics are separate fields, the two are so closely connected that many scientific organizations such as the American Geophysical Union, the Canadian Geophysical Union and the International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics encompass both.\nAbsolute positions are most frequently determined using the global positioning system (GPS). A three-dimensional position is calculated using messages from four or more visible satellites and referred to the 1980 Geodetic Reference System. An alternative, optical astronomy, combines astronomical coordinates and the local gravity vector to get geodetic coordinates. This method only provides the position in two coordinates and is more difficult to use than GPS. However, it is useful for measuring motions of the Earth such as nutation and Chandler wobble. Relative positions of two or more points can be determined using very-long-baseline interferometry.\nGravity measurements became part of geodesy because they were needed to related measurements at the surface of the Earth to the reference coordinate system. Gravity measurements on land can be made using gravimeters deployed either on the surface or in helicopter flyovers. Since the 1960s, the Earth's gravity field has been measured by analyzing the motion of satellites. Sea level can also be measured by satellites using radar altimetry, contributing to a more accurate geoid. In 2002, NASA launched the Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE), wherein two twin satellites map variations in Earth's gravity field by making measurements of the distance between the two satellites using GPS and a microwave ranging system. Gravity variations detected by GRACE include those caused by changes in ocean currents; runoff and ground water depletion; melting ice sheets and glaciers.\nSatellites and space probes.\nSatellites in space have made it possible to collect data from not only the visible light region, but in other areas of the electromagnetic spectrum. The planets can be characterized by their force fields: gravity and their magnetic fields, which are studied through geophysics and space physics.\nMeasuring the changes in acceleration experienced by spacecraft as they orbit has allowed fine details of the gravity fields of the planets to be mapped. For example, in the 1970s, the gravity field disturbances above lunar maria were measured through lunar orbiters, which led to the discovery of concentrations of mass, mascons, beneath the Imbrium, Serenitatis, Crisium, Nectaris and Humorum basins.\nGlobal positioning systems (GPS) and geographical information systems (GIS).\nSince geophysics is concerned with the shape of the Earth, and by extension the mapping of features around and in the planet, geophysical measurements include high accuracy GPS measurements. These measurements are processed to increase their accuracy through differential GPS processing. Once the geophysical measurements have been processed and inverted, the interpreted results are plotted using GIS. Programs such as ArcGIS and Geosoft were built to meet these needs and include many geophysical functions that are built-in, such as upward continuation, and the calculation of the measurement derivative such as the first-vertical derivative. Many geophysics companies have designed in-house geophysics programs that pre-date ArcGIS and GeoSoft in order to meet the visualization requirements of a geophysical dataset.\nRemote sensing.\nExploration geophysics is a branch of applied geophysics that involves the development and utilization of different seismic or electromagnetic methods which the aim of investigating different energy, mineral and water resources. This is done through the uses of various remote sensing platforms such as; satellites, aircraft, boats, drones, borehole sensing equipment and seismic receivers. These equipment are often used in conjunction with different geophysical methods such as magnetic, gravimetry, electromagnetic, radiometric, barometry methods in order to gather the data. The remote sensing platforms used in exploration geophysics are not perfect and need adjustments done on them in order to accurately account for the effects that the platform itself may have on the collected data. For example, when gathering aeromagnetic data (aircraft gathered magnetic data) using a conventional fixed-wing aircraft- the platform has to be adjusted to account for the electromagnetic currents that it may generate as it passes through Earth's magnetic field. There are also corrections related to changes in measured potential field intensity as the Earth rotates, as the Earth orbits the Sun, and as the moon orbits the Earth.\nSignal processing.\nGeophysical measurements are often recorded as time-series with GPS location. Signal processing involves the correction of time-series data for unwanted noise or errors introduced by the measurement platform, such as aircraft vibrations in gravity data. It also involves the reduction of sources of noise, such as diurnal corrections in magnetic data. In seismic data, electromagnetic data, and gravity data, processing continues after error corrections to include computational geophysics which result in the final interpretation of the geophysical data into a geological interpretation of the geophysical measurements\nHistory.\nGeophysics emerged as a separate discipline only in the 19th century, from the intersection of physical geography, geology, astronomy, meteorology, and physics. The first known use of the word \"geophysics\" was in German (\"Geophysik\") by Julius Fr\u00f6bel in 1834. However, many geophysical phenomena \u2013 such as the Earth's magnetic field and earthquakes \u2013 have been investigated since the ancient era.\nAncient and classical eras.\nThe magnetic compass existed in China back as far as the fourth century BC. It was used as much for feng shui as for navigation on land. It was not until good steel needles could be forged that compasses were used for navigation at sea; before that, they could not retain their magnetism long enough to be useful. The first mention of a compass in Europe was in 1190 AD.\nIn circa 240 BC, Eratosthenes of Cyrene deduced that the Earth was round and measured the circumference of Earth with great precision. He developed a system of latitude and longitude.\nPerhaps the earliest contribution to seismology was the invention of a seismoscope by the prolific inventor Zhang Heng in 132 AD. This instrument was designed to drop a bronze ball from the mouth of a dragon into the mouth of a toad. By looking at which of eight toads had the ball, one could determine the direction of the earthquake. It was 1571 years before the first design for a seismoscope was published in Europe, by Jean de la Hautefeuille. It was never built.\nBeginnings of modern science.\nThe 17th century had major milestones that marked the beginning of modern science. In 1600, William Gilbert release a publication titled \"De Magnete\" (1600) where he conducted series of experiments on both natural magnets (called 'loadstones') and artificially magnetized iron. His experiments lead to observations involving a small compass needle (versorium) which replicated magnetic behaviours when subjected to a spherical magnet, along with it experiencing 'magnetic dips' when it was pivoted on a horizontal axis. HIs findings led to the deduction that compasses point north due to the Earth itself being a giant magnet.\nIn 1687 Isaac Newton published his work titled \"Principia\" which was pivotal in the development of modern scientific fields such as astronomy and physics. In it, Newton both laid the foundations for classical mechanics and gravitation, as well as explained different geophysical phenomena such as the precession of the equinox (the orbit of whole star patterns along an ecliptic axis. Newton's theory of gravity had gained so much success, that it resulted in changing the main objective of physics in that era to unravel natures fundamental forces, and their characterizations in laws.\nThe first seismometer, an instrument capable of keeping a continuous record of seismic activity, was built by James Forbes in 1844.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54964", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54964", "title": "Meld", "text": "Meld may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "54965", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54965", "title": "Chinese History", "text": ""}
{"id": "54966", "revid": "7995314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54966", "title": "Savannah (disambiguation)", "text": "Savannah or Savanna is a type of grassland.\nSavannah or Savanna may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "54968", "revid": "26074453", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54968", "title": "Soda", "text": "Soda or SODA may refer to: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "54969", "revid": "51038821", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54969", "title": "Snail", "text": "Shelled gastropod\nA snail is a shelled gastropod. The name is most often applied to land snails, terrestrial pulmonate gastropod molluscs. However, the common name \"snail\" is also used for most of the members of the molluscan class Gastropoda that have a coiled shell that is large enough for the animal to retract completely into. When the word \"snail\" is used in this most general sense, it includes not just land snails but also numerous species of sea snails and freshwater snails. Gastropods that naturally lack a shell, or have only an internal shell, are mostly called \"slugs\", and land snails that have only a very small shell (that they cannot retract into) are sometimes called \"semi-slugs.\"\nOverview.\nSnails that respire using a lung belong to the group Pulmonata. As traditionally defined, the Pulmonata were found to be polyphyletic in a molecular study per J\u00f6rger \"et al.\", dating from 2010. But snails with gills also form a polyphyletic group; in other words, snails with lungs and snails with gills form a number of taxonomic groups that are not necessarily more closely related to each other than they are related to some other groups.\nBoth snails that have lungs and snails that have gills have diversified so widely over geological time that a few species with gills can be found on land and numerous species with lungs can be found in freshwater. Even a few marine species have lungs.\nSnails can be found in a very wide range of environments, including ditches, deserts, and the abyssal depths of the sea. Although land snails may be more familiar to laymen, marine snails constitute the majority of snail species, and have much greater diversity and a greater biomass. Numerous kinds of snail can also be found in fresh water.\nMost snails have thousands of microscopic tooth-like structures located on a banded ribbon-like tongue called a radula. The radula works like a file, ripping food into small pieces. Many snails are herbivorous, eating plants or rasping algae from surfaces with their radulae, though a few land species and many marine species are omnivores or predatory carnivores. Snails cannot absorb colored pigments when eating paper or cardboard so their feces are also colored.\nSeveral species of the genus \"Achatina\" and related genera are known as giant African land snails; some grow to from snout to tail, and weigh . The largest living species of sea snail is \"Syrinx aruanus\"; its shell can measure up to in length, and the whole animal with the shell can weigh up to . The smallest land snail, \"Angustopila psammion,\" was discovered in 2022 and measures 0.6 mm in diameter.\nThe largest known land gastropod is the African giant snail \"Achatina achatina\", the largest recorded specimen of which measured from snout to tail when fully extended, with a shell length of in December 1978. It weighed exactly 900 g (about 2 lb). Named Gee Geronimo, this snail was owned by Christopher Hudson (1955\u201379) of Hove, East Sussex, UK, and was collected in Sierra Leone in June 1976.\nSnails are protostomes. That means during development, in the gastrulation phase, the blastopore forms the mouth first. Cleavage in snails is spiral holoblastic patterning. In spiral holoblastic cleavage, the cleavage plane rotates each division and the cell divisions are complete. Snails do not undergo metamorphosis after hatching. Snails hatch in the form of small adults. The only additional development they will undergo is to consume calcium to strengthen their shell. Snails can be male, female, hermaphroditic, or parthenogenetic so there are many different systems of sexual determination.\nAnatomy.\nSnails have complex organ systems and anatomies that differ greatly from most animals. Snails and most other Mollusca share three anatomical features; the foot, the mantle, and the radula.\nDiet.\nThe average snail's diet varies greatly depending on the species, including different feeding styles from herbivores to highly specialized feeders and parasites. Some snails like \"Euglandina rosea\", or rosy wolfsnail, are carnivorous and prey on other snails. However, most land snails are herbivores or omnivores. Among land snails, there is also a large variation in preference for specific food. For example, \"Cepaea nemoralis\", or the grove snail, prefers dead plant material over fresh herbs or grasses. Age may also impact food preference, with adult grove snails showing a significantly larger preference for dead plant material than juvenile grove snails. Other snails, like the generalist herbivore \"Arianta arbustorum\", or copse snail, choose their meals based on availability, consuming a mix of arthropods, wilted flowers, fresh and decayed plant material, and soil.\nGenerally, land snails are most active at night due to the damp weather. The humid nighttime air minimizes water evaporation and is beneficial to land snails because their movement requires mucus, which is mostly composed of water. In addition to aiding movement, mucus plays a vital role in transporting food from the gill to the mouth, cleansing the mantle cavity, and trapping food before ingestion.\nSlugs.\nGastropods that lack a conspicuous shell are commonly called slugs rather than snails. Some species of slug have a maroon-brown shell, some have only an internal vestige that serves mainly as a calcium lactate repository, and others have some to no shell at all. Other than that, there is little morphological difference between slugs and snails. There are however important differences in habitats and behavior.\nA shell-less animal is much more maneuverable and compressible, so even quite large land slugs can take advantage of habitats or retreats with very little space, retreats that would be inaccessible to a similar-sized snail. Slugs squeeze themselves into confined spaces such as under loose bark on trees or under stone slabs, logs or wooden boards lying on the ground. In such retreats they are in less danger from either predators or desiccation. Those are often suitable places for laying their eggs.\nSlugs as a group are far from monophyletic; scientifically speaking \"slug\" is a term of convenience with little taxonomic significance. The reduction or loss of the shell has evolved many times independently within several very different lineages of gastropods. The various taxa of land and sea gastropods with slug morphology occur within numerous higher taxonomic groups of shelled species; such independent slug taxa are not in general closely related to one another.\nSnail speed.\nSnails are &lt;mark&gt;among the slowest land animals&lt;/mark&gt;, but their exact ranking can vary depending on the species. While a banana slug is often cited as the slowest land animal overall, the garden snail is also consistently ranked as one of the slowest. Garden snails typically move at speeds of about 0.03 mph (50 meters per hour), which is slower than a three-toed sloth's top speed of approximately 0.15 mph (0.24 kph). \nHow snails rank in terms of slowness\nReasons for slowness\nParasitic diseases.\nSnails can also be associated with parasitic diseases such as schistosomiasis, angiostrongyliasis, fasciolopsiasis, opisthorchiasis, fascioliasis, paragonimiasis and clonorchiasis, which can be transmitted to humans.\nHuman relevance.\nLand snails are known as an agricultural and garden pest but some species are an edible delicacy and occasionally household pets. In addition, their mucus can also be used for skin care products.\nIn agriculture.\nThere is a variety of snail-control measures that gardeners and farmers use in an attempt to reduce damage to valuable plants. Traditional pesticides are still used, as are many less toxic control options such as concentrated garlic or wormwood solutions. Copper metal is also a snail repellent, and thus a copper band around the trunk of a tree will prevent snails from climbing up and reaching the foliage and fruit. A layer of a dry, finely ground, and scratchy substance such as diatomaceous earth can also deter snails.\nThe decollate snail (\"Rumina decollata\") will capture and eat garden snails, and because of this it has sometimes been introduced as a biological pest control agent. However, this is not without problems, as the decollate snail is just as likely to attack and devour other gastropods that may represent a valuable part of the native fauna of the region.\nTextiles.\nCertain varieties of snails, notably the family Muricidae, produce a secretion that is a color-fast natural dye. The ancient Tyrian purple was made in this way as were other purple and blue dyes. The extreme expense of extracting this secretion in sufficient quantities limited its use to the very wealthy. It is such dyes as these that led to certain shades of purple and blue being associated with royalty and wealth.\nAs pets.\nThroughout history, snails have been kept as pets. There are many famous snails such as Lefty (Born Jeremy) and within fiction, Gary and Brian the snail.\nCulinary use.\nIn French cuisine, edible snails are served for instance in \"Escargot \u00e0 la Bourguignonne\". The practice of rearing snails for food is known as heliciculture. For purposes of cultivation, the snails are kept in a dark place in a wired cage with dry straw or dry wood. Coppiced wine-grape vines are often used for this purpose. During the rainy period, the snails come out of hibernation and release most of their mucus onto the dry wood/straw. The snails are then prepared for cooking. Their texture when cooked is slightly chewy and tender.\nAs well as being eaten as gourmet food, several species of land snails provide an easily harvested source of protein to many people in poor communities around the world. Many land snails are valuable because they can feed on a wide range of agricultural wastes, such as shed leaves in banana plantations. In some countries, giant African land snails are produced commercially for food.\nLand snails, freshwater snails and sea snails are all eaten in many countries. In certain parts of the world snails are fried. For example, in Indonesia, they are fried as satay, a dish known as \"sate kakul\". The eggs of certain snail species are eaten in a fashion similar to the way caviar is eaten.\nIn Bulgaria, snails are traditionally cooked in an oven with rice or fried in a pan with vegetable oil and red paprika powder. Before they are used for those dishes, however, they are thoroughly boiled in hot water (for up to 90 minutes) and manually extracted from their shells. The two species most commonly used for food in the country are \"Helix lucorum\" and \"Helix pomatia\".\nSnails and slug species that are not normally eaten in certain areas have occasionally been used as famine food in historical times. A history of Scotland written in the 1800s recounts a description of various snails and their use as food items in times of plague.\nCultural depictions.\nBecause of its slowness, the snail has traditionally been seen as a symbol of laziness. In Christian culture, it has been used as a symbol of the deadly sin of sloth. In Mayan mythology, the snail is associated with sexual desire, being personified by the god Uayeb.\nSnails were widely noted and used in divination. The Greek poet Hesiod wrote that snails signified the time to harvest by climbing the stalks, while the Aztec moon god Tecciztecatl bore a snail shell on his back. This symbolised rebirth; the snail's penchant for appearing and disappearing was analogised with the moon.\nKeong Emas (Javanese and Indonesian for Golden Snail) is a popular Javanese folklore about a princess magically transformed and contained in a golden snail shell. The folklore is a part of popular Javanese Panji cycle telling the stories about the prince Panji Asmoro Bangun (also known as Raden Inu Kertapati) and his consort, princess Dewi Sekartaji (also known as Dewi Chandra Kirana).\nIn contemporary speech, the expression \"a snail's pace\" is often used to describe a slow, inefficient process. The phrase \"snail mail\" is used to mean regular postal service delivery of paper messages as opposed to the delivery of email, which can be virtually instantaneous.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54970", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54970", "title": "Sun Yat-Sen", "text": ""}
{"id": "54972", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54972", "title": "Treaty of Nanking", "text": "1842 treaty between Qing China and Britain\nThe Treaty of Nanking was the peace treaty which ended the First Opium War (1839\u20131842) between Great Britain and the Qing dynasty of China on 29 August 1842. It was the first of what the Chinese later termed the \"unequal treaties\".\nIn the wake of China's military defeat, with British warships poised to attack Nanjing (then romanized as Nanking), British and Chinese officials negotiated on board HMS \"Cornwallis\" anchored in the Yangtze at the city. On 29 August, British representative Sir Henry Pottinger and Qing representatives Keying, Yilibu, and Niu Jian signed the treaty, which consisted of thirteen articles. \nThe treaty was ratified by the Daoguang Emperor on 27 October and Queen Victoria on 28 December. The exchange of ratification took place in Hong Kong on 26 June 1843. The treaty required the Chinese to pay an indemnity, to cede the Island of Hong Kong to the British as a colony, to essentially end the Canton system that had limited trade to that port and allow trade at five \u201ctreaty ports.\u201d It was followed in 1843 by the Treaty of the Bogue, which granted extraterritoriality and most favoured nation status.\nBackground.\nIn the late 18th and early 19th centuries, Britain faced a growing trade deficit with China. Britain could offer nothing to China to match the growing importation of Chinese goods to Britain, such as tea and porcelain. During Company rule in India, opium was grown on plantations and auctioned to merchants, who then sold it to Chinese who smuggled it into China (Chinese law forbade the importation and sale of opium). When Lin Zexu seized this privately owned opium and ordered the destruction of opium at Humen, Britain first demanded reparations, then declared what became known as the First Opium War. Britain's use of recently invented military technology produced a crushing victory and allowed it to impose a one-sided treaty.\nThe first working draft for articles of a treaty was prepared at the Foreign Office in London in February 1840. The Foreign Office was aware that preparing a treaty containing Chinese and English characters would need special consideration. Given the distance separating the countries, the parties realised that some flexibility and a departure from established procedure in preparing treaties might be required.\nTerms.\nForeign trade.\nThe fundamental purpose of the treaty was to change the framework of foreign trade imposed by the Canton System, which had been in force since 1760. Under Article V, the treaty abolished the former monopoly of the \"Cohong\" and their Thirteen Factories in Canton. Four additional \"treaty ports\" opened for foreign trade alongside Canton (Shameen Island from 1859 until 1943): Xiamen (or Amoy; until 1930), Fuzhou, Ningbo and Shanghai (until 1943), where foreign merchants were to be allowed to trade with anyone they wished. Britain also gained the right to send consuls to the treaty ports, which were given the right to communicate directly with local Chinese officials (Article II). The treaty stipulated that trade in the treaty ports should be subject to fixed tariffs, which were to be agreed upon between the British and the Qing governments (Article X).\nReparations and demobilisation.\nThe Qing government was obliged to pay the British government 6 million silver dollars for the opium that had been confiscated by Lin Zexu in 1839 (Article IV), 3\u00a0million dollars in compensation for debts that the merchants in Canton owed British merchants (Article V), and a further 12\u00a0million dollars in war reparations for the cost of the war (Article VI). The total sum of 21\u00a0million dollars was to be paid in instalments over three years and the Qing government would be charged an annual interest rate of 5 percent for the money that was not paid in a timely manner (Article VII).\nThe Qing government undertook to release all British prisoners of war (Article VIII), and to give a general amnesty to all Chinese subjects who had cooperated with the British during the war (Article IX).\nThe British on their part, undertook to withdraw all of their troops from Nanjing, the Grand Canal and the military post at Zhenhai, as well as not to interfere with China trade generally, after the emperor had given his assent to the treaty and the first instalment of money had been received (Article XII). British troops would remain in Gulangyu and Zhaobaoshan until the Qing government had paid reparations in full (Article XII).\nCession of Hong Kong.\nIn 1841, a rough outline for a treaty was sent for the guidance of Plenipotentiary Charles Elliot. It had a blank after the words \"the cession of the \"islands\" of\". Pottinger sent this old draft treaty on shore, with the letter \"s\" struck out of \"islands\" and the words \"Hong Kong\" placed after it. Robert Montgomery Martin, treasurer of Hong Kong, wrote in an official report:\nThe terms of peace having been read, Elepoo the senior commissioner paused, expecting something more, and at length said \"is that all?\" Mr. Morrison enquired of Lieutenant-colonel Malcolm [Pottinger's secretary] if there was anything else, and being answered in the negative, Elepoo immediately and with great tact closed the negotiation by saying, \"\"all shall be granted\u2014it is settled\u2014it is finished\".\"\nThe Qing government agreed to make Hong Kong Island a crown colony, ceding it to the Queen Victoria of Great Britain, in perpetuity (, \"Ch\u00e1ng yu\u01cen\", in the Chinese version of the treaty), to provide British traders with a harbour where they could \"careen and refit their ships and keep stores for that purpose\" (Article III). Pottinger was later appointed the first Governor of Hong Kong.\nIn 1860, the colony was extended with the addition of the Kowloon peninsula under the Convention of Peking and in 1898, the Second Convention of Peking further expanded the colony with the 99-year lease of the New Territories. In 1984, the governments of the United Kingdom and the People's Republic of China (PRC) concluded the Sino-British Joint Declaration on the Question of Hong Kong, under which the sovereignty of the leased territories, together with Hong Kong Island and Kowloon (south of Boundary Street) ceded under the Convention of Peking (1860), was transferred to the PRC on 1 July 1997.\nAftermath.\nThe treaty was sealed by interpreter John Robert Morrison for the British and Wang Tajin for the Chinese. Harry Parkes, who was a student of Chinese under Morrison, gave his account of the ceremony:\nThere were four copies of the Treaty signed and sealed. They were bound in worked yellow silk, one Treaty in English and the same in Chinese stitched and bound together formed a copy. This being finished they all came out of the after-cabin and sat down to tiffin, and the different officers seated themselves all round the table, making plenty of guests. Almost directly after the Treaty was signed, a yellow flag for China at the main and a Union Jack for England at the mizen were hoisted, and at the same time a royal salute of twenty-one guns was fired.\nThe Daoguang Emperor gave his assent for the treaty on 8 September. After his assent arrived in Nanjing on 15 September, Pottinger's secretary George Alexander Malcolm was dispatched on board the steamer \"Auckland\" the next morning to the Court of St James's with a copy for ratification by Queen Victoria. The emperor ratified the treaty on 27 October and Queen Victoria added her written assent on 28 December. Ratification was exchanged in Hong Kong on 26 June 1843. \nPottinger wrote in a letter to the Earl of Aberdeen the following year that at a feast with Keying celebrating the ratification, Keying insisted they ceremonially exchange miniature portraits of each member of each other's families. Upon receiving a miniature portrait of Pottinger's wife, Pottinger wrote that Keying \"placed [the miniature] on his head\u2014which I am told is the highest token of respect and friendship\u2014filled a glass of wine, held the picture in front of his face, muttered some words in a low voice, drank the wine, again placed the picture on his head and then sat down\" to complete the ceremony of long-term amity between the two families and the two peoples. This extravagant display has been analysed as showing an \"erotically charged ... reciprocity [in] this symbolic gesture of swapping images of wives.\nBecause of the brevity of the Treaty of Nanking and its terms being phrased only as general stipulations, the British and Chinese representatives agreed that a supplementary treaty should be concluded to establish more detailed regulations for relations. On 3October 1843, the parties concluded the supplementary Treaty of the Bogue at the Bocca Tigris outside Canton.\nNevertheless, the treaties of 1842\u201343 left several unsettled issues. In particular they did not resolve the status of the opium traffic in favour of the British Empire. Although the Treaty of Wanghia with the Americans in 1844 explicitly banned Americans from selling opium, the trade continued as both the British and American merchants were only subject to the legal control of their permissive consuls. The opium traffic was later legalised in the Treaties of Tianjin, which China concluded after the Second Opium War resulted in another defeat for the Qing dynasty.\nThe Treaty itself contained no provision for the legalization of the opium trade. Stephen R. Platt writes that such a term would have provided the opponents of Lord Palmerston, who headed the Conservative government that launched the war, with a seeming confirmation for their claim that the war was fought to support the opium trade. Instead, Palmerston asked his negotiators to request the Chinese to legalize the sale of opium on their own initiative, outside of the treaty\u2019s terms, which they refused.\nThese treaties had deep and lasting effect. Nanking Treaty, together with the following treaties of 1843, 1858, and 1860, ended the Canton System as created in 1760. These treaties created a new framework for China's foreign relations and overseas trade, which would last for almost a hundred years and marked the start of what later nationalists called China's \"century of humiliation.\" From the perspective of modern Chinese nationalists, the most injurious terms were the fixed trade tariff, extraterritoriality, the most favoured nation provisions and freeing the importation of British opium which continued to have social and economic consequences for the Chinese people. These terms were imposed by the British and extended to other Western powers with most favoured nation status, and were conceded by the ruling Qing dynasty in order to avert continued military defeats and under the hope that most favoured nation provision would set the foreigners against each other. Although China regained tariff autonomy in the 1920s, extraterritoriality was not formally abolished until the 1943 Sino-British Treaty for the Relinquishment of Extra-Territorial Rights in China.\nThe stipulation of legal equality in diplomatic proceedings between Britain and China ended the centuries-long Sinocentric tributary system of interstate relations that placed China atop a formal hierarchy in its interactions with other states. Despite this stipulation, the treaty's contents featured entirely concessions from the Chinese side with no reciprocity of provisions on the British side - for instance, Britain received the right to establish consulates in treaty ports that held the right to an audience with local officials, an option denied to China should it have hypothetically wanted to send its own formal diplomatic missions to Britain. The one-sided nature of this treaty as a list of concessions, alongside the sovereignty ceded with the terms granting extraterritoriality and joint Sino-British determination of tariff, would earn the Nanking Treaty and similar settlements that followed the name, \"unequal treaty,\" from Chinese nationalists in later centuries.\nInterestingly, Joanna Waley-Cohen writes that, at the time of its signing, the Qing did not regard the treaty as \u201cof major significance.\u201d According to Waley-Cohen, the Treaty of Nanking\u2019s terms remarkably resembled another treaty signed with the central Asian state of Kokand, which had also conflicted with the Qing over control of trade along Qing frontiers. Failing to achieve results with a complete trade ban, the Qing arranged a treaty with Kokand that granted Kokandis \u201cthe right to live, trade, and levy taxes [\u2026] appoint consuls with extraterritorial jurisdiction over their compatriots in China,\u201d alongside an indemnity. The precedent set by the treaty with Kokand made the Nanking Treaty palpable enough that the Qing did not immediately regard this settlement as a disastrous capitulation.\nA copy of the treaty is kept by the British government while another copy is kept by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Republic of China at the National Palace Museum in Taipei, Taiwan.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54974", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54974", "title": "Gin Rummy", "text": ""}
{"id": "54975", "revid": "473593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54975", "title": "Geffen Records", "text": "American record label\nGeffen Records (formerly The David Geffen Company from 1980 to 1992 and Geffen Records Inc. from 1993 to 2004) is an American record label owned by Interscope Geffen A&amp;M (IGA), a division of the Interscope Capitol Labels Group, which is owned by Universal Music Group. It was founded in 1980 by David Geffen, as a music subsidiary of his then film company Geffen Pictures, with financial and distribution support from Warner Bros. Records.\nIn 1990, the label was sold to MCA Music Entertainment, which later became part of Universal Music Group (UMG) through acquisitions by Panasonic and Seagram. Since its merger into the Interscope Geffen A&amp;M group in 1999, Geffen has served as a syndicate label within Interscope Records, expanding its catalog through the absorption of other imprints. It has operated as a key platform for new releases, especially following its 2003 expansion and 2017 relaunch. As of 2024, Geffen is part of Universal Music Group's Interscope Capitol Labels Group.\nHistory.\nFormation (1980\u20131990).\nGeffen Records began operations in 1980. It was created by music industry businessman David Geffen who, in the early 1970s, had co-founded Asylum Records with Elliot Roberts. Geffen stepped down from Asylum in 1975, when he crossed over to film and was named a vice president of Warner Bros. Pictures. He was fired from Warner c.\u20091978, but still remained locked in a five-year contract, which prevented him from working elsewhere. When that deal expired, he returned to work in 1980 and struck a deal with Warner Bros. Records (now simply Warner Records, due to the label's disassociation from Warner Bros. Pictures in 2004), to create Geffen Records. Warner Bros. Records provided 100 percent of the funding for the label's start-up and operations, while it distributed its releases in North America, with CBS's Epic Records handling distribution in the rest of the world until 1985 when Warner Music Group (parent company of Warner Records and formerly a division of Time Warner/Warner Bros. Discovery until 2004) took over distribution for the rest of the world. Profits were split 50% each between Geffen Records and its respective distributors. Despite being named for founder and original owner David Geffen, it has been acknowledged that Ed Rosenblatt, who became president of Geffen Records upon its inception in 1980, was the one who led Geffen Records during its heyday in the 1980s and 1990s.\nThe label released \"Double Fantasy\" by John Lennon and Yoko Ono. Two weeks after it entered the charts, Lennon was murdered in New York City. Subsequently, the album went on to sell millions and gave Geffen its first number-one album and single; the rights to the album would later be taken over by EMI, which eventually would be absorbed by Geffen's then-future parent, Universal Music Group in 2012.\nAs the mid-1980s progressed, Geffen would go on to have extended success with such acts as Asia, Berlin, Enya, Kylie Minogue, Quarterflash, Wang Chung, and Sammy Hagar. The label also signed several established acts such as Elton John, Irene Cara, Cher, Debbie Harry, Don Henley, Joni Mitchell, Neil Young, Peter Gabriel, and Jennifer Holliday. Toward the end of the decade, the company also began making a name for itself as an emerging rock label, thanks to the success of Whitesnake (U.S. and Canada only), The Stone Roses, Guns N' Roses, Tesla, Sonic Youth and the comeback of 1970s-era rockers Aerosmith. This prompted Geffen to create a subsidiary label, DGC Records (formerly the David Geffen Company), in 1990; which focused on more progressive rock and would later embrace the emergence of alternative rock\u2014Nirvana being an example. Geffen also briefly distributed the first incarnation of Def American Recordings (now simply American Recordings) through Warner Music Group from 1988 to 1990.\nAcquisitions by MCA, Panasonic, and Seagram and departure of David Geffen (1990\u20131998).\nAfter nearly a decade of operating through WMG, its contract with the company ended. Geffen was then sold to MCA Music Entertainment, by then, a label division of the now-defunct MCA Inc. in 1990. The deal earned founder David Geffen an estimated US$800 million in stock and an employment contract that ran until then. Following the sale, Geffen Records operated as one of MCA's leading independently managed labels. A year later, MCA was acquired by Japanese conglomerate Matsushita Electric (now Panasonic), bringing Geffen, Universal Pictures and other sister companies along. The acquisition was completed on New Year's Day 1991 for US$6.6 billion.\nGeffen stepped down as head of the label in 1995 to collaborate with Jeffrey Katzenberg and Amblin Entertainment co-founder Steven Spielberg to form DreamWorks SKG (later DreamWorks Pictures), an ambitious multimedia empire dealing in film, television, books and music. Geffen Records would distribute releases on the newly founded company's DreamWorks Records subsidiary. That spring, Panasonic's ownership percentage of MCA was decreased to 20% when the remaining 80% was sold to Canadian distillery company Seagram in exchange for US$5.7 billion. In January 1996, Geffen funded and distributed a short-lived boutique label, Outpost Recordings, featuring the likes of Whiskeytown, Ry Cooder, Veruca Salt, and Hayden. On December 9, 1996, Geffen's parent company, MCA Inc., was reincorporated as Universal Studios, Inc. Even so, its music division, MCA Music Entertainment Group, was also renamed Universal Music Group. However, under UMG's new ownership, Geffen's fortunes began to dwindle.\nPolyGram merger and Interscope Geffen A&amp;M (1999\u20132003).\nOn December 10, 1998, Seagram completed its seven-month $10.6 billion plan to acquire PolyGram. As a result, PolyGram's music division was merged into Universal Music Group. Geffen now became sister labels to A&amp;M Records, Island Records, Mercury Records, Def Jam Recordings and Motown (which had previously been a part of UMG during its preceding MCA days from 1988 to 1993). In the ensuing months, a number of corporate reshufflings occurred, resulting in Geffen and A&amp;M, on New Year's Eve 1998, being merged into Interscope Geffen A&amp;M Records. Interscope Geffen A&amp;M became one of Universal Music Group's four new label factions alongside the Verve Label Group, Universal Motown Republic Group and the Island Def Jam Music Group. However, the IGA merger resulted in Geffen firing 110 of its employees. Unlike A&amp;M, which was closed entirely, Geffen was able to continue existing as a one-off brand under Interscope Records. At the same time, international distribution of Interscope and Geffen releases respectively switched from BMG Distribution and Island Records UK to ex-PolyGram label Polydor Records, which had already been distributing A&amp;M releases overseas (in return for A&amp;M handling Polydor releases in the U.S.); A&amp;M was forced to remain as a one-off active label for Interscope following a lawsuit by its co-founders Jerry Moss and Herb Alpert, which was later settled in 2003.\nIn October 1999, Jordan Schur (of Flip Records) was declared Geffen's new president; this led to Schur stepping down as the head of Flip, but he still managed to maintain control of the label, while certain acts from Flip's roster, such as Cold and Professional Murder Music, were transferred over to Geffen. Geffen's first release under Schur's leadership was the \" End of Days\" soundtrack, released in November 1999. Geffen became a predominantly rock music-based label.\nMCA, DGC and DreamWorks Records merger (2003).\nGeffen continued to do steady business\u2014even within 2003, UMG folded MCA Records into Geffen that July. Though Geffen had been substantially a pop-rock label, its absorption of MCA (and its back catalogs) led to a more diverse roster; with former MCA artists such as Mary J. Blige, The Roots, Blink-182, Rise Against, and Common now being transferred to the label. Meanwhile, DreamWorks Records, in October, also folded, with its artists roster, consisting of Nelly Furtado, Lifehouse and Rufus Wainwright, being absorbed by Geffen as well. The absorption occurred following a reorganization at DreamWorks Pictures, which resulted in DreamWorks Animation being divested and DreamWorks Records being acquired by UMG. During this time, the remains of DGC Records were also folded into Geffen, although the label was previously absorbed in 1999 following its merger with Interscope. Retained artists, Beck and Sonic Youth, were later redirected to record for Geffen afterwards; DGC was later reactivated in 2007, later operating under Interscope rather than Geffen.\nWith the mergers of MCA, DGC and DreamWorks into Geffen, more than 103 employees were laid off.\nContinued success (2003\u20132009).\nAs the mid-2000s progressed, Geffen's absorption of the MCA, DGC and DreamWorks labels, along with the signage of new acts such as Ashlee Simpson, Angels &amp; Airwaves and Snoop Dogg, had boosted the company to the extent that it began gaining equal footing with the main Interscope label, leading some industry insiders to speculate that it could revert to operating as an independently managed imprint at UMG again. In 2006, musician Ron Fair was named the chairman of Geffen. That same year, after disputes with Interscope co-founder Jimmy Iovine (at the time, the chairman and CEO of Interscope Geffen A&amp;M, parent unit of Geffen), former labelmates 50 Cent and Dr. Dre, rapper The Game was dismissed from G-Unit Records and Interscope division imprint Aftermath Entertainment (the respective labels of the aforementioned latter two), but was later transferred to Geffen to avoid contractual obligations with G-Unit. His sophomore studio album (also his first under the label), \"Doctor's Advocate\", debuted at number one on the U.S. \"Billboard\" 200 upon release on November 14, 2006.\nGeffen's urban division gained even more notoriety with the IGA resigning of Keyshia Cole through the imprint, following DGC's relaunch and A&amp;M's revitalization as A&amp;M Octone Records in 2007; Cole was previously signed to sister label A&amp;M early in her career from 2004 to that point. Her sophomore album, \" Just like You\", received critical praise and debuted at number two on the \"Billboard\" 200. However, at the end of 2007, Geffen was subsided further into Interscope. The restructuring resulted in Geffen laying off sixty employees.\nIn 2009, it was announced that Geffen Records had signed an agreement with the Holy See to produce an album of Marian songs and prayers from Pope Benedict XVI.\nRelaunches (2011\u20132017).\nInterscope Geffen A&amp;M chairman and CEO Jimmy Iovine relaunched Geffen in 2011, moving its headquarters from Santa Monica to New York City. Former manager of Kanye West, Gee Roberson, was appointed chairman. However, in late 2013, the label went idle with a majority of Geffen's artists now recording under Interscope.\nOn May 28, 2014, Iovine departed from Interscope Geffen A&amp;M as its chairman and CEO and hired Fueled by Ramen co-founder John Janick as his replacement.\nIn March 2017, Neil Jacobson was appointed president of Geffen Records to oversee the second relaunch of the label via new signings as well as reinvigoration of the label's legendary catalog.\nNeil Jacobson's departure and 2020s success (2019\u2013present).\nIn 2018, Interscope musician DJ Snake was drafted to Geffen to release his second studio album, \" Carte Blanche\", which commenced on July 26, 2019. Its single, \"Taki Taki\", went on to accumulate four million equivalent units in the United States and peak at number one on \"Billboard\"'s Hot Latin Songs chart.\nIn December 2019, Neil Jacobson vacated his position as the president of Geffen, leaving to start his own company, Crescent Drive Productions. The following month to a new year, in mid-January 2020, Lee L'Heureux was appointed the general manager of Geffen. The label then started to see more success from artists Rod Wave, Lil Durk, Yungblud and Hotboii (the former two were signed to Geffen through Todd Moscowitz's Alamo Records).\nIn a staff exchange that July, longtime Interscope executive Nicole Bilzerian was drafted to Geffen to become its executive vice president.\nOlivia Rodrigo joined Geffen in the fall of 2020. Her single, \"Drivers License\", made the number one position on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 in early 2021. That May, she released her debut album, \"Sour\". It accumulated 295,000 album-equivalent units. Its five-week reign at number one on the \"Billboard\" 200 became the longest by a female recording artist that year. \"Sour\" also made Rodrigo the first Geffen recording artist and first female artist overall to have a number one album under the label in nearly 13 years since Mary J. Blige's \"Growing Pains\" (2007).\nRodrigo followed up \"Sour\" in 2023 with \"Guts\". Released in September, it once again debuted at number one on the \"Billboard\" 200, though its first week units were moderately slim behind the artist's debut. Also, in 2023, Interscope artist Kali Uchis was drafted to Geffen before releasing her sophomore album, \"Red Moon in Venus\", earlier that March. The album peaked at number four on the Billboard 200, another top five charting success for the label that year.\nSince 2024, Geffen has been a part of Universal Music Group's Interscope Capitol Labels Group.\nIn July 2024, longtime former Geffen Records president Ed Rosenblatt, who served as president of Geffen Records from its inception in 1980 through its glory years of Guns N\u2019 Roses, Nirvana, Don Henley and countless others, died.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54977", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54977", "title": "Great depression", "text": ""}
{"id": "54979", "revid": "7304691", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54979", "title": "Waldwick", "text": "Waldwick may refer to the following:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "54980", "revid": "48994151", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54980", "title": "Adirondack Mountains", "text": "Mountains in northeastern New York, U.S.\nThe Adirondack Mountains ( ) are a massif of mountains in Northeastern New York which form a circular dome approximately wide and covering about . The region contains more than 100 peaks, including Mount Marcy, which is the highest point in New York at . The Adirondack High Peaks, a traditional list of 46 peaks over , are popular hiking destinations. There are over 200 named lakes with the number of smaller lakes, ponds, and other bodies of water reaching over 3,000. Among the named lakes around the mountains are Lake George, Lake Placid, and Lake Tear of the Clouds. The region has over of rivers.\nAlthough the mountains are formed from ancient rocks more than 1 billion years old, geologically, the mountains are relatively young and were created during recent periods of glaciation. Because of this, the Adirondacks have been referred to as \"new mountains from old rocks.\" It is theorized that there is a hotspot beneath the region, which causes continued uplift at the rate of annually.\nThe Adirondack mountain range has such unusual characteristics compared to the area around it that it is divided into its own province within the Appalachian Highlands physiographic division. It is bounded by three other provinces: the St. Lawrence (Champlain) on the north, northeast; the Appalachian Plateau to the south, southwest; and the Valley and Ridge to the southeast.\nThe entire region lies within Adirondack Park, a New York state protected area of over . The park was established in 1892 by the state legislature to protect the region's natural resources and to provide recreational opportunities for the public. It covers over 20 percent of New York state's land area.\nEtymology.\nThe word Adirondack is thought to come from the Mohawk word meaning \"eaters of trees\". The earliest written use of the name was in 1635 by Harmen Meyndertsz van den Bogaert in his Mohawk to Dutch glossary, found in his \"Journey into Mohawk Country\". He spelled it \"Adirondakx\" and said that it stood for Frenchmen, meaning the Algonquians who allied with the French. Another early use of the name, spelled \"Rontaks\", was in 1729 by French missionary Joseph-Fran\u00e7ois Lafitau. He explained that the word was used by the Iroquois as a derogatory term for groups of Algonquians who did not practice agriculture and therefore sometimes had to eat tree bark to survive harsh winters.\nThe Mohawks had no written language, so Europeans used various phonetic spellings of the word, including \"Achkokx\", \"Rondaxe\", and \"Adirondax.\" Such words were strongly associated with the region, but they were not yet considered a place name; an English map from 1761 labels the area simply \"Deer Hunting Country\". In 1838, the mountains were named \"Adirondacks\" by Ebenezer Emmons, the State Geologist for the northern New York State Geological District.\nThe Mohawks themselves referred to the mountains as \"Tsiiononteskowa,\" meaning \"big mountains.\" The Oneida meanwhile, used the word \"Latilu\u00b7taks,\" which meant \"They're eating the trees/beaver.\"\nHistory.\nThe first humans to live in the Adirondacks were Paleo-Indians who arrived around the 14th millennium\u00a0BC following the end of the Last Glacial Period. The earliest migrants arrived from the St. Lawrence River Valley to the north, and settled along the shores of the Champlain Sea. During the Archaic Period (8000\u20131000\u00a0BC) this semi-nomadic hunter-gatherer Laurentian culture inhabited the Adirondacks; evidence of their presence includes a projectile point of red-brown chert found in 2007 at the edge of Tupper Lake.\nDuring an interval of roughly 11,000 years following the end of the Last Glacial Period, the climate of the Adirondacks gradually warmed, with the area's tundra being replaced by forests that were now able to grow. During the transition between the Archaic and Woodland (1000\u00a0BC\u00a0\u2013 AD\u00a01000) periods, multiple different groups replaced the Laurentian culture\u2014including the Sylvan Lake, River, Middlesex, Point Peninsula, and Owasco cultures. By the time of the Owasco culture c.\u20091\u00a0AD, maize and beans were being cultivated in the uplands of the Adirondacks.\nThe first Iroquoian peoples, the Mohawk (or Kanyengehaga) and the Oneida (or Oneyotdehaga), arrived in the Adirondack region between 4,000 and 1,200 years ago. Both groups claimed the Adirondack Mountains as hunting grounds. According to Haudenosaunee historian Rick Hill, the region was considered a 'Dish with One Spoon,' symbolizing shared hunting resources between the groups. A group of Algonquian people, known as the Mahicans, also occupied the region, particularly the Hudson River Valley.\nThese were the groups that the first European explorers of the area encountered. European presence in the area began with a battle between Samuel de Champlain and a group of Mohawks, in what is now Ticonderoga in 1609. The Jesuit missionary Isaac Jogues became the first recorded European to travel through the center of the Adirondacks, as the captive of a Mohawk hunting party, in 1642.\nThe early European perception of the Adirondacks was of a vast, inhospitable wilderness. One map of the area from 1771 shows the region as a blank space in the northeastern corner of New York. In 1784, Thomas Pownhall wrote that the Native Americans referred to the area as \"the Dismal Wilderness, or the Habitation of Winter,\" and that the area was \"either not much known to them, or, if known, very wisely by them kept from the Knowledge of the Europeans.\" He clearly had the impression that native people did not live within the Adirondack mountains.\nBecause local Iroquoian and Algonquian tribes had been decimated first by smallpox and measles in the 1600s, then by wars with encroaching European settlers, there likely were very few people living in the region by the time Pownhall wrote his description. It is only relatively recently that numerous archaeological finds have definitively shown that Native Americans were indeed very present in the Adirondacks before European contact, hunting, making pottery, and practicing agriculture.\nThe European impression of a wild region devoid of human connection set up a narrative about wilderness that would persist through the next 200-some years of the region's history. While society's perception of the Adirondacks' value changed, they were always seen as a land of natural resources and physical beauty, not of human history. First the area was an inhospitable tangle, then a lucrative store of lumber. After the American Revolutionary War, New York State gained ownership of most of the land in the region.\nNeeding money to discharge war debts, the government sold nearly all the original public acreage about 7\u00a0million acres for pennies an acre. Lumbermen were welcomed to the interior, with few restraints, resulting in massive deforestation. Later, the wilderness character of the region became popular with the rise of the Romantic movement, and the Adirondacks became a destination for those wishing to escape the evils of city life. Rising concern over water quality and deforestation led to the creation of the Adirondack Park in 1885. In 1989, part of the Adirondack region was designated by UNESCO as the Champlain-Adirondack Biosphere Reserve.\nFor the more recent human history of the Adirondack region, see Adirondack Park.\nGeology.\nThe rocks of the Adirondack mountains originated about two billion years ago as thick sediments at the bottom of a sea located near the equator. Because of plate tectonics, these collided with Laurentia (the precursor of modern North America) in a mountain-building episode known as the Grenville orogeny. During this time the sedimentary rock was changed into metamorphic rock. It is these Proterozoic minerals and lithologies that make up the core of the massif. Minerals of interest include these:\nThe Adirondacks are thought to be uplifted by a hot spot in the Canadian Shield, in contrast to other mountain ranges in New York which were created in the Alleghenian Orogeny and are a part of the Appalachian chain (not to be confused with the cultural region of Appalachia).\nAround 600\u00a0million years ago, as Laurentia drifted away from Baltica (European Craton), the area began to be pulled apart, forming the Iapetus Ocean. Faults developed, running north to northeast, which formed valleys and deep lakes. Examples visible today include the grabens Lake George and Schroon Lake. By this time the Grenville mountains had been eroded away and the area was covered by a shallow sea. Several thousand feet of sediment accumulated on the sea bed. Trilobites were the principal life-form of the sea bed, and fossil tracks can be seen in the Potsdam sandstone floor of the Paul Smiths Visitor Interpretive Center.\nAbout 10\u00a0million years ago, the region began to be uplifted. It has been lifted about and is continuing at about per year, which is greater than the rate of denudation. The cause of the uplift is unknown, but geologists theorize that it is caused by a hot spot in the Earth's crust. A recent study has revealed a column of seismically slow materials about deep beneath the Adirondack Mountains, which was interpreted to be the upwelling asthenosphere contributing to the uplift of the mountains. The occurrence of earthquake swarms near the center of the massif at Blue Mountain Lake may be evidence of this. Some of the earthquakes have exceeded 5 on the Richter magnitude scale.\nStarting about 2.5\u00a0million years ago, a cycle of Pleistocene glacial and interglacial periods began which covered the area in ice. During the most recent episode, the Laurentide Ice Sheet covered most of northern North America between about 95,000 and 20,000 years ago. After this the climate warmed, but it took nearly 10,000 years for a thick layer of ice to completely melt. Evidence of this period includes:\nSoils in the area are generally thin, sandy, acidic, and infertile, having developed since the glacial retreat.\nClimate.\nThe climate is strongly continental, with high humidity and precipitation year-round. The Adirondacks typically experience pleasantly warm, rainy weather in the summer (June\u2013August), with temperatures in the range of , cooler than the rest of New York State due to the higher elevation. Summer evenings in the Adirondacks are chilly, with temperatures ranging on average between . Winters (December\u2013March) are long, cold, snowy and harsh, with temperatures ranging from . Winter nights are frigid, with temperatures between . Spring (April\u2013May) and fall (September\u2013November) are short transitional seasons. \nEcology.\nThe Adirondack Mountains form the southernmost part of the Eastern forest-boreal transition ecoregion. They are heavily forested, and contain one of the southernmost distributions of the taiga ecotype in North America. The forests of the Adirondacks include spruce, pine and deciduous trees. Lumbering, once an important industry, has been much restricted by the creation of state forest preserve.\nThe mountains include many wetlands, of which there are three kinds:\nBreeding birds include northern forest specialists not found anywhere else in the state, such as boreal chickadees, Canada jays, spruce grouse, black-backed woodpeckers, common loons and crossbills. Mammals include raccoons, beavers, river otters, bobcats, moose, black bears, and coyotes. Extirpated or extinct mammals that formerly roamed the Adirondacks include the eastern cougar, eastern elk, wolverine, caribou, eastern wolf, and the Canada lynx. Attempted reintroductions of elk and lynx in the 20th century failed for numerous reasons, including poaching, vehicle collisions, and conservation incompetence.\nNearly 60 percent of the park is covered with northern hardwood forest. Above , conditions are too poor for hardwoods to thrive, and the trees become mixed with or replaced by balsam fir and red spruce. Above black spruce replace red. Higher still, only trees short enough to be covered in snow during the winter can survive.\nA small area on the highest peaks exists above the tree line and has an alpine climate. These areas are covered by plants which occupied a large lowland tundra following the most recent period of glaciation. The amount of area covered by this ecosystem changes from year to year due to local climate changes, and has been estimated to only cover between . The alpine ecosystem is considered extremely fragile, and was damaged by hikers prior to a 1970s campaign by the Adirondack Mountain Club to preserve it.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54981", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54981", "title": "Aleutian Island", "text": ""}
{"id": "54982", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54982", "title": "Adirondack Mountain", "text": ""}
{"id": "54983", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54983", "title": "Adirondack mountains", "text": ""}
{"id": "54984", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54984", "title": "Adirondack mountain", "text": ""}
{"id": "54985", "revid": "35807425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54985", "title": "Whoopi Goldberg", "text": "American actor, comedian, and television personality (born 1955)\nCaryn Elaine Johnson (born November 13, 1955), known professionally as Whoopi Goldberg (), is an American actor, comedian, author, and television personality. The recipient of numerous accolades, she is one of few people to receive an Emmy Award, Grammy Award, Academy Award, and Tony Award, collectively known as the EGOT (Emmy, Grammy, Oscar, Tony). In 2001, she received the Mark Twain Prize for American Humor.\nGoldberg began her career on stage in 1983 with her one-woman show, \"Spook Show\", which transferred to Broadway under the title \"Whoopi Goldberg\", running from 1984 to 1985. She won a Grammy Award for Best Comedy Album for the recording of the show. Her film breakthrough came in 1985 with her role as Celie, a mistreated woman in the Deep South, in Steven Spielberg's period drama film \"The Color Purple\", for which she won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture \u2013 Drama. For her role as an eccentric psychic in the romantic fantasy film \"Ghost\" (1990), she won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress, becoming the second African-American woman to win an Oscar. She starred in the comedy \"Sister Act\" (1992) and its sequel \"\" (1993), becoming the highest-paid actress at the time. She also acted in \"Jumpin' Jack Flash\" (1986), \"Clara's Heart\" (1988), \"Soapdish\" (1991), \"Corrina, Corrina\" (1994), \"Ghosts of Mississippi\" (1996), \"Girl, Interrupted\" (1999), and \"Till\" (2022). She also voiced roles in \"The Lion King\" (1994) and \"Toy Story 3\" (2010).\nOn stage, Goldberg has starred in the Broadway revivals of Stephen Sondheim's musical \"A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum\" and August Wilson's play \"Ma Rainey's Black Bottom\". She won a Tony Award as a producer of the musical \"Thoroughly Modern Millie\". In 2011 she received her third Tony Award nomination for the stage adaptation of \"Sister Act\" (2011). On television, Goldberg portrayed Guinan in the science fiction series ' (1988\u20131993), and ' (2022). Since 2007, she has co-hosted and moderated the daytime talk show \"The View\", for which she won the Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Talk Show Host. She has hosted the Academy Awards ceremony four times.\nEarly life.\nCaryn Elaine Johnson was born in Manhattan, New York City, on November 13, 1955, the daughter of Emma Johnson (n\u00e9e Harris), a nurse and teacher, and Robert James Johnson Jr., a Baptist clergyman. She was raised in a public housing project, the Chelsea-Elliot Houses, in New York City.\nGoldberg described her mother as a \"stern, strong, and wise woman\" who raised her as a single mother with her brother Clyde (c.\u20091949\u00a0\u2013 2015). Raised Catholic, she attended a local parochial school in Manhattan, St Columba's. Her more recent forebears migrated north from Faceville, Georgia; Palatka, Florida; and Virginia. She dropped out of Washington Irving High School.\nShe has stated that her stage forename (\"Whoopi\") was taken from a whoopee cushion: \"When you're performing on stage, you never really have time to go into the bathroom and close the door. So if you get a little gassy, you've got to let it go. So people used to say to me, 'You're like a whoopee cushion.' And that's where the name came from.\"\nAbout her stage surname, she claimed in 2011, \"My mother did not name me Whoopi, but Goldberg is my name\u2014it's part of my family, part of my heritage, just like being black,\" and \"I just know I am Jewish. I practice nothing. I don't go to temple, but I do remember the holidays.\" She has stated that \"people would say 'Come on, are you Jewish?' And I always say 'Would you ask me that if I was white? I bet not.'\" One account suggests that her mother, Emma Johnson, thought the family's original surname was \"not Jewish enough\" for her daughter to become a star. Goldberg has said that her family is \"Jewish, Buddhist, Baptist, and Catholic.\"\nResearcher Henry Louis Gates Jr. found that all of Goldberg's traceable ancestors were black, that she had no known Jewish ancestry, and that none of her ancestors were named Goldberg. Results of a DNA test, revealed in the 2006 PBS documentary \"African American Lives\", traced part of her ancestry to the Papel and Bayote people of modern-day Guinea-Bissau of West Africa. The show identified her great-great-grandparents as William and Elsie Washington, who had acquired property in northern Florida in 1873, and mentions they were among a very small number of black people who became landowners through homesteading in the years following the Civil War. The show also mentions that her grandparents were living in Harlem, and that her grandfather was working as a Pullman porter.\nIn the 1970s, Goldberg moved to San Diego, California, where she became a waitress, then to Berkeley, where she worked odd jobs, including as a bank teller, a mortuary cosmetologist, and a bricklayer. She joined the avant-garde theater troupe the Blake Street Hawkeyes and gave comedy and acting classes; Courtney Love was one of her acting students. Goldberg was also in a number of theater productions. In 1978, she witnessed a midair collision of two planes in San Diego, causing her to develop a fear of flying and post-traumatic stress disorder.\nCareer.\n1980s: Early work and recognition.\nGoldberg trained under acting teacher Uta Hagen at the HB Studio in New York City. She first appeared onscreen in \"\" (1982), an avant-garde ensemble feature by San Francisco filmmaker William Farley.\nIn 1983 and 1984, she \"first came to national prominence with her one-woman show\" in which she portrayed Moms Mabley, \"Moms\", first performed in Berkeley, California, and then at the Victoria Theatre in San Francisco; the Oakland Museum of California preserves a poster advertising the show.\nShe created \"The Spook Show\", a one-woman show composed of different character monologues in 1983. Director Mike Nichols \"discovered\" her when he saw her perform. In an interview, he recalled that he \"burst into tears\", and that he and Goldberg \"fell into each other's arms\" when they first met backstage. Goldberg considered Nichols her mentor. Nichols helped her transfer the show to Broadway, where it was retitled \"Whoopi Goldberg\". The show ran from October 24, 1984, to March 10, 1985, and was taped and broadcast by HBO as \"Whoopi Goldberg: Direct from Broadway.\" The recording of the special was awarded the Grammy Award for Best Comedy Album, making Goldberg the first Black female comedian to win the Grammy.\nGoldberg's Broadway performance caught the eye of director Steven Spielberg while she performed in The Belly Room at The Comedy Store. Spielberg gave her the lead role in his film \"The Color Purple\", based on the novel by Alice Walker. It was released in late 1985, and was a critical and commercial success. Film critic Roger Ebert described Goldberg's performance as \"one of the most amazing debut performances in movie history\". It was nominated for 11 Academy Awards, including a nomination for Goldberg as Best Actress. She won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture \u2013 Drama for her portrayal of Celie, becoming the first Black actress to win in this category.\nBetween 1985 and 1988, Goldberg was the busiest female star, making seven films. She starred in Penny Marshall's directorial debut \"Jumpin' Jack Flash\" (1986) and began a relationship with David Claessen, a director of photography on the set; they married later that year. The film was a modest success, and during the next two years, three additional motion pictures featured Goldberg: \"Burglar\" (1987), \"Fatal Beauty\" (1987), and \"The Telephone\" (1988). Though they were not as successful, Goldberg garnered awards from the NAACP Image Awards. Goldberg and Claessen divorced after the poor box office performance of \"The Telephone\", in which she was contracted to perform. She tried unsuccessfully to sue the film's producers. \"Clara's Heart\" (1988) did poorly at the box office, though her own performance was critically acclaimed. She made a guest appearance in Michael Jackson's short film for the song \"Liberian Girl\". As the 1980s concluded, she hosted numerous HBO specials of \"Comic Relief\" with fellow comedians Robin Williams and Billy Crystal. \n1990s: Mainstream breakthrough.\nIn January 1990, Goldberg starred with Jean Stapleton in the situation comedy \"Bagdad Cafe\" (inspired by the 1987 film of the same name). The sitcom ran for two seasons on CBS. Simultaneously, she starred in \"The Long Walk Home\", portraying a woman in the US civil rights movement. She played a psychic in the film \"Ghost\" (1990) and became the first black woman to win the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress in nearly 50 years, and the second black woman to win an Academy Award for acting (the first being Hattie McDaniel for \"Gone with the Wind\" in 1940). She also won the BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role and the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress \u2013 Motion Picture. \"Premiere\" named her character Oda Mae Brown in its list of Top 100 best film characters.\nGoldberg starred in \"Soapdish\" (1991) and had a recurring role on ' between 1988 and 1993 as Guinan, a character she reprised in two \"Star Trek\" films. She made a cameo in the Traveling Wilburys 1991 music video \"Wilbury Twist\". On May 29, 1992, the film \"Sister Act\" was released. It grossed well over US$200\u00a0million (equivalent to $\u00a0million in 2024), and Goldberg was nominated for a Golden Globe Award. That year, she starred in \"The Player\" and \"Sarafina!\" She also hosted the 34th Annual Grammy Awards, receiving praise from the \"Sun-Sentinel\"'s Deborah Wilker for bringing to life what Wilker considered \"stodgy and stale\" ceremonies. During the next year, Goldberg hosted a late-night talk show, \"The Whoopi Goldberg Show\", and starred in two more films: \"Made in America\" and '. With an estimated salary of $7\u201312 million for \"\" (1993), she was the highest-paid actress at the time. From 1994 to 1995, she appeared in \"Corrina, Corrina\", \"The Lion King\" (voice), \"Theodore Rex\", \"The Little Rascals\", \"The Pagemaster\" (voice), \"Boys on the Side\", and \"Moonlight and Valentino\", and guest-starred on \"Muppets Tonight\" in 1996.\nIn 1994, Goldberg became the first black woman to host the Academy Awards ceremony starting with the 66th Oscar telecast. She hosted it again in 1996, 1999, and 2002, and has been regarded as one of the show's best hosts. Goldberg starred in four motion pictures in 1996: \"Bogus\" (with G\u00e9rard Depardieu and Haley Joel Osment), \"Eddie\", \"The Associate\" (with Dianne Wiest), and \"Ghosts of Mississippi\" (with Alec Baldwin and James Woods). During the filming of \"Eddie\", she began dating co-star Frank Langella, a relationship that lasted until early 2000. In October 1997, she and ghostwriter Daniel Paisner cowrote \"Book\", a collection featuring Goldberg's insights and opinions. Also in 1996, Goldberg replaced Nathan Lane as Pseudolus in the Broadway revival of Stephen Sondheim's musical comedy \"A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum\". Greg Evans of \"Variety\" regarded her \"thoroughly modern style\" as \"a welcome invitation to a new audience that could find this 1962 musical as dated as ancient Rome\". \"The Washington Post\"'s Chip Crews deemed Goldberg \"a pip and a pro\", and that she \"ultimately [...] steers the show past its rough spots\".\nFrom 1998 to 2001, Goldberg took supporting roles in \"How Stella Got Her Groove Back\" with Angela Bassett, \"Girl, Interrupted\" with Winona Ryder and Angelina Jolie, \"Kingdom Come\", and \"Rat Race\" with an all-star ensemble cast. She starred in the ABC versions of \"Cinderella\" and \"A Knight in Camelot\". In 1998 she gained a new audience when she became the \"Center Square\" on \"Hollywood Squares\", hosted by Tom Bergeron. She also served as executive producer, for which she was nominated for four Emmy Awards. She left the series in 2002. In 1999, she voiced Ransome in the British animated children's show \"Foxbusters\" by Cosgrove Hall Films. AC Nielsen EDI ranked her as the actress appearing in the most theatrical films in the 1990s, with 29 films grossing $1.3\u00a0billion in the U.S. and Canada (equivalent to $\u00a0billion in 2024).\n2000s: Established actor and career expansion.\nGoldberg performed the role of Califia, the Queen of the Island of California, for a theater presentation called \"Golden Dreams\" at Disney California Adventure Park, the second gate at the Disneyland Resort, in 2000. The show, which explains the history of the Golden State (California), opened on February 8, 2001, with the rest of the park. \"Golden Dreams\" closed in September 2008 to make way for the planned for DCA. In 2001, Goldberg co-hosted the 50th Anniversary of \"I Love Lucy\". \nIn 2001, Goldberg hosted the documentary short \"The Making of A Charlie Brown Christmas\" and later portrayed Death in \"Monkeybone\". In 2003, she returned to television in \"Whoopi\", which was canceled after one season. On her 46th birthday, she was honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. She also appeared alongside Samuel L. Jackson and Angela Bassett in the HBO documentary \"Unchained Memories\" (2003), narrating slave narratives. During the next two years, she became a spokeswoman for Slim Fast and produced two television series: Lifetime's original drama \"Strong Medicine\", which ran six seasons; and \"Whoopi's Littleburg\", a children's television series on Nickelodeon. In 2002, Goldberg completed the EGOT (Emmy, Grammy, Oscar, and Tony Awards) when she received the Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Special Class Special as a producer of \"Beyond Tara: The Extraordinary Life of Hattie McDaniel\" and the Tony Award for Best Musical for producing \"Thoroughly Modern Millie\". She is the first Black woman to be an EGOT recipient. Goldberg returned to the stage in 2003, starring as blues singer Ma Rainey in the Broadway revival of August Wilson's historical drama \"Ma Rainey's Black Bottom\" at the Royale Theatre. She was also one of the show's producers.\nGoldberg was involved in controversy at a fundraiser for John Kerry at Radio City Music Hall in New York in July 2004 when she made a sexual joke about President George W. Bush by waving a bottle of wine, pointed toward her pubic area, and said, \"We should keep \"Bush\" where he belongs, and not in the White House.\" As result, Slim-Fast dropped her from their ad campaign. Later that year, she revived her one-woman show at the Lyceum Theatre on Broadway in honor of its 20th anniversary; Charles Isherwood of \"The New York Times\" called the opening night performance an \"intermittently funny but sluggish evening of comic portraiture\". Goldberg made guest appearances on \"Everybody Hates Chris\" as elderly character Louise Clarkson.\nIn July 2006, Goldberg became the main host of the Universal Studios Hollywood Studio Tour, in which she appears multiple times in video clips shown to the guests on monitors placed on the trams. From August 2006 to March 2008, Goldberg hosted \"Wake Up with Whoopi\", a nationally syndicated morning radio talk and entertainment program. In October 2007, Goldberg announced on the air that she was going to retire from acting because she was no longer sent scripts, saying, \"You know, there's no room for the very talented Whoopi. There's no room right now in the marketplace of cinema\". On December 13, 2008, she guest starred on \"The Naked Brothers Band\", a Nickelodeon rock- mockumentary television series. Before the episode premiered, on February 18, 2008, the band performed on \"The View\" and the band members were interviewed by Goldberg and Sherri Shepherd. That same year, Goldberg hosted 62nd Tony Awards. \nGoldberg made a guest appearance on the situation comedy \"30 Rock\" during the series' fourth season, in which she played herself, counseling Tracy Jordan on winning the \"EGOT\", the coveted combination of Emmy, Grammy, Oscar, and Tony Awards. On July 14, 2008, Goldberg announced on \"The View\" that from July 29 to September 7, she would perform in the Broadway musical \"Xanadu\". On November 13, 2008, Goldberg's birthday, she announced live on \"The View\" that she would be producing, along with Stage Entertainment, the premiere of \"Sister Act: The Musical\" at the London Palladium. \n2010s: Television and stage focus.\nGoldberg has been a frequent guest narrator at Disney's Candlelight Processional at Walt Disney World. She also appeared on the seventh season of the cooking reality series \"Hell's Kitchen\" as a special guest. On January 14, 2010, Goldberg made a one-night-only appearance at the Minskoff Theatre to perform in the mega-hit musical \"The Lion King\". That same year, she attended the Life Ball in Austria. In 2010, she starred in the Tyler Perry movie \"For Colored Girls\", alongside Janet Jackson, Phylicia Rashad, Thandie Newton, Loretta Devine, Anika Noni Rose, Kimberly Elise, Kerry Washington, and Macy Gray. The film received generally good reviews from critics and grossed over $38\u00a0million worldwide. The same year, she voiced Stretch in the Disney/Pixar animated movie \"Toy Story 3\". The movie received critical acclaim and grossed $1.067\u00a0billion worldwide. \nGoldberg made her West End debut as the Mother Superior in a musical version of \"Sister Act\" for a limited engagement set for August 10\u201331, 2010, but prematurely left the cast on August 27 to be with her family; her mother had had a severe stroke. However, she later returned to the cast for five performances. The show closed on October 30, 2010.\nGoldberg had a recurring role on the television series \"Glee\" during its third and fourth seasons as Carmen Tibideaux, a renowned Broadway performer and opera singer and the dean at a fictional performing arts college NYADA (New York Academy of the Dramatic Arts). In 2011, she had a cameo in \"The Muppets\". In 2012, Goldberg guest starred as Jane Marsh, Sue Heck's guidance counselor on \"The Middle\". She voiced the Magic Mirror on Disney XD's \"The 7D\". In 2014, she also portrayed a character in the superhero film \"Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles\" (2014). She also appeared as herself in Chris Rock's \"Top Five\" and starred in the romantic comedy film \"Big Stone Gap\".\nIn 2016, Goldberg executive produced a reality television series called \"Strut\", based on transgender models from the modeling agency Slay Model Management in Los Angeles. The series aired on Oxygen. In 2017, she voiced Ursula, the Sea Witch and Uma's mother, in the TV movie \"Descendants 2\". In 2018, she starred in the Tyler Perry's film \"Nobody's Fool\", alongside Tiffany Haddish, Omari Hardwick, Mehcad Brooks, Amber Riley, and Tika Sumpter. That same year, she also starred in the comedy-drama film \"Furlough\", alongside Tessa Thompson, Melissa Leo, and Anna Paquin. In 2019, Goldberg's voice was used for the role of the Giant's Wife in the Hollywood Bowl production of \"Into the Woods\".\n2020s: Current work.\nIn an appearance on \"The View\" on January 22, 2020, Patrick Stewart invited Goldberg to reprise her role as Guinan during the second season of \"\". She immediately accepted his offer. Goldberg also starred in \"The Stand\", a CBS All Access miniseries based on the 1978 novel of the same name by Stephen King, portraying Mother Abagail, a 108-year-old woman. In 2020, it was announced Goldberg was set to return in \"Sister Act 3\" with Tyler Perry producing. The film is slated to debut on Disney+.\nGoldberg also stars in the biographical film \"Till\" (2021), written and directed by Chinonye Chukwu, which she also produced. The film focuses on abduction and lynching of Emmett Till with Goldberg playing Till's grandmother, Alma Carthan. The film debuted at the 60th New York Film Festival. Goldberg guest starred on the Disney Channel show \"Amphibia\" as the character Mother Olms. In 2023, she appeared in a cameo role in the musical film \"The Color Purple\" playing a midwife. She also took supporting roles in the drama \"Ezra\" (2023) and the western \"Outlaw Posse\" (2024).\nGoldberg returned to the stage playing Miss Hannigan in the musical \"Annie\" as part of a limited engagement at The Theater at Madison Square Garden from December 4, 2024, to January 5, 2025. \"The New York Times\" praised Goldberg's performance describing her as a \"holiday gift\" adding, \"In a just sweet enough production with a strong cast, the \"View\" host delivers a performance that reaffirms her savvy as a comic actor.\" Patrick Ryan of \"USA Today\" agreed writing, \"[She] is perfectly prickly and altogether hilarious in her first stage acting role in more than 15 years\".\nGoldberg started filming the Italian soap opera \"Un posto al sole (soap opera)\" on November 17, 2025 in a recurring role.\nOther ventures.\n\"The View\".\nOn September 4, 2007, Goldberg became the new moderator and co-host of \"The View\", replacing Rosie O'Donnell. Goldberg's debut as moderator drew 3.4\u00a0million viewers, 1 million fewer than O'Donnell's debut ratings. However, after 2 weeks, \"The View\" was averaging 3.5\u00a0million total viewers under Goldberg, a 7-percent increase from 3.3\u00a0million under O'Donnell the previous season.\nGoldberg has made controversial comments on the program on several occasions. One of her first appearances involved defending Michael Vick's participation in dogfighting as a result of \"cultural upbringing\". In 2009, she opined that Roman Polanski's rape conviction of a thirteen-year-old in 1977 was not \"rape-rape\". She later clarified that she had intended to distinguish between statutory rape and forcible rape. The following year, in response to alleged comments by Mel Gibson considered racist, she said: \"I don't like what he did here, but I know Mel and I know he's not a racist\".\nIn 2015, Goldberg was initially a defender of Bill Cosby from the rape allegations made against him, questioning why Cosby had never been arrested or tried for them. She later changed her stance, stating that \"all of the information that's out there kinda points to 'guilt'.\" After learning that the statute of limitations on these allegations had expired and thus Cosby could not be tried, she also stated her support for removing the statute of limitations for rape.\nOn January 31, 2022, Goldberg drew widespread criticism for stating on the show that the Holocaust was not based on race but \"about man's inhumanity to man\", telling her co-hosts: \"This is white people doing it to white people, so y'all going to fight amongst yourselves.\" She apologized on Twitter later that day. She maintained that the Nazis' issue was with ethnicity and not race on \"The Late Show with Stephen Colbert\" that same day, which drew further criticism. Goldberg issued another apology on air the following day. She was subsequently suspended from \"The View\" for two weeks over the comments.\nActivism.\nIn 2006, Goldberg appeared during the 20th anniversary of \"Comic Relief\". Goldberg is an advocate for human rights, moderating a panel at the Alliance of Youth Movements Summit on how social networks can be used to fight violent extremism in 2008, and also moderating a panel at the UN on human rights, children and armed conflict, terrorism, and reconciliation in 2009. She gave a short message at the beginning of the Junior Eurovision Song Contest 2008 wishing all the participants good luck, and stressing the importance of UNICEF, the official charity of the Junior Eurovision Song Contest. Since its launch in 2008, Goldberg has been a contributor for wowOwow.com, a new website for women to talk culture, politics, and gossip. \nOn April 1, 2010, Goldberg joined Cyndi Lauper in the launch of her Give a Damn campaign to bring a wider awareness of discrimination of the LGBT community and to invite straight people to ally with the gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender community. Her high-profile support for LGBT rights and AIDS activism dates from the 1987 March on Washington, in which she participated. In May 2017, she spoke in support of transgender rights at the 28th GLAAD Media Awards.\nGoldberg is on the Board of Selectors of Jefferson Awards for Public Service. She also serves on the National Council Advisory Board of the National Museum of American Illustration. On an episode of \"The View\" that aired on May 9, 2012, Goldberg stated she is a member of the National Rifle Association of America. She was a speaker at the 2017 Women's March in New York City and was such again at the following year's event. \nOn January 24, 2021, Goldberg appeared with Tom Everett Scott as guests on the \"AmAIRican Grabbuddies\" marathon fundraising episode of \"The George Lucas Talk Show\", where she spoke of her time working on \"Snow Buddies\" and raised money for the ASPCA.\nEntrepreneurship.\nGoldberg co-founded Whoopi &amp; Maya, a company that made medical cannabis products for women seeking relief from menstrual cramps. Goldberg says she was inspired to go into business by \"a lifetime of difficult periods and the fact that cannabis was literally the only thing that gave me relief\". The company was launched in April 2016 but announced in February 2020 that it was ceasing operations. In 2021, Goldberg announced the launch of a new line of cannabis products, \"Emma &amp; Clyde\", named for her late mother and brother.\nOn June 13, 2025, Goldberg appeared on the CBS Mornings to announce that she had co-founded an all women's sports network, AWSN, that is now streaming on Pluto TV.\nArtistry.\nGoldberg has stated that her influences are Richard Pryor, George Carlin, Moms Mabley, Lenny Bruce, Joan Rivers, Eddie Murphy, Bill Cosby, Sidney Poitier, and Harry Belafonte. \nAccording to an anecdote told by Nichelle Nichols in \"Trekkies\" (1997), a young Goldberg was watching ', and on seeing Nichols' character Uhura, exclaimed, \"Momma! There's a black lady on television and she ain't no maid!\" This spawned Goldberg's lifelong \"Star Trek\" fandom, and she eventually joined the franchise as Guinan in '.\nPersonal life.\nGoldberg has been married three times. She was married to drug counselor Alvin Martin from 1973 to 1979; to cinematographer David Claessen from 1986 to 1988; and to union organizer Lyle Trachtenberg from 1994 to 1995. She has had live-in relationships with actor Frank Langella and playwright David Schein. Her other ex-boyfriends include businessman Michael Visbal, orthodontist Jeffrey Cohen, camera operator Edward Gold, and actors Timothy Dalton and Ted Danson. Danson controversially appeared in blackface during his 1993 Friars Club roast; Goldberg wrote some of his jokes for the event and defended Danson after a media furor.\nShe has stated that she has no plans to marry again: \"Some people are not meant to be married and I am not meant to. I'm sure it is wonderful for lots of people.\" In a 2011 interview with Piers Morgan, she explained that she was never in love with the men she married and commented: \"You have to really be committed to them...I don't have that commitment. I'm committed to my family.\"\nOn May 9, 1974, Goldberg gave birth to a daughter, Alexandrea Martin, who also became an actress and producer. Through her daughter, Goldberg has three grandchildren and a great-granddaughter. On August 29, 2010, Goldberg's mother, Emma Johnson, died after having a stroke. She left London at the time, where she had been performing in the musical \"Sister Act\", but returned to perform on October 22, 2010. In 2015, Goldberg's brother Clyde died of a brain aneurysm.\nIn 1991, Goldberg spoke out about her abortion in \"\". In that book, she spoke about using a coat hanger to terminate a pregnancy at age 14. She said she had six or seven abortions by the age of 25 and that birth control pills failed to stop several of her pregnancies. After the 2022 Kansas abortion referendum, Goldberg claimed that God would support abortion rights because he gave women freedom of choice.\nGoldberg has stated that she was once a \"functioning\" drug addict. She has stated that she smoked marijuana before accepting the Best Supporting Actress award for \"Ghost\" in 1991.\nGoldberg has dyslexia. She has lived in Llewellyn Park, a neighborhood in West Orange, New Jersey, saying she moved there to be able to be outside in private. She maintains an additional summer residence on the coast of Sardinia. She has expressed a preference for defining herself by the gender-neutral term \"actor\" rather than \"actress\", saying: \"An actress can only play a woman. I'm an actor\u2014I can play anything.\" In March 2019, Goldberg revealed that she had been battling pneumonia and sepsis, which caused her to take a leave of absence from \"The View\".\nOn a season 9 episode of \"Finding Your Roots\", featuring Pro Football Hall of Fame tight end Tony Gonzalez, it was revealed Goldberg and Gonzalez are distant cousins.\nActing credits and awards.\nHaving acted in over 150 films, Goldberg is one of the 19 people to achieve the EGOT, having won the four major American awards for professional entertainers: an Emmy (Television), a Grammy (Music), an Oscar (Film), and a Tony (Theater). She is the first black woman to have achieved all four awards.\nGoldberg has received two Academy Award nominations, for \"The Color Purple\" and \"Ghost\" (winning for \"Ghost\"). She is the first African-American actor to have received Academy Award nominations for both Best Actress and Best Supporting Actress, and the second African-American woman to win an Oscar. She has received three Golden Globe Award nominations, winning two (Best Actress in 1986 for \"The Color Purple\", and Best Supporting Actress in 1991 for \"Ghost\"). For \"Ghost\", she also won a BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role in 1991.\nShe won a Grammy Award for Best Comedy Recording in 1985 for \"Whoopi Goldberg: Original Broadway Show Recording\", becoming only the second solo woman performer\u2014not part of a duo or team\u2014to receive the award, and the first African-American woman. Goldberg is one of only three single women performers to receive that award. She won a Tony Award in 2002 as a producer of the Broadway musical \"Thoroughly Modern Millie\". She has received eight Daytime Emmy Award nominations, winning two. She has received nine Primetime Emmy Award nominations. In 2009, Goldberg won the Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Talk Show Host for her work on \"The View\". She shared the award with her then co-hosts Joy Behar, Sherri Shepherd, Elisabeth Hasselbeck, and Barbara Walters.\nGoldberg is the recipient of the 1985 Drama Desk Award for Outstanding One-Person Show for her solo performance on Broadway. She has won three People's Choice Awards. She has been nominated for five American Comedy Awards with two wins (Funniest Supporting Actress in 1991 for \"Ghost\" and Funniest Actress in 1993 for \"Sister Act\"). She was the three-time (and inaugural) winner of the Kids' Choice Award for Favorite Movie Actress. In 2001, she became the first African-American female to receive the Mark Twain Prize for American Humor.\nIn 1990, Goldberg was officially named an honorary member of the Harlem Globetrotters exhibition basketball team by the members. In 1999, she received the Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation Vanguard Award for her continued work in supporting the gay and lesbian community, as well as the Women in Film Crystal Award for outstanding women who, through their endurance and the excellence of their work, have helped to expand the role of women within the entertainment industry. In July 2010, the Ride of Fame honored Goldberg with a double-decker tour bus in New York City for her life's achievements. In 2017, Goldberg was named a Disney Legend for her contributions to the Walt Disney Company.\nBibliography.\nChildren's books\nNon-fiction\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54987", "revid": "1368779", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54987", "title": "Assembly", "text": "Assembly may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "54989", "revid": "44318805", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54989", "title": "Marillion", "text": "British progressive rock band\nMarillion are a British neo-prog band, formed in Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire, in 1979. They emerged from the post-punk music scene in Britain and existed as a bridge between the styles of punk rock and classic progressive rock, becoming the most commercially successful neo-prog band of the 1980s.\nMarillion released their debut single \"Market Square Heroes\" in 1982, followed by their first album \"Script for a Jester's Tear\" in 1983. They have released 20 studio albums in total. The band achieved eight Top 10 UK albums between 1983 and 1994, including a No. 1 album in 1985 with \"Misplaced Childhood\". The album also produced two UK Top 10 singles in \"Kayleigh\" (No. 2) and \"Lavender\" (No. 5), while the follow-up album, 1987's \"Clutching at Straws\", included another UK Top 10 single \"Incommunicado\" (No. 6). \"Clutching at Straws\" was the band's last studio album with original lead singer Fish, who left for a solo career in late 1988. Altogether, during the Fish era, Marillion scored 11 Top 40 hits on the UK Singles Chart. \"Kayleigh\" also entered the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 in the United States.\nIn early 1989, Marillion announced Steve Hogarth as their new lead singer. The first album with him, \"Seasons End\", was another Top 10 hit, and albums continued to chart well until their departure from EMI Records, following the release of their 1996 live album \"Made Again\", and the dissipation of the band's mainstream popularity in the late 1990s; save for a resurgence in the mid- to late-2000s, they have essentially been a cult act since then. Since the arrival of Hogarth, Marillion have achieved a further 12 Top 40 hit singles in the UK, including 2004's \"You're Gone\" from the album \"Marbles\", which charted at No.\u00a07 and is the biggest hit of the Hogarth era. In 2016, the album \"Fuck Everyone and Run (F E A R)\" returned them to the UK Albums Chart Top 10 for the first time since 1994's \"Brave\". Their most recent album, 2022's \"An Hour Before It's Dark\", entered the UK Albums Chart at No. 2, their highest chart position since \"Clutching at Straws\" in 1987. Marillion continue to tour internationally, becoming ranked 38th in \"Classic Rock\"'s \"50 Best Live Acts of All Time\" in 2008. \nDespite unpopularity in the mainstream media and a consistently unfashionable status within the British music industry, Marillion have maintained a loyal international fanbase, becoming widely acknowledged as playing a pioneering role in the development of crowdfunding and fan-funded music. They have sold over 15 million albums worldwide.\nHistory.\nThe Fish era.\nFormation and early years (1978\u20131982).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"I thought they were a lot like Camel. It was also very clear to me that Steve Rothery was a brilliant guitarist.\"\n\u2014Fish on his first impression of the band\nIn 1977, drummer Mick Pointer joined Electric Gypsy, which also included Doug Irvine on bass, Alan King on vocals and Andy Glass (later of Solstice) on guitar. Pointer and Irvine left to form their own band, Silmarillion, named after J.R.R. Tolkien's book \"The Silmarillion\", in late 1978. They played one London show as an instrumental band with Neil Cockle (keys) and Martin Jenner (guitar). 1979 saw a new line-up of Mick Pointer, Steve Rothery (guitar), Doug Irvine (bass/vocals) and Brian Jelliman (keys). They played their first concert at Berkhamsted Civic Centre, Hertfordshire, on 1 March 1980. According to Pointer, it was at this stage that the name was shortened to Marillion.\nOther sources have that the band name was shortened to Marillion in 1981 to avoid potential copyright conflicts, at the same time as singer Fish and bassist William 'Diz' Minnitt replaced original bassist/vocalist Doug Irvine following an audition at Leyland Farm Studios in Buckinghamshire on 2 January 1981. The line-up of Rothery, Pointer, Jelliman, Fish, and Minnitt performed their first gig at the Red Lion Pub at 35 Market Square in Bicester on 14 March 1981. Many years after his departure from Marillion, Irvine eventually joined the band Steam Shed.\nBy the end of 1981, Mark Kelly had replaced Jelliman on keyboards, with Pete Trewavas replacing Minnitt on bass in 1982. Minnitt later formed Pride of Passion and went on to perform with Zealey and Moore.\nMarillion's first recordings were two demos recorded in March and the summer of 1980, before Fish and Minnitt joined the band. Two versions of the Spring demo circulate amongst collectors; the first has four tracks; \"The Haunting of Gill House\", \"Herne the Hunter\", an untitled track known as \"Scott's Porridge\", and \"Alice\". The second version has an instrumental version of \"Alice\" in place of \"Scott's Porridge\". All tracks are instrumental apart from \"Alice\", with vocals by Doug Irvine. The summer demo has three tracks; \"Close\" (parts of which were later rewritten into \"The Web\", \"He Knows You Know\" and \"Chelsea Monday\"), \"Lady Fantasy\" (an original based on an earlier Electric Gypsy song), and another version of \"Alice\". Both were recorded at The Enid's studio in Hertfordshire. Following Irvine's departure and replacement by Fish and Minnitt, the band recorded another demo tape, produced by Les Payne, in July 1981 that included early versions of \"He Knows You Know\", \"Garden Party\", and \"Charting the Single\".\nThe group attracted attention with a radio session for the \"Friday Rock Show\". They were subsequently signed by EMI Records. They released their first single, \"Market Square Heroes\", in 1982, with the 17-minute epic \"Grendel\" on the B-side of the 12\" version. Following the single, the band released their first full-length album in 1983.\n\"Script for a Jester's Tear\" and \"Fugazi\" (1983\u20131984).\nThe music on their debut album, \"Script for a Jester's Tear\", was born out of the intensive performances of the previous years. Featuring a dark progressive rock sound, the album was a commercial success, peaking at No. 7 on the UK album chart and producing the singles \"He Knows You Know\" (No. 35) and \"Garden Party\" (No. 16). Although they were accused of being Genesis soundalikes, the album reached the Platinum certification and has been credited with giving a second life to progressive rock bands from the previous era.\nIn April 1983, following the UK tour to promote \"Script for a Jester's Tear\", Mick Pointer was dismissed due to Fish's dissatisfaction with what he later described as the drummer's \"awful\" timing and failure to develop as a musician with the rest of the band. Over the next six months, three drummers passed through the band - original Camel drummer Andy Ward, followed by John 'Martyr' Marter, followed by Jonathan Mover - before Ian Mosley, who had played for acts including Darryl Way's Wolf, Trace, Gordon Giltrap, and Steve Hackett, was secured in October 1983. Despite being beset by production problems, the band's second album \"Fugazi\", released in early 1984, built upon the success of \"Script for a Jester's Tear\", with a more streamlined hard rock sound. It improved on the chart placing of its predecessor by reaching the Top 5 and produced the singles \"Punch and Judy\" (No. 29) and \"Assassing\" (No. 22).\nIn November 1984, Marillion released their first live album, \"Real to Reel\", featuring songs from \"Fugazi\" and \"Script for a Jester's Tear\", as well as \"Cinderella Search\" (B-side to \"Assassing\") and the debut single \"Market Square Heroes\", which had not been available on album until that point. \"Real to Reel\" entered the UK album charts at No.\u00a08.\n\"Misplaced Childhood\" and international success (1985\u20131986).\nTheir third and commercially most successful studio album was \"Misplaced Childhood\", which had a more mainstream sound. The lead single from the album, \"Kayleigh\", received major promotion by EMI and gained heavy rotation on BBC Radio 1 and Independent Local Radio stations as well as television appearances, bringing the band to the attention of a much wider audience. \"Kayleigh\" reached No. 2 in the UK and \"Lavender\" reached No. 5; these remain the only singles by the band to enter the Top 5.\nFollowing the exposure given to \"Kayleigh\" and its subsequent chart success, the album became their only No. 1 in the UK, knocking Bryan Ferry's \"Boys and Girls\" off the top spot and holding off a challenge from Sting, whose first solo album, \"The Dream of the Blue Turtles\", entered the chart in the same week. The third single from the album, \"Heart of Lothian\", became another Top 30 hit for the band, reaching No.\u00a029. The album came sixth in \"Kerrang!\" magazine's \"Albums of the Year\" in 1985. \"Kayleigh\" also gave Marillion its sole entry on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100, reaching No.\u00a074. In the summer of 1986, the band played to their biggest ever audience as special guests to Queen at a festival in Germany attended by a crowd of over 150,000 people. They were also offered the \"Highlander\" soundtrack but turned it down because of their world tour, a missed opportunity which Rothery later said he regretted.\n\"Clutching at Straws\" and the departure of Fish (1987\u20131988).\nThe fourth studio album, \"Clutching at Straws\", shed some of its predecessor's pop stylings and retreated into a darker exploration of excess, alcoholism, and life on the road, representing the strains of constant touring that would result in the departure of Fish to pursue a solo career. It did continue the group's commercial success, however; lead single \"Incommunicado\" charted at No.\u00a06 in the UK, gaining the band an appearance on \"Top of the Pops\", and the album entered the UK album chart at No.\u00a02. \"Sugar Mice\" and \"Warm Wet Circles\" also became hit singles, both reaching No.\u00a022. Fish has also stated in interviews since that he believes this was the best album he made with the band. The album came sixth in \"Kerrang!\" magazine's \"Albums of the Year\" in 1987, equalling the ranking given to \"Misplaced Childhood\". It was also included in \"Q\" magazine's \"50 Best Recordings of the Year\". Fish made the decision to leave the group after this tour, explaining his reasons for departing in a 2003 interview:\n\"By 1987 we were over-playing live because the manager was on 20 per cent of the gross. He was making a fantastic amount of money while we were working our asses off. Then I found a bit of paper proposing an American tour. At the end of the day the band would have needed a \u00a314,000 loan from EMI as tour support to do it. That was when I knew that, if I stayed with the band, I'd probably end up a raging alcoholic and be found overdosed and dying in a big house in Oxford with Irish wolfhounds at the bottom of my bed.\" \nFish gave the band a choice to continue with either him or the manager, John Arnison. They sided with the manager and Fish left for a solo career. His last live performance with Marillion was at Craigtoun Country Park on 23 July 1988. The band's second live album, \"The Thieving Magpie\", was released in late 1988, marking the end of an era.\nAftermath.\nOwing to lengthy legal battles, informal contact between Fish and the other four band members apparently did not resume until 1999. Fish would disclose in the liner notes to the remastered edition of \"Clutching at Straws\" that he and his former bandmates had met up, discussed the demise of the band and renewed their friendship. They had come to the consensus that an excessive touring schedule and too much pressure from the band's management led to the rift.\nAlthough reportedly now on good personal terms, both camps had always made it very clear that the oft-speculated-upon reunion would never happen. When Fish headlined the 'Hobble on the Cobbles' free concert in Aylesbury's Market Square on 26 August 2007, the attraction of playing their debut single in its spiritual home proved strong enough to overcome any lingering bad feeling between the former bandmates, and Kelly, Mosley, Rothery, and Trewavas replaced Fish's backing band for an emotional encore of \"Market Square Heroes\".\nIn a press interview following the event, Fish denied this would lead to a full reunion, saying that: \"Hogarth does a great job with the band. We forged different paths over the 19 years.\"\nThe Steve Hogarth era.\n\"Seasons End\" and \"Holidays in Eden\" (1989\u20131992).\nAfter the split, the band found Steve Hogarth, the former keyboardist and vocalist of the Europeans and the duo How We Live. Hogarth first sang with the band in Pete Trewavas' garage on 24 January 1989, and the first public pictures together were released in \"Kerrang!\" magazine issue 230 on 18 March 1989. Hogarth was a significant contrast to Fish, coming from a new wave musical background instead of progressive rock, and possessing a very different vocal style, image and stage presence. He had also never owned a Marillion album before joining the band.\nThe group had already recorded some demos of the next studio album, which was eventually titled \"Seasons End\", just prior to the split. With Fish taking his lyrics with him, Hogarth set to work crafting new words to existing songs, collaborating with lyricist and author John Helmer. The demo sessions of the songs from \"Seasons End\" with Fish vocals and lyrics can be found on the bonus disc of the remastered version of \"Clutching at Straws\", while those lyrics found their way into various Fish solo albums, such as his first album \"Vigil in a Wilderness of Mirrors\", some snippets on his second album \"Internal Exile\", and even a line or two found its way to his third album \"Suits\".\nThe first time Marillion would appear in public with Steve Hogarth as the new singer was under the banner of Low Fat Yoghurts, at the Crooked Billet pub in Stoke Row, on 8 June 1989. Only about 100 fans attended that Crooked Billet show, while considerably more attended Hogarth's official introduction to fans at the recording of the promo video for \"Hooks in You\" at London's Brixton Academy on 1 August that year. Hogarth's first proper concert with Marillion was at the Palais des Sports in Besan\u00e7on, France on 5 October following the release of \"Seasons End\". The band ended 1989 with their traditional Christmas show at London's Hammersmith Odeon, and kicked off 1990 with the beginning of the \"Seasons End\" world tour, in front of 180,000 people at Hollywood Rock Festival in Rio de Janeiro in January, then rolling through Canada and North America before returning to Europe. The tour would prove to be the longest that Hogarth has thus far undertaken with Marillion. The tour ended in the UK in July, with a sold out show at Wembley Arena, highlighting how successful the shift from Fish to the new frontman Hogarth had been.\nHogarth's second album with the band, \"Holidays in Eden\", was the first he wrote in partnership with the band from the beginning, and includes the song \"Dry Land\", which Hogarth had written and recorded with his earlier duo, How We Live. As quoted from Steve Hogarth, \"\"Holidays in Eden\" was to become Marillion's \"pop\"est album ever, and was greeted with delight by many, and dismay by some of the hardcore fans\". EMI also wanted Marillion to deliver three hit singles from the album.\nMarillion returned to their pseudonym Low Fat Yoghurts in December 1990 to preview their forthcoming album at the Moles club in Bath, Somerset. \"Holidays in Eden\" wouldn't be released until June 1991, and was followed by a headlining appearance at the second and final Cumbria Rock Festival at Derwent Park in Workington 13 July 1991. The Cumbria appearance kick-started another lengthy world tour that would see the band course through the UK, before venturing through Europe and returning to the UK for some Christmas shows. At the beginning of 1992 the band built their own recording and rehearsal studio, The Racket Club, in Buckinghamshire. March and April 1992 saw Marillion back touring Canada and America, before returning to the UK for an exclusive and intimate 10th Anniversary show at London's Borderline for members of their The Web fan club on 9 May 1992, followed by another European tour in August.\nMarillion returned to the UK to headline Wembley Arena, for what would ultimately be the final time for the band, on 5 September 1992. The 1992 tour wound up in Baltimore, USA on 23 October. 1992 also saw the release of a 10th anniversary compilation album, \"A Singles Collection: Six of One, Half A Dozen of the Other\", so-titled as it included six tracks from the Fish era and six from the two albums with Hogarth. It also included two new recordings, \"I Will Walk on Water\" and a cover of Rare Bird's \"Sympathy\". \"Sympathy\" was also released as a single and it reached No. 17 in the UK charts, the first time the band had been inside the singles Top 20 since \"Incommunicado\". Marillion would play only one live show in 1993, a fan club gig at Tivoli Theatre in Utrecht on 19 June, as a duo with only Hogarth and Trewavas. The band spent most of 1993 recording what would become one of the most significant albums of their history.\n\"Brave\", \"Afraid of Sunlight\" and split with EMI Records (1993\u20131995).\n\"Brave\" was released on 7 February 1994. A dark and richly complex concept album inspired by a true news story, it took the band 18 months to write and record and marked the start of their longtime relationship with producer Dave Meegan. \nSome of the material had been aired at that sole 1993 show in Utrecht, and was also previewed at low-key gigs in the Netherlands, Italy, and Germany before Marillion kicked off the \"Brave\" world tour at Liverpool's Royal Court Theatre on 20 February 1994. The \"Brave\" tour was another lengthy one, and the band undertook the move to perform the whole of their new album in its entirety (as they had done with \"Misplaced Childhood\" just under a decade earlier). However, this meant the inevitable relegating of some Fish-era songs from the set. After a series of summer shows in Japan, the \"Brave\" tour wound its way down to Mexico in September. An independent film based on the album, which featured the band, was also released in February 1995. The film was directed by Richard Stanley.\nThe band's next album, \"Afraid of Sunlight\", was released June 1995. It would be Marillion's last studio album with EMI Records. It received limited promotion, no mainstream radio airplay and the sales were disappointing for the band. Despite this, it was one of their most critically acclaimed albums and was included in \"Q\"'s 50 Best Albums of 1995. A particularly notable track on the album is \"Out of This World\", a song about Donald Campbell, who died in January 1967 whilst trying to set his eighth world water speed record on Coniston Water, in the English Lake District. The song inspired an initiative by Bill Smith, an underwater surveyor and amateur diver, to recover both Campbell's body and \"Bluebird K7\", the hydroplane in which Campbell had crashed, from the lakebed. The recovery was finally undertaken in 2001, with both Steve Hogarth and Steve Rothery invited. Steve Rothery produced a photographic record of the event. In 1998, Steve Hogarth said he considered \"Afraid of Sunlight\" the best album he made with the band.\nOn 2 August 1995, Marillion began their \"Afraid of Sunlight\" tour in USA at the Bayou in Washington D.C. They returned to the UK and Europe before ending the tour in Krakow, Poland on 21 November 1995.\n\"This Strange Engine\", \"Radiation\" and \"marillion.com\" (1996\u20131999).\nThe band's independent status was confirmed with signing a deal to the UK-based Castle. The first album to be released through Castle was the band's third live album (the first with Hogarth) \"Made Again\". Not only did it release Marillion from its obligations with EMI (as the fifth album in a five-album deal), as well as paying off the debts without creating new ones, it marked a certain symmetry with the first seven years of the band. Mark Kelly noted: \"Our first four studio albums were followed by a double live album that signalled the end of a chapter. Now, after another four studio albums, followed by a live album, we move from EMI.\" Featuring \"Brave\" in its entirety, \"Made Again\" was released 25 March 1996 as the final EMI-era Marillion release in the UK, with Castle handling the release in mainland Europe and the US. The release was followed by a brief tour with four dates in Europe at the end of April.\nIn the months prior, Rothery, Hogarth and Mosley used the break from Marillion to record separate solo projects. Mosley's project, IRIS, with French guitarist Sylvian Gouvernaire and Trewavas, released \"Crossing the Desert,\" on 22 April 1996. Rothery's project with the female singer Hannah Stobart, drummer Paul Craddick (from Enchant) and Trewavas, called The Wishing Tree, released their album \"Carnival of Souls\" in September 1996. Hogarth released his solo album \"Ice Cream Genius\" in February 1997.\n\"This Strange Engine\" was the following Marillion album released in April 1997 in the UK, and in October in the US, with limited promotion from their new label Castle. Marillion could not afford to make tour stops in the United States. Their dedicated US fan base decided to solve the problem by raising some $60,000 themselves online to give to the band to come to the US. The band's loyal fanbase (combined with the Internet) would eventually become vital to their existence. Following the completion of the extensive 1997 tour (including Marillion's one-thousandth gig, on 27 October at the Amsterdam Paradiso), the band returned to their own studio, The Racket Club, in November. During 1997 to 1999, EMI issued 2-CD remastered editions of Marillion's first eight studio albums (from \"Script for a Jester's Tear\" to \"Afraid of Sunlight\"), each with a second CD of non-album tracks and other archival recordings.\nThe band's tenth album, \"Radiation,\" released on 21 September 1998, saw them taking a different approach and was received by fans with mixed reactions. The short \"Radiation\" tour, with only dates in the UK and mainland Europe, ended on 18 November 1998 at the \u00c9lys\u00e9e Montmartre in Paris.\n\"marillion.com\" was the follow-up, released on 18 October 1999, and showed progression in a new musical direction. However, the band were still unhappy with their record label situation. Under the terms of the deal, this was to be the third and final album distributed on the Castle label. The \"Dot Com\" tour, again with dates only in the UK and mainland Europe, started on 13 October at the MCM Cafe in Paris, and ended with a special Christmas show for the Web fanclubs worldwide in Aachen, Germany on 5 December 1999. For the whole of 2000, the band were writing the next album at the Racket Club and in November 2000 they played 2 Charity gigs at Bass Museum in Burton-on-Trent, before playing some more Christmas shows for their European fan clubs. Marillion needed a new strategy, and following the release of three albums via Castle, they came up with a novel approach for their next album.\n\"Anoraknophobia\" and \"Marbles\" (2000\u20132006).\nThe band decided that they would try a radical experiment by asking their fans if they would help fund the recording of the next album by pre-ordering it before recording even started. The result was 12,674 pre-orders, which raised enough money to record and release \"Anoraknophobia\" in the beginning of May 2001. As a 'thank-you' gesture to the fans who pre-ordered it, their names were credited in the sleeve notes and the pre-order \"Special Edition\" came in a deluxe 48-page hard-bound case with an extra enhanced CD. The band was able to strike a deal with EMI to also help distribute the album. This allowed Marillion to retain all the rights to their music while enjoying commercial distribution. The band went on tour which started in May 2001. A second leg of the tour (with a setlist largely decided by a poll of the fans) reached places that had never been played before, such as in the Azores at Ponta Delgada 22 September 2001. A US Tour was still not a possibility. A four-part BBC documentary 'The Future Just Happened' aired in the UK on BBC2 in the Summer 2001. Featured in Episode 3 was Marillion's revolutionary internet pre-order campaign for \"Anoraknophobia\". The band released its fourth live album, entitled \"Anorak in the UK\", in 2002.\nApril 2002 marked a new era of Marillion fandom. The band decided to book out a holiday camp and invite their fanbase to enjoy three entire days of Marillion with three concerts, signing sessions, and more. The hallmark of the weekend was the first night which hosts the entire rendition of an album of Marillion's choice. The Marillion weekends began at Pontin's Holiday Park, Brean Sands in the West Country, to which fans would fly in from all over the world. In March 2003 they continued and held the Marillion weekend at Butlin's Minehead.\nThe success of \"Anoraknophobia\" allowed the band to start recording their next album, but they decided to leverage their fanbase once again to help raise money towards marketing and promotion of a new album. The band put up the album for pre-order in mid-production. This time fans responded by pre-ordering 18,000 copies.\n\"Marbles\" was released at the end of April 2004 with a 2-CD version that was only available at Marillion's website. The pre-order version (known as the Deluxe Campaign Edition) of \"Marbles\" was packaged as a 128-page hard-bound book, packed in a rigid slip case. Those who purchased the Deluxe Campaign Edition by the end of 31 December 2003 were directly helping the Campaign Fund, and as a \"Thank You\" their name was printed in the album credits (like with the previous album, \"Anoraknophobia\").\n The band's management organised the biggest promotional schedule since they had left EMI and Steve Hogarth secured interviews with prominent broadcasters on BBC Radio, including Matthew Wright, Bob Harris, Stuart Maconie, Simon Mayo and Mark Lawson. \"Marbles\" also became the band's most critically acclaimed album since \"Afraid of Sunlight\", prompting many positive reviews in the press. The band released \"You're Gone\" as the lead single from the album. Aware that it was unlikely to gain much mainstream radio airplay, the band released the single in three separate formats and encouraged fans to buy a copy of each to get the single into the UK Top Ten. The single reached No.\u00a07, making it the first Marillion song to reach the UK Top 10 since \"Incommunicado\" in 1987 and the band's first Top 40 entry since \"Beautiful\" in 1995. The second single from the album, \"Don't Hurt Yourself\", reached No.\u00a016. Following this, they released a download-only single, \"The Damage (live)\", recorded at the band's sell-out gig at the London Astoria. All of this succeeded in putting the band back in the public consciousness, making the campaign a success. In September 2004, Marillion returned for shows in Mexico, USA and ended in Canada Quebec City on 13 October 2004.\nMarillion continued to tour throughout 2005, playing several summer festivals and embarking on acoustic tours of both Europe and the United States, followed up by the \"Not Quite Christmas Tour\" of Europe throughout the end of 2005.\nA new DVD, \"Colours and Sound\", was released in February 2006, documenting the creation, promotion, release, and subsequent European tour in support of the album \"Marbles\".\n\"Somewhere Else\" and \"Happiness is the Road\" (2007\u20132008).\nIn February 2007, the Marillion weekend was held abroad for the first time in the Netherlands at Center Parcs, Port Z\u00e9lande.\nApril 2007 saw Marillion release their fourteenth studio album \"Somewhere Else\", their first album in 10 years to make the UK Top 30. The success of the album was further underscored by that of the download-only single \"See it Like a Baby\", making UK No.\u00a045 (March 2007) and the traditional CD release of \"Thankyou Whoever You Are\" / \"Most Toys\", which made UK No.\u00a015 and No.\u00a06 in the Netherlands during June 2007. The \"Somewhere Else\" tour started in Gibraltar 14 April 2007, and they also played in some places they had never been before like Bratislava.\nIn July 2008, the band posted a contest for fans to create a music video for the soon-to-be released single \"Whatever is Wrong with You\", and post it on YouTube. The winner would win \u00a35,000.\n\"Happiness Is the Road\", released in October 2008, again featured a pre-order Deluxe Edition with a list of the fans who bought in advance, and a more straightforward regular release. It is another double album, with one disc based on a concept and the second containing the other songs that are not a part of the theme. Before the album's release, on 9 September 2008, Marillion pre-released their album via p2p networks themselves. Upon attempting to play the downloaded files, users were shown a video from the band explaining why they had taken this route. Downloaders were then able to opt to purchase the album at a user-defined price or select to receive DRM-free files for free, in exchange for an email address. The band explained that although they do not support piracy, they realised their music would inevitably be distributed online anyway, and wanted to attempt to engage with p2p users and make the best of the situation.\n\"Less is More\" and \"Sounds That Can't Be Made\" (2009\u20132014).\nIn April 2009, they took their Marillion weekend to Montreal for the first time.\nThe band's sixteenth studio album (released 2 October 2009) was an acoustic album featuring new arrangements of previously released tracks (except one, the new track \"It's Not Your Fault\") entitled \"Less Is More\". In October Marillion started an acoustic European tour which ended with a show in Istanbul 4 March 2010.\nTheir seventeenth studio album, titled \"Sounds That Can't Be Made\", was released in September 2012. Two versions of the album were released: A two-disc Deluxe Edition that included a DVD with 'making-of' features and sound-check recordings and a single CD jewel case version. The Deluxe Edition also included a 128-page book that incorporated lyrics, artwork and, as was the case with \"Anoraknophobia\", \"Marbles\" and \"Happiness is the Road\", the names of people who pre-ordered the album. Parts of the album were recorded at Peter Gabriel's Real World Studios in 2011.\nMarillion were awarded \"Band of the Year\" at the annual Progressive Music Awards in 2013.\n\"Fuck Everyone And Run (F E A R)\" and \"An Hour Before It's Dark\" (2015\u2013present).\nIn September 2015, Marillion announced that they were working on a new album, provisionally titled \"M18\" and later confirmed as \"Fuck Everyone And Run (F E A R)\". As with several of their previous releases, the recording of the album was to be funded by fan pre-orders, this time through direct-to-fan website PledgeMusic. The album was released on 23 September 2016 debuting at No. 4 in the official UK charts of 30 September 2016, their highest placing since \"Clutching at Straws\" nearly three decades earlier. In November 2016, they announced their first ever show at the Royal Albert Hall in London, in October 2017. The gig sold out in just 4 minutes and was filmed for DVD release. They also won \"UK Band of the Year\" at the 2017 Progressive Music Awards.\nIn May 2017, Marillion took their Marillion Weekend to Santiago, Chile for the first time. In February 2018 Marillion returned to tour in the US and also played shows in Japan in September. In March 2018, the film of the Royal Albert Hall gig was premiered at cinemas around the UK, before the DVD launch, with the band attending the showing in London. On 6 April the concert was released as \"All One Tonight \u2013 Live at the Royal Albert Hall\".\nIn March 2018, Hogarth was involved with fellow musician Howard Jones in helping to unveil a memorial to David Bowie, which is situated close to Aylesbury's Market Square. The memorial was the inspiration of promoter David Stopps, who booked Bowie to appear at the Friars Aylesbury where he debuted his Ziggy Stardust persona. The bulk of the funds for the memorial were raised at a gig held at the Waterside Theatre in Aylesbury on the evening of the unveiling which Marillion headlined, alongside Jones, John Otway and the Dung Beatles, all of whom have close association to Aylesbury and in particular, the Friars.\nIn early 2019, Marillion entered the studio with the intention to record songs from their catalogue with friends from the orchestra who played with the band at the Royal Albert Hall shows in 2017. \"With Friends from the Orchestra\" was recorded at The Racket Club and Peter Gabriel's Real World Studios and features reimagined versions of songs accompanied by the In Praise of Folly String Quartet with Sam Morris on French horn and Emma Halnan on flute. The album was released 29 November 2019. In November and December 2019, the orchestra followed Marillion on tour in the UK, returning for two nights at the Royal Albert Hall, and they also played shows in the Netherlands, France, Italy and Germany.\nOn 3 August 2021, Marillion announced their new pre-order campaign for a new studio album, entitled \"An Hour Before It's Dark\". The album was released on 4 March 2022.\nIn 2021, Marillion asked their fans to insure their 10-date Light at the End of the Tunnel Tour in November. Manager Lucy Jordache said: \"We're asking our fans to pledge money that will be held in escrow and if it all goes Covid free, it will be returned to them at the end of the tour. But if we do have to cancel, then their money will be used to pay the band's unavoidable expenses.\" The band had already invested more than \u00a3150,000 on preparations, but risked losing it all if just one member tested positive for COVID-19 and was forced to isolate. The tour was a success, and the donations were refunded to the fans who were named \"Lightsavers\".\nLine-up, influences and sound changes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"One of the reasons we're still together is because we're successful enough that we can still make a living, but we're not so successful that we can afford to do nothing.\"\n\u2014Mark Kelly in 2016\nMarillion's music has changed stylistically throughout their career. The band themselves stated that each new album tends to represent a reaction to the preceding one, and for this reason their output is difficult to 'pigeonhole'. Although the band has featured two very distinct and different vocalists, the core instrumental line-up of Steve Rothery (lead guitar, and the sole 'pre-Fish' original member), Pete Trewavas (bass), Mark Kelly (keyboards) and Ian Mosley (drums) has been unchanged since 1984.\nTheir 1980s sound (with Fish on vocals) was guitar and keyboard-led neo-prog. They have been described at their outset as \"a bridge between punk and classic progressive rock\". Guitarist Steve Rothery wrote most of the music during the period Fish was in the band. Iron Maiden guitarist Janick Gers commented, \"What I love so much about Marillion is that they could be very strong and powerful and have very quiet passages, but the powerful stuff was really edgy and heavy... I just thought he (Fish) wrote good lyrics, and they wrote good music, and it fit together effortlessly.\"\nThey were often compared unfavourably by critics during the Fish era with the Peter Gabriel era of Genesis, although the band had many other influences. Fish was influenced by a wide range of artists and his favourite albums were by artists such as Van der Graaf Generator, Joni Mitchell, the Who, Pink Floyd, John Martyn, Yes, Lowell George, Led Zeppelin, Roy Harper, the Faces, the Beatles and Supertramp. Rothery's main influences were Jimi Hendrix, Carlos Santana, David Gilmour, Andrew Latimer of Camel, Steve Hackett, Jeff Beck and Joni Mitchell, with Gordon Giltrap also an early influence on the development of his playing style. Kelly's biggest inspiration was Yes keyboardist Rick Wakeman, and Trewavas' favourite bass player was Paul McCartney. Original drummer Mick Pointer was a huge fan of Neil Peart's drumming in his favourite band, Rush.\nDuring the Steve Hogarth era, their sound has been compared, on various albums, to more contemporary acts such as U2, Radiohead, Coldplay, Muse, Talk Talk, Elbow, and Massive Attack. In 2016, Hogarth himself was quoted as describing the band: \"If Pink Floyd and Radiohead had a love child that was in touch with their feminine side, they would be us.\" According to an interview with Rothery in 2016, many of their later albums with Hogarth had been written by jamming.\nIn the media.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"We have got a bit of a reputation. I had a conversation with Noel Gallagher at a party once and said to him, 'I'm in a band but it's the most uncool band in the world - Marillion'. He went, 'Yeah, you're right.' Deadpan! Not even smiling.\"\n\u2014Keyboardist Mark Kelly\nThe chief music critic of \"The Guardian\", Alexis Petridis, has described Marillion as \"perennially unfashionable prog-rockers\". On the subject of joining the band in 1989, Steve Hogarth said in a 2001 interview: \"At about the same time, Matt Johnson of The The asked me to play piano on his tour. I always say I had to make a choice between the most hip band in the world, and the least.\" In the same conversation, he said: \"We're just tired of the opinions of people who haven't heard anything we've done in ten years. A lot of what's spread about this band is laughable.\"\nMuch of the band's enduring and unfashionable reputation stems from their emergence in the early 1980s as the most commercially successful band of the neo-prog movement, an unexpected revival of the progressive rock musical style that had fallen out of critical favour in the mid-1970s. Some early critics were quick to dismiss the band as clones of Peter Gabriel-era Genesis due to musical similarities, such as their extended songs, a prominent and Mellotron-influenced keyboard sound, vivid and fantastical lyrics and the equally vivid and fantastical artwork by Mark Wilkinson used for the sleeves of their albums and singles. Lead singer Fish was also often compared with Gabriel due to his early vocal style and theatrical stage performances, which in the early years included wearing face paint.\nAs Jon Wilde summarised in \"Melody Maker\" in 1989: At the end of a strange year for pop music, Marillion appeared in November 1982 with \"Market Square Heroes\". There were many strange things about 1982, but Marillion were the strangest of them all. For six years, they stood out of time. Marillion were the unhippest group going. As punk was becoming a distant echo, they appeared with a sound and an attitude that gazed back longingly to the age of Seventies pomp. When compared to Yes, Genesis and ELP, they would take it as a compliment. The Eighties have seen some odd phenomena. But none quite as odd as Marillion. Along the way, as if by glorious fluke, they turned out some singles that everybody quietly liked \u2013 \"Garden Party\", \"Punch and Judy\" and \"Incommunicado\". By this time, Marillion did not need the support of the hip-conscious. They were massive. Perhaps the oddest thing about Marillion was that they became one of the biggest groups of the decade. They might have been an anomaly but they were monstrously effective.\nThe band's unfashionable reputation and image has often been mentioned in the media, even in otherwise positive reviews. In \"Q\" in 1987, David Hepworth wrote: \"Marillion may represent the inelegant, unglamorous, public bar end of the current Rock Renaissance but they are no less part of it for that. \"Clutching at Straws\" suggests that they may be finally coming in from the cold.\" In the same magazine in 1995, Dave Henderson wrote: \"It's not yet possible to be sacked for showing an affinity for Marillion, but has there ever been a band with a larger stigma attached?\" He also argued that if the album \"Afraid of Sunlight\" \"had been made by a new, no baggage-of-the-past combo, it would be greeted with open arms, hailed as virtual genius.\" In \"Record Collector\" in 2002, Tim Jones argued they were \"one of the most unfairly berated bands in Britain\" and \"one of its best live rock acts.\" In 2004, \"Classic Rock\"'s Jon Hotten wrote: \"That genre thing has been a bugbear of Marillion's, but it no longer seems relevant. What are Radiohead if not a progressive band?\" and said Marillion were \"making strong, singular music with the courage of their convictions, and we should treasure them more than we do.\" In the \"Q\" &amp; \"Mojo\" Classic Special Edition \"Pink Floyd &amp; The Story of Prog Rock\", an article on Marillion written by Mick Wall described them as \"probably the most misunderstood band in the world\".\nIn 2007, Stephen Dalton of \"The Times\" stated: The band have just released their 14th album, \"Somewhere Else\", which is really rather good. Containing tracks that shimmer like Coldplay, ache like Radiohead and thunder like Muse, it is better than 80 per cent of this month's releases. But you are unlikely to hear Marillion on British radio, read about them in the music press or see them play a major festival. This is largely because Marillion have \u2013 how can we put this kindly? \u2013 an image problem. Their music is still perceived as bloated, bombastic mullet-haired prog-rock, even by people who have never heard it. In fairness, they did once release an album called \"Script for a Jester's Tear\". But, come on, we all had bad hair days in the 1980s.\nDespite publishing a very good review for their 1995 album \"Afraid of Sunlight\" and including it in their 50 Best Albums of 1995, \"Q\" refused to interview the band or write a feature on them. Steve Hogarth later said: \"How can they say, this is an amazing record... no, we don't want to talk to you? It's hard to take when they say, here's a very average record... we'll put you on the front cover.\"\nIn 2001, the television critic of \"The Guardian\", Gareth McLean, used his review of the Michael Lewis BBC Two documentary, \"\", to concentrate on launching a scathing attack on the band, whose appearance only constituted one segment of the programme. He described them as \"once dodgy and now completely rubbish\" and he characterised their fans as \"slightly simple folks\". He also dismissed the band's efforts to continue their career without a label by dealing directly with their fans on the Internet, writing: \"One suspects that their decision occurred round about the time that the record industry decided to shun Marillion.\"\nRachel Cooke, a writer for \"The Observer\" and \"New Statesman\", has repeatedly referred negatively to the band and insulted their fans in her articles.\nIn an interview in 2000, Hogarth expressed regret about the band retaining their name after he joined: If we had known when I joined Marillion what we know now, we'd have changed the name and been a new band. It was a mistake to keep the name, because what it represented in the mid-Eighties is a millstone we now carry. If we'd changed it, I think we would have been better off. We would have been judged for our music. It's such a grave injustice that the media constantly calls us a 'dinosaur prog band'. They only say that out of ignorance because they haven't listened to anything we've done for the last 15 bloody years. If you hear anything we've done in the last five or six years, that description is totally irrelevant... It's a massive frustration that no-one will play our stuff. If we send our single to Radio 1 they say: 'Sorry, we don't play music by bands who are over so-many years old... and here's the new U2 single.' I suppose it's something everyone has to cope with \u2013 every band are remembered for their big hit single, irrespective of how much they change over the years. But you can only transcend that by continuing to have hits. It's Catch 22. You know, at some stage, someone has to notice that we're doing interesting things. Someday someone will take a retrospective look at us and be surprised.\nThe 2013 film \"\" includes a joke reference to a former drummer of the band. The band were quoted: \"We know Marillion are seen as 'uncool' but we were delighted to be a part of it.\"\nCrowdfunding pioneers.\nMarillion are widely considered to have been one of the first mainstream acts to have fully recognised and tapped the potential for commercial musicians to interact with their fans via the internet, starting in around 1996, and are nowadays often characterised as a rock &amp; roll 'Web Cottage Industry'. The history of the band's use of the Internet is described by Michael Lewis in the book \"\" as an example of how the Internet is shifting power away from established elites, such as multinational record labels and record producers.\nThe band are renowned for having an extremely dedicated following (often self-termed 'Freaks'), with some fans regularly travelling significant distances to attend single gigs, driven in large part by the close fan base involvement which the band cultivate via their website, podcasts, biennial conventions and regular fanclub publications. The release of their 2001 album \"Anoraknophobia\", which was funded by their fans through advance orders instead of by the band signing to a record company, gained significant attention and was called \"a unique funding campaign\" by the BBC. Writing for \"The Guardian\", Alexis Petridis described Marillion as \"the undisputed pioneers\" of fan-funded music.\nMembers.\nTimeline.\nImageSize = width:900 height:auto barincrement:18\nPlotArea = left:120 bottom:90 top:5 right:10\nAlignbars = justify\nDateFormat = mm/dd/yyyy\nTimeAxis = orientation:horizontal format:yyyy\nLegend = orientation:vertical position:bottom columns:4\nScaleMajor = increment:5 start:1979\nScaleMinor = increment:1 start:1979\nColors =\n id:vocals value:red legend:Vocals\n id:guitars value:green legend:Guitars\n id:keys value:purple legend:Keyboards\n id:backing value:pink legend:Backing_vocals\n id:bass value:blue legend:Bass\n id:drums value:orange legend:Drums\n id:perc value:claret legend:Percussion \n id:albums value:black legend:Studio_Releases\n id:bars value:gray(0.92)\nBackgroundColors = bars:bars\nLineData =\n at:03/14/1983 color:black layer:back\n at:03/12/1984 color:black layer:back\n at:06/17/1985 color:black layer:back\n at:06/22/1987 color:black layer:back\n at:09/25/1989 color:black layer:back\n at:06/24/1991 color:black layer:back\n at:02/07/1994 color:black layer:back\n at:06/26/1995 color:black layer:back\n at:04/09/1997 color:black layer:back\n at:09/18/1998 color:black layer:back\n at:10/18/1999 color:black layer:back\n at:05/07/2001 color:black layer:back\n at:05/03/2004 color:black layer:back\n at:04/09/2007 color:black layer:back\n at:10/10/2008 color:black layer:back\n at:10/02/2009 color:black layer:back\n at:09/17/2012 color:black layer:back\n at:09/23/2016 color:black layer:back\n at:11/29/2019 color:black layer:back\n at:03/04/2022 color:black layer:back\nBarData =\n bar:Fish text:Fish\n bar:Lloyd text:Dave Lloyd\n bar:Hogarth text:Steve Hogarth\n bar:Rothery text:Steve Rothery\n bar:Irvine text:Doug 'Rastus' Irvine\n bar:Minnitt text:Diz Minnitt\n bar:Trewavas text:Pete Trewavas\n bar:Jelliman text:Brian Jelliman\n bar:Kelly text:Mark Kelly\n bar:Pointer text:Mick Pointer\n bar:Ward text:Andy Ward\n bar:Marter text:John 'Martyr' Marter\n bar:Mover text:Jonathan Mover\n bar:Mosley text:Ian Mosley\nPlotData=\n width:13 textcolor:black align:left anchor:from shift:(10,-4)\n bar:Rothery from:01/01/1979 till:end color:guitars\n bar:Jelliman from:01/01/1979 till:11/21/1981 color:keys\n bar:Kelly from:12/01/1981 till:end color:keys\n bar:Kelly from:12/01/1981 till:end color:backing width:3\n bar:Minnitt from:01/02/1981 till:03/27/1982 color:bass\n bar:Trewavas from:03/25/1982 till:end color:bass\n bar:Trewavas from:03/25/1982 till:end color:backing width:3\n bar:Trewavas from:07/23/1988 till:end color:guitars width:7\n bar:Trewavas from:11/12/1988 till:11/12/1988 color:vocals width:9\n bar:Pointer from:01/01/1979 till:05/01/1983 color:drums\n bar:Pointer from:01/01/1979 till:05/01/1983 color:Perc width:3\n bar:Ward from:05/01/1983 till:06/30/1983 color:drums\n bar:Ward from:05/01/1983 till:06/30/1983 color:perc width:3\n bar:Ward from:08/25/1983 till:08/27/1983 color:perc\n bar:Marter from:08/25/1983 till:08/27/1983 color:drums\n bar:Marter from:08/25/1983 till:08/27/1983 color:perc width:3\n bar:Mover from:10/01/1983 till:10/10/1983 color:drums\n bar:Mosley from:10/27/1983 till:end color:drums\n bar:Mosley from:10/27/1983 till:end color:perc width:3\n bar:Irvine from:01/01/1979 till:11/14/1980 color:vocals width:3\n bar:Irvine from:01/01/1979 till:11/14/1980 color:bass \n bar:Fish from:01/02/1981 till:09/15/1988 color:vocals\n bar:Fish from:01/02/1981 till:09/15/1988 color:perc width:3\n bar:Lloyd from:12/10/1988 till:12/10/1988 color:vocals\n bar:Hogarth from:01/26/1989 till:end color:vocals\n bar:Hogarth from:01/01/1993 till:end color:guitars width:5\n bar:Hogarth from:01/26/1989 till:end color:keys width:9\n bar:Hogarth from:01/26/1989 till:end color:perc width:3"}
{"id": "54990", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54990", "title": "Agricultural Science", "text": ""}
{"id": "54992", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54992", "title": "Bunge International", "text": ""}
{"id": "54995", "revid": "199747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54995", "title": "Mantoux test", "text": "Immunological method to test for tuberculosis\nThe Mantoux test (also called the Mendel\u2013Mantoux test, tuberculin sensitivity test, or PPD test) is a method used to screen for tuberculosis (TB) infection. It has largely replaced older skin testing techniques such as the tine and Heaf tests. The test involves injecting a small amount of purified protein derivative (PPD) tuberculin just under the skin of the forearm. If performed correctly, the injection creates a small, pale bump called a wheal. The test site is examined a few days later for swelling or hardening of the skin, an immune response that would be expected if the person had been exposed to tuberculosis. However, additional tests are usually required to confirm active infection.\nHistory.\nTuberculin is a glycerol extract of the tubercle bacillus. Purified protein derivative (PPD) tuberculin is a precipitate of species-nonspecific molecules obtained from filtrates of sterilized, concentrated cultures. The tuberculin reaction was first described by Robert Koch in 1890. The test was first developed and described by the German physician Felix Mendel in 1908. It is named after Charles Mantoux, a French physician who built on the work of Koch and Clemens von Pirquet to create his test in 1907. However, the test was unreliable due to impurities in tuberculin which tended to cause false results.\nEsmond R. Long and Florence B. Seibert identified the active agent in tuberculin as a protein. Seibert then spent a number of years developing methods for separating and purifying the protein from \"Mycobacterium tuberculosis\", obtaining purified protein derivative (PPD) and enabling the creation of a reliable test for tuberculosis. Her first publication on the purification of tuberculin appeared in 1934. By the 1940s, Seibert's PPD was the international standard for tuberculin tests. In 1939, Russian M.A. Linnikova created a modified version of PPD. In 1954, the Soviet Union started mass production of PPD-L, named after Linnikova.\nProcedure.\nIn the Mantoux test, a standard dose of tuberculin is injected intradermally (into the dermis, just beneath the outer layer of skin) on the forearm using a small syringe. The standard dose specified by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is 5 tuberculin units (TU) in 0.1\u00a0ml of solution, while the U.K. National Health Service specifies 2\u00a0TU in the same volume. The injection is given with the needle bevel facing upward, producing a small, pale, raised bump (called a wheal) about 6 to 10\u00a0mm in diameter if placed correctly. The test site is then examined 48\u201396 hours later\u2014ideally at 72 hours\u2014and the result is recorded based on the size of the reaction.\nThe reaction occurs because a person previously exposed to \"Mycobacterium tuberculosis\" is expected to mount an immune response to the injected proteins. This is a classic example of a delayed-type hypersensitivity (type IV) reaction, in which T cells and other immune cells gather at the site over 24 to 72 hours, producing localized inflammation. The response is measured by the diameter of induration (a firm, raised area of skin), recorded in millimeters across the forearm. Redness (erythema) is not measured. A result with no induration is recorded as \"0 mm.\"\nEarlier versions of the test, such as the Pirquet test, applied tuberculin to the skin through a shallow scratch (scarification).\nClassification of tuberculin reaction.\nThe results of this test must be interpreted carefully. The person's medical risk factors determine at which increment (5\u00a0mm, 10\u00a0mm, or 15\u00a0mm) of induration the result is considered positive. A positive result indicates TB exposure.\nA tuberculin test conversion is defined as an increase of 10\u00a0mm or more within a two-year period, regardless of age. Alternative criteria include increases of 6, 12, 15 or 18\u00a0mm.\nFalse positive result.\nTST (tuberculin skin test) positive is measured by size of induration. The size of the induration considered to be a positive result depends on risk factors. For example, a low-risk patient must have a larger induration for a positive result than a high-risk patient. High-risk groups include recent contacts, those with HIV, those with chest radiograph with fibrotic changes, organ transplant recipients, and those with immunosuppression.\nA meta-analysis in 2014 found that the Bacillus Calmette\u2013Gu\u00e9rin (BCG) vaccine reduced infections by 19\u201327% and reduced progression to active tuberculosis by 71%. The Ohio Department of Health states that it give 80% of children protection against tuberculous meningitis and miliary tuberculosis. Therefore, a positive TST/PPD in a person who has received BCG vaccine is interpreted as latent TB infection (LTBI).\nDue to the test's low specificity, most positive reactions in low-risk individuals are false positives. A false positive result may be caused by nontuberculous mycobacteria or previous administration of BCG vaccine. Vaccination with BCG may result in a false-positive result for many years after vaccination.\nFalse positives can also occur when the injected area is touched, causing swelling and itching. If the swelling is less than 5\u00a0mm, it is possibly due to error by the healthcare personnel causing inflammation to the area.\nAnother source of false positive results can be allergic reaction or hypersensitivity. Although rare (about 0.08 reported reactions per million doses of tuberculin), these reactions can be dangerous and precautions should be taken by having epinephrin available.\nFalse negative result.\nReaction to the PPD or tuberculin test is suppressed by the following conditions:\nThis is because the immune system needs to be functional to mount a response to the protein derivative injected under the skin. A false negative result may occur in a person who has been recently infected with TB, but whose immune system hasn't yet reacted to the bacteria.\nIn case a second tuberculin test is necessary it should be carried out in the other arm to avoid hypersensitising the skin.\nBCG vaccine and the Mantoux test.\nThe role of Mantoux testing in people who have been vaccinated is disputed. The US recommends that tuberculin skin testing is not contraindicated for BCG-vaccinated persons, and prior BCG vaccination should not influence the interpretation of the test. The UK recommends that interferon-\u03b3 testing should be used to help interpret positive Mantoux tests of over 5\u00a0mm, and repeated tuberculin skin testing must not be done in people who have had BCG vaccinations. In general, the US recommendation may result in a larger number of people being falsely diagnosed with latent tuberculosis, while the UK approach has an increased chance of missing patients with latent tuberculosis who should be treated.\nAccording to the US guidelines, latent tuberculosis infection diagnosis and treatment is considered for any BCG-vaccinated person whose skin test is 10\u00a0mm or greater, if any of these circumstances are present:\nAnergy testing.\nIn cases of anergy, a lack of reaction by the body's defence mechanisms when it comes into contact with foreign substances, the tuberculin reaction will occur weakly, thus compromising the value of Mantoux testing. For example, anergy is present in AIDS, a disease which strongly depresses the immune system. Therefore, anergy testing is advised in cases where there is suspicion that anergy is present. However, routine anergy skin testing is not recommended.\nTwo-step testing.\nSome people who have been infected with TB may have a negative reaction when tested years after infection, as the immune system response may gradually wane. This initial skin test, though negative, may stimulate (boost) the body's ability to react to tuberculin in future tests. Thus, a positive reaction to a subsequent test may be misinterpreted as a new infection, when in fact it is the result of the boosted reaction to an old infection.\nUse of two-step testing is recommended for initial skin testing of adults who will be retested periodically (e.g., health care workers). This ensures any future positive tests can be interpreted as being caused by a new infection, rather than simply a reaction to an old infection.\nA person who is diagnosed as \"infected in the distant past\" on two-step testing is called a \"tuberculin reactor\".\nThe US recommendation that prior BCG vaccination be ignored results in almost universal false diagnosis of tuberculosis infection in people who have had BCG (mostly foreign nationals).\nThe latest interpretation for Mantoux test results.\nAccording to the guidelines published by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in 2005, the results are re-categorized into 3 parts based on their previous or baseline outcomes:\nRecent developments.\nIn addition to tuberculin skin tests such as (principally) the Mantoux test, interferon gamma release assays (IGRAs) have become common in clinical use in the 2010s. In some contexts they are used instead of TSTs, whereas in other contexts TSTs and IGRAs both continue to be useful.\nThe QuantiFERON-TB Gold blood test measures the patient's immune reactivity to the TB bacterium, and is useful for initial and serial testing of persons with an increased risk of latent or active tuberculosis infection. Guidelines for its use were released by the CDC in December 2005. QuantiFERON-TB Gold is FDA-approved in the United States, has CE Mark approval in Europe and has been approved by the MHLW in Japan. The interferon gamma release assay is the preferred method for patients who have had immunosuppression and are about to start biological therapies.\nT-SPOT.TB is another IGRA; it uses the ELISPOT method.\nHeaf test.\nThe Heaf tuberculin skin test was used in the United Kingdom, but discontinued in 2005. The equivalent Mantoux test positive levels done with 10 TU (0.1\u00a0ml at 100\u00a0TU/ml, 1:1000) are\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54996", "revid": "1316193926", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54996", "title": "Prader\u2013Willi syndrome", "text": "Genetic disorder involving an imprinted genomic region\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nPrader\u2013Willi syndrome (PWS) is a rare genetic disorder caused by a loss of function of specific genes on chromosome 15. In babies, symptoms include weak muscles, poor feeding, and slow development. Beginning in childhood, those affected become constantly hungry, which often leads to obesity and type 2 diabetes. Mild to moderate intellectual impairment and behavioral problems are also typical of the disorder. Often, affected individuals have a narrow forehead, small hands and feet, short height, and light skin and hair. Most are unable to have children.\nAbout 74% of cases occur when part of the father's chromosome 15 is deleted. In another 25% of cases, the affected person has two copies of the maternal chromosome 15 from the mother and lacks the paternal copy. As parts of the chromosome from the mother are turned off through imprinting, they end up with no working copies of certain genes. PWS is not generally inherited, but rather the genetic changes happen during the formation of the egg, sperm, or in early development. No risk factors are known for the disorder. Those who have one child with PWS have less than a 1% chance of the next child being affected. A similar mechanism occurs in Angelman syndrome, except the defective chromosome 15 is from the mother, or two copies are from the father.\nPrader\u2013Willi syndrome has no cure. Treatment may improve outcomes, especially if carried out early. In newborns, feeding difficulties may be supported with feeding tubes. Strict food supervision is typically required, starting around the age of three, in combination with an exercise program. Growth hormone therapy also improves outcomes. Counseling and medications may help with some behavioral problems. Group homes are often necessary in adulthood.\nPWS affects between 1 in 10,000 to 30,000 people worldwide. More than 400,000 people live with PWS.\nSigns and symptoms.\nPWS symptoms can range from poor muscle tone during infancy to behavioral problems in early childhood. Some symptoms often found in infants, besides poor muscle tone, are a lack of eye coordination; almond-shaped eyes; thin upper lip; and, due to poor muscle tone, lack of a strong sucking reflex. Their cries are weak, and they have difficulty waking up.\nMore aspects seen in a clinical overview include hypotonia and abnormal neurologic function, hypogonadism, developmental and cognitive delays, hyperphagia and obesity, short stature, and behavioral and psychiatric disturbances.\nThe following features and signs are indicators of PWS, although not all will be present:\nNeurocognitive.\nIndividuals with PWS are at risk of learning and attention difficulties. Curfs and Fryns (1992) conducted research into the varying degrees of learning disability found in PWS.\nCassidy found that 40% of individuals with PWS have borderline/low average intelligence, a figure higher than the 32% found in Curfs and Fryns' study. However, both studies suggest that most individuals (50\u201365%) fall within the mild/borderline/low average intelligence range.\nChildren with PWS show an unusual cognitive profile. They are often strong in visual organization and perception, including reading and vocabulary, but their spoken language (sometimes affected by hypernasality) is generally poorer than their comprehension. A marked skill in completing jigsaw puzzles has been noted, but this may be an artifact of increased practice.\nAuditory information processing and sequential processing are relatively poor, as are arithmetic and writing skills, visual and auditory short-term memory, and auditory attention span. These sometimes improve with age, but deficits in these areas remain throughout adulthood.\nPWS may be associated with psychosis.\nBehavioral.\nPWS is frequently associated with a constant insatiable appetite, which persists no matter how much the patient eats, often resulting in severe obesity. Caregivers need to strictly limit the patients' access to food, usually by installing locks on refrigerators and on all closets and cabinets where food is stored. It is the most common genetic cause of morbid obesity in children. Currently, no consensus exists as to the cause for this symptom, although genetic abnormalities in chromosome 15 disrupt the normal functioning of the hypothalamus. Given that the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus regulates many basic processes, including appetite, a link may well exist. In the hypothalamus, nerve cells that produce oxytocin, a hormone thought to contribute to satiety, are believed to be abnormal in people with PWS.\nPeople with PWS have high ghrelin levels, which are thought to contribute directly to the increased appetite, hyperphagia, and obesity seen in this syndrome. Cassidy states the need for a clear delineation of behavioral expectations, the reinforcement of behavioural limits, and the establishment of regular routines.\nThe main mental health difficulties experienced by people with PWS include compulsive behaviour (usually manifested in skin picking) and anxiety. Psychiatric symptoms, for example, hallucinations, paranoia and depression, have been described in some cases and affect about 5\u201310% of young adults. Patients are often extremely stubborn and prone to anger. Psychiatric and behavioural problems are the most common cause of hospitalization.\nTypically, 70\u201390% of affected individuals develop behavioral patterns in early childhood. Aspects of these patterns can include stubbornness, temper tantrums, controlling and manipulative behavior, difficulty with change in routine, and compulsive-like behaviors.\nEndocrine.\nSeveral aspects of PWS support the concept of a growth hormone deficiency. Specifically, individuals with PWS are obese with short stature, abnormal body composition, reduced fat-free mass, reduced lean body mass and total energy expenditure, and decreased bone density. PWS is characterized by hypogonadism. This is manifested as undescended testes in males and benign premature adrenarche in females. Testes may descend with time or can be managed with surgery or testosterone replacement. Adrenarche may be treated with hormone replacement therapy.\nOphthalmologic.\nPWS is commonly associated with the development of strabismus. In one study, over 50% of patients had strabismus, mainly esotropia.\nSome individuals (often those with deletions) may have hypopigmented fundi due to OCA2 haploinsufficiency.\nGenetics.\nPWS is related to an epigenetic phenomenon known as imprinting. Normally, a fetus inherits an imprinted maternal copy of PW genes and a functional paternal copy of PW genes. Due to imprinting, the maternally inherited copies of these genes are virtually silent, and the fetus therefore relies on the expression of the paternal copies of the genes. In PWS, however, there is mutation/deletion of the paternal copies of PW genes, leaving the fetus with no functioning PW genes. The PW genes are the \"SNRPN\" and \"NDN\" genes, along with clusters of snoRNAs: SNORD64, SNORD107, SNORD108 and two copies of SNORD109, 29 copies of SNORD116 (HBII-85) and 48 copies of SNORD115 (HBII-52). These genes are located on chromosome 15, located in the region 15q11-13. This so-called PWS/AS region in the paternal chromosome 15 may be lost by one of several genetic mechanisms, which in the majority of instances occurs through chance mutation. Other, less common mechanisms include uniparental disomy, sporadic mutations, chromosome translocations, and gene deletions.\nRegion 15q11-13 is implicated in both PWS and Angelman syndrome (AS). While PWS results from the loss of PW genes within this region on the paternal chromosome, loss of a different gene (\"UBE3A\") within the same region on the maternal chromosome causes AS. PWS and AS represent the first reported instances of disorders related to imprinting in humans.\nThe risk to the sibling of an affected child of having PWS depends on the genetic mechanism that caused the disorder. The risk to siblings is &lt;1% if the affected child has a gene deletion or uniparental disomy, up to 50% if the affected child has a mutation of the imprinting control region, and up to 25% if a parental chromosomal translocation is present. Prenatal testing is possible for any of the known genetic mechanisms.\nA microdeletion in one family of the snoRNA HBII-52 has excluded it from playing a major role in the disease.\nStudies of human and mouse model systems have shown deletion of the 29 copies of the C/D box snoRNA SNORD116 (HBII-85) to be the primary cause of PWS.\nDiagnosis.\nIt is traditionally characterized by hypotonia, short stature, hyperphagia, obesity, behavioral issues (specifically obsessive\u2013compulsive disorder-like behaviors), small hands and feet, hypogonadism, and mild intellectual disability. However, with early diagnosis and early treatment (such as with growth hormone therapy), the prognosis for persons with PWS is beginning to change. Like autism, PWS is a spectrum disorder and symptoms can range from mild to severe and may change throughout the person's lifetime. Various organ systems are affected.\nTraditionally, PWS was diagnosed by clinical presentation. Currently, the syndrome is diagnosed through genetic testing; testing is recommended for newborns with pronounced hypotonia. Early diagnosis of PWS allows for early intervention and the early prescription of growth hormone. Daily recombinant growth hormone (GH) injections are indicated for children with PWS. GH supports linear growth and increased muscle mass, and may lessen food preoccupation and weight gain.\nThe mainstay of diagnosis is genetic testing, specifically DNA-based methylation testing to detect the absence of the paternally contributed PWS/AS region on chromosome 15q11.2-q13. Such testing detects over 99% of cases. Methylation-specific testing is important to confirm the diagnosis of PWS in all individuals, but especially those who are too young to manifest sufficient features to make the diagnosis on clinical grounds or in those individuals who have atypical findings.\nPWS is often misdiagnosed due to its unfamiliarity in the medical community. Sometimes it is misdiagnosed as Down syndrome, simply because of the relative frequency of Down syndrome compared to PWS.\nTreatment.\nWhile PWS has no cure, several treatments are available to lessen the condition's symptoms. During infancy, subjects should undergo therapies to improve muscle strength. Speech and occupational therapy are also indicated. During the school years, children benefit from a highly structured learning environment and extra help. The largest problem associated with the syndrome is severe obesity. Access to food must be strictly supervised and limited, usually by installing locks on all food-storage places, including refrigerators. Physical activity in individuals with PWS for all ages is needed to optimize strength and promote a healthy lifestyle.\nAn intranasal formulation of betahistine dihydrochloride received orphan drug designation from the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of obesity associated with Prader\u2013Willi syndrome.\nIn March 2025, the FDA approved a drug, to be called Vykat XR, that treats the acute hunger that is a symptom of PWS.\nPrescription of daily recombinant growth hormone injections is indicated for children with PWS. GH supports linear growth and increased muscle mass, and may lessen food preoccupation and weight gain.\nBecause of severe obesity, obstructive sleep apnea is a common sequela, and a positive airway pressure machine is often needed. A person who has been diagnosed with PWS may have to undergo surgical procedures. One surgery that has proven to be unsuccessful for treating obesity is the gastric bypass procedure.\nBehavior and psychiatric problems should be detected early for the best results. These issues are best treated with parental education and training. Sometimes medication is introduced as well. Serotonin agonists have been most effective in lessening temper tantrums and improving compulsivity.\nEpidemiology.\nPWS affects between 1 in 10,000 to 30,000 people worldwide. The condition is named after Swiss physicians Andrea Prader and Heinrich Willi who, together with Alexis Labhart, described it in detail in 1956. An earlier description was made in 1887 by British physician John Langdon Down.\nSociety and culture.\nDespite its rarity, PWS has been often referenced in popular culture, partly due to curiosity surrounding the insatiable appetite and the obesity symptomatic of the syndrome.\nKatie Price's son, Harvey, is one well-known person with PWS.\nThe syndrome has been depicted and documented several times on television. A fictional individual with PWS featured in the episode \"Dog Eat Dog\" of the television series \"\", which aired in the US on 24 November 2005. In July 2007, Channel 4 aired a 2006 documentary called \"Can't Stop Eating\", surrounding the everyday lives of two people with PWS, Joe and Tamara. In a 2010 episode of \",\" Sheryl Crow helped Ty Pennington rebuild a home for a family whose youngest son, Ethan Starkweather, was living with the syndrome. In a 2012 episode of \"Mystery Diagnosis\" on the Discovery Health channel, Conor Heybach, who has Prader\u2013Willi syndrome, shared how he was diagnosed with it.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54997", "revid": "15536200", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54997", "title": "Scotia", "text": "Latin term for Gaelic lands\nScotia is a Latin placename derived from \"Scoti\", a Latin name for the Gaels, first attested in the late 3rd century. The Romans referred to Ireland as \"Scotia\" around 500 A.D. From the 9th century on, its meaning gradually shifted, so that it came to mean only the part of Britain lying north of the Firth of Forth: the Kingdom of Alba. By the later Middle Ages it had become the fixed Latin term for what in English is called Scotland.\nEtymology and derivations.\nThe name of \"Scotland\" is derived from the Latin \"Scotia\". The word \"Scoti\" (or \"Scotti\") was first used by the Romans. It is found in Latin texts from the 4th century describing an Irish group that raided Roman Britain. It came to be applied to all Gaels. It is not believed that any Gaelic groups called themselves \"Scoti\" in ancient times, except when writing in Latin. Old Irish documents use the term \"Scot\" (plural \"Scuit\") going back as far as the 9th century; for example, in the glossary of Cormac mac Cuilenn\u00e1in.\nOman derived it from \"Scuit\" (modern Gaelic \"scoith\"), meaning someone cut off. He believed it referred to bands of outcast Gaelic raiders, suggesting that the Scots were to the Gaels what the Vikings were to the Norse.\nThe 19th-century author Aonghas MacCoinnich of Glasgow proposed that \"Scoti\" was derived from a Gaelic ethnonym (proposed by MacCoinnich) \"Sgaothaich\" from \"sgaoth\" \"swarm\", plus the derivational suffix \"-ach\" (plural \"-aich\"). However, this proposal to date has not been met with any response in mainstream place-name studies.\nPope Leo X (1513\u20131521) decreed that the use of the name Scotia be confined to referring to land that is now Scotland.\nVirtually all names for Scotland are based on the \"Scotia\" root (cf. Dutch \"Schotland\", French \"\u00c9cosse\", Czech \"Skotsko\", Zulu \"IsiKotilandi\", M\u0101ori \"Koterana\", Hakka \"S\u00fb-kak-l\u00e0n\", Quechua \"Iskusya\", Turkish \"\u0130sko\u00e7ya\" etc.), either directly or via intermediate languages. The only exceptions are the Celtic languages, where the names are based on the Alba root; e.g., Manx \"Nalbin\", Welsh \"Yr Alban\", Irish \"Albain.\"\nMedieval usage.\nScotia translates to \"Land of the Scots\". It was a way of saying \"Land of the Gaels\" (compare \"Angli\" and \"Anglia\"; \"Franci\" and \"Francia\"; \"Romani\" and \"Romania\"; etc). It was initially used as a name for Ireland, originally with ethnic connotations, for example in Adomn\u00e1n's \"Life of Columba\", or by Isidore of Seville, who wrote in 580 CE that \"Scotia and Hibernia are the same country\" (Isidore, lib. xii. c. 6). This is how it was used, for instance, by King Robert I of Scotland (Robert the Bruce) and Domhnall Ua N\u00e9ill during the Scottish Wars of Independence, when Ireland was called \"Scotia Maior\" (greater Scotia) and Scotland \"Scotia Minor\" (lesser Scotia).\nAs a translation of \"Alba\", \"Scotia\" could mean both the whole kingdom belonging to the King of Scots, or just Scotland north of the Forth. After the 11th century, \"Scotia\" was used mostly for the Kingdom of Alba, and later, by expansion, to refer to the Kingdom of Scotland in its modern extent; in this way, it became the fixed designation.\nPope Leo X of the Roman Catholic Church eventually granted Scotland exclusive right over the word, and this led to Anglo-Scottish takeovers of continental Gaelic monasteries (e.g., the \"Schottenkl\u00f6ster\").\nIn Irish sources.\nOne of the oldest sources recorded was from medieval Monarchy. In the year 1005, after Brian Boru was crowned king, he adopted the title Imperator Scotorum, \"Emperor of the Scoti\" suggesting he saw himself as the overlord of all Scotia and Gaels. The title was however adopted and not formally provided. \nWithin Irish Mythology, Geoffrey Keating's \"Foras Feasa ar \u00c9irinn\", Ireland's \"ninth name was Scotia; and it is the sons of M\u00edleadh who gave that name to it, from their mother, whose name was Scota, daughter of Pharao Nectonibus; or it is why they called it Scotia, because that they are themselves the Scottish race from Scythia\". According to the Middle Irish language synthetic history \"Lebor Gab\u00e1la \u00c9renn\", she was the daughter of Pharaoh Necho II of Egypt. Other sources say that Scota was the daughter of Pharaoh Neferhotep I of Egypt and his wife Senebsen, and was the wife of M\u00edl, that is Milesius, and the mother of \u00c9ber Donn and \u00c9rim\u00f3n. M\u00edl had given Neferhotep military aid against ancient Ethiopia and was given Scota in marriage as a reward for his services. Writing in 1571, Edmund Campion named the pharaoh Amenophis; Keating named him Cincris.\nOther uses.\nIn geography, the term is also used for the following:\nThe term also is used/for the following purposes;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54998", "revid": "47445645", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54998", "title": "Bunge Global", "text": "Swiss-domiciled agribusiness company\nBunge Global SA (\"BUN-ghee\") is a global agribusiness and food company, incorporated in Geneva, Switzerland and headquartered in St. Louis, Missouri, United States. \nAs well as being an international soybean exporter, it is also involved in food processing, grain trading, and fertilizer. It competes with Archer Daniels Midland, Cargill and Louis Dreyfus. The company has approximately 23,000 employees in 40 countries.\nHistory.\nFormation and listing.\nBunge was founded in 1818 by Johann Peter Gottlieb Bunge in Amsterdam, it was relocated to Antwerp by Edouard Bunge in 1859. Edouard's brother; Ernest Bunge, took the Bunge name to Argentina in 1884, and in 1905 the business extended to Brazil and later on to the United States. The company was converted into the Bermuda-registered Bunge International in 1994, retaining the Bunge y Born name only in Argentina. Bunge remained a privately held company of 180 shareholders (including the longtime controlling family interests) and divested itself in 1998 of almost all its retail foods interests in favor of a greater role in international agribusiness and commodity markets; by then the company's gross annual turnover had reached US$13 billion. Bunge ultimately went public on the New York Stock Exchange in 2001, becoming Bunge Limited.\nIn 1994, the Bermuda-registered Bunge International was created as the main company in which the families had shares. There were around 180 shareholders\u2014the main families were Hirsch, Bunge, Born, Engels, and De La Tour. This replaced the older structure in which individual shareholders had stakes in all the different Bunge companies. Now only in Argentina does the Bunge y Born name still exist.\nIn 2001, under the leadership of Alberto Weisser, Bunge was listed on the New York Stock Exchange. Through their three businesses\u2014agribusiness, fertilizer, and food products\u2014they have established a leading global presence in the farm-to-consumer food chain. Bunge is the world's largest oilseed processor, the world's number one seller of bottled vegetable oil to consumers and the largest producer and supplier of fertilizers to farmers in South America.\nAcquisitions.\nIn 2002, Bunge acquired Cereol, parent of oilseed companies Central Soya and CanAmera Foods. In 2008, Bunge acquired Walter Rau, a margarine company, from Germany. In 2009, Bunge acquired the margarine business from Raisio Group, maker of functional food ingredients. In 2017, Bunge announced intentions to acquire a 70% stake in IOI Loders Croklaan for $946 million from Malaysian palm oil producer IOI Corp Berhad.\nBrazilian sourcing protests.\nIn 2012, Bunge came under criticism from NGO Survival International for sourcing its sugarcane from the ancestral land of the Guaran\u00ed people in Brazil. It has been reported by the tribe that crop production has brought pesticides and machinery that has damaged their health, as well as restricting them to a small area that has prevented them from hunting and practicing their traditions. Also, in January 2003, opposition from the tribe had led to the killing of their chief Marcus Vernon by ranchers. In 2012, survivors were requesting Bunge follows the example of the company Ra\u00edzen, which agreed to stop the sourcing of sugarcane from the area.\nRecent.\nIn May 2017, Glencore in Switzerland began pursuing the acquisition of Bunge. In early June 2017, Bunge hired advisers to help it fend off Glencore's takeover interest. In January 2017, Archer Daniels Midland agreed to sell its crop risk services (insurance) unit to Validus Holdings for $127.5 million. On January 19, 2018, it was reported that Archer Daniels Midland had approached Bunge Ltd. about a takeover, with details \"unclear.\" At that point, Bunge had a market value of about $9.8 billion, and was still being pursued by Glencore.\nIn 2019, Bunge relocated its global headquarters from White Plains, New York, to the St Louis metropolitan area in 2020, where the company had its US headquarters.\nIn April 2020, Bunge announced it agreed to sell 35 U.S interior grain elevators to Zen-Noh Corporation. The completion of the sale was subject to regulatory approval and closed in December 2021. \nIn 2021, Bunge was ranked 18th on FoodTalks' Global Top 40 Plant Protein Producers list. \nA 2023, Bloomberg Businessweek described Bunge's food science pivot.\nIn 2023, a merger with Viterra was announced. In July 2025, the merger with Viterra was completed.\nProducts.\nThe company's operations include:\nEnvironmental record.\nIn 2006, the United States Environmental Protection Agency filed charges against Bunge company regarding pollution emissions. This involved twelve soybean processing plants and corn mills in eight states throughout the US. The lawsuit claimed Bunge violated the Clean Air Act by constructing major modifications that increased emissions. Bunge was required to implement engineering changes and pollution control projects, estimated to cost $12 million, to reduce emissions at the facilities by 2,200 tons a year. The settlement also called for Bunge to pay a cash penalty of $625,000 and to spend $1.25 million to fund community-based environmental projects selected by and to be supervised by the impacted states. \nBiofuel production.\nIn November 2005, Bunge created a Europe production joint venture biodiesel with French company KBBV and Diester Industrie. The new company received the name Diester Industrie International. The joint venture will produce biodiesel in Germany, Austria and Italy. The total capacity of the plants will reach 430 thousand tons biodiesel per year.\nCorporate governance.\nAs of 05 Feb 2020\nTax dodging.\nA noteworthy case of transfer mispricing came to light in 2011 in Argentina involving the world\u2019s four largest grain traders: ADM, Bunge, Cargill and Louis Dreyfus Company. Argentina\u2019s revenue and customs service began an investigation into the four companies when prices for agricultural commodities spiked in 2008 and yet very little profit for the four companies had been reported to the office. As a result of the investigation, it was alleged that the companies had submitted false declarations of sales and routed profits through tax havens or through their headquarters. In some cases, they were said to have used phantom firms to buy grain and had inflated costs in Argentina in order to reduce the recorded profits earned in the country. According to the country\u2019s revenue and customs service, the outstanding taxes amounted to almost USD 1 billion. The companies involved have denied the allegations. To date, the Argentinian tax authorities have not replied to the Swiss NGO Public Eye\u2019s request regarding the current state of the case. In its 2018 annual report to the US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), Bunge mentioned provisions which suggest that the case is still ongoing: \u201c[A]s of December 31, 2018, Bunge\u2019s Argentine subsidiary had received income tax assessments relating to 2006 through 2009 of approximately 1,276 million Argentine pesos (approximately $34 million), plus applicable interest on the outstanding amount of approximately 4,246 million Argentine pesos (approximately $113 million]).\u201d\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54999", "revid": "47110100", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54999", "title": "Forbidden Planet", "text": "1956 science fiction film by Fred M. Wilcox\nForbidden Planet is a 1956 American science-fiction action film from Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, produced by Nicholas Nayfack and directed by Fred M. Wilcox from a script by Cyril Hume that was based on a film story by Allen Adler and Irving Block. It stars Walter Pidgeon, Anne Francis, and Leslie Nielsen. Shot in Eastmancolor and CinemaScope, this landmark film is considered one of the great science-fiction films of the 1950s, a precursor of contemporary science-fiction cinema. The characters and isolated setting have been compared to those in William Shakespeare's \"The Tempest\", and the plot contains certain happenings analogous to the play, leading many to consider it a loose adaptation.\n\"Forbidden Planet\" pioneered several aspects of science-fiction cinema. It was the first sci-fi film to depict humans traveling in a human-made, faster-than-light starship. It was also the first to be set entirely on a planet orbiting another star, far away from Earth and the Solar System. The Robby the Robot character is one of the first film robots that was more than just a mechanical \"tin can\" on legs; Robby displays a distinct personality and is an integral supporting character in the film. Outside science fiction, the film was groundbreaking as the first of any genre to use an entirely electronic musical score, courtesy of Bebe and Louis Barron.\n\"Forbidden Planet\"'s effects team was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Special Effects at the 29th Academy Awards. Tony Magistrale describes it as one of the best examples of early techno-horror. In 2013, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPlot.\nIn the 23rd century, after more than a year's journey, the United Planets starship \"C-57D\" arrives at the distant planet Altair IV to determine the fate of the ship \"Bellerophon\", sent there 20 years before. Dr. Edward Morbius, one of the original expedition's scientists, warns the ship not to land for safety reasons, but Commander John J. Adams ignores his warning.\nAdams and Lieutenants Jerry Farman and \"Doc\" Ostrow are met by Robby the Robot, who transports them to Morbius' residence. Morbius describes how all other members of their expedition had been killed, one by one, by an unseen \"planetary force\", with the \"Bellerophon\" being vaporized as the last survivors tried to escape. Only Morbius, his wife (whom Morbius claims later died of natural causes), and their daughter Altaira were somehow immune. Morbius offers to help the starship return home, but Adams says he must receive further instructions from Earth.\nThe next day, Adams finds Farman kissing Altaira. Furious, he rebukes Farman and criticizes Altaira for wearing revealing clothing. That night, an invisible intruder sabotages communications equipment aboard the starship. The next morning, Adams and Ostrow go to Morbius' residence to discuss the intrusion. While waiting, Adams happens upon Altaira swimming. After she dons a new, less revealing dress, Adams apologizes for his behavior toward her, and they kiss. They are suddenly attacked by Altaira's pet tiger, and Adams is forced to disintegrate it with his blaster.\nMorbius appears and tells Adams and Ostrow that he has been studying artifacts of the Krell, a highly advanced race that mysteriously perished in a single night 200,000 years before. One such device enhances the intellect, which Morbius had used. He barely survived, but his intellectual capacity had doubled. Another is a vast underground machine, still functioning, powered by 9,208 thermonuclear reactors. Adams tells Morbius he must share these discoveries with Earth, but Morbius refuses, saying, \"Humanity is not yet ready to receive such limitless power.\"\nAdams erects a force field fence around the starship, but the unseen intruder easily passes through and brutally murders Chief Engineer Quinn, who was repairing the damaged communications equipment. Morbius warns Adams of his premonition of further deadly attacks. That night, the intruder is detected approaching. Its outline and features become visible when it enters the force field and blasters are fired at it, to little effect. The thing kills Farman and two other crewmen. When Morbius is awakened by Altaira's screams, the creature suddenly vanishes.\nAdams tries to persuade Altaira to leave. Ostrow sneaks away and uses the Krell intellect enhancer, but is fatally injured. Before dying, he informs Adams that the underground machine's purpose was to create anything by mere thought, anywhere on the planet. However, he tells Adams the Krell forgot one thing: \"Monsters from the id.\" The machine gave the Krell's own subconscious desires free rein with unlimited power, causing their own extinction. Adams deduces that Morbius's subconscious created the thing that both killed the original expedition members and attacked his crewmen; Morbius refuses to believe him.\nAltaira tells Morbius that she is leaving Altair IV with Adams. Robby detects the creature approaching; Morbius commands Robby to kill it, but the robot knows it is Morbius and shuts down, being programmed to never kill a human. Adams, Altaira, and Morbius hide in the Krell laboratory, but the creature melts its way through the thick doors. Morbius finally accepts the truth and confronts and disowns his other self, but is fatally injured by the creature as it vanishes. Before he dies, he has Adams activate a planetary self-destruct system, warning them to be far away in deep space. At a safe distance, Adams, Altaira, Robby, and the surviving crew witness the obliteration of Altair IV. Adams reassures Altaira that in about a million years, the human race will stand where the Krell did. They embrace as \"C-57D\" heads back to Earth.\nProduction.\nThe screenplay by Irving Block and Allen Adler, written in 1952, was originally titled \"Fatal Planet\". The later screenplay draft by Cyril Hume renamed the film \"Forbidden Planet\", because this was believed to have greater box-office appeal. Block and Adler's drama took place in the year 1976 on the planet Mercury. An Earth expedition headed by John Grant is sent to the planet to retrieve Dr. Adams and his daughter Dorianne, who have been stranded there for twenty years. In this version, there is no Krell or a monster from the id. The invisible ape-like beast simply appears to be a native of Mercury. Hume's first story outline from November 1952 fleshed out and rewrote much of the original concept.\nThe film sets for \"Forbidden Planet\" were constructed on a Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM) sound stage at its Culver City film lot and were designed by Cedric Gibbons and Arthur Lonergan. The film was shot entirely indoors, with all the Altair IV exterior scenes simulated using sets, visual effects, and matte paintings. As the art director of the film, Lonergan took the liberty to build sets that were much larger than the budget allowed. The sets were already half done when the budget department found out, too late to do anything about it.\nA full-sized mock-up of roughly three-quarters of the starship was built to suggest its full width of 170\u00a0ft (51\u00a0m). The starship was surrounded by a huge, painted cyclorama featuring the desert landscape of Altair IV; this one set took up all of the available space in one of the Culver City sound stages. Principal photography took place from April 18 to late May 1955.\nAt a cost of roughly $125,000, Robby the Robot was very expensive for a film prop at this time; it represented almost 7% of the film's $1.9 million budget and equates to at least $1 million in 2017 dollars. Both the electrically controlled passenger vehicle driven by Robby and the truck/tractor-crane off-loaded from the starship were also constructed especially for this film. Robby later starred in the science-fiction film \"The Invisible Boy\" (1957) and appeared in many TV series and films.\nThe animated sequences of \"Forbidden Planet\", especially the attack of the Id Monster, were created by veteran animator Joshua Meador, who was loaned to MGM by Walt Disney Productions. According to a \"Behind the Scenes\" featurette on the film's DVD, a close look at the creature shows it to have a small goatee beard, suggesting its connection to Dr. Morbius, the only character with this physical feature. Unusually, the scene in which the Id Monster is finally revealed during its attack on the Earth ship was not created using traditional cel animation. Instead, Meador simply sketched each frame of the entire sequence in black pencil on animation stand translucent vellum paper; each page was then photographed in high contrast, so that only the major details remained visible. These images were then photographically reversed into negative and the resulting white line images were then tinted red, creating the effect of the Id Monster's body remaining largely invisible, with only its major outlines illuminated by the energy from the force-field and blaster beams. The monster was considered so scary that in some states its image was edited out of the film so as to not frighten children. Meador was also responsible for the other visual effects, like the ray gun beams and disintegration scenes.\nAlthough workprints of cinema films were normally destroyed, the workprint of \"Forbidden Planet\" was not destroyed, and was discovered in 1977. Differences are seen in characterization, dialogue, and scenes between the workprint and the release print.\nReception.\n\"Forbidden Planet\" had its world premiere at the Southeastern Science Fiction Convention in Charlotte, North Carolina, on March 3 and 4, 1956. The film opened in more than 100 cities on March 23 in CinemaScope, Eastmancolor, and in some theaters, stereophonic sound, either by the magnetic or Perspecta processes.\nAt the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds a rating of 92% based on 52 reviews from critics, averaging 8.20/10. Bosley Crowther of \"The New York Times\" wrote that everyone who worked on the film certainly \"had a barrel of fun with it. And, if you've got an ounce of taste for crazy humor, you'll have a barrel of fun, too.\" \"Variety\" wrote: \"Imaginative gadgets galore, plus plenty of suspense and thrills, make the Nicholas Nayfack production a top offering in the space travel category.\" \"Harrison's Reports\" called the film \"weird but fascinating and exciting\", with \"highly imaginative\" production. Philip K. Scheuer of the \"Los Angeles Times\" wrote that the film was \"more than another science-fiction movie, with the emphasis on fiction; it is a genuinely thought-through concept of the future, and the production MGM has bestowed on it gives new breadth and dimension to that time-worn phrase, 'out of this world.'\" John McCarten of \"The New Yorker\" called the film \"a pleasant spoof of all the moonstruck nonsense the movies have been dishing up about what goes on among our neighbors out there in interstellar space.\" The \"Monthly Film Bulletin\" of Britain praised the film as \"an enjoyably thorough-going space fantasy\", adding, \"In tone the film adroitly combines naivete with sophistication, approaching its inter-planetary heroics with a cheerful consciousness of their absurdity that still allows for one or two genuinely weird and exciting moments, such as the monster's first advance on the spaceship.\" The Philadelphia film critic Steve Friedman (\"Mr. Movie\") told interviewers that \"Forbidden Planet\" was his favorite film. He watched it 178 times. Pauline Kael called it \"The best of the science-fiction interstellar productions of the 50s... Caliban has become a marvellously flamboyant monster out of Freud\u2014pure id. It's a pity the film... didn't lift some of Shakespeare's dialogue: it's hard to believe you're in the heavens when the diction of the hero (Leslie Nielsen) and his spaceshipmates flattens you down to Kansas.\" Film historian Lee Pfeiffer wrote: \"Much-beloved by science fiction fans, \"Forbidden Planet\" creaks with age, but if viewed in the context of the time in which it was produced, it remains quite impressive... \"Forbidden Planet\" is an intelligent sci-fi entry, even if the performances are sometimes over-the-top.\"\nAccording to MGM records, the film initially earned $1,530,000 in the U.S. and Canada and $1,235,000 elsewhere resulting in a profit of $210,000.\n\"Forbidden Planet\" was re-released to film theaters during 1972 as one of MGM's \"Kiddie Matinee\" features; it was missing about six minutes of film footage cut to ensure it received a G rating from the Motion Picture Association of America, including a 1950s-style muted scene of Anne Francis, which made it seem she swam without a bathing suit. Later video releases carry a G rating, although they are all the original theatrical version.\nThe American Film Institute nominated the film as one of its top-10 science-fiction films. The score was nominated for AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores.\nHome media.\n\"Forbidden Planet\" was first released in the pan and scan format in 1981 on MGM VHS and Betamax videotape and on MGM laser disc and CED Videodisc; years later, in 1996, it was again reissued by MGM/UA, but this time in widescreen VHS and laserdisc, both for the film's 40th anniversary. The Criterion Collection later reissued \"Forbidden Planet\" in CinemaScope's original 2.55:1 aspect ratio for the first time, on a deluxe laserdisc set with various extra features on a second disc. Warner Bros. next released the film on DVD in 1999 (MGM's catalog of films has since remained under ownership of Turner Entertainment, currently a division of Warner Bros. Discovery). Warner's release offered both cropped and widescreen picture formats on the same disc.\nFor the film's 50th anniversary, the Ultimate Collector's Edition was released on November 28, 2006, in an oversized red metal box, using the original film poster for its wraparound cover. Both DVD and high definition HD DVD formats were available in this deluxe package. Inside both premium packages were the films \"Forbidden Planet\" and \"The Invisible Boy\", \"The Thin Man\" episode \"Robot Client\" (\"Robby The Robot\", one of the film's co-stars, was also a guest star in both \"The Thin Man\" episode and \"The Invisible Boy\") and a documentary \"Watch the Skies!: Science Fiction, The 1950s and Us\". Also included were miniature lobby cards and an 8\u00a0cm (3-inch) toy replica of Robby the Robot. This was quickly followed by the release of the \"Forbidden Planet\" 50th Anniversary edition in both standard DVD and HD DVD packaging. Both 50th anniversary formats were mastered by Warner Bros.-MGM techs from a fully restored, digital transfer of the film. A Blu-ray edition of \"Forbidden Planet\" was released on September 7, 2010.\nNovelization.\nShortly before the film was released, a novelization appeared in hardcover and then later in mass-market paperback; it was written by W.J. Stuart (the pseudonym of mystery novelist Philip MacDonald), which chapters the novel into separate first person narrations by Dr. Ostrow, Commander Adams, and Dr. Morbius. The novel delves further into the mysteries of the vanished Krell and Morbius' relationship to them. In the novel, he repeatedly exposes himself to the Krell's manifestation machine, which (as suggested in the film) boosts his brain power far beyond normal human intelligence. Morbius retains enough of his imperfect human nature to be afflicted with hubris and a contempt for humanity. Not recognizing his own base primitive drives and limitations proves to be Morbius' downfall, as it had for the extinct Krell. While not stated explicitly in the film (although the basis for a deleted scene first included as an extra with the Criterion Collection's LaserDisc set and included with both the later 50th anniversary DVD and current Blu-ray releases), the novelization compared Altaira's ability to tame the tiger (until her sexual awakening with Commander Adams) to the medieval myth of a unicorn being tamable only by a virgin.\nThe novel also includes some elements never included in the film: in one of them, Adams, Farman, and Ostrow clandestinely observe Morbius' house overnight one evening, but see or hear nothing. When they leave they accidentally kill one of Altaira's pet monkeys. When Dr. Ostrow later on dissects the dead animal he discovers that its internal structure precludes it from ever having been alive in the normal biological sense. The tiger, deer, and monkeys are all conscious creations by Dr. Morbius as companions (\"pets\") for his daughter and only outwardly resemble their Earth counterparts. The novel also differs somewhat from the film in that it does not directly establish the great machine as the progenitor of the animals or monster; instead only attributes them to Morbius' elevated mental power. The Krell's self-destruction can be interpreted by the reader as a cosmic punishment for misappropriating the life-creating power of God. This is why in the film's ending, Commander Adams says in his speech to Altaira \"...we are, after all, not God\". The novel ends with a postscript making a similar observation.\nSoundtrack.\n\"Forbidden Planet\"'s innovative electronic music score (credited as \"electronic tonalities\" due to disputes with the musicians' union) was composed by Bebe and Louis Barron. The two were originally slated to contribute about twenty minutes of sound effects and electronic pieces, as avant-garde composer Harry Partch was also due to contribute music. When Partch left the project, the Barrons took over the entire soundtrack. MGM producer Dore Schary had been approached by them at a nightclub in Greenwich Village while on a family Christmas visit to New York City, where they asked if he was interested in listening to a demonstration of their electronic music. Schary told them he was returning to California the next morning, but to assuage their disappointment, he promised to give them a chance if they ever came to California. Assuming he had heard the last of them, he was surprised when they showed up in Hollywood a few weeks later. Keeping his promise, he listened to their music, and after a consultation with the head of MGM's music department Johnny Green and the movie's producer Nicholas Nayfack, he agreed to hire them. When they declined to have all their equipment transferred from New York to Hollywood for a three-month job, the studio agreed, and the movie became MGM's first production to have its score produced outside of the studio lot. While the theremin had been used on the soundtracks of \"Spellbound\" (1945) and \"The Day the Earth Stood Still\" (1951), the Barrons are credited with creating the first completely electronic film score, preceding the development of analog synthesizers by Robert Moog and Don Buchla in the early 1960s.\nUsing ideas and procedures from the book \"\" (1948) by the mathematician and electrical engineer Norbert Wiener, Louis Barron constructed his own electronic circuits that he used to generate the score's \"bleeps, blurps, whirs, whines, throbs, hums, and screeches\", making heavy use of ring modulation. After recording the basic sounds, the Barrons further manipulated the sounds with reverberation, delay, filters, and tape manipulations (as employed in the piece \"Williams Mix\", which they had assisted John Cage in realizing at their Greenwich Village studio).\nSince Bebe and Louis Barron did not belong to the Musicians Union, their work could not be considered for an Academy Award in either the \"soundtrack\" or \"sound effects\" categories; this also necessitated the \"electronic tonalities\" credit. MGM declined to publish a soundtrack album at the time that \"Forbidden Planet\" was released; however, film composer and conductor David Rose later published a 7-inch (18\u00a0cm) single of his original main title theme that he had recorded at the MGM studios in March 1956. Rose was originally hired to compose the musical score in 1955, but his main title theme was discarded when he was discharged from the project by Dore Schary in late December of that year. The film's original theatrical trailer contains snippets of Rose's score, the tapes of which he reportedly later destroyed.\nThe Barrons finally released their soundtrack in 1976 as an LP album for the film's 20th anniversary; it was on their very own Planet Records label (later changed to Small Planet Records and distributed by GNP Crescendo Records). The LP premiered at MidAmeriCon, the 34th World Science Fiction Convention, held in Kansas City, Missouri, over the 1976 Labor Day weekend, as part of a 20th Anniversary celebration of \"Forbidden Planet\" held at that Worldcon; the Barrons were there promoting their album's first release, signing all the copies sold at the convention. They also introduced the first of three packed-house screenings that showed an MGM 35mm fine-grain vault print in original CinemaScope and stereophonic sound. A decade later, in 1986, their soundtrack was released on a music CD for the film's 30th Anniversary, with a six-page color booklet containing images from \"Forbidden Planet\", plus liner notes from the composers and Bill Malone.\nA tribute to the film's soundtrack was performed live in concert by Jack Dangers, and is available on disc one of the album \"Forbidden Planet Explored\".\nCostumes and props.\nThe costumes worn by Anne Francis were designed by Helen Rose. Her miniskirts resulted in \"Forbidden Planet\" being banned in Spain; it was not shown there until 1967. Other costumes were designed by Walter Plunkett.\nRobby the Robot was operated at first by diminutive stuntman Frankie Darro. He was fired shortly after an early scene because of his having consumed a five-martini lunch prior to the scene being shot; he nearly fell over while attempting to walk while inside the expensive prop.\nMany costume and prop items were reused in several different episodes of the television series \"The Twilight Zone\", most of which were filmed by Rod Serling's Cayuga Productions at the MGM studio in Culver City, including Robby the Robot, the various \"C-57D\" models, the full-scale mock-up of the base of the ship (which featured in the episodes \"To Serve Man\" and \"On Thursday We Leave for Home\"), the blaster pistols and rifles, crew uniforms, and special effects shots.\nIn late September 2015, several screen-used items from \"Forbidden Planet\" were offered in Profiles in History's Hollywood Auction 74, including Walter Pidgeon's \"Morbius\" costume, an illuminating blaster rifle, blaster pistol, a force field generator post, and an original Sascha Brastoff steel prehistoric fish sculpture seen outside Morbius' home; also offered were several lobby cards and publicity photos.\nOn November 2, 2017, the original Robby the Robot prop was offered for auction by Bonhams, and it earned US$5.3 million, including the buyer's premium. It set a new record for TCM-Bonhams auctions, surpassing the US$4 million earned for a Maltese Falcon in 2013, making it the most valuable film prop ever sold at auction.\nIn popular culture.\nAn Australian radio adaptation using the original electronic music and noted local actors was broadcast in June 1959 on \"The Caltex Radio Theatre\".\nIn Stephen King's \"The Tommyknockers\", Altair-4 is frequently referenced as the home planet of the titular alien presence.\nIn the authorized biography of \"Star Trek\" creator Gene Roddenberry, biographer David Alexander notes that \"Forbidden Planet\" was an inspiration for \"Star Trek\" and quotes a memo by Roddenberry in which he explicitly avoids copying the mechanics of \"Forbidden Planets spaceship, but hopes for it to \"stimulate our own thinking\" in regards to the production of the still-in-development \"Star Trek\" TV series. In the opening scene of the movie, the navigator says \"We'll reach D.C. point at 1701\". The registration number for the USS Enterprise is NCC-1701. There were many references to Altair IV in \"Star Trek\". In a scene from ' (1984) Dr. McCoy visits a bar and orders \"Altair Water\".\nElements of the \"Doctor Who\" serial \"Planet of Evil\" were consciously based on \"Forbidden Planet\".\nIn the novel \"Strata\" by Terry Pratchett the main characters get stranded on a disc world which is driven completely by underground machinery. Close to the end, an explicit reference is made: \"Didn't you ever see \"Forbidden Planet\"? Human movie. They remade it five, six times\".\n\"Forbidden Planet\" and star Anne Francis are named alongside ten other classic science fiction films in the opening song \"Science Fiction Double Feature\" in the stage musical \"The Rocky Horror Show\" and its subsequent film adaptation.\nIn \"RoboCop\" executive producer Jon Davison wanted the interior of the OCP headquarters to look like Krell's underground machine complex, which was his favorite shots in the movie.\nThe British musical \"Return to the Forbidden Planet\" was inspired by and loosely based on the MGM film, and won the Olivier Award for best musical of 1989/90.\nA scene from the science fiction TV series \"Babylon 5\", set on the Epsilon III Great Machine bridge, strongly resembles the Krell's great machine. While this was not the intent of the show's producer, the special effects crew, tasked with creating the imagery, stated that the Krell's machine was a definite influence on their Epsilon III designs. Also, Season 2 episode 5 \"The Long Dark\" features an invisible creature, that when shot is made visible with very similar effects as the invisible creature from Forbidden Planet.\n\"The Time Tunnel\"'s pilot episode featured a matte shot of huge underground buildings and people running across a walkway above a giant power generator, in homage to the scene of the Krell's underground complex.\n\"The Outer Limits\" episode \"The Man with the Power\" revisits the premise of a person's subconscious manifesting as a destructive, murderous entity.\nFor the film's 50th anniversary in 2006, DAW Books released an original mass-market paperback anthology of new science fiction short stories, \"Forbidden Planets\", all of which were inspired by the film.\n\"Out of the Silent Planet\", a song on Iron Maiden's album \"Brave New World\", is based on \"Forbidden Planet\".\n\"\"'s DLC \"Old World Blues\" uses multiple references, including Doctor Mobius as a reference to Morbius in the film, the protectrons being modeled after Robby the Robot, and The Forbidden Dome being based on the film's title.\nIn the first \"Mass Effect\" game, while examining the planets in the Gagarin system of the Armstrong Nebula, specifically on the planet's Junthor survey feed, a reference is made to \"Monsters from the id\".\nAuthor George R. R. Martin cites \"Forbidden Planet\" as his favorite science fiction film and states that he owns a working full-size Robby the Robot replica.\nIn the \"Firefly\" film \"Serenity\", one of the vehicles they examine on the planet Miranda has \"C-57D\" stenciled on its side.\nIn the \"Castle\" episode \"Law &amp; Murder\" (2011) \"Forbidden Planet\" is playing at the \"Angelika Film Center\". Castle, who is a fan of the film, invites his daughter to go with him to see it, but she has made other plans. At the end of the episode, Beckett tells Castle she is going to see it, and by feigning ignorance (\"\"Forbidden Planet\"? Is...Is that the one with the robot?\") Castle succeeds in getting Beckett to treat him to see the film.\nRobby the Robot makes many cameo appearances in television and film. Examples include episodes of \"The Perry Como Show\", \"Hazel\", \"The Many Loves of Dobie Gillis\", \"The Twilight Zone\", \"The Banana Splits\", \"Mork and Mindy\", \"Wonder Woman\", \"The Man from UNCLE\", \"Ark II\", \"Lost in Space\", \"Space Academy\", \"The Thin Man\", \"Project UFO\" and \"The Love Boat\". Robby was also featured in the films \"Cherry 2000\", \"Gremlins\", \"The Invisible Boy\", \"Invasion of the Neptune Men\", \"Hollywood Boulevard\", and \"D\u00fcnyay\u0131 Kurtaran Adam\". He also has appeared on numerous magazine covers, record sleeves, and in some TV commercials.\nRemake.\nNew Line Cinema had developed a remake with James Cameron, Nelson Gidding, and Stirling Silliphant involved at different times. In 2007, DreamWorks set up the project with David Twohy set to direct. Warner Bros. re-acquired the rights the following year and on October 31, 2008, J. Michael Straczynski was announced as writing a remake, Joel Silver was to produce. Straczynski explained that the original had been his favorite science fiction film, and it gave Silver an idea for the new film that makes it \"not a remake\", \"not a re-imagining\", and \"not exactly a prequel\". His vision for the film would not be retro, because when the original was made it was meant to be futuristic. Straczynski met with people working in astrophysics, planetary geology, and artificial intelligence to reinterpret the Krell back-story as a film trilogy. In March 2009, Straczynski reported that the project was abandoned, and that a new script was requested.\nOn November 15, 2024, Brian K. Vaughan was announced to be writing a new screenplay for the remake.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55000", "revid": "235918", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55000", "title": "Quebec Act", "text": "1774 law setting up Quebec as part of the British Empire\nThe Quebec Act 1774 (14 Geo. 3. c. 83) () was an act of the Parliament of Great Britain which set procedures of governance in the Province of Quebec. One of the principal components of the act was the expansion of the province's territory to take over part of the Indian Reserve, including much of what is now southern Ontario, Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Ohio, Wisconsin, and parts of Minnesota.\nThe act removed the reference to the Protestant faith from the oath of allegiance, and guaranteed free practice of Catholicism and restored the Church's power to impose tithes. Additionally, it restored the use of the French civil law for matters of private law, except for the granting of unlimited freedom of testation in accordance with English common law; which was maintained for matters of public law, including administrative appeals, court procedure, and criminal prosecution.\nIn Quebec, English-speaking immigrants from the Thirteen Colonies fiercely objected to a variety of its provisions, which they saw as a removal of certain political freedoms. The act was one of the many catalysts that led to the American Revolution. Meanwhile, French-speaking Canadiens varied in their reaction, although the land-owning seigneurs and ecclesiastics were generally happy with its provisions.\nIn the Thirteen Colonies, the act had been passed in the same session of Parliament as a number of other acts designed as punishment for the Boston Tea Party and other protests, which the American Patriots collectively termed the Intolerable Acts or, in England, the Coercive Acts. Moreover, the act was seen by the colonists as a new model for administration, which would strip them of their self-elected assemblies, and appeared to void some of the colonies' land claims by granting most of the Ohio Country to the province of Quebec. The Americans also interpreted the Act as an \"establishment\" of Catholicism in the colony, as many Americans had participated in the French and Indian War, and they now saw the religious freedoms and land given to their former enemy as an affront.\nBackground.\nFollowing the defeat of the Kingdom of France by the Kingdom of Great Britain in the Seven Years' War, the peace was formalized with the Treaty of Paris of 1763. Under the terms of the treaty, France ceded New France, specifically the French colony of Canada, to Britain as it was considered less valuable, since its only significant commercial product at the time was beaver pelts, choosing instead to keep the islands of Guadeloupe and Martinique for their valuable sugar production. This territory along the St. Lawrence River, called \"Canada\" by the French, was renamed Quebec by the British, after its capital city. Non-military administration of the territories acquired by the British in the war was defined in the Royal Proclamation of 1763. \nDespite the Treaty of Paris permitting the free exercise of religion for French Catholics, certain restrictions remained under British rule. Under the terms of the peace treaty, Canadiens who chose not to leave became British subjects. In order for them to serve in public offices, they were required to swear an oath to the King that contained specific provisions rejecting the Catholic faith. Given that many of the predominantly Roman Catholic Canadiens were unwilling to take such an oath, this effectively prevented large numbers of Canadiens from participating in the local governments. Furthermore, following the death of Henri-Marie Dubreil de Pontbriand, French Catholics lacked a bishop, as British ecclesiastical policy did not allow for new appointments prior to the passage of the Quebec Act. To temporarily address this leadership gap, vicar generals were appointed, but the absence of a bishop posed challenges for the Catholic community in maintaining religious guidance and governance. These issues extended to Governor James Murray, who faced conflicts in executing his duties in the province. Initially tasked with enforcing Protestantism in Quebec, he was instructed \u201cnot to admit of any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of the See of Rome, or any other foreign Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction whatsoever in the Province under your Government.\u201d However, during his tenure, Murray\u2019s stance shifted as he began to support the extension of religious rights to Catholics. His successor, Guy Carleton, received similar instructions regarding the enforcement of British ecclesiastical policy. Despite this, Carleton also demonstrated a degree of flexibility, allowing French Catholics to continue their religious practices as they had prior to British rule. \nWith unrest, which was growing into the American Revolution, increasing in the colonies to the south, the British were worried that the Canadiens might also support the growing rebellion. At that time, Canadiens formed the vast majority of the settler population of the province of Quebec (more than 99%) and there was little immigration from Great Britain.To secure the allegiance of the approximately 90,000 Canadiens to the British crown, Murray adopted his policy of local tolerance, which Carleton later advanced by bringing proposals for formal legal protections before Parliament. \nA growing class of British merchants in Quebec \"viewed with alarm and disgust the leniency manifested toward the French Canadians.\" These merchants emerged as vocal opponents of Governor Carleton\u2019s policy of religious tolerance, instead advocating for the establishment of Protestantism as the official religion of the province. The conflict extended to the legislative sphere, where Attorney General Francis Maseres, a representative of the British minority, expressed strong opposition to Catholic influence. He argued that the appointment of a Catholic bishop had reinforced loyalty among French Canadian clergy, preventing their conversion to Protestantism, and criticized the legalization of tithes and the expansion of Quebec\u2019s territory as measures that strengthened \"the Popish religion\". Maseres became one of Carleton\u2019s main opponents in debates leading to the Quebec Act. Nonetheless, there was a need to compromise between the conflicting demands of the Canadien subjects and those of newly arrived British subjects. These efforts by the colonial governors eventually resulted in the enactment of the \"Quebec Act, 1774\".\nLegacy.\nParticipation of the Canadiens.\nThe internal communications of the British colonial government at Quebec suggest a relative failure of the purpose of the Quebec Act. On 4 February 1775, Governor Guy Carleton wrote to General Thomas Gage that he believed the Canadiens to be generally happy with the Act, yet he also added:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I must not however conceal from Your Excellency, that the Gentry, well disposed, and heartily desirous as they are, to serve the Crown, and to serve it with Zeal, when formed into regular Corps, do not relish commanding a bare Militia, they never were used to that Service under the French Government, (and perhaps for good Reasons) besides the sudden Dismission of the Canadian Regiment raised in 1764, without Gratuity or Recompence to Officers, who engaged in our Service almost immediately after the Cession of the Country, of taking any Notice of them since, tho' they all expected half pay, is still uppermost in their Thoughts, and not likely to encourage their engaging a second Time in the same Way; as to the Habitants or Peasantry, ever since the Civil Authority has been introduced into the Province, the Government of it has hung so loose, and retained so little Power, they have in a Manner emancipated themselves, and it will require Time, and discreet Management likewise, to recall them to their ancient Habits of Obedience and Discipline; considering all the new Ideas they have been acquiring for these ten years past, can it be thought they will be pleased at being suddenly, and without Preparation embodied into a Militia, and marched from their Families, Lands, and Habitations to remote Provinces, and all the Horrors of War, which they have already experienced; It would give appearance of Truth to the Language of our Sons of Sedition, at this very Moment busily employed instilling into their Minds, that the Act was passed merely to serve the present Purposes of Government, and in the full Intention of ruling over them with all the Despotism of their ancient Masters.\nOn June 7, after having received word of the Battles of Lexington and Concord, as well as the capture of Fort Ticonderoga and Benedict Arnold's subsequent raid on Fort Saint-Jean, he wrote to Colonial Secretary Dartmouth:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The little Force we have in the Province was immediately set in Motion, and ordered to assemble at or near St. John's; The Noblesse of this Neighbourhood were called upon to collect their Inhabitants, in order to defend themselves, the Savages of those Parts likewise had the same orders; but tho' the Gentlemen testified great Zeal, neither their Entreaties or their Example could prevail upon the People; a few of the Gentry, consisting principally of the Youth, residing in this Place, and its Neighbourhood, formed a small Corps of Volunteers under the Command of Mr. Samuel Mackay, and took Post at St. John's; the Indians shewed as much Backwardness as the Canadian Peasantry. ...\nLess than a month later, on 28 June 1775, Chief Justice William Hey wrote to the Lord Chancellor from Quebec:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;What will be your Lordships astonishment when I tell you that an Act passed for the express purpose of gratifying the Canadians &amp; which was supposed to comprehend all that they either wished or wanted is become the first object of their discontent &amp; dislike. English officers to command them in time of war, &amp; English Laws to govern them in time of Peace, is the general wish. The former they know to be impossible (at least at present) &amp; by the latter if I understand them right, they mean no Laws &amp; no Government whatsoever \u2013 in the mean time it may be truly said that Gen. Carleton had taken an ill measure of the influence of the seigneurs &amp; Clergy over the lower order of people whose Principle of conduct founded in fear &amp; the sharpness of authority over them now no longer exercised, is unrestrained, &amp; breaks out in every shape of contempt or detestation of those whom they used to behold with terror &amp; who gave them I believe too many occasions to express it. And they on their parts have been and are too much elated with the advantages they supposed they should derive from the restoration of their old Privileges &amp; customs, &amp; indulged themselves in a way of thinking &amp; talking that gave very just offence, as well to their own People as to the English merchants.\nOn 21 September 1775, Lieutenant-Governor Cramah\u00e9, who governed at Quebec while Carleton was in Montreal, wrote to Dartmouth on the failure to rally the people after word arrived of the impending invasion from the colonies to the south:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My Lord !\nI am sorry to transmit to Your Lordship the disagreeable account of a disagreeable Business, some time in the Beginning of this Month, upon news of the Rebel Army approaching, General Carleton set out for Montreal in great Haste; the 7th instant the Rebels landed in the Woods near St. John's, and beat back to their Boats by a Party of Savages incamped at that Place; in this Action the Savages behaved with great Spirit and Resolution, and had they remained firm to our Interests, probably the Province would have been safe for this Year, but finding the Canadians in General averse to the taking up Arms for the Defence of their Country, they withdrew, and made their Peace.\nAfter their Defeat the Rebels retired to the Isle aux Noix, where they continued till lately, sending out some Parties, and many Emissaries, to debauch the Minds of the Canadians and Indians, in which they have proved too successful, and for which they were too well prepared by the Cabals and Intrigues of these two last years; We knew of their being reinforced, and very considerably, I suppose, as they appeared in Numbers near St. John's last Sunday Evening; where or when they landed, or the Particulars since, we have but very imperfect Accounts of, all Communications with the Forts of St. John's and Chambli, being, as far as I can find, entirely cut off.\nNo Means have been left untried to bring the Canadian Peasantry to a Sense of their Duty, and engage them to take up arms in Defence of the Province, but all to no Purpose. The Justice must be done to the Gentry, Clergy, and most of the Bourgeoisie, that they have shewen the greatest Zeal and Fidelity to the King's Service, and exerted their best endeavours to reclaim their infatuated Countrymen; ...\nThirteen Colonies.\nThe Quebec Act angered some Americans. Along with four punitive acts passed in the same parliamentary session (called the \"Coercive Acts\" in England), it was termed one of the Intolerable Acts by the Patriots, and contributed to the coming of the American Revolution.\nFrontiersmen from Virginia and other colonies were already entering the areas that the act transferred to Quebec. Land development companies such as the Ohio Company had already been formed to acquire ownership of large tracts and sell land to settlers and trade with the Indians. Americans denounced the act for promoting the growth of \"Papism\" (Catholicism) and cutting back on their freedom and traditional rights. In particular, the colonial governments of New York, Pennsylvania and Virginia were angered by the unilateral assignment of the Ohio lands to Quebec, which had each been granted them in their royal charters. The George Rex protest flag was created in New York as a result.\nLangston (2005) looked at press reaction in New England. Some colonial editors explained their views on how it reorganized Canadian governance, explaining how they felt it established direct rule by the Crown and limiting the reach of English law to criminal jurisprudence. Isaiah Thomas of the \"Massachusetts Spy\" drew links between the \"Quebec Act\" and legislation circumscribing American liberties, such as the \"Tea Act\" and the Coercive Acts. Editors shaped public opinion by writing editorials and reprinting opposition letters from both sides of the Atlantic. The First Continental Congress, which met from 5 September to 26 October 1774, addressed the inhabitants of Quebec, warning them of the perils of the supposedly arbitrary and tyrannical nature of Parliament.\nThe Quebec Act's main significance in the Thirteen Colonies was that it angered the Patriots, and dismayed the Loyalists who supported the Crown, and helped to accelerate the confrontation that became the American Revolution. The act is listed as one of the rebels' 27 colonial grievances in the Declaration of Independence:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For abolishing the free System of English Laws in a neighbouring Province, establishing therein an Arbitrary government, and enlarging its Boundaries so as to render it at once an example and fit instrument for introducing the same absolute rule into these Colonies.\nThe First Continental Congress petitioned Parliament to repeal the Intolerable Acts, which Parliament declined to do. Instead, in February 1775 Parliament passed the Conciliatory Resolution in an attempt to curry favour with the angry colonists. This was too little, too late, as the war broke out before news of its passage could reach the colonies. Although the Continental Congress did eventually receive this proposal, they ultimately rejected it.\nIn Quebec, the 1774 act was effectively superseded by the Constitutional Act 1791, which partitioned Quebec into two new provinces, Upper and Lower Canada. \nThe Quebec Act 1774 is an important predecessor to the First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States by establishing religious freedom.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55002", "revid": "1319407560", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55002", "title": "Autonomous communities of Spain", "text": "First-level administrative divisions of Spain\nThe autonomous communities () are the first-level administrative divisions of Spain, created in accordance with the Spanish Constitution of 1978, with the aim of guaranteeing limited autonomy to the nationalities and regions that make up Spain.\nThere are 17 autonomous communities and two autonomous cities (Ceuta and Melilla) that are collectively known as \"autonomies\". The two autonomous cities have the right to become autonomous communities.\nThe autonomous communities exercise their right to self-government within the limits set forth in the constitution and organic laws known as Statutes of Autonomy, which broadly define the powers that they assume.\nEach statute sets out the devolved powers () for each community; typically those communities with stronger local nationalism have more powers, and this type of devolution has been called \"asymmetrical\" which is on the whole seen as advantageous, able to respond to diversity.\nDespite the Constitution not setting a mandatory legislative chamber framework, all autonomous communities have chosen unicameralism. All such governments have legislative and executive branches of government but not judicial.\nDecentralisation model.\nThe Spanish model is generally considered by foreign political scientists and scholars as \"a federal system with certain peculiarities\". However it is also described as a decentralised unitary country. While sovereignty is vested in the nation as a whole, represented in the central institutions of government, the nation has, to varying degrees, devolved power to the communities.\nThis unique framework of territorial administration has been labeled by the Constitutional Court as the \"State of Autonomous Communities\", to avoid implying either a unitary or federal model. Some scholars have referred to the resulting system as a federal system in all but name, or a \"federation without federalism\".\nList of autonomous communities.\nThe official names of the autonomous communities can be in Spanish only (which applies to the majority of them), in the co-official language in the community only (as in the Valencian Community and the Balearic Islands), or in both Spanish and the co-official language (as in the Basque Country, Navarre and Galicia). Since 2006, Occitan\u2014in its Aranese dialect\u2014is also a co-official language in Catalonia, making it the only autonomous community whose name has three official variants (Spanish: \"Catalu\u00f1a\", Catalan: \"Catalunya\", Occitan: \"Catalonha\").\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:row hover highlight/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"RA: Regionally Appointed\"\n\"DE: Directly Elected\"\nAutonomous cities.\n\"DE: Directly Elected\"\nHistory.\nBackground.\nSpain is a diverse country made up of several different regions with varying economic and social structures, as well as different languages and historical, political and cultural traditions. While the entire Spanish territory was united under one crown in 1479, this was not a process of national homogenization or amalgamation. The constituent territories\u2014be they crowns, kingdoms, principalities or dominions\u2014retained much of their former institutional existence, including limited legislative, judicial or fiscal autonomy. These territories also exhibited a variety of local customs, laws, languages and currencies until the mid 19th century.\nFrom the 18th century onwards, the Bourbon kings and the government tried to establish a more centralized regime. Leading figures of the Spanish Enlightenment advocated for the building of a Spanish nation beyond the internal territorial boundaries. This culminated in 1833, when Spain was divided into 49 (now 50) provinces, which served mostly as transmission belts for policies developed in Madrid.\nSpanish history since the late 19th century has been shaped by a dialectical struggle between Spanish nationalism and peripheral nationalisms, mostly in Catalonia and the Basque Country, and to a lesser degree in Galicia.\nIn a response to Catalan demands, limited autonomy was granted to the Commonwealth of Catalonia in 1914, only to be abolished in 1925. It was granted again in 1932 during the Second Spanish Republic, when the Generalitat, Catalonia's mediaeval institution of government, was restored. The constitution of 1931 envisaged a territorial division for all Spain in \"autonomous regions\", which was never fully attained\u2014only Catalonia, the Basque Country and Galicia had approved \"Statutes of Autonomy\"\u2014the process being thwarted by the Spanish Civil War that broke out in 1936, and the victory of the rebel Nationalist forces under Francisco Franco.\nFranco's dictatorial regime strongly believed that the only way of preserving the \"unity of the Spanish nation\" was by ruling Spain as a highly centralized state. Peripheral nationalism, along with communism and atheism, were regarded by his regime as the main threats. His attempts to fight separatism with heavy-handed but sporadic repression, and his often severe suppression of language and regional identities backfired: the demands for democracy became intertwined with demands for the recognition of a pluralistic vision of Spanish nationhood.\nWhen Franco died in 1975, Spain entered into a phase of transition to democracy. The most difficult task of the newly democratically elected (the Spanish Parliament) in 1977 acting as a Constituent Assembly was to transition from Franco's rigid centralism to a more decentralized model in a way that would satisfy the demands of the peripheral nationalists.\nThe Prime Minister of Spain, Adolfo Su\u00e1rez, met with Josep Tarradellas, president of the Generalitat of Catalonia in exile. They agreed to restore the Generalitat and transfer limited powers while the constitution was still being written. Shortly after, the government allowed the creation of \"assemblies of members of parliament\" made up of deputies and senators of the different territories of Spain, so that they could constitute \"pre-autonomic regimes\" for their regions as well. \nThe Fathers of the Constitution had to strike a balance between the opposing views of Spain\u2014on the one hand, the centralist view inherited from monarchist and nationalist elements of Spanish society, and on the other hand federalism and a pluralistic view of Spain as a \"nation of nations\"; between a uniform decentralization of entities with the same powers and an asymmetrical structure that would distinguish the nationalities. Peripheral nationalist parties wanted a multinational state with a federal or confederal model, whereas the governing Union of the Democratic Centre (UCD) and the People's Alliance (AP) wanted minimum decentralization; the Spanish Socialist Workers' Party (PSOE) was sympathetic to a federal system.\nIn the end, the constitution, published and ratified in 1978, found a balance in recognizing the existence of \"nationalities and regions\" in Spain, within the \"indissoluble unity of the Spanish nation\". In order to manage the tensions present in the Spanish transition to democracy, the drafters of the current Spanish constitution avoided giving labels such as 'federal' to the territorial arrangements, while enshrining in the constitution the right to autonomy or self-government of the \"nationalities and regions\", through a process of asymmetric devolution of power to the \"autonomous communities\" that were to be created.\nConstitution of 1978.\nThe starting point in the territorial organization of Spain was the second article of the constitution, which reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Constitution is based on the indissoluble unity of the Spanish Nation, the common and indivisible homeland of all Spaniards; it recognizes and guarantees the right to self-government of the nationalities and regions of which it is composed and the solidarity among them all.\u2014\u200a\nThe constitution was rather ambiguous on how this was to take place. It does not define, detail, or impose the structure of the state; it does not tell the difference between \"nation\" and \"nationality\"; and it does not specify which are the \"nationalities\" and which are the \"regions\", or the territories they comprise. Rather than imposing, it \"enables\" a process towards a decentralized structure based on the exercise that these \"nationalities and regions\" would make of the right to self-government that they were granted. As such, the outcome of this exercise was not predictable and its construction was deliberately open-ended; the constitution only created a process for an eventual devolution, but it was voluntary in nature: the \"nationalities and regions\" themselves had the option of choosing to attain self-government or not.\nIn order to exercise this right, the constitution established an open process whereby the \"nationalities and regions\" could be constituted as \"autonomous communities\". Provinces would serve as the building blocks and constituent parts of the autonomous communities. The 50 provinces were a pre-existing territorial division of the liberal centralizing regime of the 19th century created for purely administrative purposes (and in the 1978 Constitution were defined as groupings of municipalities). The constitution stipulated that the following could be constituted as autonomous communities:\nIt also allowed for exceptions to the above criteria, in that the Spanish Parliament could:\nThe constitution also established two \"routes\" to accede to autonomy. The \"fast route\" or \"fast track\", also called the \"exception\", was established in article 151, and was implicitly reserved for the three \"historical nationalities\"\u2014Catalonia, the Basque Country and Galicia, regions with strong regional identities\u2014in that the very strict requirements to opt for this route were waived for those territories that had approved a \"Statute of Autonomy\" during the Second Spanish Republic (1931\u20131936). Otherwise, the constitution required the approval of three-fourths of the municipalities involved whose population would be at least the majority of the electoral census of each province, and required the ratification through a referendum with the affirmative vote of the absolute majority of the electoral census of each province (that is, of all registered citizens, not only of those who would vote).\nWhile the constitution was still being drafted, and self-government seemed likely to be granted only to the \"historical nationalities\", there was a popular outcry in Andalusia, demanding self-government as well, which led to the creation of a quicker process for that region, which eventually self-identified as a \"historical nationality\" as well. In the end, the right to self-government was extended to any other region that wanted it.\nThe \"slow route\" or \"slow track\", also called the \"norm\", was established in Article 143. This route could be taken\u2014via the first transitory disposition\u2014by the \"pre-autonomic regimes\" that had been constituted in 1978, while the constitution was still being drafted, if approved by two-thirds of all municipalities involved whose population would sum up to at least the majority of the electoral census of each province or insular territory. These communities would assume limited powers () during a provisional period of 5 years, after which they could assume further powers, upon negotiation with the central government. However, the constitution did not explicitly establish an institutional framework for these communities. They could have established a parliamentary system like the \"historical nationalities\", or they could have not assumed any legislative powers and simply established mechanisms for the administration of the powers they were granted.\nThe constitution also explicitly established that the institutional framework for these communities would be a parliamentary system, with a Legislative Assembly elected by universal suffrage, a cabinet or \"council of government\", a president of such a council, elected by the Assembly, and a High Court of Justice. They were also granted a maximum level of devolved powers.\nWhile the constitution did not establish how many autonomous communities were to be created, on 31 July 1981, Leopoldo Calvo-Sotelo, then the prime minister of Spain and Felipe Gonz\u00e1lez, leader of the opposition in Parliament, signed the \"First Autonomic Pacts\" (\"Primeros pactos auton\u00f3micos\" in Spanish), in which they agreed to the creation of 17 autonomous communities and two autonomous cities, with the same institutions of government, but different competences. By 1983, all 17 autonomous communities were constituted: Andalusia, Aragon, Asturias, the Balearic Islands, the Basque Country, the Canary Islands, Cantabria, Castile and Le\u00f3n, Castile\u2013La Mancha, Catalonia, the Community of Madrid, Extremadura, Galicia, La Rioja, Navarra, the Region of Murcia and the Valencian Community. The two autonomous cities, Ceuta and Melilla were constituted in 1995.\nOnce the autonomous communities were created, Article 145 prohibits the \"federation of autonomous communities\". This was understood as any agreement between communities that would produce an alteration to the political and territorial equilibrium that would cause a confrontation between different blocks of communities, an action incompatible with the principle of solidarity and the unity of the nation.\nThe so-called \"additional\" and \"transitory\" dispositions of the constitution allowed for some exceptions to the above-mentioned framework. In terms of territorial organization, the fifth transitory disposition established that the cities of Ceuta and Melilla, Spanish exclaves located on the northern coast of Africa, could be constituted as \"autonomous communities\" if the absolute majority of the members of their city councils would agree on such a motion, and with the approval of the Spanish Parliament, which would exercise its prerogatives to grant autonomy to other entities besides provinces.\nHowever one aspect of this asymmetry in powers between regions is a cause of friction, namely that the Basque Country and Navarre can raise their own taxes and negotiate a transfer to Madrid to pay for common services and hence, unlike the other regions, do not contribute to fiscal equalisation across Spain. These two regions or communities are known as \"chartered\" territories,\nIn all other communities, all taxes are levied and collected by or for the central government and then redistributed among all.\nAutonomic pacts.\nThe Statutes of Autonomy of the Basque Country and Catalonia were sanctioned by the Spanish Parliament on 18 December 1979. The position of the party in government, the Union of the Democratic Centre (UCD), was that only the three \"historical nationalities\" would assume full powers, while the rest would accede to autonomy via article 143, assuming fewer powers and perhaps not even establishing institutions of government. This was firmly opposed by the representatives of Andalusia, who demanded for their region the maximum level of powers granted to the \"nationalities\".\nAfter a massive rally in support of autonomy, a referendum was organized for Andalusia to attain autonomy through the strict requirements of article 151, or the \"fast route\"\u2014with UCD calling for abstention, and the main party in opposition in Parliament, the Spanish Socialist Workers' Party (PSOE) calling for a vote in favour. These requirements were not met, as in one of the eight provinces, Almer\u00eda, votes in favour \u2014 although the plurality \u2014 did not amount to half of the electoral census as required. Yet, in general, the results of the referendum had been clear and unequivocal.\nAfter several months of discussion, the then prime minister of Spain, Adolfo Su\u00e1rez and the leader of the opposition, Felipe Gonz\u00e1lez, reached an agreement to resolve the Andalusian issue, whereby the Parliament approved an amendment to the law that regulated referendums, and used a prerogative of article 144c of the constitution, both actions which combined would allow Andalusia to take the fast route. They also agreed that no other region would take the \"fast route\", but that all regions would establish a parliamentary system with all institutions of government. This opened a phase that was dubbed as , \"coffee for all\". This agreement was eventually put into writing in July 1981 in what has been called the \"first autonomic pacts\".\nThese \"autonomic pacts\" filled in the gap left by the open character of the constitution. Among other things:\nIn the end, 17 autonomous communities were created:\nSpecial provisions were made for the Valencian Community and the Canary Islands in that, although they took the \"slow route\", through the subsequent approval of specific organic laws, they were to assume full autonomy in less than 5 years, since they had started a process towards the \"fast route\" prior to the approval of the \"autonomic pacts\".\nOn the other hand, Cantabria and La Rioja, although originally part of Old Castile\u2014and both originally included in the \"pre-autonomic regime\" of Castile and Le\u00f3n\u2014were granted autonomy as single provinces with historical identity, a move supported by the majority of their populations. The \"autonomic pacts\" give both Cantabria and La Rioja the option of being incorporated into Castile and Le\u00f3n in the future, and required that the Statutes of Autonomy of all three communities include such a provision. Le\u00f3n, a historical kingdom and historical region of Spain, once joined to Old Castile to form Castile and Le\u00f3n, was denied secession to be constituted as an autonomous community on its own right.\nDuring the second half of the 1980s, the central government seemed reluctant to transfer all powers to the \"slow route\" communities. After the five years set up by the constitution, all \"slow route\" communities demanded the maximum transfer guaranteed by the constitution. This led to what has been called the \"second autonomic pacts\" of 1992, between the then prime minister of Spain Felipe Gonz\u00e1lez from PSOE and the leader of the opposition, Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Aznar from the newly created People's Party (PP), successor to the People's Alliance party. Through these agreements new powers were transferred, with the reforms to many Statutes of Autonomy of the \"slow-route\" communities with the aim of equalizing them to the \"fast route\" communities. In 1995, the cities of Ceuta and Melilla were constituted as \"autonomous cities\" without legislative powers, but with an autonomous assembly not subordinated to any other province or community.\nThe creation of the autonomous communities was a diverse process, that started with the constitution, was normalized with the autonomic pacts and was completed with the Statutes of Autonomy. It is, however, an ongoing process; further devolution\u2014or even the return of transferred powers\u2014is always a possibility. This has been evidenced in the 2000s, at the beginning with a wave of approval of new Statutes of Autonomy for many communities, with many considering the recentralization of some powers after the 2008 financial crisis. Nonetheless, Spain is now a decentralized country with a structure unlike any other, similar but not equal to a federation, even though in many respects the country can be compared to countries which are undeniably federal. The unique resulting system is referred to as \"Autonomous state\", or more precisely \"State of Autonomies\".\nCurrent state of affairs.\nWith the implementation of the Autonomous Communities, Spain went from being one of the most centralized countries in the OECD to being one of the most decentralized; in particular, it has been the country where the incomes and outcomes of the decentralized bodies (the Autonomous Communities) has grown the most, leading this rank in Europe by 2015 and being fifth among OECD countries in tax devolution (after Canada, Switzerland, the United States and Austria). By means of the State of Autonomies implemented after the Spanish Constitution of 1978, Spain has been quoted to be \"remarkable for the extent of the powers peacefully devolved over the past 30 years\" and \"an extraordinarily decentralized country\", with the central government accounting for just 18% of public spending, 38% by the regional governments, 13% by the local councils, and the remaining 31% by the social security system.\nIn terms of personnel, by 2010 almost 1,350,000 people or 50.3% of the total civil servants in Spain were employed by the autonomous communities; city and provincial councils accounted for 23.6% and those employees working for the central administration (police and military included) represented 22.2% of the total.\nMovement for further autonomy.\nPeripheral nationalism continues to play a key role in Spanish politics. Some peripheral nationalists view that there is a vanishing practical distinction between the terms \"nationalities\" and \"regions\", as more powers are transferred to all communities in roughly the same degree and as other communities have chosen to identify themselves as \"nationalities\". In fact, it has been argued that the establishment of the State of Autonomies \"has led to the creation of \"new regional identities\", and \"invented communities\".\nMany in Galicia, the Basque Country, and Catalonia view their communities as \"nations\", not just \"nationalities\", and Spain as a \"plurinational state\" or a \"nation of nations\", and they have made demands for further devolution or secession.\nBasque Country.\nIn 2004 the Basque Parliament approved the Ibarretxe Plan, whereby the Basque Country would approve a new Statute of Autonomy containing key provisions such as shared sovereignty with Spain, full independence of the judiciary, and the right to self-determination, and assuming all powers except that of the Spanish nationality law, defense, and monetary policy. The plan was rejected by the Spanish Parliament in 2005 and the situation has remained largely stable in that front so far.\nCatalonia.\nA particularly contentious point \u2013 especially in Catalonia \u2013 has been the one of fiscal tensions, with Catalan nationalists intensifying their demand for further financing during the 2010s. In this regard, the new rules for fiscal decentralisation in force since 2011 already make Spain one of the most decentralized countries in the world also in budgetary and fiscal matters, with the base for income tax split at 50/50 between the Spanish government and the regions (something unheard of in much bigger federal states such as Germany or the United States, which retain the income tax as an exclusively or primarily federal one). Besides, each region can also decide to set its own income tax bands and its own additional rates, higher or lower than the federal rates, with the corresponding income accruing to the region which no longer has to share it with other regions. This current level of fiscal decentralisation has been regarded by economists such as Thomas Piketty as troublesome since, in his view, \"challenges the very idea of solidarity within the country and comes down to playing the regions against each other, which is particularly problematic when the issue is one of income tax as this is supposed to enable the reduction of inequalities between the richest and the poorest, over and above regional or professional identities\".\nCatalan independence.\nThe severe economic crisis in Spain that started in 2008 produced different reactions in the different communities. On one hand, some began to consider a return of some responsibilities to the central government while, on the other hand, in Catalonia debate on the fiscal deficit\u2014\"Catalonia being one of the largest net contributors in taxes\"\u2014led many to support secession. In September 2012, Artur Mas, then Catalonia's president, requested from the central government a new \"fiscal agreement\", with the possibility of giving his community powers of fiscal autonomy equal to those of the chartered communities, but prime minister Mariano Rajoy refused. Mas dissolved the Catalan Parliament, called for new elections, and promised to conduct a referendum on independence within the next four years.\nRajoy's government declared that they would use all \"legal instruments\"\u2014current legislation requires the central executive government or the Congress of Deputies to call for or sanction a binding referendum\u2014 to block any such attempt. The Spanish Socialist Workers' Party and its counterpart in Catalonia proposed to reopen the debate on the territorial organization of Spain, changing the constitution to create a true federal system to \"better reflect the singularities\" of Catalonia, as well as to modify the current taxation system.\nIn 2017 and 2018 the situation developed into constitutional crisis. Following a highly fraught attempted referendum, on Friday 27 October 2017 the Catalan Parliament voted on the independence of Catalonia; the result was 70 in favor, 10 against, 2 neither, with 53 representatives not present in protest. In the following days, the members of the Catalan government either fled or were imprisoned.\nOne scholar summarises the current situation as follows:\nthe autonomous state appears to have come full circle, with reproaches from all sides. According to some, it has not gone far enough and has failed to satisfy their aspirations for improved self-government. For others it has gone too far, fostering inefficiency or reprehensible linguistic policies.\nPossible rearrangements.\nBesides the territorial disputes that Spain holds with the United Kingdom, Morocco and Portugal, some forces have campaigned for the redistribution of territories among communities:\nConstitutional and statutory framework.\nThe State of Autonomies, as established in Article 2 of the constitution, has been argued to be based on four principles: willingness to accede to autonomy, unity in diversity, autonomy but not sovereignty of the communities, and solidarity among them all. The structure of the autonomous communities is determined both by the devolution allowed by the constitution and the powers assumed in their respective Statutes of Autonomy. While the autonomic agreements and other laws have allowed for an \"equalization\" of all communities, differences still remain.\nThe Statute of Autonomy.\nThe Statute of Autonomy is the basic institutional law of the autonomous community or city, recognized by the Spanish constitution in article 147. It is approved by a parliamentary assembly representing the community, and then approved by the , the Spanish Parliament, through an \"Organic Law\", requiring the favourable vote of the absolute majority of the Congress of Deputies.\nFor communities that acceded to autonomy through the \"fast route\", a referendum is required before it can be sanctioned by the Parliament. The Statutes of Autonomy must contain, at least, the name of the community, its territorial limits, the names, organization and seat of the institutions of government, the powers they assume and the principles for their bilingual policy, if applicable.\nThe Constitution establishes that all powers not explicitly assumed by the State (the central government) in the constitution, can be assumed by the autonomous community in their Statutes of Autonomy; but also, all powers not explicitly assumed by the autonomous community in their Statutes of Autonomy are automatically assumed by the State. In case of conflict, the constitution prevails. In case of disagreement, any administration can bring the case before the Constitutional Court of Spain.\nInstitutional organization.\nAll autonomous communities have a parliamentary system based on a division of powers comprising:\nThe majority of the communities have approved regional electoral laws within the limits set up by the laws for the entire country. Despite minor differences, all communities use proportional representation following the D'Hondt method; all members of regional parliaments are elected for four-year terms, but the president of the community has the faculty to dissolve the legislature and call for early elections. Nonetheless, in all communities except for the Basque Country, Catalonia, Galicia, and Andalusia, elections are held the last Sunday of May every four years, concurrent with municipal elections in all of Spain.\nThe names of the Council of Government and the Legislative Assembly vary between communities. In some autonomous communities, these institutions are restored historical bodies of government or representation of the previous kingdoms or regional entities within the Spanish Crown\u2014like the Generalitat of Catalonia\u2014while others are entirely new creations.\nIn some, both the executive and the legislature, though constituting two separate institutions, are collectively identified with a single specific name. A specific denomination may not refer to the same branch of government in all communities; for example, \"junta\" may refer to the executive office in some communities, to the legislature in others, or to the collective name of all branches of government in others.\nGiven the ambiguity in the constitution that did not specify which territories were nationalities and which were regions, other territories, besides the implicit three \"historical nationalities\", have also chosen to identify themselves as nationalities, in accordance with their historical regional identity, such as Andalusia, Aragon, the Balearic Islands, the Canary Islands, and the Valencian Community.\nThe two autonomous cities have more limited powers than autonomous communities, but less limited than other municipalities. The executive is exercised by a president, who is also the mayor of the city. In the same way, limited legislative power is vested in a local assembly in which the deputies are also the city councillors.\nLegal powers.\nThe autonomic agreements of 1982 and 1992 tried to equalize powers () devolved to the 17 autonomous communities, within the limits of the constitution and the differences guaranteed by it. This has led to an \"asymmetrical homogeneity\". In the words of the Constitutional Court of Spain in its ruling of 5 August 1983, the autonomous communities are characterized by their \"homogeneity and diversity...equal in their subordination to the constitutional order, in the principles of their representation in the Senate, in their legitimation before the Constitutional Court, and in that the differences between the distinct Statutes [of Autonomy] cannot imply economic or social privileges; however, they can be unequal with respect to the process to accede to autonomy and the concrete determination of the autonomic content of their Statute, and therefore, in their scope of powers. The autonomic regime is characterized by an equilibrium between homogeneity and diversity ... Without the former there will be no unity or integration in the state's ensemble; without the latter, there would not be [a] true plurality and the capacity of self-government\".\nThe asymmetrical devolution is a unique characteristic of the territorial structure of Spain, in that the autonomous communities have a different range of devolved powers. These were based on what has been called in Spanish as \"hechos diferenciales\", \"differential facts\" or \"differential traits\".\nThis expression refers to the idea that some communities have particular traits, with respect to Spain as a whole. In practice these traits are a native \"language proper to their own territories\" separate from Spanish, a particular financial regime or special civil rights expressed in a code, which generate a distinct political personality. These \"hechos diferenciales\" of their distinct political and historical personality are constitutionally and statutorily (i. e., in their Statutes of Autonomy) recognized in the exceptions granted to some of them and the additional powers they assume.\nHowever a doctrine that came to be called caf\u00e9 para todos (coffee for everyone), sought to harmonise the autonomy model across Spain while simultaneously reinforcing the primacy of the central government and dilute claims of ethno-territorial distinctiveness from the historic nationalities. In particular, the organic law on the Harmonisation of the Autonomy Process (LOAPA) in 1982 not only extended powers to the other communities to achieve similar powers as the historic nationalities, but showed an intention to reverse already devolved powers.\nThe powers to be exercised can be divided into three groups: exclusive to the State or central government, shared powers, and devolved powers exclusive to the communities. Powers can also be \"executive\", meaning the autonomous community may have exclusive responsibility for the administration of a policy area but may only have executive (i. e., carries out) powers as far as the policy itself is concerned, meaning it must enforce policy and laws decided at the national level.\nThe Constitution states which powers are exclusive to the central government: international relations, defense, administration of justice, commercial, criminal, civil, and labour legislation, customs, general finances and state debt, public health, basic legislation, and general coordination. As the Constitution had not set clearly defined methods for power sharing, particularly over shared powers, there had been major conflict because the real power of an autonomous community depended upon how far the State wanted to legislate. There is now a large body of case-law produced by the Constitutional Court to clarify ambiguities.\nAll autonomous communities have the power to manage their own finances in the way they see fit, and are responsible for the administration of education\u2014school and universities\u2014health and social services and cultural and urban development. Yet there are differences as stipulated in their Statutes and the constitution:\nThe powers of the autonomous communities are not homogeneous.\nDegree of financial autonomy.\nHow the communities are financed has been one of the most contentious aspects in their relationship with the central government. The constitution gave all communities significant control over spending, but the central government retained effective control of their revenue supply. That is, the central government is still charge of levying and collecting most taxes, which it then redistributes to the autonomous communities with the aim of producing \"fiscal equalization\". This applies to all communities, with the exception of the Basque Country and Navarre, which level all taxes and pay an annual quote for the public services provided by the State.\nThis financial scheme is known as the \"common regime\" and applies to the other 15 autonomous communities. In essence, fiscal equalization implies that richer communities become net contributors to the system, while poorer communities become net recipients. The two largest net contributors to the system are the Balearic Islands and the Community of Madrid, in percentage terms, or the Community of Madrid and Catalonia in absolute terms.\nCentral government funding is the main source of revenue for the communities of \"common regime\". Redistribution, or transfer payments, are given to the communities of common regime to manage the responsibilities they have assumed. The amount they receive is based upon several calculations which include a consideration for population, land area, administrative units, dispersal of population, relative poverty, fiscal pressure and insularity. The central government is committed to returning a specific percentage of taxes to all communities with common regime, within the differences allowed for fiscal equalization. The communities of common regime have the ability to add a surcharge to the so-called \"ceded taxes\"\u2014taxes set at the central level, but collected locally\u2014and they can lower or raise personal income taxes up to a limit.\nThe Basque Country and Navarre were granted an exception in the fiscal and financial system through the first additional disposition of the constitution that recognizes their historical \"charters\"\u00a0\u2014hence they are known as \"communities of chartered regime\" or \"foral regime\". Through their \"chartered regime\", these communities are allowed to levy and collect all so-called \"contracted taxes\", including income tax and corporate tax, and they have much more flexibility to lower or raise them. This \"chartered\" or \"foral\" contract entails true financial autonomy.\nSince they collect almost all taxes, they send to the central government a pre-arranged amount known as \"cupo\", \"quota\" or \"aportaci\u00f3n\", \"contribution\", and the treaty whereby this system is recognized is known as \"concierto\", \"treaty\", or \"convenio\", \"pact\". Hence they are also said to have \"concierto econ\u00f3mico\", an \"economic treaty\". Since they collect all taxes themselves and only send a prearranged amount to the central government for the powers exclusive to the State, they do not participate in \"fiscal equalization\", in that they do not receive any money back.\nSpending.\nAs more responsibilities have been assumed by the autonomous communities in areas such as social welfare, health, and education, public expenditure patterns have seen a shift from the central government towards the communities since the 1980s. In 2005, autonomous communities accounted for 35% of all public expenditure in Spain, a percentage that is even higher than that of states within a federation. With no legal constraints to balance budgets, and since the central government retains control over fiscal revenue in the communities of common regime, these are in a way encouraged to build up debt.\nThe Council on Fiscal and Financial Policy, which includes representatives of the central government and of the autonomous communities, has become one of the most efficient institutions of coordination in matters of public expenditures and revenue. Through the Council several agreements of financing have been agreed, as well as limits to the communities' public debt. The Organic Law of the Financing of Autonomous Communities of 1988 requires that the communities obtain the authorization of the central Ministry of Finance to issue public debt.\nLinguistic regimes.\nThe preamble to the constitution explicitly stated that it is the nation's will to protect \"all Spaniards and the peoples of Spain in the exercise of human rights, their cultures and traditions, languages and institutions\". This is a significant recognition not only in that it differed drastically from the restrictive linguistic policies during the Franco era, but also because part of the distinctiveness of the \"historical nationalities\" lies on their own regional languages. The nation is thus openly multilingual, in which Castilian\u2014that is, Spanish\u2014is the official language in all territories, but the \"other Spanish languages\" can also be official in their respective communities, in accordance with their Statutes of Autonomy.\nArticle 3 of the constitution ends up declaring that the \"richness of the distinct linguistic modalities of Spain represents a patrimony which will be the object of special respect and protection\". Spanish remains the only official language of the State; other languages are only co-official with Spanish in the communities that have so regulated. In addition, knowledge of the Spanish language was declared a right and an obligation of all Spaniards.\nSpanish legislation, most notably in the Statutes of Autonomy of the bilingual communities, use the term \"own language\", or \"language proper to a community\", to refer to a language other than Spanish that originated or had historical roots in that particular territory. The Statutes of Autonomy of the respective autonomous communities have declared Basque the language proper to the Basque Country and Navarre, Catalan the language proper to Catalonia, the Balearic Islands and the Valencian Community\u2014where it is historically, traditionally and officially known as Valencian\u2014and Galician to be the language proper to Galicia. There are other protected regional languages in other autonomous communities. As a percentage of total population in Spain, Basque is spoken by 2%, Catalan/Valencian by 17%, and Galician by 7% of all Spaniards. A 2016 Basque Government census revealed 700,000 fluent speakers in Spain (51,000 in Basque counties in France) and 1,185,000 total when passive speakers are included.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTranslation of terms.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55003", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55003", "title": "Andalucia (Tito &amp; Tarantula album)", "text": "Andalucia is the fourth studio album by Los Angeles rock band Tito &amp; Tarantula, released in 2002. The album marked several line-up changes in the band, which had previously consisted of lead singer/rhythm guitarist Tito Larriva, lead guitarist Peter Atanasoff, and drummer Johnny \"Vatos\" Hernandez. This album featured the debut of lead guitarist Steven Hufsteter \u2013 who had previously played with Larriva in the Cruzados, bassist Io Perry, and keyboardist Marcus Praed.\nThe band toured promoting the album for several years. They also filmed a music video for the song \"California Girl\". However, upon seeing how bad the footage of the video was, Perry threw up, Larriva threatened to quit, and Atanasoff was not seen around for days. So, to compensate, Larriva made his own video for the song using the eight dollars he had in his pocket. In the last 40 seconds of the song \"Effortless\", Larriva, Atanasoff, and Perry can be heard laughing while they watch the \"California Girl\" music video.\nThe song \"La Flor De Mal\" is a cover of a Cruzados song that Larriva and Hufsteter wrote when they were in the Cruzados.\nTrack listing.\nAll songs written by Tito Larriva, Peter Atanasoff, Steven Hufsteter, Io Perry, and Johnny \"Vatos\" Hernandez except where noted.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55004", "revid": "25708940", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55004", "title": "Battle of Tsushima", "text": "1905 naval battle of the Russo-Japanese War\nThe Battle of Tsushima (, \"Tsusimskoye srazheniye\"), was the final naval battle of the Russo-Japanese War, fought on 27\u201328 May 1905 in the Tsushima Strait. A devastating defeat for the Imperial Russian Navy, the battle was the only decisive engagement ever fought between modern steel battleship fleets and the first in which wireless telegraphy (radio) played a critically important role. The battle was described by contemporary Sir George Clarke as \"by far the greatest and the most important naval event since Trafalgar\". The battle is also known in Japan as the \"Battle of the Sea of Japan\".\nThe battle involved the Japanese Combined Fleet under Admiral T\u014dg\u014d Heihachir\u014d and the Russian Second Pacific Squadron under Admiral Zinovy Rozhestvensky, which had sailed over seven months and from the Baltic Sea. The Russians hoped to reach Vladivostok and establish naval control of the Far East in order to relieve the Imperial Russian Army in Manchuria. The Russian fleet had a large advantage in the number of battleships, but was overall older and slower than the Japanese fleet, and outnumbered nearly three to one in total hulls. The Russians were sighted in the early morning on 27 May, and the battle began in the afternoon. Rozhestvensky was wounded and knocked unconscious in the initial action, and four of his battleships were sunk by sunset. At night, Japanese destroyers and torpedo boats attacked the remaining ships, and Admiral Nikolai Nebogatov surrendered in the morning of 28 May.\nAll 11 Russian battleships were lost, out of which seven were sunk and four captured. Only a few warships escaped, with one cruiser and two destroyers reaching Vladivostok, and two auxiliary cruisers as well as one transport escaping back to Madagascar. Three cruisers were interned at Manila by the United States until the war was over. Eight auxiliaries and one destroyer were disarmed and remanded at Shanghai by China. Russian casualties were high, with more than 5,000 dead and 6,000 captured. The Japanese, which had lost no heavy ships, had 117 dead.\nThe loss of almost every heavy warship of the Baltic Fleet forced Russia to sue for peace, and the Treaty of Portsmouth was signed in September 1905. In Japan, the battle was hailed as one of the greatest naval victories in Japanese history, and Admiral T\u014dg\u014d was revered as a national hero. His flagship has been preserved as a museum ship in Yokosuka Harbour.\nBackground.\nConflict in the Far East.\nOn 8 February 1904, destroyers of the Imperial Japanese Navy launched a surprise attack on the Russian Far East Fleet anchored in Port Arthur; three ships \u2013 two battleships and a cruiser \u2013 were damaged in the attack. The Russo-Japanese war had thus begun. Japan's first objective was to secure its lines of communication and supply to the Asian mainland, enabling it to conduct a ground war in Manchuria. To achieve this, it was necessary to neutralise Russian naval power in the Far East. At first, the Russian naval forces remained inactive and did not engage the Japanese, who staged unopposed landings in Korea. The Russians were revitalised by the arrival of Admiral Stepan Makarov and were able to achieve some degree of success against the Japanese, but on 13 April Makarov's flagship, the battleship , struck a mine and sank; Makarov was among the dead. His successors failed to challenge the Japanese Navy, and the remaining six Russian battleships and five armoured cruisers were effectively bottled up in their base at Port Arthur.\nBy May, the Japanese had landed forces on the Liaodong Peninsula and in August began the siege of the naval station. On 9 August, Admiral Wilgelm Vitgeft, commander of the 1st Pacific Squadron, was ordered to sortie his fleet to Vladivostok, link up with the Squadron stationed there, and then engage the Imperial Japanese Navy (IJN) in a decisive battle. Both squadrons of the Russian Pacific Fleet would ultimately become dispersed during the Battle of the Yellow Sea, where Admiral Vitgeft was killed by a salvo strike from the on 10 August, and the Battle off Ulsan on 14 August 1904. What remained of Russian Pacific naval power would eventually be sunk in Port Arthur in December 1904.\nDeparture.\nWith the inactivity of the First Pacific Squadron after the death of Admiral Makarov and the tightening of the Japanese noose around Port Arthur, the Russians considered sending part of their Baltic Fleet to the Far East. The plan was to relieve Port Arthur by sea, link up with the First Pacific Squadron, overwhelm the Imperial Japanese Navy, and then delay the Japanese advance into Manchuria until Russian reinforcements could arrive via the Trans-Siberian railroad and overwhelm the Japanese land forces there. As the situation in the Far East deteriorated, the Tsar (encouraged by his cousin Kaiser Wilhelm II), agreed to the formation of the \"Second Pacific Squadron\". This would consist of five divisions of the Baltic Fleet, including 11 of its 13 battleships. The squadrons, including the later-formed \"Third Pacific Squadron\", departed the Baltic ports of Reval (Tallinn) and Libau (Liep\u0101ja) on 15\u201316 October 1904 (Rozhestvensky fleet) and 2 February 1905 (Nebogatov fleet), and on 3 November 1904 (armoured cruisers and , auxiliary cruisers and \"Terek\", destroyers \"Gromkiy\" and \"Grozniy\" under the command of Captain 1st rank .), numbering 48 ships and auxiliaries.\nDogger Bank.\nThe Rozhestvensky and von F\u00f6lkersahm squadrons sailed through \u00d8resund strait into the North Sea. The Russians had received numerous fictitious reports of Japanese torpedo boats operating in the area and were on high alert. In the Dogger Bank incident, the Rozhestvensky squadron mistook a group of British fishing trawlers operating near the Dogger Bank at night for hostile Japanese ships. The fleet fired upon the small civilian vessels, killing several British fishermen; one trawler was sunk while another six were damaged. In confusion, the Russians even fired upon two of their own vessels, killing some of their own men. The firing continued for twenty minutes before Rozhestvensky ordered firing to cease; loss of life was limited by the fact that the Russian gunnery was highly inaccurate. The British were outraged by the incident and incredulous that the Russians could mistake a group of fishing trawlers for Japanese warships, thousands of kilometres from the nearest Japanese port. Britain almost entered the war in support of Japan, with whom it had an alliance (but was neutral in the war, as their mutual defense clause stipulated \"when either nation faced 'more than one' adversaries in a war\"). The Royal Navy sortied and shadowed the Russian fleet until a diplomatic agreement was reached. France, which had hoped to eventually bring the British and Russians together in an anti-German bloc, intervened diplomatically to restrain Britain from declaring war. The Russians were forced to disembark officers who were suspected of misconduct to give evidence to the International Court of Inquiry at Paris, ultimately accepting responsibility for the incident and compensating the fishermen.\nRoutes.\nThe draught of the newer battleships, which had proven to be considerably greater than designed, preventing their passage through the Suez Canal caused the fleet to separate after leaving Tangier on 3 November 1904. The newer battleships, cruisers, fast auxiliaries and the destroyers for protection, proceeded around the Cape of Good Hope under the command of Admiral Rozhestvensky while the older battleships and cruisers made their way through the Suez Canal under the command of Admiral von F\u00f6lkersahm. They planned to rendezvous in Madagascar, and both sections of the fleet successfully completed this part of the voyage. The longer journey around Africa took a toll on the Russian crews under Rozhestvensky, \"who had never experienced such a different climate or such a long time at sea\" as \"conditions on the ships deteriorated, and disease and respiratory issues killed a number of sailors\". The voyage took half a year in rough seas, with difficulty obtaining coal for refueling \u2013 as the warships could not legally enter the ports of neutral nations \u2013 and the morale of the crews plummeted. The Russians needed of coal and 30 to 40 re-coaling sessions to reach French Indochina (now Vietnam), and coal was provided by 60 colliers from the Hamburg-Amerika Line. By April and May 1905 the reunited fleet had anchored at Cam Ranh Bay in French Indochina.\nThe Russians had been ordered to break the blockade of Port Arthur, but the battleships in the port were sunk by the Japanese land artillery, and the heavily fortified city/port had already fallen on 2 January just after the Second Pacific Squadron arrived at Nossi Be, Madagascar, before the arrival of the F\u00f6lkersahm detachment. The objective was therefore shifted to linking up with the remaining Russian ships stationed in the port of Vladivostok, before bringing the Japanese fleet to battle.\nPrelude.\nThe Russians had three possible routes to enter the Sea of Japan and reach Vladivostok: the longer were the La P\u00e9rouse Strait and Tsugaru Strait, on either side of Hokkaido. Admiral Rozhestvensky did not reveal his choice even to his subordinates until 25 May, when it became apparent he chose Tsushima by ordering the fleet to head northeast after detaching transports \"Yaroslavl\", \"Vladimir\", \"Kuronia\", \"Voronezh\", \"Livonia\" and \"Meteor\" as well as auxiliary cruisers \"Rion\" and \"Dniepr\" with the instruction to go to the near-by neutral port of Shanghai. The Tsushima Strait is the body of water eastward of the Tsushima Island, located midway between the Japanese island of Kyushu and the Korean Peninsula, the shortest and most direct route from Indochina. The other routes would have required the fleet to sail east around Japan. The Japanese Combined Fleet and the Russian Second and Third Pacific Squadrons, sent from the Baltic Sea now numbering 38, would fight in the strait between Korea and Japan on the East side of Tsushima Island.\nBecause of the journey, the Russian fleet was in a poor condition for battle. Apart from the four newest s, Admiral Nebogatov's 3rd Pacific Fleet consisted of older and poorly maintained warships. Overall, the Japanese side had a manoeuvrability advantage. The long voyage, combined with a lack of opportunity for maintenance, meant the Russian ships were heavily fouled, significantly reducing their speed. The Japanese 1st Battle Division could exceed and regularly manoeuvred at 15\u00a0knots, but the Russian fleet included warships with the maximum speed of 14 to 15\u00a0knots (with new engines/boilers, normal load, and clean hull) and the auxiliaries of 10\u201312\u00a0knots, that limited the fleet speed to 9\u00a0knots.\nT\u014dg\u014d's greatest advantage was that of experience, having five of the ten fleet commanders in the history of the Russian and Japanese navy with combat experience aboard modern warships on his side, while Rozhestvensky had none. The other five were all Russian admirals whom T\u014dg\u014d had defeated and not present for this battle, including Oskar Starck, who had been relieved of his command following his humiliating defeat in the Battle of Port Arthur; Admiral Stepan Makarov, killed by a mine off Port Arthur; Wilgelm Vitgeft, who had been killed in the Battle of the Yellow Sea; and Admiral (Prince) Pavel Ukhtomsky who was relieved and recalled to Mukden by Viceroy Yevgeni Alekseyev after six battleships of the Pacific Squadron failed to reach Vladivostok as a result of the Battle of the Yellow Sea. Admiral Karl Jessen, who experienced the Battle off Ulsan, remained in Vladivostok.\nAdditionally, there were significant deficiencies in the Russian naval fleet's equipment and training. Russian naval tests with their torpedoes exposed major technological failings.\nBattle.\nFirst contact.\nBecause the Russians wanted to slip undetected into Vladivostok, they approached Japanese waters in radio silence. They steered outside regular shipping channels to reduce the chance of detection. On the night of 26 May 1905 the Russian fleet approached the Tsushima Strait.\nIn the night, thick fog blanketed the straits, giving the Russians an advantage. At 02:45 on 27 May Japan Standard Time (JST), the Japanese auxiliary cruiser observed three lights on what appeared to be a vessel on the distant horizon and closed to investigate. These lights were from the Russian hospital ship \"Orel\", which, in compliance with the rules of war, had continued to burn them. At 04:30, \"Shinano Maru\" approached the vessel, noting that she carried no guns and appeared to be an auxiliary. The \"Orel\" mistook the \"Shinano Maru\" for another Russian vessel and did not attempt to notify the fleet. Instead, she signaled to \"Shinano Maru\" in Russian code, which made no sense to the Japanese ship. The \"Shinano Maru\" then sighted the shapes of ten other Russian ships in the mist.\nWireless telegraphy played an important role from the start. At 04:55, of the \"Shinano Maru\" sent a message to the Combined Fleet command onboard \"Mikasa\" in Masampo that the \"Enemy is in grid 203\". By 05:00, intercepted radio signals informed the Russians that they had been discovered and that Japanese scouting cruisers were shadowing them. Admiral T\u014dg\u014d received the message at 05:05, and immediately began to prepare his battle fleet for a sortie.\nBeginning of the battle.\nAt 06:34, before departing with the Combined Fleet, Admiral T\u014dg\u014d wired a message to the navy minister in Tokyo:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In response to the report that enemy ships have been sighted, the Combined Fleet will immediately commence action and attempt to attack and destroy them. Weather today fine but high waves.\nThe final sentence of this telegram has become famous in Japanese military history, and has been quoted by former Japanese Prime Minister Shinz\u014d Abe.\nThe entire Japanese fleet was put to sea, with T\u014dg\u014d in his flagship \"Mikasa\" leading over 40 vessels to meet the Russians. Meanwhile, the shadowing Japanese scouting vessels sent wireless reports every few minutes as to the formation and course of the Russian fleet. There was mist which reduced visibility and the weather was poor. Wireless gave the Japanese an advantage; in his report on the battle, Admiral T\u014dg\u014d noted the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Though a heavy fog covered the sea, making it impossible to observe anything at a distance of over five miles, [through wireless messaging] all the conditions of the enemy were as clear to us, who were 30 or 40 miles distant, as though they had been under our very eyes.\nAt 13:40, both fleets sighted each other, ready to engage. At around 13:55, T\u014dg\u014d ordered the hoisting of the Z flag, issuing a predetermined announcement to the entire fleet:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Empire's fate depends on the result of this battle, let every man do his utmost duty.\nDaylight action.\nThe Russians sailed from south-southwest to north-northeast; \"continuing to a point of intersection which allowed only their bow guns to bear; enabling him [T\u014dg\u014d] to throw most of the Russian batteries successively out of bearing.\" The Japanese fleet steamed from northeast to southwest, then T\u014dg\u014d ordered the fleet to turn 180-degrees in sequence, which enabled his ships to take the same course as the Russians. Rozhestvensky had only two alternatives, \"a charge direct, in line abreast\", or to commence \"a formal pitched battle.\" He chose the latter, and at 14:08, the Japanese flagship \"Mikasa\" was hit at about 7,000 metres, with the Japanese replying at 6,400 meters. Although T\u014dg\u014d's U-turn was successful, Russian gunnery had proven surprisingly good and the flagship \"Mikasa\" was hit 15 times in five minutes. Before the end of the engagement, she was struck 15 more times by large calibre shells. The Japanese fleet then steamed at 15 knots; the Russian at 11 in parallel engagement. Superior Japanese gunnery took its toll, with most of the Russian battleships being crippled in thirty minutes.\nCaptain 2nd Rank Vladimir Semenoff, a Russian staff officer aboard the flagship , said \"It seemed impossible even to count the number of projectiles striking us. Shells seemed to be pouring upon us incessantly one after another. The steel plates and superstructure on the upper decks were torn to pieces, and the splinters caused many casualties. Iron ladders were crumpled up into rings, guns were literally hurled from their mountings. In addition to this, there was the unusually high temperature and liquid flame of the explosion, which seemed to spread over everything. I actually watched a steel plate catch fire from a burst.\"\nNinety minutes into the battle, the first warship to be sunk was the from Rozhestvensky's 2nd Battleship division. This was the first time a modern armoured warship had been sunk by gunfire alone.\nBy 14:45, T\u014dg\u014d had \"crossed the Russian T\", enabling him to fire broadsides, while the Russians could reply only with their forward turrets.\nA direct hit on the 's magazines by the Japanese battleship \"Fuji\" caused her to explode, which sent smoke thousands of metres into the air and trapped all but one of her crew onboard as she sank. Rozhestvensky was knocked out of action by a shell fragment that struck his skull. In the evening, Rear Admiral Nikolai Nebogatov took over command of the Russian fleet. The Russians lost the battleships \"Knyaz Suvorov\", \"Oslyabya\", and \"Borodino\". The Japanese ships suffered only light damage.\nNight attacks.\nAt night, around 20:00, 21 destroyers and 45 Japanese torpedo boats were thrown against the Russians. They were deployed initially from the north, east and west while being slightly visible, forcing the Russians, roughly in the order of cruisers, battleships and auxiliaries groups, to turn west. The Japanese were aggressive, continuing their attacks for three hours without a break; as a result, during the night there were a number of collisions between the small craft and Russian warships. The Russians were dispersed in small groups. By 23:00, it appeared that the Russians had vanished, but they revealed their positions to their pursuers by switching on their searchlights \u2013 ironically, the searchlights had been turned on to spot the attackers. The old battleship struck chained floating mines laid in front and was forced to stop in order not to push the chain forward, inviting other floating mines on the chain in on herself. She was consequently torpedoed four times and sunk. Out of a crew of 622, only three survived, one to be rescued by the Japanese and the other two by a British merchant ship.\nThe battleship was badly damaged by a torpedo in the stern and was scuttled the next day. Two old armoured cruisers \u2013 and \u2013 were badly damaged, the former by a torpedo hit to the bow, the latter by colliding with a Japanese destroyer. They were both scuttled by their crews the next morning off Tsushima Island, where they headed while taking on water. The night attacks placed a great strain on the Russians, as they lost two battleships and two armoured cruisers, while the Japanese lost only three torpedo boats.\n\"XGE\" signal and Russian surrender.\nAt 05:23 on 28 May, what remained of the Russian fleet was sighted heading northeast. T\u014dg\u014d's battleships proceeded to surround Nebogatov's remaining squadron south of the island of Takeshima and commenced main battery fire at 12,000 meters. The then turned southeast and started to flee. Realising that his guns were outranged by at least one thousand metres, and the Japanese battleships had proven on the day before to be faster than his own so that he could not close the distance if he tried, Nebogatov ordered the four battleships remaining under his command to surrender. \"XGE\", an international signal of surrender, was hoisted; however, the Japanese navy continued to fire as they did not have \"surrender\" in their code books and had to hastily find one that did. Still under heavy fire, Nebogatov then ordered a white tablecloth sent up the masthead, but T\u014dg\u014d, having faced the difficult decision to sink a British transport ship full of Chinese soldiers during the First Sino-Japanese War as the commander of IJN cruiser , knew the signal meant a request for a truce or parley, not 'surrender' in the legal definition, and that either meaning contradicted not stopping the ships.\nHis lieutenants found the codebook that included XGE signal and reported that stopping engines is a requirement for the signal and all the Russian ships were still moving, so he continued firing while the response flag signal \"STOP\" hoisted. Nebogatov then ordered St. Andrew's Cross lowered and the Japanese national flag raised on the gaff and all engines stopped. Seeing the requirement for the signal met, T\u014dg\u014d gave the cease-fire and accepted Nebogatov's surrender. Nebogatov surrendered knowing that he could be shot for doing so. He said to his men:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You are young, and it is you who will one day retrieve the honour and glory of the Russian Navy. The lives of the two thousand four hundred men in these ships are more important than mine.\nAs an example of the level of damage inflicted on a Russian battleship, was hit by five 12-inch, nine 8-inch, 39 six-inch and 21 smaller or unidentified shells. This damage caused her to list, and the engine ceased to operate when she was being taken by the Japanese navy to First Battle Division home port of Sasebo in Nagasaki after T\u014dg\u014d accepted the surrender. Cruiser and then battleship had to tow \"Oryol\", and their destination was changed to the closer Maizuru Naval Arsenal to avoid losing the prize of war. Her commander Captain Yung, who was seriously injured on 27 May, died in the night of the 29th onboard battleship \"Asahi\" en route.\nCapture of Rozhestvensky.\nRussian destroyer \"Buyniy\", after rescuing the squadron command including Admiral Rozhestvensky from the burning at 17:30 during the day battle on the 27th, found cruiser \"Donskoi\", destroyers \"Byedoviy\" and \"Grozniy\" in convoy on the morning of 28 May. Rozhestvensky chose \"Byedoviy\" to move the fleet command officers and himself as \"Buyniy\" had serious damages and \"Donskoi\", being an old ship, was very slow. (Later in the afternoon, \"Buyniy\" was sunk by gunfire from \"Donskoi\" after taking the crew aboard.) Leaving the struggling \"Buyniy\" and the slow \"Donskoi\" behind, \"Byedoviy\" and \"Grozniy\" headed for Vladivostok.\nJapanese destroyers and had mechanical issues during the night battle on the 27th and had to fix the problems at the Port of Ulsan. Both destroyers finished their temporary repair work by the morning of the 28th and left the port together. They spotted the two Russian destroyers on the way to join the rest of the Combined Fleet and engaged at 15:25.\nDestroyer \"Grozniy\" increased speed being chased by \"Kager\u014d\", but \"Byedoviy\" slowed down and stopped in the face of firing and approaching \"Sazanami\" while raising a white flag. \"Grozniy\" was able to keep sufficient distance from \"Kager\u014d\", exchanging just a few long-distance shots at about 18:30, before nightfall. She became one of the three warships reaching Vladivostok after surviving the battle.\nThe Combined Fleet command could not believe the news when cruiser , which rendezvoused \"Sazanami\" on the morning of the next day, sent a radio telegraph message about the capture of Admiral Rozhestvensky, as they were certain to have sunk \"Knyaz Suvorov\" and assumed the squadron commander went down with the flagship. But cruiser \"Akashi\", accompanied by \"Sazanami\" and \"Kager\u014d\", arrived at Sasebo port in the morning of 30 May with \"Byedoviy\" in tow, with not only the injured admiral but also the surviving members of the Russian fleet command onboard.\nConclusion.\nUntil the evening of 28 May, isolated Russian ships were pursued by the Japanese until almost all were destroyed or captured. The cruiser , which escaped from the Japanese despite being present at Nebogatov's surrender, was destroyed by her crew after running aground on the Siberian coast.\nThe wounded Admiral Rozhestvensky went to the Imperial Japanese Naval Hospital in Sasebo to recover from a head injury caused by shrapnel; there, the victorious Admiral T\u014dg\u014d visited him personally in plain clothes, comforting him with kind words: \"Defeat is a common fate of a soldier. There is nothing to be ashamed of in it. The great point is whether we have performed our duty.\" Rozhestvensky was allowed to send a telegram to the Tsar at Tsarskoye Selo.\nOn 10 June 1905, Tsar Nicholas II responded with a telegram:\n \"Tokyo. Adjutant General Rozhdestvensky. From the bottom of my heart I thank you and all the ranks of the squadron who honestly fulfilled their duty in battle, for their selfless service to Russia. Your feat was destined to be crowned with success, but your fatherland will always be proud of your selfless courage. I wish you a speedy recovery, and may God console you all.\u00a0 Nikolai\"\nRozhestvensky and other officers were placed on trial in August 1905 after returning to Russia. Rozhestvensky claimed full responsibility for the fiasco and was sentenced to death, but the Tsar commuted his death sentence. Flag captains Clapier de Colongue (Second Pacific Squadron) and Cross (Third Pacific Squadron), Staff officers Filippinovsky, Leontieff, together with the commanders of the surrendered battleships, Captains Vladimir Smirnov (\"Nikolai I\"), Nikolai Lishin (\"Apraksin\"), (\"Senyavin\"), and the \"Byedoviy\" commander Nikolai Baranov were sentenced to 10 years in prison and dismissed from service (Nicholas II pardoned them on 1 May 1909). The executive officer of \"Oryol\" (who was in charge of the ship at the surrender) Captain 2nd rank K.L. Schwede and other officers were acquitted.\nAdmiral Nebogatov, who surrendered the fleet, was also sentenced to death, which was commuted to 10 years imprisonment and eventually pardoned by the Tsar. He was released from the Trubetskoy Bastion prison in Peter and Paul Fortress in May 1909.\nFollowing this battle, the Imperial Japanese Navy grew to the third largest in the world after World War I. T\u014dg\u014d Heihachir\u014d was appointed to Order of Merit by King Edward VII on 21 February 1906, as one of the three first non-Dominion members, before he was enobled as Earl (Count) by Emperor Meiji in 1907. Later, he became the first Japanese cover person of Time magazine on 8 November 1926 issue.\nContributing factors.\nCommander and crew experience.\nAdmiral Rozhestvensky faced a more combat-experienced battleship admiral in T\u014dg\u014d Heihachir\u014d. Admiral T\u014dg\u014d had already killed two Russian admirals: Stepan Makarov outside of Port Arthur in the battleship \"Petropavlovsk\" in April 1904, then Wilgelm Vitgeft in his battleship in August of the same year. Before those two deaths, T\u014dg\u014d had chased Admiral Oskar Starck, also flying his flag in the \"Petropavlovsk\", off the battlefield.\nAdmiral T\u014dg\u014d and his men had two battleship fleet action experiences, which amounted to over four hours of combat experience in battleship-to-battleship combat at Port Arthur and the Yellow Sea.\nThe Japanese fleets had practiced gunnery extensively since the beginning of the war, using sub-calibre practice guns mounted in their larger guns.\nIn contrast, underwent sea trials from 23 August to 13 September 1904 as a brand new ship upon her completion, and the new crew did not have much time for training before she set sail for the Pacific on 15 October 1904. \"Borodino\"'s sister ship, , started trials on 9 August, started trials the latest on 10 September 1904, leaving (the trials finished in October 1903) as the only ship actually ready for deployment. As the Imperial Russian Navy planned on building 10 \"Borodino\"-class battleships (5 were ultimately built) with the requirement for thousands of additional crewmen, the basic training, quality and experience of the crew and cadets were far lower than those onboard the battleships in the seasoned Pacific Fleet.\nThe Imperial Russian Admiralty Council (\u0410\u0434\u043c\u0438\u0440\u0430\u043b\u0442\u0435\u0439\u0441\u0442\u0432-\u0441\u043e\u0432\u0435\u0442) and the rest of the Admiralty were quite aware of this disadvantage, and opposed the September dispatch plan for the following reasons:\n1. The Japanese navy has completed the battle preparations with all the crew having some combat experience.\n2. The long voyage is mostly through extreme tropical weather, so a meaningful training is practically impossible on the way.\n3. Therefore, the newly created Second Pacific Fleet should conduct training in the Baltic until the next spring while waiting for the rigging of another battleship, , and the purchase of Chilean and Argentine warships.\nHowever, at the council in the imperial presence on 23 August 1904 held at the Peterhof Grand Palace, this opinion was overruled by Admiral Rozhestvensky (Commander in Chief of the Fleet), Navy Minister Avellan, and Tsar Nicholas II; for it was deemed impossible to re-arrange the massive coaling for the long voyage if the navy broke the contract that was already signed with Hamburg-American Steamship Line of Germany.\nSalvo firing director system.\nUp to the Battle of the Yellow Sea on 10 August 1904, naval guns were controlled locally by a gunnery officer assigned to that gun or a turret. He specified the elevation and deflection figures, gave the firing order while keeping his eyes on the inclinometers indicating the rolling and pitching angles of the ship, received the fall of shot observation report from the spotter on the mast, calculated the new elevation and deflection to 'walk' the shots in on the target for the next round, without much means to discern or measure the movements of his own ship and the target. He typically had a view on the horizon, but with the new 12-inch gun's range extended to over , his vantage point was lower than desired.\nIn the months before the battle, the Chief Gunnery Officer of \"Asahi\", Lieutenant Commander Kat\u014d Hiroharu, aided by a Royal Navy advisor who introduced him to the use of the early mechanical computer Dumaresq in fire control, introduced a system for centrally issuing the gun-laying and salvo-firing orders by voice. Using a central system allowed the spotter to identify a salvo of distant shell splashes much more effectively than trying to identify a single splash among the many in the confusion of fleet-to-fleet combat. Further, the spotter needed to keep track of just one firing at a time as opposed to multiple shots on multiple stopwatches, in addition to having to report to just one officer on the bridge. The 'director' officer on the bridge had the advantage of having a higher vantage point than in the gun turrets, in addition to being steps away from the ship commander giving orders to change the course and the speed in response to the incoming reports on target movements.\nThis fire control director system was introduced to other ships in the fleet, and the training and practice on this system were carried out in the months waiting for the arrival of the Baltic Fleet while its progress was reported by the British intelligence from their naval stations at Gibraltar, Malta, Aden (Yemen), Cape of Good Hope, Trincomalee (Ceylon), Singapore and Hong Kong, among other locations.\nAs a result, Japanese fire was more accurate in the far range (), on top of the advantage they held in the shorter distances using the latest 1903 issue Barr and Stroud FA3 coincidence rangefinders of baselength , which had a range of , while the Russian battleships were equipped with \"Lugeol\" stadiametric rangefinders from the 1880s (except battleships \"Oslyabya\" and \"Navarin\", which had the Barr and Stroud 1895 issue FA2 of baselength retrofitted), which only had a range of about .\nWireless telegraphy.\nThe wireless telegraph (radio) had been invented during the last half of the 1890s, and by the turn of the century, nearly all major navies were adopting this improved communications technology. Tsushima was \"the first major sea battle in which wireless played any role whatsoever\".\nLieutenant Akiyama Saneyuki (who was the key staff to Admiral T\u014dg\u014d in formulating plans and directives before and during the battle as a Commander, who also went aboard \"Nikolai I\" to accompany Admiral Nebogatov to \"Mikasa\" for a formal meeting with T\u014dg\u014d) had been sent to the United States as a naval attach\u00e9 in 1897. He witnessed the capabilities of wireless telegraphy firsthand during the Spanish\u2013American War, and sent several memos to the Navy General Staff urging that they push ahead as rapidly as possible to acquire the new technology. The IJN command became heavily interested in the technology; however, it found the Marconi wireless system, which was then operating with the Royal Navy, to be exceedingly expensive.\nThe Japanese therefore decided to create their own radio sets by setting up a wireless research committee under Professor Kimura Shunkichi, which eventually produced an acceptable system. In 1901, having attained radio transmissions of up to with the Type 34 (34th year of Meiji = 1901) set, the Navy formally adopted wireless telegraphy. Two years later, a laboratory, a factory, and the wireless telegraphy curriculum were set up at in Yokosuka to produce the Type 36 (1903) wireless sets, and these were quickly installed on every major warship in the Combined Fleet by the time the war started.\nAlexander Stepanovich Popov of the Naval Warfare Institute had built and demonstrated a wireless telegraphy set in 1900. However, technology improvement and production in the Russian empire lagged those of Germany, and \"System Slaby-Arco\", originally made by Allgemeine Elektricit\u00e4ts-Gesellschaft (AEG) and then produced in volume by its successor wireless-set maker Telefunken in Germany (by 1904, this system was in wide use by Kaiserliche Marine) was adopted by the Imperial Russian Navy. Although both sides had early wireless telegraphy, the Russians were using German sets tuned and maintained by German technicians half-way into the voyage, while the Japanese had the advantage of using their own equipment maintained and operated by their own navy specialists trained at the Yokosuka school.\nBritish support.\nThe United Kingdom assisted Japan by manufacturing guns and building battleships for the IJN. As the ally in the Anglo-Japanese Alliance, the UK also assisted Japan in intelligence, finance, technology, training and other aspects of the war against Russia. At the time, Britain owned and controlled more harbour facilities around the world \u2013 specifically shipyards and coaling stations \u2013 than Russia and its allies (France, and to some extent Germany) combined. The UK also obstructed, where possible, Russian attempts to purchase ships and coal. France openly allowed the Baltic Fleet warships into Cherbourg and Tangier ports before and after the Dogger Bank Incident; and the UK formally protested in the post-Dogger Bank negotiations, pointing out that the neutral countries could not accept warships of the fighting countries into their ports without enforcing internment, and if France is no longer neutral in the war, the UK is obligated to commence military action in support of Japan as required in the Anglo-Japanese Alliance. As a result, the rendezvous point for Rozestvensky and F\u00f6lkersahm squadrons was changed from the port of Diego Suarez to the waters around remote islands of \u00cele Sainte-Marie and Nosy Be in Madagascar, and free access to the ports including Saigon and Ba Ngoi port in Cam Ranh Bay was denied for the fleet in French Indochina.\nThis support created a major logistics problem for around the world deployment of the Baltic Fleet to the Pacific in procuring coal and supplies on the way. At Nosy Be in Madagascar and at Camranh Bay, French Indochina, the fleet was forced to be anchored for about two months each, seriously degrading morale of the crew. By the time it reached the Sea of Japan, the hulls of all the ships in the fleet were heavily fouled in addition to carrying the extra coal otherwise not required on deck.\nThe Japanese ships, on the other hand, were well maintained in the ample time given by the intelligence. For example, battleship was under repair from November 1904 to April 1905 at Sasebo Naval Arsenal for two 12-inch guns lost and serious damage to the hull from striking a mine. They were divided into battle divisions of as much uniform speed and gun range so that a fleet would not suffer a bottleneck in speed, and the range of guns would not render some ships useless within a group in extended-range combat.\nAt the end of the Argentine\u2013Chilean naval arms race in 1903, two Chilean-ordered and British-built battleships (then called \"Constituci\u00f3n\" and \"Libertad\") and two Argentine-ordered, Italian-built cruisers (then called \"Bernardino Rivadavia\" and \"Mariano Moreno\") were offered to Russia and the purchase was about to be finalised. Britain stepped in as the mediator of Pacts of May that ended the race, bought the Chilean battleships (which became and ), and brokered the sale of Argentine cruisers to Japan. This support not only limited the growth of the Imperial Russian Navy but also helped IJN in obtaining the Italian-built cruisers (IJN and ) with a strong armour design that enabled IJN to use them on the main line of battle along with the heavier-armoured battleships.\nHigh explosive and cordite.\nThe Japanese used mostly high-explosive shells filled with Shimose powder, which was a pure picric acid (as opposed to the French Melinite or the British Lyddite, which were picric acid mixed with collodion (French) or with dinitrobenzene and vaseline (British) for stability). Engineer Shimose Masachika (1860\u20131911) solved the instability problem of picric acid on contact with iron and other heavy metals by coating the inside of a shell with unpigmented Japanese lacquer and further sealing with wax. Because it was undiluted, Shimose powder had a stronger power in terms of detonation velocity and temperature than other high explosives at the time. These shells had a sensitive Ijuin fuse (named after Vice Admiral Ijuin Gor\u014d) at the base as opposed to the tip of a shell that armed itself when the shell was spun by the rifling. These fuses were designed to explode on contact and wreck the upper structure of ships. The Japanese Navy imported cordite from Great Britain as the smokeless propellant for these Shimose shells, so that the smoke off the muzzle would not impede the visibility for the spotters.\nIn the early 1890s, Vice Admiral Stepan O. Makarov, then the Chief Inspector of Russian naval artillery, proposed a new 12-inch gun design, and assigned a junior officer, Semyon V. Panpushko, to research the use of picric acid as the explosive in the shell. However, Panpushko died in an accidental explosion in experiment due to the instability. Consequently, high explosive shells remained unreachable for the Russian Navy at the time of the Russo-Japanese War, and the navy continued to use the older armour-piercing rounds with guncotton (Nitrocellulose, Pyroxylin) bursting charges and the insensitive delayed-detonation fuses. They mostly used brown powder or black powder as the propellant, except \"Sissoi Veliky\" and the four \"Borodino\"-class ships that used smokeless gunpowder for the main 12-inch guns.\nAs a result, Japanese hits caused more damage to Russian ships than Russian hits on Japanese ships. Shimose blasts often set the superstructure, the paintwork and the large quantities of coal stored on the decks on fire, and the sight of the spotters on Russian ships was hindered by the large amount of smoke generated by the propellant on each uncoordinated firing. Moreover, the sensitivity difference of the fuse caused the Japanese off-the-target shells to explode upon falling on the water creating a much larger splash that sent destabilizing waves to Russian inclinometers, as opposed to the Russian shells not detonating upon falling on the water. This made an additional difference in the aforementioned shot accuracy by aiding the Japanese spotters to make an easier identification in fall of shot observation.\nGun range and rate of fire.\nThe Makarov proposal resulted in Model 1895 12-inch gun that extended the range of the previous Model 1886 12-inch Krupp guns (installed on \"Imperator Nikolai I\" and \"Navarin\") from 5\u20136\u00a0km to 11\u00a0km (at 15-degrees elevation) at the expense of significantly limited amount of explosives that can be contained in the shell. Reload time was also improved from 2\u20134 minutes previously to a rated 90 seconds, but in reality, it was 2.5\u20133 minutes. These guns were installed to \"Sissoi Veliky\" and the four \"Borodino\"-class ships.\nThe four Japanese battleships, \"Mikasa\", \"Shikishima\", \"Fuji\" and \"Asahi\", had the latest Armstrong 12-inch 40-calibre naval gun designed and manufactured by Sir W.G. Armstrong &amp; Company ahead of its acceptance by the Royal Navy in the UK. These British-built 12-inch guns had a range of 15,000 yards (14\u00a0km) at 15-degrees elevation and the rate of fire at 60 seconds with a heavier shell. One of the reasons for the Royal Navy's late adoption of this type of gun was the accidental shell explosions in the barrel Japanese battleships experienced up to the Battle of the Yellow Sea in August 1904, which were diagnosed and almost rectified by the Japanese Navy with the use of aforementioned Ijuin Fuse by the time of this battle.\nThe Russian fleet had 20 of the 1895-issue longer-range 12\" guns on five battleships compared to 16 of the Armstrong 12\" guns on four battleships for the Japanese. Statistically, this 20% advantage in the number of guns was much more than offset by the 60% disadvantage in the rate of fire difference of one shot in 2.5 minutes versus one minute. The range difference of 11\u00a0km versus 14\u00a0km translated into a flatter trajectory (smaller elevation and fall angle) for the Japanese shells, which resulted in a better hit rate for the Japanese shots when both sides had an equal distance facing each other in 11\u00a0km and shorter range.\nAftermath.\nBattle damage and casualties.\nSource:\nThe (imperial yacht) and two torpedo boat destroyers \"Grozniy\" and \"Braviy\" reached Vladivostok. Protected cruisers, , , and , escaped to the U.S. Naval Base Subic Bay in the Philippines, and were interned. Ammunition ship \"Koreya\", transports \"Yaroslavl\", \"Vladimir\", \"Kuronia\", \"Voronezh\", \"Livonia\" and \"Meteor\" as well as ocean tug \"Svir\" went to Shanghai and eventually returned home. Destroyer \"Bodriy\" was interned in Shanghai. Transports \"Mercury\", \"Tambov\", \"Herman Lerke\", \"Count Stroganov\" and repair ship \"Ksenia\" were sent home via Saigon. Auxiliary cruisers \"Rion\" and \"Dniepr\" eventually reached back home after some raiding activities in the Yellow Sea. Auxiliary cruisers \"Kuban\" and \"Terek\" were interned at Batavia in Dutch East Indies by the Netherlands. Auxiliary (merchant) cruiser \"Anadyr\" escaped to Madagascar. Hospital ships \"Orel\" and \"Kostroma\" were captured by the Japanese. \"Kostroma\" was released afterwards.\nRussian losses.\nRussian personnel losses were 216 officers and 4,614 men killed; with 278 officers and 5,629 men taken as Prisoners Of War (POW). Interned in neutral ports were 79 officers and 1,783 men. Escaping to Vladivostok and Diego-Suarez were 62 officers and 1,165 men.\nThe battle was humiliating for Russia, which lost all its battleships and most of its cruisers and destroyers. The battle effectively ended the Russo-Japanese War in Japan's favour. The Russians lost 4,380 killed and 5,917 captured with a further 1,862 interned. Two admirals, Rozhestvensky and Nebogatov, were captured by the Japanese Navy. The second in command of the fleet, Rear Admiral Dmitry Gustavovich von F\u00f6lkersahm, after suffering a cerebral hemorrhage on 16 April, died in the night of 24 May 1905 onboard battleship . Vice Admiral Oskar Enqvist fled to Manila onboard cruiser and was interned by the United States.\nBattleships.\nThe Russians lost eleven battleships, including three smaller coastal battleships, either sunk or captured by the Japanese, or scuttled by their crews to prevent capture. Four were lost to enemy action during the daylight battle on 27 May: , , and . was lost during the night action on 27\u201328 May, while the and were either scuttled or sunk the next day. Four other battleships, under Rear Admiral Nebogatov, were forced to surrender and would end up as prizes of war. This group consisted of only one modern battleship, , along with the old battleship and two small coastal battleships and .\nCruisers.\nThe Russian Navy lost five of its nine cruisers during the battle, three more were interned by the Americans, with just one reaching Vladivostok. and were sunk the next day after the daylight battle. The cruiser fought against six Japanese cruisers on the 28th and barely survived with many officers and crew killed onboard, and was scuttled on 29 May 1905 due to heavy damage. \"Izumrud\" ran aground on the Siberian coast. Three Russian protected cruisers, , , and , escaped to the U.S. naval base at Manila in the then-American-controlled Philippines where they were interned by the United States. The armed yacht (classified as a cruiser) , alone was able to reach Vladivostok.\nDestroyers and auxiliaries.\nImperial Russia also lost six of its nine destroyers in the battle, had one interned by the Chinese, and the other two reached Vladivostok. \"Buyniy\" (\"\u0411\u0443\u0439\u043d\u044b\u0439\"), \"Bezuprechniy\" (\"\u0411\u0435\u0437\u0443\u043f\u0440\u0435\u0447\u043d\u044b\u0439\"), \"Gromkiy\" (\"\u0413\u0440\u043e\u043c\u043a\u0438\u0439\") and \"Blestyashchiy\" (\"\u0411\u043b\u0435\u0441\u0442\u044f\u0449\u0438\u0439\") were sunk on 27 May. \"Bistriy\" (\"\u0411\u044b\u0441\u0442\u0440\u044b\u0439\") was beached and destroyed by her crew the next day. \"Byedoviy\" (\"\u0411\u0435\u0434\u043e\u0432\u044b\u0439\") surrendered also on 28 May. Destroyer \"Bodriy\" (\"\u0411\u043e\u0434\u0440\u044b\u0439\") ran out of coal, and was interned in Shanghai. \"Grozniy\" (\"\u0413\u0440\u043e\u0437\u043d\u044b\u0439\") and \"Braviy\" (\"\u0411\u0440\u0430\u0432\u044b\u0439\") reached Vladivostok.\nOf the auxiliaries, repair ship \"Kamchatka\", auxiliary cruiser and ocean tug \"Rus\" were sunk on 27 May, auxiliary cruiser \"Irtysh\" was disabled, abandoned on 28 May, then sank on 29 May. Ammunition ship \"Koreya\" and ocean tug \"Svir\" reached Shanghai and returned home. After being ordered to separate from the fleet on 22 May, auxiliary cruisers \"Kuban\" and \"Terek\" were interned at Batavia in Dutch East Indies by the Netherlands on 9 June 1905 after raiding a British and a Danish steamer destined for Japan. Transports \"Yaroslavl\", \"Vladimir\", \"Kuronia\", \"Voronezh\", \"Livonia\" and \"Meteor\" were detached from the fleet on 25 May, reached Shanghai and returned home. Auxiliary cruisers \"Rion\" and \"Dniepr\" escorted the transports to Shanghai, engaged in commerce raiding activities in the Yellow Sea, and returned to Kronstadt on 31 July 1905. Transports \"Mercury\", \"Tambov\", \"Herman Lerke\", \"Count Stroganov\" and repair ship \"Ksenia\", which accompanied the Third Pacific Fleet to Cam Ranh Bay, had been sent home via Saigon. Merchant cruiser \"Anadyr\" escaped to Madagascar and then returned home. The hospital ships \"Orel\" and \"Kostroma\" were captured during the battle; \"Kostroma\" was released afterwards.\nJapanese losses.\nThe Japanese lost three torpedo boats (Nos. \"34\", \"35\" and \"69\"). Personnel losses were 117 officers and men killed and 583 officers and men wounded.\nPolitical consequences.\nImperial Russia's prestige was badly damaged and the defeat was a blow to the Romanov dynasty. Most of the Russian fleet was lost; the fast armed yacht \"Almaz\" (classified as a cruiser of the 2nd rank) and the destroyers \"Grozny\" and \"Bravy\" were the only Russian ships to reach Vladivostok. In \"The Guns of August\", the American historical writer and journalist Barbara Tuchman argued that because Russia's loss destabilised the balance of power in Europe, it emboldened the Central Powers and contributed to their decision to go to war in 1914.\nThe battle had a profound cultural and political impact on the world. It was the first defeat of a European power by an Asian nation in the modern era. It also heightened the alarm of \"The Yellow Peril\" as well as weakening the notion of white superiority that was prevalent in some Western countries. Mahatma Gandhi (India), Mustafa Kemal Atat\u00fcrk (Turkey), Sun Yat-sen (China) and Jawaharlal Nehru (India) were amongst the future national leaders to celebrate this defeat of a colonial power. The victory established Japan as the sixth greatest naval power while the Russian navy declined to one barely stronger than that of Austria-Hungary.\nIn \"The Guinness Book of Decisive Battles\", the British historian Geoffrey Regan argues that the victory bolstered Japan's increasingly aggressive political and military establishment. According to Regan, the lopsided Japanese victory at Tsushima:...created a legend that was to haunt Japan's leaders for forty years. A British admiral once said, 'It takes three years to build a ship, but 300 years to build a tradition.' Japan thought that the victory had completed this task in a matter of a few years ... It had all been too easy. Looking at T\u014dg\u014d's victory over one of the world's great powers convinced some Japanese military men that with more ships, and bigger and better ones, similar victories could be won throughout the Pacific. Perhaps no power could resist the Japanese navy, not even Britain and the United States.\nRegan also believes the victory contributed to the Japanese road to later disaster, \"because the result was so misleading. Certainly the Japanese navy had performed well, but its opponents had been weak, and it was not invincible... T\u014dg\u014d's victory [helped] set Japan on a path that would eventually lead her\" to the Second World War.\nTakano Isoroku, the future Japanese admiral Yamamoto Isoroku who would plan the attack on Pearl Harbor and command the Imperial Japanese Navy through much of the Second World War, served as a junior officer (aboard ) during the battle and was wounded and lost two fingers by an accidental explosion of an 8-inch shell in a forward gun. Had he lost a third, he would have been medically discharged from the IJN.\nDreadnought arms race.\nPrior to the Russo-Japanese War, countries constructed their battleships with mixed batteries of mainly 6-inch (152\u00a0mm), 8-inch (203\u00a0mm), 10-inch (254\u00a0mm) and 12-inch (305\u00a0mm) guns, with the intent that these battleships fight on the battle line in a close-quarter, decisive fleet action. The Battle of Tsushima conclusively demonstrated that faster battleships and big guns with longer ranges were superior to batteries of mixed-size guns.\nBritain's First Sea Lord, Admiral Jackie Fisher, reasoned that the Japanese victory at Tsushima confirmed the importance of large guns and speed for modern battleships. Captain William Pakenham of the British Royal Navy, who had been present aboard the Japanese battleship \"Asahi\" as an official observer during the Tsushima Battle, \"famously remarked...the effect of the fire of every gun is so much less than that of the next larger size, that when 12in guns are firing, shots from 10in pass unnoticed...everything in this war has tended to emphasize the vast importance to a ship, at every stage of her career, of carrying some of the heaviest and furthest shooting guns that can be got into her.\" In October 1905 the British started the construction of , which marked the beginning of a naval arms race between Britain and Germany in the years before 1914.\nThe battle also accelerated the naval arms race on a geopolitical level; though the Anglo-German naval arms race had begun in 1897, the collapse of Russian naval power in 1905 allowed Britain to send the bulk of its naval forces to other regions, reassured by the naval superiority of its ally Japan in the Far East. In turn, the presence of a larger British fleet in Europe meant that the Germans felt forced to build a proportionally larger fleet to maintain the same relative power, in accordance with Tirpitz's fleet in being principle. The Royal Navy, in turn, must increase its fleet size to maintain the relative power as set out by its two-power standard. This positive feedback meant that any external increase in the regional naval power of one side \u2013 in this case, the British \u2013 would precipitate not just a proportional increase in naval power from the opposing side, but rather a \"mutual\" multi-stage build-up in naval power on both sides, before settling to a higher equilibrium. Ultimately, the Germans passed three of its five Fleet Acts after Tsushima within a span of 6 years.\nUpon the outbreak of World War I, the British and Germans were both aware of the potentially devastating consequences of a naval defeat on the scale of Tsushima. Britain needed its battle fleet to protect its empire, and the trade routes vital to its war effort. Winston Churchill, then First Lord of the Admiralty, described British Admiral John Jellicoe as \"the only man who on either side could lose the war in an afternoon.\" German naval commanders, for their part, understood the importance Kaiser Wilhelm II attached to his navy and the diplomatic prestige it carried. As a result of caution, the British and German fleets met in only one major action in World War I, the indecisive Battle of Jutland.\nTimeline.\nNote\n27 May 1905 (JST)\n28 May 1905 (JST)\nOn film.\nThe battle has been the main focus for two historical films in Japan. The first, 1969's \"Battle of the Japan Sea\" (\u65e5\u672c\u6d77\u5927\u6d77\u6226, \"Nihonkai Daikaisen\"), directed by Seiji Maruyama, starring Toshiro Mifune as Admiral T\u014dg\u014d, with music by Masaru Sato and special effects by Eiji Tsuburaya. It was dramatised again in 1983's \"Battle Anthem\" (\u65e5\u672c\u6d77\u5927\u6d77\u6226\u30fb\u6d77\u3086\u304b\u3070, \"Nihonkai Daikaisen\u00a0\u2013 Umi Yukaba\") with Mifune reprising his role.\nAnother, more recent, depiction is episode 4, season 3 of the 2009\u20132011 NHK taiga drama series (lit. \"Clouds Above the Slope\").\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0Notes: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55008", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55008", "title": "Solar Power Satellite", "text": ""}
{"id": "55010", "revid": "41465089", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55010", "title": "Ablative Heat Shield", "text": ""}
{"id": "55012", "revid": "32558396", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55012", "title": "Abenaki", "text": "Indigenous people of the Northeastern Woodlands of Canada and the US\nThe Abenaki (Abenaki: ) are an Indigenous people of the Northeastern Woodlands of Canada and the United States. They are an Algonquian-speaking people and part of the Wabanaki Confederacy. The Eastern Abenaki language was predominantly spoken in Maine, while the Western Abenaki language was spoken in Quebec, Vermont, and New Hampshire.\nWhile Abenaki peoples share cultural traits, they historically did not have a centralized government. They came together as a post-contact community after their original tribes were decimated by colonization, disease, and warfare.\nNames.\nThe word \"Abenaki\" and its syncope, \"Abnaki,\" are both derived from \"Wabanaki\", or \"W\u00f4banakiak,\" meaning \"People of the Dawn Land\" in the Abenaki language. While the two terms are often confused, the Abenaki are one of several tribes in the Wabanaki Confederacy.\nAlternate spellings include: \"Abnaki\", \"Abinaki\", \"Aln\u00f4bak\", \"Abanakee\", \"Abanaki\", \"Abanaqui\", \"Abanaquois\", \"Abenaka\", \"Abenake\", \"Abenaki\", \"Abenakias\", \"Abenakiss\", \"Abenakkis\", \"Abenaque\", \"Abenaqui\", \"Abenaquioict\", \"Abenaquiois\", \"Abenaquioue\", \"Abenati\", \"Abeneaguis\", \"Abenequa\", \"Abenkai\", \"Abenquois\", \"Abernaqui\", \"Abnaqui\", \"Abnaquies\", \"Abnaquois\", \"Abnaquotii\", \"Abasque\", \"Abnekais\", \"Abneki\", \"Abonakies\", \"Abonnekee\".\n\"W\u00f4banakiak\" is derived from \"w\u00f4ban\" (\"dawn\" or \"east\") and \"aki\" (\"land\") (compare Proto-Algonquian \"*wa\u00b7pan\" and \"*axkyi\") \u2014 the aboriginal name of the area broadly corresponding to New England and the Maritimes. It is sometimes used to refer to all the Algonquian-speaking peoples of the area\u2014Western Abenaki, Eastern Abenaki, Wolastoqiyik-Passamaquoddy, and Mi'kmaq\u2014as a single group.\nThe Abenaki people also call themselves \"Aln\u00f4bak\", meaning \"Real People\" (cf., Lenape language: \"Lenapek\") and by the autonym \"Alnanbal,\" meaning \"men\".\nHistorically, ethnologists have classified the Abenaki by geographic groups: \"Western Abenaki\" and \"Eastern Abenaki\". Within these groups are the Abenaki bands:\nWestern Abenaki.\nSmaller tribes:\nEastern Abenaki.\nSmaller tribes:\nWolastoqiyik and Passamaquoddy:\nLocation.\nThe homeland of the Abenaki, called \"Ndakinna\" (Our Land; alternately written as \"N'dakinna\" or \"N'Dakinna\"), previously extended across most of what is now northern New England, southern Quebec, and the southern Canadian Maritimes. The Eastern Abenaki population was concentrated in portions of New Brunswick and Maine east of New Hampshire's White Mountains. The other major group, the Western Abenaki, lived in the Connecticut River valley in Vermont, New Hampshire, and Massachusetts. The Missiquoi lived along the eastern shore of Lake Champlain. The Pennacook lived along the Merrimack River in southern New Hampshire. The maritime Abenaki lived around the St. Croix and Wolastoq (Saint John River) Valleys near the boundary line between Maine and New Brunswick.\nEnglish colonial settlement in New England and frequent violence forced many Abenaki to migrate to Quebec. The Abenaki settled in the Sillery region of Quebec between 1676 and 1680, and subsequently, for about twenty years, lived on the banks of the Chaudi\u00e8re River near the falls, before settling in Odanak and W\u00f4linak in the early eighteenth century.\nIn those days, the Abenaki practiced a subsistence economy based on hunting, fishing, trapping, berry picking and on growing corn, beans, squash, potatoes and tobacco. They also produced baskets, made of ash and sweet grass, for picking wild berries, and boiled maple sap to make syrup. Basket weaving remains a traditional activity practiced by some tribal members.\nDuring the Anglo-French wars, the Abenaki were allies of France, having been displaced from Ndakinna by immigrating English settlers. An anecdote from the period tells the story of a Wolastoqew war chief named Nescambuit (variant spellings include Assacumbuit), who killed more than 140 enemies of King Louis XIV of France and received the rank of knight. Not all Abenaki people fought on the side of the French, however; many remained on their Native lands in the northern colonies. Much of the trapping was done by the people and traded to the English colonists for durable goods. These contributions by Native American Abenaki peoples went largely unreported.\nTwo tribal communities formed in Canada, one once known as Saint-Francois-du-lac near Pierreville (now called Odanak, Abenaki for \"coming home\"), and the other near B\u00e9cancour (now known as W\u00f4linak) on the south shore of the St. Lawrence River, directly across the river from Trois-Rivi\u00e8res. These two Abenaki reserves continue to grow and develop. Since the year 2000, the total Abenaki population (on and off reserve) has doubled to 2,101 members in 2011. Approximately 400 Abenaki reside on these two reserves, which cover a total area of less than . The unrecognized majority are off-reserve members, living in various cities and towns across Canada and the United States.\nThere are about 3,200 Abenaki living in Vermont and New Hampshire, without reservations, chiefly around Lake Champlain. The remaining Abenaki people live in multi-racial towns and cities across Canada and the US, mainly in Ontario, Quebec, New Brunswick, and northern New England.\nIn December 2012, the Nulhegan Band of the Coosuk Abenaki Nation created a tribal forest in the town of Barton, Vermont. This forest was established with assistance from the Vermont Sierra Club and the Vermont Land Trust. It contains a hunting camp and maple sugaring facilities that are administered cooperatively by the Nulhegan. The forest contains . The Missiquoi Abenaki Tribe owns forest land in the town of Brunswick, Vermont, centered around the Brunswick Springs. These springs are believed to be a sacred Abenaki site.\nLanguage.\nThe Abenaki language is closely related to the Panawahpskek (Penobscot) language. Other neighboring Wabanaki tribes, the Pestomuhkati (Passamaquoddy), Wolastoqiyik (Maliseet), and Mi'kmaq, and other Eastern Algonquian languages share many linguistic similarities. It has come close to extinction as a spoken language. Tribal members are working to revive the Abenaki language at Odanak (means \"in the village\"), a First Nations Abenaki reserve near Pierreville, Quebec, and throughout New Hampshire, Vermont, and New York state.\nThe language is polysynthetic, meaning that a phrase or an entire sentence is expressed by a single word. For example, the word for \"white man\" \"awanoch\" is a combination of the words \"awani\" meaning \"who\" and \"uji\" meaning \"from\". Thus, the word for \"white man\" literally translates to \"Who is this man and where does he come from?\"\nHistory.\nThere is archaeological evidence of Indigenous people in what is today New Hampshire for at least 12,000 years.\nIn \"Reflections in Bullough's Pond\", historian Diana Muir argues that the Abenakis' neighbors, pre-contact Iroquois, were an imperialist, expansionist culture whose cultivation of the corn/beans/squash agricultural complex enabled them to support a large population. They made war primarily against neighboring Algonquian peoples, including the Abenaki. Muir uses archaeological data to argue that the Iroquois expansion onto Algonquian lands was checked by the Algonquian adoption of agriculture. This enabled them to support their own populations large enough to have sufficient warriors to defend against the threat of Iroquois conquest.\nIn 1614, Thomas Hunt captured 24 Abenaki people, including Squanto (Tisquantum) and took them to Spain, where they were sold into slavery. During the European colonization of North America, the land occupied by the Abenaki was in the area between the new colonies of England in Massachusetts and the French in Quebec. Since no party agreed to territorial boundaries, there was regular conflict among them. The Abenaki were traditionally allied with the French; during the reign of Louis XIV, Chief Assacumbuit was designated a member of the French nobility for his service.\nAround 1669, the Abenaki started to emigrate to Quebec due to conflicts with English colonists and epidemics of new infectious diseases. The governor of New France allocated two seigneuries (large self-administered areas similar to feudal fiefs). The first, of what was later to become Indian reserves, was on the Saint Francis River and is now known as the \"Odanak\" Indian Reserve; the second was founded near B\u00e9cancour and is called the \"W\u00f4linak\" Indian Reserve.\nAbenaki wars.\nWhen the Wampanoag under King Philip (Metacomet) fought the English colonists in New England in 1675 in King Philip's War, the Abenaki joined the Wampanoag. For three years they fought along the Maine frontier in the First Abenaki War. The Abenaki pushed back the line of white settlement through devastating raids on scattered farmhouses and small villages. The war was settled by a peace treaty in 1678, with the Wampanoag more than decimated and many Native survivors having been sold into slavery in Bermuda.\nDuring Queen Anne's War in 1702, the Abenaki were allied with the French; they raided numerous English colonial settlements in Maine, from Wells to Casco, killing about 300 settlers over ten years. They also occasionally raided into Massachusetts, for instance in Groton and Deerfield in 1704. The raids stopped when the war ended. Some captives were adopted into the Mohawk and Abenaki tribes; older captives were generally ransomed, and the colonies carried on a brisk trade.\nThe Third Abenaki War (1722\u201325), called the Dummer's War or Father Rale's War, erupted when the French Jesuit missionary S\u00e9bastien Rale (or Rasles, ~1657?-1724) encouraged the Abenaki to halt the spread of Yankee settlements. When the Massachusetts militia tried to seize Rale, the Abenaki raided the settlements at Brunswick, Arrowsick, and Merry-Meeting Bay. The Massachusetts government then declared war and bloody battles were fought at Norridgewock (1724), where Rale was killed, and at a daylong battle at the Indian village near present-day Fryeburg, Maine, on the upper Saco River (1725). Peace conferences at Boston and Casco Bay brought an end to the war. After Rale died, the Abenaki moved to a settlement on the St. Francis River.\nThe Abenaki from St. Francois continued to raid British settlements in their former homelands along the New England frontier during Father Le Loutre's War (see Northeast Coast campaign (1750)) and the French and Indian War.\nCanada.\nThe development of tourism projects has allowed the Canadian Abenaki to develop a modern economy, while preserving their culture and traditions. For example, since 1960, the Odanak Historical Society has managed the first and one of the largest aboriginal museums in Quebec, a few miles from the Quebec-Montreal axis. Over 5,000 people visit the Abenaki Museum annually. Several Abenaki companies include: in W\u00f4linak, General Fiberglass Engineering employs a dozen Natives, with annual sales exceeding C$3 million. Odanak is now active in transportation and distribution. Notable Abenaki from this area include the documentary filmmaker Alanis Obomsawin (National Film Board of Canada).\nUnited States.\nMaine: federally recognized tribes.\nThe Penobscot Indian Nation, Passamaquoddy people, and Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians have been federally recognized as tribes in the United States.\nVermont: state-recognized tribes.\nNulhegan Band of the Coosuk Abenaki Nation, Koasek Abenaki Tribe, Elnu Abenaki Tribe, and the Missisquoi Abenaki Tribe are, as of 2011, all state-recognized tribes in the United States.\nThe Missisquoi Abenaki applied for federal recognition as an Indian tribe in the 1980s but failed to meet four of the seven criteria. The Bureau of Indian Affairs found that less than 1 percent of the Missisquoi's 1,171 members could show descent from an Abenaki ancestor. The bureau's report concluded that the petitioner is \"a collection of individuals of claimed but mostly undemonstrated Indian ancestry with little or no social or historical connection with each other before the early 1970s.\"\nState recognition allows applicants to seek certain scholarship funds reserved for American Indians and to for members to market artwork as American Indian or Native American-made under the Indian Arts and Crafts Act of 1990.\nIn 2002, the State of Vermont reported that the Abenaki people have not had a \"continuous presence\" in the state and had migrated north to Quebec by the end of the 17th century. Facing annihilation, many Abenaki had begun emigrating to Canada, then under French control, around 1669.\n\"Race-shifting\" controversy.\nThe Abenaki Nation, based in Quebec, claim that those self-identifying as Abenaki in Vermont are settlers making false claims to Indigenous ancestry. While the Odanak and Wolinak Abenaki First Nations in Quebec initially believed claims from residents of Vermont who said they were Abenaki, the Odanak reversed their position in 2003, calling on the groups in Vermont to provide them with genealogical evidence of Indigenous ancestry.\nScholars have not been able to find credible evidence of the Vermont Abenaki's claims of Indigenous ancestry. Anthropological research from the first half of the 20th century indicates that no Abenaki community actively existed in Vermont during that time period.\nResearcher Darryl Leroux characterizes the Vermont Abenaki's claims of Abenaki ancestry as \"race-shifting\", arguing that genealogical and archival evidence shows that most members of the state-recognized tribes are descended from white French Canadians. Leroux found that only 2.2 percent of the Missisquoi Abenaki membership has Abenaki ancestry, with the rest of the organization's root ancestors being primarily French Canadian and migrating to Vermont in the mid-19th century. The Abenaki Nation of Missisquoi's shifting claims about its root ancestors as well as loose membership criteria are consistent with race-shifting patterns. Leroux's research prompted renewed calls by the Abenaki First Nations to reassess Vermont's state recognition process.\nIn 2025, leaders of the Quebec-based Odanak and W\u00f4linak communities released a genealogical report they had commissioned into the origins of prominent Vermont-recognized Abenaki leaders. All subjects of the report were found to have at least 96.9 percent European ancestry, although \"one or two distant Indigenous ancestors\". Odanak representative Jacques Watso accused the Vermont groups of falsifying their ancestry and allowing \"illegitimate groups to obtain official recognition and rights that rightfully belong to the true Abenaki people\". In response, the Vermont leaders issued a joint statement describing the report as \"malicious propaganda\" and \"junk science, compiled with bias and full of factual and interpretative errors\".\nNew Hampshire and minority recognition.\nNew Hampshire does not recognize any Abenaki tribes. It has no federally recognized tribes or state-recognized tribes; however, it established the New Hampshire Commission on Native American Affairs in 2010. The various Cowasuck, Abenaki, and other Native and heritage groups are represented to the commission.\nIn 2021, a bill was introduced to the New Hampshire legislature to allow New Hampshire communities to rename locations in the Abenaki language. This bill did not pass.\nCulture.\nThere are a dozen variations of the name \"Abenaki\", such as Abenaquiois, Abakivis, Quabenakionek, Wabenakies and others.\nThe Abenaki were described in the \"Jesuit Relations\" as not cannibals, and as docile, ingenious, temperate in the use of liquor, and not profane.\nAbenaki lifeways were similar to those of Algonquian-speaking peoples of southern New England. They cultivated food crops and built villages on or near fertile river floodplains. They also hunted game, fished, and gathered wild plants and fungi.\nUnlike the Haudenosaunee, the Abenaki were patrilineal. Each man had different hunting territories inherited through his father.\nMost of the year, Abenaki lived in dispersed bands of extended families. Bands came together during the spring and summer at seasonal villages near rivers, or somewhere along the seacoast for planting and fishing. During the winter, the Abenaki lived in small groups further inland. These villages occasionally had to be fortified, depending on the alliances and enemies of other tribes or of Europeans near the village. Abenaki villages were quite small with an average number of 100 residents.\nMost Abenaki crafted dome-shaped, bark-covered wigwams for housing, though a few preferred oval-shaped longhouses. During the winter, the Abenaki lined the inside of their conical wigwams with bear and deer skins for warmth.\nGender, food, division of labor, and other cultural traits.\nThe Abenaki were a farming society that supplemented agriculture with hunting and gathering. Generally the men were the hunters. The women tended the fields and grew the crops. In their fields, they planted the crops in groups of \"sisters\". The three sisters were grown together: the stalk of corn supported the beans, and squash or pumpkins provided ground cover and reduced weeds. The men would hunt bears, deer, fish, and birds.\nThe Abenaki were a patrilineal society, which was common among New England tribes. In this they differed from the six Iroquois tribes to the west in New York, and from many other North American Native tribes who had matrilineal societies.\nGroups used the consensus method to make important decisions.\nStorytelling.\nStorytelling is a major part of Abenaki culture. It is used not only as entertainment but also as a teaching method. The Abenaki view stories as having lives of their own and being aware of how they are used. Stories were used as a means of teaching children behavior. Children were not to be mistreated, and so instead of punishing the child, they would be told a story.\nOne of the stories is of Azban the Raccoon. This is a story about a proud raccoon that challenges a waterfall to a shouting contest. When the waterfall does not respond, Azban dives into the waterfall to try to outshout it; he is swept away because of his pride. This story would be used to show a child the pitfalls of pride.\nEthnobotany.\nThe Abenaki smash the flowers and leaves of \"Ranunculus acris\" and sniff them for headaches. They consume the fruit of \"Vaccinium myrtilloides\" as part of their traditional diet. They also use the fruit and the grains of \"Viburnum nudum var. cassinoides\" for food.\nMany other plants are used for various healing and treatment modalities, including for the skin, as a disinfectant, as a cure-all, as a respiratory aid, for colds, coughs, fevers, grippe, gas, blood strengthening, headaches and other pains, rheumatism, demulcent, nasal inflammation, anthelmintic, for the eyes, abortifacent, for the bones, antihemorrhagic, as a sedative, anaphrodisiac, swellings, urinary aid, gastrointestinal aid, as a hemostat, pediatric aid (such as for teething), and other unspecified or general uses.\nThey use \"Hierochloe odorata\" (sweetgrass), \"Apocynum\" (dogbane), \"Betula papyrifera\" (paper birch), \"Fraxinus americana\" (white ash), \"Fraxinus nigra\" (black ash), \"Laportea canadensis\" (Canada nettle), a variety of \"Salix\" species, and \"Tilia americana\" (basswood, or American linden) var. \"Americana\" for making baskets, canoes, snowshoes, and whistles. They use \"Hierochloe odorata\" and willow to make containers, \"Betula papyrifera\" to create containers, moose calls and other utilitarian pieces, and the bark of \"Cornus sericea\" (red osier dogwood) ssp. sericea for smoking.\nThey also use \"Acer rubrum\", \"Acornus calamus\", an unknown \"Amelanchier\" species, \"Caltha palustris\", \"Cardamine diphylla\", \"Cornus canadensis\", an unknown \"Crataegus\" species, \"Fragaria virginiana\", \"Gaultheria procumbens\", \"Osmunda cinnamomea\", \"Phaseolus vulgaris\", \"Photinia melanocarpa\", \"Prunus virginiana\", \"Rubus idaeus\" and another unknown \"Rubus\" species, \"Solanum tuberosum\", \"Spiraea alba\" var. \"latifolia\", \"Vaccinium angustifolium\", and \"Zea mays\" as a tea, soup, jelly, sweetener, condiment, snack, or meal.\nThe Abenaki use the gum of \"Abies balsamea\" for slight itches and as an antiseptic ointment. They stuff the leaves, needles and wood into pillows as a panacea.\nPopulation and epidemics.\nBefore the Abenaki, except the Pennacook and Mi'kmaq, had contact with the European world, their population may have numbered as many as 40,000. Around 20,000 would have been Eastern Abenaki, another 10,000 would have been Western Abenaki, and the last 10,000 would have been Maritime Abenaki. Early contact with European fishermen resulted in two major epidemics that affected Abenaki during the 16th century. The first epidemic was an unknown sickness occurring sometime between 1564 and 1570, and the second one was typhus in 1586. Multiple epidemics arrived a decade prior to the English colonization of Massachusetts in 1620, when three separate sicknesses swept across New England and the Canadian Maritimes. Maine was hit very hard during the year of 1617, with a fatality rate of 75 per, and the population of the Eastern Abenaki fell to about 5,000. The more isolated Western Abenaki suffered fewer fatalities, losing about half of their original population of 10,000.\nThe new diseases continued to strike in epidemics, starting with smallpox in 1631, 1633, and 1639. Seven years later, an unknown epidemic struck, with influenza passing through the following year. Smallpox affected the Abenaki again in 1649, and diphtheria came through 10 years later. Smallpox struck in 1670, and influenza in 1675. Smallpox affected the Native Americans in 1677, 1679, 1687, along with measles, 1691, 1729, 1733, 1755, and finally in 1758.\nThe Abenaki population continued to decline, but in 1676, they took in thousands of refugees from many southern New England tribes displaced by settlement and King Philip's War. Because of this, descendants of nearly every southern New England Algonquian tribe can be found among the Abenaki people. A century later, fewer than 1,000 Abenaki remained after the American Revolution.\nIn the 1990 US census, 1,549 people identified themselves as Abenaki. So did 2,544 people in the 2000 US census, with 6,012 people claiming Abenaki heritage. In 1991 Canadian Abenaki numbered 945; by 2006 they numbered 2,164.\nFiction.\nLydia Maria Child wrote of the Abenaki in her short story, \"The Church in the Wilderness\" (1828). Several Abenaki characters and much about their 18th-century culture are featured in the Kenneth Roberts' novel \"Arundel\" (1930). The film \"Northwest Passage\" (1940) is based on a novel of the same name by Roberts.\nThe Abenaki are featured in Charles McCarry's historical novel \"Bride of the Wilderness\" (1988), and James Archibald Houston's novel \"Ghost Fox\" (1977), both of which are set in the eighteenth century; and in Jodi Picoult's \"Second Glance\" (2003) and \"Lone Wolf\" (2012) novels, set in the contemporary world. Books for younger readers both have historical settings: Joseph Bruchac's \"The Arrow Over the Door\" (1998) (grades 4\u20136) is set in 1777; and Beth Kanell's young adult novel, \"The Darkness Under the Water\" (2008), concerns a young Abenaki-French Canadian girl during the time of the Vermont Eugenics Project, 1931\u20131936.\nThe first sentence in Norman Mailer's novel \"Harlot's Ghost\" makes reference to the Abenaki: \"On a late-winter evening in 1983, while driving through fog along the Maine coast, recollections of old campfires began to drift into the March mist, and I thought of the Abnaki Indians of the Algonquin tribe who dwelt near Bangor a thousand years ago.\"\nNon-fiction.\nLetters and other non-fiction writing can be found in the anthology \"Dawnland Voices\", edited by Siobhan Senier. Selections include letters from leader of the early praying town, Wamesit in Massachusetts Samuel Numphow, Sagamore Kancamagus, and writings on the Abenaki language by former chief of the reserve at Odanak in Quebec, Joseph Laurent, as well as many others.\nAccounts of life with the Abenaki can be found in the captivity narratives written by women taken captive by the Abenaki from the early New England settlements: Mary Rowlandson (1682), Hannah Duston (1702); Elizabeth Hanson (1728); Susannah Willard Johnson (1754); and Jemima Howe (1792).\nMaps.\nMaps showing the approximate locations of areas occupied by members of the Wabanaki Confederacy (from north to south):\nNotable historic Abenaki people.\n\"Please list living people under their First Nation or state-recognized tribe.\"\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nOther grammar books and dictionaries include:\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons\n* https://\n* https://\n* https://\n* http://"}
{"id": "55013", "revid": "20318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55013", "title": "Bauhaus (band)", "text": "English rock band\nBauhaus were an English rock band formed in Northampton in 1978. Known for their dark image and gloomy sound, Bauhaus are one of the pioneers of gothic rock, although they mixed many genres, including dub, glam rock, psychedelia, and funk. The group consisted of Daniel Ash (guitar, saxophone), Peter Murphy (vocals, occasional instruments), Kevin Haskins (drums) and David J (bass).\nThe band formed under the name Bauhaus 1919, in reference to the first operating year of the German art school Bauhaus, but they shortened this name within a year of formation. Their 1979 debut single \"Bela Lugosi's Dead\" is considered one of the harbingers of gothic rock music and has been influential on contemporary goth culture. Their debut album, \"In the Flat Field\", is regarded as one of the first gothic rock records. Their 1981 second album \"Mask\" expanded their sound by incorporating a wider variety of instruments\u2014such as keyboards, saxophone and acoustic guitar\u2014and experimenting with funk-inspired rhythms on tracks like \"Kick in the Eye\". \nBauhaus went on to achieve mainstream success in the United Kingdom with their third album, \"The Sky's Gone Out\", which peaked at No. 3 on the UK Albums Chart in 1982. That same year, they also reached No. 15 on the Singles Chart with a standalone cover of David Bowie's \"Ziggy Stardust\", earning them an appearance on \"Top of the Pops\". During recording sessions for their next album, Murphy fell ill and spent much of his time away from the studio, leaving the rest of the band to compensate for his absence. This created a rift between the singer and his bandmates, culminating in the group breaking up on 5 July 1983, one week before \"Burning from the Inside\" was released. Featuring the Top 30 UK single \"She's in Parties\", it would be their final studio album composed entirely of new material for a quarter of a century.\nAfter Bauhaus's break-up, Murphy formed Dalis Car with bassist Mick Karn before beginning a solo career, while Ash and Haskins continued as Tones on Tail and, later, reunited with David J to form Love and Rockets. Murphy's solo career enjoyed greater commercial success in the United States than Bauhaus, as did Love and Rockets. Bauhaus eventually reunited for a 1998 tour, again from 2005 to 2008, and in 2019 and 2022.\nHistory.\nDaniel Ash, his friend David J. Haskins and Haskins' younger brother Kevin had played together in various bands since childhood such as Jam and Jackplug &amp; the Sockets, playing cover songs by the Rolling Stones and the Beatles. Ash initially tried unsuccessfully to convince his school friend Peter Murphy to join him in a band. According to Ash: \"Pete didn't think about it at all, it wasn't on his mind as such.\" Ash's band the Craze performed several times around Northampton in 1978. When the Craze dissolved, Ash once again tried to convince Murphy to join him, simply because Ash thought that Murphy had the right look for a band. Murphy, who was working in a printing factory, agreed to try it, although he had never written any lyrics or music. During their first rehearsal, he co-wrote the song \"In the Flat Field\".\nAsh's old bandmate Kevin Haskins joined as the drummer. Ash intentionally avoided inviting David J, the driving force in their previous bands, because he wanted a band that he could control. Instead, Chris Barber was recruited to play bass, and together the four musicians formed the band S.R. However, within a few weeks, Ash relented and replaced Barber with David J, who suggested the new name of Bauhaus 1919. David J had already agreed to tour American airbases with another band but decided that joining his friends' group was \"the right thing to do\". With their line-up complete, the band played their first gig at the Cromwell pub (since demolished) in Wellingborough on New Year's Eve 1978.\nThe band had chosen the name \"Bauhaus 1919\", a reference to the German Bauhaus art movement of the 1920s, because of its \"stylistic implications and associations\", according to David J. The band also chose the same typeface used on the Bauhaus college building in Dessau, Germany, as well as the Bauhaus emblem, designed by Oskar Schlemmer. Bauhaus associate Graham Bentley said that the group was unlike any Northampton band of the time, most of whom played predominantly cover songs. Bentley videotaped a performance by the group, which was sent to several record labels, in the hope of obtaining a contract. This approach was hindered partly because many record companies did not have home-video equipment, so the group opted to record a demo.\n\"Bela Lugosi's Dead\" and 4AD.\n\"Bela Lugosi's Dead\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"We'd been talking about the erotic quality of vampire movies, even if they were the Hammer horror type. There was this conversation about the sexuality and eroticism of Dracula. Danny talked about his fascination with this and the occult connotations. So, we carried on that conversation and made it into a song.\"\n \u2014Peter Murphy, on the origins of \"Bela Lugosi's Dead\" \nAfter only six weeks as a band, Bauhaus entered the studio for the first time, meeting at Beck Studios in Wellingborough to record a demo. In rehearsal, the band experimented with echo and delay effects on the drums. The first of five tracks recorded during the session, \"Bela Lugosi's Dead\", exceeded nine minutes in length but was released as the group's debut single on Small Wonder Records, in August 1979 according to Alexis Petridis. The BBC archives mentioned that radio DJ John Peel first broadcast \"Bela Lugosi's Dead\" in his show in September 1979. The single was reviewed in \"Sounds\" on 22 September 1979 as a record with \"a moody intensity\". The band was listed simply as Bauhaus, with the \"1919\" abandoned.\n\"Bela Lugosi's Dead\" was strongly influenced by the band's interest in reggae and dub, styles in which the bass and the drums play prominent roles. The recording was completed on the first take. It was also the first time that Murphy had sung into a studio microphone, although he was sick with a cold when he recorded the song. Kevin Haskins' drumbeat was based on a bossa nova style. Daniel Ash explained the inception of the song: \"I was talking to David (J, bass) on the blower one night and told him I had this riff, using these trick chords that had a very haunting quality to it. He went: 'It's so weird you should say that because I've got these lyrics about Bela Lugosi, the actor who played a vampire.'\" David J further elaborated: \"There was a season of old horror films on radio, and I was telling Daniel about how much I loved them. The one that had been on the night before was \n\"Dracula\" [1931]. I was saying how Bela Lugosi was the quintessential Dracula, the elegant depiction of the character.\" Ash elaborated about the chords: \"My riff has these mutant chords \u2013 they're not even minor chords \u2013 but it's rooted in an old Gary Glitter song, slowed right down. I didn't realize that when I was doing it.\" Ash also explained how he was able to achieve the echo effects for the song: \"...David had this old HH echo unit, which would crap out on you all the time. We hooked up the guitar and snare drum to this echo unit and I was just sliding the HH amp thing to trigger all these echoes as the song went through.\" David J explained the song's recording process: \"We didn't really talk about what we were doing. Daniel started scratching away on the guitar, Kevin started his rhythm and there was this atmosphere building. I came in with those descending chords and Peter was just prowling up and down, slowly, like a big cat.\"\nMurphy explained: \"There's an erotic, alluring element to the vampire. We didn't want to write an ode to Bela Lugosi, ostensibly. The kitsch element was his name because he was the biggest icon, yet he was the most unlikely vampire-looking person. So there was that Brit angle to it, but it wasn't at all negative. It was perfect. The idea of Bela Lugosi being dead or undead is classic.\" The band was initially nervous about the song's excessive length, as it had caused several record labels to decline to issue the single. Haskins explained: \"Danny took an acetate around all the big companies\u2013Virgin, EMI and the rest\u2013and they all said similar things: 'This is the sort of thing I listen to at home, but it's not commercial.' Or: 'It's way too long. Can you edit it down to three minutes?' Even Beggars Banquet turned us down, which is ironic because we ended up on that label.\" However, Peter Stennet of Small Wonder Records agreed to release the single, favorably comparing it to the Velvet Underground's single \"Sister Ray\".\nThe single received a positive review in \"Sounds\" and stayed on the British independent charts for two years. It received crucial airplay on BBC Radio 1 and DJ John Peel's evening show. The band recorded a session for Peel's show, which was broadcast on 3 January 1980. After the band introduced themselves on his show, Peel said, \"We've got Bauhaus in the studio, they're from Northampton and they have a new single out called 'Bela Lugosi's Dead'. It's nine and a half minutes long and this will probably be the first and last time I'll play this.\" After the initial broadcast, according to Murphy, \"The BBC switchboard was jammed with listeners wanting him to play it again.\" Of the additional tracks, \"Classic Rock\" wrote that, \"The rest of the material finds a band fumbling for direction, even touching on ska.\"\n\"In the Flat Field\".\nDespite the success of their signature song, the band left Small Wonder Records because of its lack of support for touring stemming from budget issues. Stennet stated: \"The trouble is we just can't afford to send the bands on tour or anything like that, and a group needs that sort of support.\" Signing with the 4AD label, Bauhaus released two more singles, \"Dark Entries\" in January 1980 and \"Terror Couple Kill Colonel\" in June 1980, before issuing their first album \"In the Flat Field\" in October 1980. The album's cover image, selected by David J, is a photograph titled \"Homage to Purvis de Chavannes\" by Duane Michals, an image of a naked man blowing a horn instrument. \"NME\" reviewer Andy Gill described it as \"Gothick-Romantick pseudo-decadence\" and dismissed the band as \"a hip Black Sabbath\". Despite negative reviews, \"In the Flat Field\" topped the indie charts and spent one week at No. 72 on the UK Albums Chart. Although the band was satisfied with the album, they later admitted that it had failed to capture everything that they had wanted and that its intensity level was too high, but it was \"the purest statement of what [we] were like then\". \nIn August 1980, the band traveled to North America to play four dates in cities such as Toronto, Chicago and New York. One of Bauhaus' first US shows was in a venue called Space Place in Chicago, Illinois in September 1980, booked by Jim Nash and Dannie Flesher, the owners of the independent record label Wax Trax! Records. The band returned to England in October 1980 for a 20-date tour in England and in Europe to promote their first album. In December 1980, Bauhaus released a cover version of \"Telegram Sam\", originally a hit by glam-rock pioneers T. Rex, as a single.\nBeggars Banquet and breakup.\n\"Mask\".\nBauhaus' growing success outstripped 4AD's resources, so the band moved to 4AD's parent label, Beggars Banquet Records. Bauhaus released \"Kick in the Eye\" in March 1981 as its debut release on the label. The single reached No. 59 on the charts. The following single, \"The Passion of Lovers\", peaked at No. 56 in July 1981. Murphy said, \"One of our loves is to make each single totally different from the last, not to be tied down by a style or sound.\" David J explained the techniques, effects and his reaction regarding the content of the title track to the album: \"I can still recall with crystal clarity overdubbing the echoed bass part and using a metal bottleneck to achieve the cascade effect that comes in at the point where Daniel's acoustic twelve-string part starts. Hearing these sounds in ultra-sharp coke-intensified focus through headphones produced an ecstatic heart-bursting emotion on the edge of orgasmic release.\"\nBauhaus released their second album, \"Mask\", in October 1981. The band employed more keyboards, and a variety of other instruments, to add to the diversity of the record. The front and back cover of the album was an impressionistic drawing created by Ash. \nIn an unconventional move, the group shot a video for the album's title track as a promotional tool for the band, rather than any specific song from the record, filmed in a hazardous and abandoned Victorian shoe factory in Northampton. The video was filmed early in the morning across from a police station, and made with a minuscule budget; the gear used in the video were powered off car batteries and roll film. The video's imagery and lighting borrowed heavily from German Expressionism. David J commented on the content of the music video: \"We improvised around the loose idea of a ritualistic resurrection, with Peter lain out like a corpse on a wooden slab. Each of us would administer some kind of shamanistic voodoo to assist in the raising of the dead. The place was freezing cold, dank, and dripping with filthy water. The lights kept going out, and we would be plunged into complete darkness until they were restored.\" When the scenes of the factory were finished, the group went to another location for filming. David J explained: \"Once we had filmed the scenes in the factory, we set off for a second location: the woods on the grounds of the Spencer family's country estate \u2013 another illegal situation, and a potential threat to the monarchy. We did have fun that night! The finished film looked great: a fog-cloaked atmospheric drama that was redolent of a German Expressionist silent horror flick.\" David J also mentioned that the music video was more of an art piece than a traditional music video and commented that Chris Collins \"did a brilliant job of capturing the visual essence of the band.\" Ultimately, the finished video made only one appearance on British TV.\nAround the same time, \"In keeping with our surrealist leaning...\", the band also employed the \"exquisite corpse\" technique to an experimental film they made called \"Consequences\", where each member was given an amount of time to film whatever they wished. It was shown on tour in place of a support band. The band toured broadly to promote the album by playing a 16-date tour of England and 13 dates in Europe.\n\"Spirit\" and \"The Sky's Gone Out\".\nIn July 1982, Bauhaus released the single \"Spirit\", produced by Hugh Jones. This was unusual for the band because they typically produced their own music. Conflicts and compromises subsequently occurred in the studio. David J explained: \"It took ages and ages. Usually we recorded very quickly\u2014we'd do an album in three weeks from start to finish\u2014but that took about nine days, which for us was absurd. There was so much agonising over it more from the producer than us.\" The song used an acoustic guitar with a bossa nova drumbeat. According to Shirley, the song was about \"a 'fifth member' of the band\u2014a spirit they felt occupied the stage, lifting them to a higher plane when they were playing well.\" The music video was originally intended to show a physical representation of the spirit, including \"a single dancer with a white face mask and body paint who would come onto the stage whilst the band performed the song and literally 'lift' Peter and give him wings.\" However, the producers changed the spirit to a spectral female figure \"who would walk through the theatre along with a motley crew of clowns and jugglers.\" When the band returned from their tour of the United States, they disliked the music video and wanted to redo it. The record label refused, unwilling to provide more money for it, but according to David J, \"We raised the money ourselves out of our own bank balances and pooled our money and so we went in and re-edited it, trying to get it into some kind of shape. We did it. Delivered the master to Beggars Banquet. Next week\u2014this was at the time of the video jukebox craze\u2014we went into a pub and we see the original horrible version on the video. So we immediately rang Beggars Banquet and said; 'What's going on?' and they'd send out the wrong one and it had gone off to TV and everything.\" The single was intended to break into the Top 30 but only reached No. 42. The band was displeased with the single and rerecorded it in 1982 for their third album, \"The Sky's Gone Out\". Nico made a guest appearance when the band played a gig in Salford University for a cover performance of the Velvet Underground song, \"I'm Waiting for the Man\".\nThe band wanted to produce their third LP, \"The Sky's Gone Out\", themselves, but arguments ensued in the studio among the band members over creative direction. The band members realized that they needed an objective perspective on their music, and producer Derek Tompkins was hired. Tompkins commented: \"I was, however, quite willing to act as an engineer provided the resident engineer was responsible for the engineering and I was only responsible for interpreting what they wanted to him and helping a bit creatively myself.\"\nThe band were booked into Rockfield Studios in Wales for one month to record the album but had little original material written beforehand. Murphy explained: \"The third LP was one of those unwritten albums that was done on the spot. An album of experimentation which was enjoyable to us because we didn't have any songs and we didn't feel like writing stuff and we said, \"OK that's fine. If we don't have any songs we'll make the songwriting environment the studio.\" Although the sessions were successful, conflicts arose between the band and engineer, with Tompkins as the mediator. Although Tompkins did not understand the album's music or lyrics, he \"always used to ask them what the song was about so I knew what mood I was aiming for\". Some of the lyrics reflected the band's personal feelings and experiences, such as \"All We Ever Wanted Was Everything\". According to David J, the song \"evokes nostalgic memories of a time of innocence and naive yearning.\" David J praised Murphy's vocals on the song as \"emoting the bittersweet sentiment so perfectly, every word ringing true.\"\nThat same year, Bauhaus scored their greatest hit with a cover of David Bowie's \"Ziggy Stardust\", which was recorded during a BBC session. The song was chosen by the band in response to critics who had accused them of copying Bowie's sound. Ash explained: \"[W]e thought we'd do the opposite of what they'd expect and promptly release 'Ziggy'.\" The song reached No. 15 on the British charts and earned the band an appearance on the television show \"Top of the Pops\". \"The Sky's Gone Out\" also became the band's greatest album success, peaking at No. 3. That same year, Bauhaus appeared in the horror film \"The Hunger\", performing \"Bela Lugosi's Dead\" during the opening credits. The final cut of the scene focused on Murphy; this, coupled with his modelling work in a popular ad campaign for Maxell, caused resentment among his bandmates.\n\"Burning from the Inside\".\nPrior to the recording of their fourth album, \"Burning from the Inside\" (1983), Murphy was stricken with pneumonia, which prevented him from contributing much to the album. Ash and David assumed control of the album and performed lead vocals on several tracks. The album's song \"Who Killed Mister Moonlight\" was described by David J as a \"surrealistic ballad inspired in part by the murder of John Lennon\". Also, the mysterious character of Mister Moonlight had a symbolic meaning, which was seen by the band \"as being representative of the dreamy, poetic aspect of Bauhaus\". The album's lead single \"She's in Parties\" reached No. 26 on the charts and earned Bauhaus their third and final \"Top of the Pops\" appearance. Bauhaus then embarked on an international promotional tour for the album, with dates in Europe and the Far East. On the night before they were supposed to perform two shows at Hammersmith Palais in London, the group decided to disband.\nThe band played their farewell show on 5 July 1983 at the Hammersmith Palais. Fans had been warned by the band's crew to not miss the show, without telling them it was the last. After a long encore, consisting of some of their early songs, David J left the stage with the words \"rest in peace\". \"Burning from the Inside\" was released one week later. The album received largely positive reviews and reached No. 13 on the charts. Bauhaus released the single \"Sanity Assassin\" in limited quantities as a farewell gift to their fan-club members.\nPost-Bauhaus careers and solo projects.\nDuring the band's initial lifecycle, solo projects would be initiated at times. In 1981, while still a member of Bauhaus, David J started a solo project with Rene Halkett, an original student of the Bauhaus art school. This correspondence came about due to Halkett's younger neighbor telling him of hearing about a group called Bauhaus on the John Peel Show on BBC radio. This intrigued Halkett and he soon wrote to Peel about getting in touch with the band. They eventually met, discussed poetry and decided to send David a cassette tape that contained Halkett reciting two of his poems, in hopes of enticing David to collaborate with him. After listening intensely to the tape, David decided to go to a recording studio where he created backing music for the tape. \nThis collaboration resulted in a single called \"Armour/Nothing\" which was released by 4AD. Halkett commented on his contribution to the single: \"I felt that the two poems required something more than print because they depend on things which can only be expressed in musical signs... It (the single) falls between music and poetry and is not entirely either. With \"Nothing\", David has written a perfect arrangement for what is a quite concentrated philosophical idea and it becomes so much more than the words...\"\nAfter Bauhaus disbanded, the members of the band began solo work. Murphy worked briefly with bassist Mick Karn of Japan in the band Dalis Car before embarking on a solo career with albums such as \"Should the World Fail to Fall Apart\" (1986), \"Love Hysteria\" (1988) and \"Deep\" (1989). Ash had already started Tones on Tail with Bauhaus roadie Glen Campling as a side project in 1982. After Bauhaus disbanded, Kevin Haskins joined the group and the trio released an album and several EPs but disbanded after a 1984 American tour. During this time, David J released two solo albums and collaborated with other musicians, recording two albums with the Jazz Butcher, and also with comics writer/spoken-word artist Alan Moore in the short-lived band the Sinister Ducks.\nThe former members of Bauhaus planned to reform and arranged a rehearsal, but Murphy failed to appear on the scheduled day. However, the other three band members rehearsed and were inspired by the chemistry that they developed as a trio, leading to the formation of Love and Rockets in 1985. Love and Rockets released several highly acclaimed albums and penetrated the American charts with \"So Alive\" in 1989. The band dissolved in 1999, briefly reunited for a festival tour in 2009 and then reunited in 2023. Both Ash and David J released solo albums during the Love and Rockets years, and Murphy contributed backing vocals to David J's 1992 single \"Candy on the Cross\".\nSubsequent developments: reunions and a final album.\nBauhaus reunited for the Resurrection Tour in 1998. Their stage show opened with \"Double Dare\" and Murphy singing to the audience on a television screen. The tour featured a new song, \"The Dog's a Vapour\", which was also included in the \"Heavy Metal 2000\" film soundtrack. A live album was recorded during the tour, \"Gotham\", which was released the following year. It included a studio recording of Bauhaus' cover of the Dead Can Dance song \"Severance\".\nBauhaus reunited again in 2005, playing the Coachella Festival in Indio, California. Their set opened with Murphy being lowered upside-down to the stage while singing \"Bela Lugosi's Dead\". Following Murphy's 2005 tour, Bauhaus embarked on a full tour beginning in North America in Autumn 2005 and ending in Europe in February 2006. During the tour, Bauhaus covered Joy Division's \"Transmission\". The band also mentioned that they hoped to record new music. In May, they performed as the opening act during Nine Inch Nails' American tour.\nIn 2008, Bauhaus released their first new studio album since 1983, \"Go Away White\", on the Cooking Vinyl label. However, it marked the band's end, and the album had no promotional tour. Haskins later said: \"We were getting along really well, but there was an incident that occurred ... Some of us just felt that we didn't want to carry on as a working unit.\" In early 2008, Murphy claimed that he \"was most satisfied with the bonding on an emotional level. It was good to be working together and to put the past behind us and it was very positive. The result was coming out really fast, so it was exciting and it was very enjoyable\", but in the end, \"that rocky character worked and I think it was a bit right to finish it, really\". David J commented on the breakup: \"You have a test tube, and you pour in one chemical, and you pour in another chemical, and something happens. It starts to bubble. Pour in another chemical, and it starts to bubble a bit more. You pour in a fourth chemical, and it bubbles really violently, and then explodes. That's my answer\".\nIn 2017, Ash and Haskins toured as Poptone with Haskins' daughter Diva Dompe on bass. The group performed songs by Bauhaus, Tones on Tail and Love and Rockets, along with cover songs. A live album recorded at various stops on the tour was released through PledgeMusic.\nIn 2018, Murphy and David J announced a tour of New Zealand, Australia and Europe to celebrate the 40th anniversary of Bauhaus, performing \"In the Flat Field\" in its entirety.\nIn September 2019, after a 13-year hiatus, Bauhaus announced a show at the 4,000-seat Hollywood Palladium with all original members on 3 November. A second show was added for the following night after all tickets for the first show sold quickly. A third date at the same venue was confirmed for 1 December.\nIn March 2022, Bauhaus released their first new song in 14 years with \"Drink the New Wine\", which was recorded separately by all four members during the COVID-19 lockdown. The recording process used the exquisite corpse method whereby each artist adds to the piece without hearing what the others have done.\nBauhaus toured Europe and the West Coast of the United States in 2022. The band was due to tour the East Coast of the United States, but the tour was cancelled on 31 August as Murphy announced that he was entering rehab. On 19 April 2023, Ash confirmed that the Bauhaus reunion had ended, and the remaining members reformed Love and Rockets.\nMusical style and influences.\nInfluences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"Our influences were many. The obvious ones were glam rock and punk rock, but when we were recording, when we finished each day, we'd usually record in a residential studio so we would all stay together at night time. So when we'd wind down, we'd always play either dub reggae or late Beatles, like Sgt. Pepper. When I mention that to people they're kind of surprised. So we weren't listening to dark music, there were many influences.\"\n Kevin Haskins, regarding the band's influences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"We were very influenced by reggae, especially dub. I mean, basically Bela was our interpretation of dub.\"\n David J, regarding reggae's influence on the band.\nAccording to David J, the bands Bauhaus related to in the post-punk scene were Joy Division, Pere Ubu, Devo, Gang of Four, Cabaret Voltaire, and the Pop Group. Among bands and singers who influenced Bauhaus, they cited Siouxsie and the Banshees, David Bowie, T-Rex, Roxy Music, Syd Barrett's Pink Floyd, New York Dolls, Velvet Underground, Iggy Pop and the Stooges, the Doors, Alice Cooper, MC5, Ramones, the Sex Pistols, the Clash, the Residents, Captain Beefheart, Suicide, Kraftwerk, Neu!, Can, Faust, the Beatles, the Rolling Stones, the Who, Bob Dylan, Tom Waits, Serge Gainsbourg, Lee Scratch Perry, King Tubby, Mikey Dread, Kurt Weill, Scott Walker, and Jacques Brel. Specific recordings that were influential on the band include the compilation album , Lou Reed's albums \"Berlin\" and \"Transformer\", the \"Bits and Pieces\" single by the Dave Clark Five and the \"Double Barrel\" single by Dave and Ansell Collins.\nIn terms of early influences from childhood, David J said that he was interested in jazz and its musicians such as Miles Davis, Charlie Parker and Thelonious Monk. He has also listed Television's \"Marquee Moon\" as one of his all-time favorite albums. Peter Murphy cited Doris Day, Simon and Garfunkel, the Beatles, the Everly Brothers and his experiences from Mass in Catholic school as highly influential to his singing. He mentioned that the first 7-inch single he ever bought was \"A Hard Day's Night\" by the Beatles and also listed Brian Eno's \"Music for Airports\" as one of his favorite albums. Daniel Ash was interested in music at a young age, first being impressed by the stomping of the Dave Clark Five's \"Bits and Pieces\" song and later going through his older brother's music collection of records from the Beatles, the Rolling Stones, Faces and the Kinks. The first record he bought was Dave and Ansell Collins' \"Double Barrel\". When Ash was asked about how he developed his playing style and guitar influences, he replied: \"My style of playing comes from a mixture of extreme laziness to learn proper scales/chords and a burning desire to sound original and new. Although I am a huge fan of Hendrix and Mick Ronson, Robert Fripp on Bowie tracks is also fab, and what about Earl Slick!\" Ash also mentioned his appreciation of bands such as the Only Ones, the Damned, Television, Richard Hell and the Voidoids and said that the Stooges' \"Raw Power\" as one of his all-time favorite records. Kevin Haskins at 14 years old went to see Led Zeppelin and the drummer's (John Bonham) drum solo impressed him and called it \"amazing\". However at the same time, he was depressed as well due to feeling inadequate about his own musical abilities and never reaching the skill of Bonham. He even had thoughts of giving up music altogether. However, the nascent punk scene and seeing bands such as the Sex Pistols and the Clash gave him the confidence he needed to pursue in music.\nAround 1970, David J's was intrigued by the ska music, roots reggae and dub music coming out of Jamaica. He mentioned that reggae \"...was the first music that I was seriously into.\" It was from this exposure from these musical styles that made David J choose a bass guitar instead of a lead guitar. David explained: \"I loved [dub]. It was so exciting because it was my first exposure to this other world really. Something subterranean, dark, sexually charged, violent and compelling. This dark music was played in these dark places and was just captivating. I realised very quickly that what was powerful about this sound was the bass. I recalled that when we got guitars, no-one wanted to be the bass player \u2013 we had various bands just a bunch of friends who wanted to play pop music and they all wanted to play lead guitar \u2013 so I went; 'Well, I'll play the bass'. I retained my six string guitar and just played the bottom four strings and just used to play along with the records and work out the bass lines. I just got into it and found it really satisfying and saved up and bought a bass guitar.\"\nGiven their mixture of reggae and punk rock, Murphy said that musically, they were \"more aligned to the Clash than anything else that was going around.\" When asked about the influence of reggae on Bauhaus' music, Murphy stated that it was \"massive. We were listening to toasting music all the time, and David brought in a lot of bass lines that were very lead riffs ... those bass lines really formed the basis of the music\" In particular, dub reggae was highly influential to the band, so far that David J mentioned that their signature song, \"Bela Lugosi's Dead\", was intended as dub.\nThe band members Daniel, David and Kevin once attended a Rastafarian event that became quite influential to their music. As David explained: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At the time, Northampton had a large Rastafarian population, centred around the Matta Fancanta Youth Movement, which had its base at the old Salvation Army Citadel on the corner of Sheep Street, just across from Derngate Bus Station. It was run by Trevor Hall, whose uncle had started the famed Count Shelly sound system, which Trevor inherited. They would hold monthly events featuring two outfits competing against each other, spinning dub plates\u2014instrumental tracks direct from Jamaica\u2014and blasting them over the huge speakers while their respective 'toasters' took turns freestyling over the top. They would really go to town, painting up the entire place in the red, green, and gold of the Ethiopian flag and wearing suits and outsized hats to match, while the women would dye their hair. There were quotations from Haile Selassie all around the walls, and the air was thick with ganja smoke and the gamey aroma of goat's head soup. It was a true 'temporary autonomous zone', to quote the anarchist writer and poet Hakim Bey, and the police would wisely keep their distance. Daniel, Kevin, and I would be the only white faces in the throng, but there was never any trouble\u2014quite the opposite\u2014and the amazing music that we heard in that place became a big influence on us, 'Bela Lugosi's Dead' being a good example.\nThe band's other musical influences included various forms of rock (garage, glam, art, electronic, prog, psychedelic, heavy metal, folk, experimental, krautrock), as well as avant-garde music, ambient music, traditional pop, disco and funk. Outside of music, Bauhaus's influences were often artistic and literary and included William S. Burroughs, Brion Gysin, Allen Ginsberg, Jack Kerouac, Bertolt Brecht, Arthur Rimbaud, Charles Baudelaire, Comte de Lautr\u00e9amont, Jean Cocteau, Andr\u00e9 Breton, Surrealism, German Expressionism, Greek Mythology, Ingmar Bergman, David Lynch, Oscar Wilde, Franz Kafka and Antonin Artaud. In regards to the influence of the original Bauhaus movement on the band, Murphy stated that \"Bauhaus had no influence on Bauhaus (the band) except for being the sound, shape, energetic, and sensory birth name of our group.\"\nSound.\nBauhaus combined these influences to create a gloomy, earnest and introspective version of post-punk, which appealed to many music fans who felt disillusioned in the wake of punk's collapse. Its crucial elements included Murphy's deep and sonorous voice, Ash's jagged guitar playing and David J's dub-influenced bass. Their sound and gloomy style would eventually come to be known as gothic rock or simply \"goth\".\nAccording to David J, the band were \"...always keen not to be a traditional 'rock' band, and we would go to great pains to avoid that well-trodden road.\" They experimented with various techniques and methods for song composition such as the Exquisite corpse on tracks such as \"1. David Jay 2. Peter Murphy 3. Kevin Haskins 4. Daniel Ash\" along with the use of Brian Eno's Oblique Strategies cards. To achieve some of the sound effects in their songs, various instruments were implemented such as bottlenecks, echo units and a Syndrum.\nIn their second album \"Mask\", expanded their sound with the addition of synthesizers, electronics and a saxophone to \"add color and dynamics to each song.\" The album was less structured and spontaneous compared to their first album. The song \"Of Lillies and Remains\" is an example of this method. According to Murphy: \"\"Of Lillies and Remains\" is a song that was written as it happened. None of it was rehearsed, worked out or played beforehand. We simply told the engineer to turn on the tape. That was incredibly exciting. That said a lot for our confidence and courage and total absurdity; that it was possible to demonstrate that those ideas form an artistic point of view, come from another outside force \u2013 i.e. the collective creative thing.\" In an interview with John Robb, Ash mentioned that he bought an EBow in 1981.\nLyrics.\nIn their first album and singles, Bauhaus' songs dealt with taboo subjects such as martyrdom, paranoia, madness, obsession and prostitution. For example, Shirley described the song \"Stigmata Martyr\" as about \"a person whose religious obsession with Christ takes the form of a physical manifestation of the crucifixion; i.e. nail marks on the hands: 'In a crucifixion, ecstacy, Lying cross checked in agony, Stigmata bleed continuously, Holes in head, hands, feet, and weep for me.' When delivering these lyrics Peter became the stigmata.\" Murphy also commented on the misconceptions of the lyrics of the song: \"I don't think the other members of the band really got what I was writing about, and the collective intention suddenly became very anti-religious. And that song is not an anti-religious song at all. The message is, really, the dangers of obsession, of almost psychosomatic induction of that masochism. That alone can be an illusion. And it's way off the mark as to the actual source of the message of any religious God. God doesn't want you to be in pain and die. It wasn't anti-religious. It wasn't demonic. It was alluding to the manifestation. Is it truly a mark of the Holy Ghost or is it simply an obsession condition? That's all there is to it.\" Another song, \"Dark Entries\", tells the story of title character Dorian Gray from Oscar Wilde's novel \"The Picture of Dorian Gray\", which is Murphy's favorite novel. Murphy explains: \"It was the first book with real substance that I chose for myself. It's a story of great narcissism and esoteric interior, and brilliantly written. It's a window into this personality, this Oscar Wilde chap I'd heard about. The language is so opulent. It's a rock star's story, really.\" The song \"A God in an Alcove\" was about \"the story of a fallen idol.\" The track \"In the Flat Field\" was inspired by \"the quotidian mundaneness of life in Northampton, and the desire to escape that 'flat' existence.\"\nOther songs from later albums and singles, explored subjects such as nostalgia, desire, reflection, self-realization and hope. For example, the song \"All We Ever Wanted Was Everything\" was about the \"...nostalgic memories of a time of innocence and naive yearning.\" Also, some of the song titles came from literary sources. For example, the song title \"Kick in the Eye\" was based on a line from the novel \"Satori in Paris\" by Jack Kerouac.\nThe construction of their lyrics were inspired by the cut-up technique method. An example of their approach to lyric structure is the amalgamation of individual lyrics from each member in the song \"Of Lillies and Remains\", as Murphy explained: \"I'd written a dream out on a piece of paper and Dave picked up this piece of paper at random and found a blank side and wrote out a lyric. He turned it over and asked what it was. I said, \"It's a dream.\" And so he said: \"Let's do this.\" So David went in to do his half \u2013 no rehearsal \u2013 and then I took it from where he left off. That was a typical way of working.\"\nLive performances.\nIn terms of live performances, Bauhaus' stage theatrics, specifically their lighting, was inspired by a Judas Priest concert that Murphy attended with Bauhaus' manager. They predominantly used black and white lighting for their live shows. When they were asked why in early interviews, David J responded, \"...coloured lights are for Christmas trees.\" Their lighting was so minimal that sometimes the band would play in almost complete darkness where they were glimpsed rather than seen in their shows. Their manager Graham Bentley helped with the lighting, \"I started doing lights for Bauhaus \u2013 which obviously came about because I was the person who was there \u2013 I got into it very much from the start. I love the shadows. I used to call it a dark show rather than a light show. The essential emphasis was less light.\" Bentley used industrial lights for the lighting and put the lights on the floor rather than the ceiling. Also, a strobe light would be used for Murphy to hold on to his body and move around with it on stage.\nLegacy and influence.\nBauhaus are frequently considered to be the inventors of goth; however, the band rejected this label, preferring to describe their style as \"dark glam\". Peter Murphy said he felt their contemporaries had a larger hand in solidifying what became goth. Likewise, Kevin Haskins felt that bands such as Siouxsie and the Banshees were more influential to goth subculture than themselves and mentioned that Bauhaus were \"...more three dimensional, more art rock\". Ash nevertheless admitted: \"if you wear black and your first single is \"Bela Lugosi's Dead\", you've pretty much got a stamp on you. That's always been one of our strongest songs, so it's sort of undeniable\".\nVarious bands and artists with goth associations pointed to Bauhaus as an inspiration, including Type O Negative, Alien Sex Fiend, Zola Jesus, Deine Lakaien, AFI, Buck-Tick, Lycia, Jaz Coleman (of Killing Joke), the Cult, Glenn Danzig (of Misfits), Greg Mackintosh (of Paradise Lost), She Wants Revenge, the Dresden Dolls, Soul Merchants, She Past Away and Wolfsheim. The Mission's Wayne Hussey even sang with Murphy on stage in 2013. Bauhaus were also influential upon many industrial rock groups and artists, like Ministry, Marilyn Manson, Nine Inch Nails, Nitzer Ebb, and Skinny Puppy.\nIn addition, Bauhaus were hailed by various alternative/indie rock performers and groups, including the Flaming Lips, Steve Albini (of Big Black), Jehnny Beth of Savages, Stephen Malkmus (of Pavement), Alan Sparhawk (of Low), Bradford Cox (of Deerhunter), Mark Lanegan (of Screaming Trees), Jesse Hughes (of the Eagles of Death Metal), Courtney Taylor-Taylor (of the Dandy Warhols), Jeff Ament (of Pearl Jam), Alex Henry Foster (of Your Favorite Enemies), Nicholas Thorburn (of Islands), Matt Noveskey (of Blue October), Jane's Addiction, Soundgarden, the Smashing Pumpkins, A Neon Rome, ...And You Will Know Us by the Trail of Dead, Hole, whose lead singer Courtney Love admitted that a lot of her songs are \"complete Bauhaus rip-offs\", Interpol, My Chemical Romance, the Twilight Sad, Shearwater, and Elliott Smith.\nThe group have been namechecked by several other prominent musical acts from other genres, including Jello Biafra (of the Dead Kennedys), Jonathan Davis (of Korn), the extreme metal band Celtic Frost, the lo-fi musician Ariel Pink, Maynard James Keenan (from Tool), electronic act Carl Craig, American record producer DJ Premier (of Gang Starr), the American comedian/musician Reggie Watts, the Iranian musician Azam Ali, the Japanese Visual kei musician Hide (of X Japan), the Japanese post-rock Mono, the Japanese heavy metal band Dir En Grey, whose lead singer Kyo listed \"Press the Eject and Give Me the Tape\" as his top record he would take to a desert island, the electronica act Moby, the trip hop band Massive Attack, the crust punk band Amebix, the shoegaze band Drop Nineteens, the psychedelic rock band White Hills, the noise rock band Today Is the Day, the nu metal band Coal Chamber, the extreme metal band Behemoth, the grindcore band Napalm Death, Randy Blythe (of Lamb of God), Fred Durst (of Limp Bizkit), Serj Tankian (of System of a Down), Sean Yseult (of White Zombie), Bilinda Butcher (of My Bloody Valentine), Stuart Braithwaite (of Mogwai) Blink-182 namedropped Bauhaus on their song \"She's Out of Her Mind\" on their \"California\" album. Duff McKagan of Guns N' Roses listed the Bauhaus compilation \"Bauhaus 1979\u20131983\" in his 100 favorite albums list.\nAlternative Press included Bauhaus in its 1996 list of \"100 underground inspirations of the past 20 years\".\nThe Bauhaus song \"All We Ever Wanted Was Everything\" (from \"The Sky's Gone Out\") was covered by several artists and bands, including John Frusciante (guitarist of the Red Hot Chili Peppers), MGMT and Xiu Xiu (who recorded it in 2006 for their \"Tu Mi Piaci\" EP). Billy Corgan of the Smashing Pumpkins sang T. Rex's \"Telegram Sam\" and \"All We Ever Wanted Was Everything\" live on stage with Bauhaus in 1998. \"Double Dare\" was covered by the alternative rock band the God Machine. \"Hollow Hills\" was covered by System of a Down. \"Silent Hedges\" (along with \"Double Dare\") was covered by the power metal band Nevermore.\n\"Bela Lugosi's Dead\", was covered by numerous acts, including Until December (1986), the Electric Hellfire Club (1996), Opera IX (on 2000 album \"\"), Sepultura (on 2001 album \"Nation\"), Nouvelle Vague (on 2006 album \"Bande \u00e0 part\"), Chris Cornell (2007), Nine Inch Nails (2009), Trent Reznor with Murphy and TV on the Radio (2013), Massive Attack (2013), David J with Jill Tracy (2013), Chvrches (for the 2014 \"Vampire Academy\" soundtrack), Dead Cross (on their 2017 debut album), the Damned (2019).\nCultural references.\nBauhaus's fanbase extends beyond music; the American novelist Chuck Palahniuk was influenced by the Bauhaus song \"Bela Lugosi's Dead\" when writing his 2005 novel \"Haunted\". In James O'Barr's 1989 comic book \"The Crow\", the facial features of Eric Draven were based on those of Peter Murphy. In Neil Gaiman's series \"The Sandman\", Dream's face and appearance were also based on Murphy. Additionally, comic book writer Alan Moore wrote the sleeve notes of \"Mask\" and contributed an anonymous Bauhaus review called \"Phantoms of the Teenage Opera\" to the UK music paper \"Sounds\".\nThe 1984 music video of the song \"You're the Inspiration\" from the American band Chicago featured lead singer Peter Cetera wearing a Bauhaus T-shirt.\nIn an interview at the CBGB, Axl Rose from Guns N' Roses is seen wearing a Bauhaus T-shirt. In the \"Beavis and Butt-head\" season 3 episode \"Meet God, Part II\" (1993), they view and comment on a music video for Bauhaus' Bowie cover, \"Ziggy Stardust\". Susie Lewis, the co-creator of the American animated series \"Daria\", is a fan of the band and used their song \"1. David Jay 2. Peter Murphy 3. Kevin Haskins 4. Daniel Ash\" in the closing credits of episode 213, \"Write Where it Hurts\". In the 2003 \"South Park\" episode \"Raisins\", Henrietta Biggle (one of the \"goth kids\") had a bedroom poster of \"Blauhaus\", a parody version of the band.\nIn the 2015\u20132016 \"American Horror Story\" season \"\", \"Bela Lugosi's Dead\" is used in the opening episode, in line with the underlying horror/vampire theme of the series. In the 2017 \"The Americans\" episode \"Darkroom\", the Bauhaus song \"Slice of Life\" is played in the background of the red room scene. It was ranked number 8 in Vulture's list of \"The 10 Best Musical Moments in The Americans\". \"Saturday Night Live\"'s recurring \"Goth Talk\" skit used \"Bela Lugosi's Dead\" as its theme song.\nThe 2016 single \"She's Out of Her Mind\" by American pop punk band Blink-182 describes a girl with \"a black shirt, black skirt and Bauhaus stuck in her mind\".\nBauhaus' performance at Coachella in 2005 has been ranked number 5 among \"LA Weekly\" as one of \"The 20 Best Coachella Sets of All Time\".\nBauhaus' appearance in the Tony Scott film \"The Hunger\" has been ranked number 20 by \"Rolling Stone\" as \"The 30 Greatest Rock &amp; Roll Movie Moments\". and number 17 by \"Time Out\" as \"The 50 Best Uses of Songs in Movies\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55014", "revid": "1005449", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55014", "title": "Leslie Nielsen", "text": "Canadian-American actor (1926\u20132010)\nLeslie William Nielsen (February 11, 1926\u00a0\u2013 November 28, 2010) was a Canadian-American actor and comedian. With a career spanning 60 years, he appeared in more than 100 films and 150 television programs, portraying more than 220 characters.\nNielsen made his acting debut in 1950, appearing in 46 live television programs that year. He made his film debut in 1956, with supporting roles in several dramas, westerns and romance films produced from the 1950s to 1970s.\nAlthough his performances in the films \"Forbidden Planet\" and \"The Poseidon Adventure\" gave him standing as a dramatic actor, Nielsen later gained recognition for his deadpan comedy roles during the 1980s, after being cast for the Zucker, Abrahams and Zucker comedy film \"Airplane!\"\u200a In his comedy roles, he specialized in portraying characters oblivious to and complicit in their absurd surroundings. His performance in \"Airplane!\" marked a turning point which made him \"the Olivier of spoofs\", according to film critic Roger Ebert, and led to further success in the genre, starring in \"The Naked Gun\" film series, based on his earlier short-lived television series \"Police Squad!\"\nHe received a variety of awards and was inducted onto Canada's Walk of Fame and the Hollywood Walk of Fame.\nEarly life.\nNielsen was born on February 11, 1926, in Regina, Saskatchewan. His mother, Mabel Elizabeth (\"n\u00e9e\" Davies), was an immigrant from Wales, and his father, Ingvard Eversen Nielsen (1900\u20131975), was a Danish-born constable in the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. Nielsen's elder brother, Erik Nielsen (1924\u20132008), was a long-time Canadian Member of Parliament, cabinet minister, and Deputy Prime Minister of Canada from 1984 to 1986. He also had a half-brother, Gilbert Nielsen, from his father's other relationship.\nNielsen's half-uncle Jean Hersholt was an actor known for his portrayal of Dr. Christian in a radio series of that title, and the subsequent television series and films. In a 1994 \"Boston Globe\" article, he explained: \"I did learn very early that when I would mention my uncle, people would look at me as if I were the biggest liar in the world. Then I would take them home and show them 8-by-10 glossies, and things changed quite drastically. So I began to think that maybe this acting business was not a bad idea, much as I was very shy about it and certainly without courage regarding it. My uncle died not too long after I was in a position to know him. I regret that I had not a chance to know him better.\"\nAs a child, Nielsen lived with his family in Fort Norman (now Tulita) in the Northwest Territories, where his father was with the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. They moved to Edmonton in 1930. His father was an abusive man who beat his wife and sons, and Leslie longed to escape. Following graduation from Victoria High School (later renamed Victoria School of the Arts) in Edmonton, he enlisted in the Royal Canadian Air Force at age 17 in 1943, though he was legally deaf (he wore hearing aids most of his life). There he trained as an aerial gunner during World War II but was never sent overseas. Upon the war's end, he was discharged and worked briefly as a disc jockey at a Calgary, Alberta, radio station, before enrolling at the Lorne Greene Academy of Radio Arts in Toronto.\nWhile studying in Toronto, Nielsen received a scholarship to the Neighborhood Playhouse. He noted, \"I couldn't refuse, but I must say when you come from the land of the snow goose, the moose, and wool to New York, you're bringing every ton of hayseed and country bumpkin that you packed. As long as I didn't open my mouth, I felt a certain security. But I always thought I was going to be unmasked: 'OK, pack your stuff'. 'Well, what's the matter?'. 'We've discovered you have no talent; we're shipping you back to Canada'.\"\nHe moved to New York City for his scholarship, studying theatre and music at the Neighborhood Playhouse, while performing in summer stock theatre. Afterward, he attended the Actors Studio, until his first television appearance in 1950 on an episode of \"Studio One\", alongside Charlton Heston, for which he was paid $75 ().\nCareer.\nEarly career.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"It was a strange era, the tail end of the golden age. A time when the Tiffany's of filmmakers was burying its head in the sand and trying to pretend that this new medium [television] was not happening.\"\nNielsen reflecting on the era when he started acting\nNielsen's career began in dramatic roles on television during \"Television's Golden Age\", appearing in 46 live programs in 1950 alone. He said there \"was very little gold, we only got $75 or $100 per show\". He narrated documentaries and commercials and most of his early work as a dramatic actor was uneventful. Hal Erickson of Allmovie noted that \"much of Nielsen's early work was undistinguished; he was merely a handsome leading man in an industry overstocked with handsome leading men\".\nIn 1952 Nielsen made his Broadway debut as Petty Officer Herbert in \"Seagulls Over Sorrento\", a short-lived transfer from the West End. In 1956, he made his feature film debut in the Michael Curtiz-directed musical, \"The Vagabond King\". In the \"Seattle Post-Intelligencer\", Nielsen remembered Curtiz as \"a sadist, a charming sadist, but a sadist\". Nielsen called this film \"The Vagabond Turkey\". Though the film was not a success, producer Nicholas Nayfack offered him an audition for the science-fiction film \"Forbidden Planet\", resulting in Nielsen's taking a long contract with Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM).\n\"Forbidden Planet\" became an instant success, and roles in other MGM films such as \"Ransom!\" (1956), \"The Opposite Sex\" (1956) and \"Hot Summer Night\" (1957) followed. In 1957, Nielsen won the lead role opposite Debbie Reynolds in the romantic comedy \"Tammy and the Bachelor\" for Universal Pictures, which, as a \"Chicago Tribune\" critic wrote in 1998, made people consider him a dramatic actor and handsome romantic lead. Dissatisfied with the films he was offered, calling the studios \"a Tiffany, which had forgotten how to make silver\", he left MGM after auditioning for Messala in the 1959 \"Ben-Hur\". Stephen Boyd got the role.\nAfter leaving the studios, Nielsen landed the lead role in the Disney miniseries \"The Swamp Fox\", as American Revolutionary War hero Francis Marion. In a 1988 interview, he reflected on the series: \"That was a great experience, because the Disney people didn't do their shows like everyone else, knocking out an episode a week. ... We only had to do an episode a month, and the budgets were extremely high for TV at that time. We had location shooting rather than cheap studio backdrops, and very authentic costumes.\" Eight episodes were produced and aired between 1959 and 1961.\nHis television appearances include \"Justice\", \"The Swamp Fox\", \"Alfred Hitchcock Presents\", \"Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea\", \"Wagon Train\", \"Gunsmoke\", \"Columbo\", \"The Virginian\" and \"The Wild Wild West\". In 1961, he was the lead in a Los Angeles police drama called \"The New Breed\". He guest-starred in a 1964 episode of \"Daniel Boone\" with Fess Parker in a minor but credited role. In 1965 he guest-starred in 19 episodes of \"Peyton Place\" in two roles, Vincent &amp; Kenneth Markham, identical twins with distinctly different personalities.\nIn 1968, he had a major role in the pilot for the police series \"Hawaii Five-O\" and appeared in one of the seventh-season episodes. In 1969, he had the leading role as a police officer in \"\".\nIn 1972, Nielsen appeared in the supporting role as the captain of the doomed ocean liner SS \"Poseidon\" in the disaster epic, \"The Poseidon Adventure\". He also starred in William Girdler's 1977 action film, \"Project: Kill\". He was cast in the 1979 Canadian disaster film \"City on Fire\", in which he portrayed a corrupt mayor. In 1980, he guest-starred as Sinclair in the CBS TV miniseries \"The Chisholms\".\nComedy: \"Airplane!\" and \"The Naked Gun\".\nIn an early comedic appearance, Nielsen appeared on \"M*A*S*H\" in 1973 as the title character in \"The Ringbanger\".\nNielsen's supporting role of Dr. Rumack in Zucker, Abrahams, and Zucker's (ZAZ) 1980's \"Airplane!\" was a turning point in his career. The film, a parody of disaster films such as \"Zero Hour!\" and \"Airport\", was based on building a comedy around \"serious\" actors better known for their dramatic roles. Other \"straight\" stars in the film included Robert Stack, Peter Graves, and Lloyd Bridges.\nNielsen's deadpan delivery contrasted with the absurdity surrounding him. When asked, \"Surely you can't be serious?\", his curt, now iconic response was: \"I am serious. And don't call me Shirley.\" In several later interviews, he reflected on the line: \"I thought it was amusing, but it never occurred to me that it was going to become a trademark. It's such a surprise\u00a0... the thing comes out, people say, 'What did he say?!'\" Nielsen said he was \"pleased and honoured that [he] had a chance to deliver that line\". As of 2010, the comedic exchange was at number 79 on the American Film Institute's AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes.\nThe American Film Institute included the film in its list of the top ten comedy films of all time in 2008, and a 2007 survey in the United Kingdom judged it the second-greatest comedy film of all time after \"Monty Python's Life of Brian\". In 2012, \"Empire\" voted it number one in the 50 Funniest Comedies Ever poll. Critics praised the film, which also proved a long-term success with audiences. In 2010, \"Airplane!\" was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry by the Library of Congress.\nThe directors cast Nielsen for his ability to play like \"a fish in water\", saying: \"You could have cast funny people and done it with everybody winking, goofing off, and silly\u00a0... we wanted people to be oblivious to the comedy.\" For Nielsen, \"Airplane!\" marked a career shift from dramatic roles to deadpan comedy. When it was suggested his role in \"Airplane!\" was against type, Nielsen protested that he had \"always been cast against type before\", and that comedy was what he always wanted to do. In 1982, ZAZ cast Nielsen in a similar style, in their ABC TV series \"Police Squad!\". The spoof series introduced Nielsen as Lt. Frank Drebin, the stereotypical police officer modeled after serious characters, such as Joe Friday, in earlier police TV dramas.\nThe opening sequence for \"Police Squad!\" was based on the 1950s show \"M Squad\", which starred Lee Marvin, and opened with footage of a police car roving through a dark urban setting with a big band playing a jazz song in the background. The Hank Simms voice-over and the show's organization into acts with an epilogue was homage to Quinn Martin police dramas including \"The Fugitive\", \"The Streets of San Francisco\", \"Barnaby Jones\", \"The F.B.I.\", \"Dan August\" and \"Cannon\". Nielsen portrayed a serious character whose one-liners appeared accidental next to the pratfalls and sight gags that were happening around him. Nielsen received an Emmy Award nomination for his performance, and despite positive critical reviews, the series was cancelled after just six episodes.\nSix years after the cancellation of \"Police Squad!\", the film \"\" returned Nielsen to his role as Frank Drebin. It involved a ruthless drug king using hypnosis to attempt an assassination on Queen Elizabeth II. Nielsen did many of his own stunts: \"You have an idea of how you're going to do something, and it's your vision\u00a0... unless you do it, it really doesn't stand a chance.\" This movie grossed over $78\u00a0million and was well received by critics. Ebert's &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3+1\u20442\u2013star review (out of four) noted: \"You laugh, and then you laugh at yourself for laughing.\"\n\"The Naked Gun\" spawned two sequels: ' (1991) and ' (1994). \"The Naked Gun 2\u00bd\" grossed more than the original, with $86.9 million, while \"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;33+1\u20443\" grossed $51.1 million. Nielsen remained open to a fourth \"Naked Gun\" film, although he doubted that it would be produced \u2014 \"I don't think so\", he said in 2005. \"If there hasn't been one by now, I doubt it. I think it would be wonderful.\"\nNielsen briefly appeared on the World Wrestling Federation program in the summer of 1994 on \"WWF Monday Night Raw\", spoofing the role of Frank Drebin. Nielsen and \"Naked Gun\" co-star George Kennedy were hired as sleuths to unravel the mystery of the Undertaker, who had disappeared at January's Royal Rumble event. At SummerSlam 1994, in a \"Naked Gun\" parody, they were hot on the case (in fact, they were standing on a case). Although they did not find the Undertaker, the case had been closed (the literal case had been shut), thus they solved the mystery. In 1990, Nielsen appeared as a Frank Drebin type character in advertisements for Red Rock Cider in the United Kingdom. In 1992, Nielsen appeared in the series finale for \"The Golden Girls\" as Lucas, who was Blanche's uncle and Dorothy's boyfriend.\nNielsen's few dramatic roles following his comedic success in \"Airplane!\" included the horror films \"Prom Night\" (1980) and \"Creepshow\" (1982). He appeared as a dramatic and unsympathetic character in the 1986 comedy \"Soul Man\". His final dramatic role was as Allen Green, a violent client killed in self-defense by prostitute Claudia Draper (Barbra Streisand) in Martin Ritt's courtroom drama \"Nuts\" (1987).\nLater comedies.\nAfter \"Airplane!\" and \"The Naked Gun\", Nielsen portrayed similarly styled roles in a number of other films. These mostly emulated the style of \"The Naked Gun\" with varying success and often targeted specific films; many were panned by critics, and most performed poorly. \"Repossessed\" (1990) and ' (2001) are parodies of \"The Exorcist\" and ', respectively. Both attempted absurd comedy, but were poorly received. Even a leading role in a Mel Brooks comic horror, \"\", failed to generate much box-office excitement, although it did gain a following in a later release to video. Both 1996's \"Spy Hard\" and 1998's \"Wrongfully Accused\", a parody of James Bond films and \"The Fugitive\", were popular on video, but not well received by critics.\nHis attempt at family and children's comedies met additional criticism. He appeared as Santa Claus in the Christmas comedy \"All I Want for Christmas\" (1991), a film that was at best only moderately successful at the box office, and had bad reviews. \"Surf Ninjas\" (1993) and \"Mr. Magoo\" (1997) also had scathing reviews. Several critics were disappointed that Nielsen's role in \"Surf Ninjas\" was only \"an extended cameo\" and Chris Hicks recommended that viewers \"avoid any comedy that features Leslie Nielsen outside of the \"Naked Gun\" series\". Jeff Miller of the \"Houston Chronicle\" panned \"Mr. Magoo\", a live-action remake of the 1950s cartoon: \"I'm supposed to suggest how the film might be better, but I can't think of anything to say other than to make the film again.\"\nNielsen's first major success since \"The Naked Gun\" came in a supporting role in \"Scary Movie 3\" (2003). His appearance as President Harris led to a second appearance in its sequel, \"Scary Movie 4\" (2006). This was the first time Nielsen had reprised a character since Frank Drebin. In one scene, Nielsen appeared almost nude, and reviewer James Berardinelli referred to the scene as putting \"the 'scary' in \"Scary Movie 4\"\".\nVideo, stage, and celebrity productions.\nNielsen also produced instructional golf videos, which are not presented in a serious style, beginning with 1993's \"Bad Golf Made Easier\". The videos combine comedy with golf techniques. The series spawned two additional sequels, \"Bad Golf My Way\" (1994) and \"Stupid Little Golf Video\" (1997). Nielsen also co-wrote a fictional autobiography titled \"The Naked Truth\". The book portrays Nielsen as a popular actor with a long history of prestigious films.\nIn his 80s, Nielsen performed serious roles on screen and stage (such as his one-man theatre show \"Darrow\", in which he played Clarence Darrow), as well as providing voice-overs and appearances for commercials (including spots for a credit union in Arizona, where he owned a secondary residence), cartoons such as \"Zeroman\", where he had the leading role/voice, children's shows, such as \"Pumper Pups\", which he narrated, and comedic film roles. The sibling relationship with his elder brother, the Honourable Erik Nielsen, a former Deputy Prime Minister of Canada, served as the premise of an HBO mockumentary entitled \"The Canadian Conspiracy\", in which Leslie Nielsen appeared along with other prominent Canadian-born media personalities. He was a celebrity contestant on CBS's \"Gameshow Marathon\", where he played \"The Price Is Right\", \"Let's Make a Deal\", \"Beat the Clock\", and \"Press Your Luck\" for charity.\nFinal acting years.\nBeginning in February 2007, Nielsen began playing a small role as a doctor in the humorous yet educational television show \"Doctor*Ology\". The show chronicles real-life medical techniques and technology on the Discovery Channel. Nielsen said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There are any number of things that you think about when you ponder if you hadn't been an actor, what would you be, and I've always said I'd like to be an astronaut or a doctor. I have such admiration for doctors. I just don't know how you go around to thank them enough for coming up with the world's most remarkable new discoveries.\nIn 2007, Nielsen starred in the drama \"Music Within\". In 2008, he portrayed a version of Uncle Ben for \"Superhero Movie\", a spoof of superhero films. He then appeared in the 2008 parody \"An American Carol\", which David Zucker directed, produced, and co-wrote. He appeared in the 2009 parody \"Stan Helsing\". Nielsen portrayed the doctor in the Spanish horror comedy \"Spanish Movie\", a spoof comedy like \"Scary Movie\", but making fun of popular Spanish films.\nNielsen appeared in more than 100 films and 1,500 television episodes, portraying more than 220 characters. From at least the early 1970s, he was a television commercial spokesperson for the Bank of Montreal, Ford, Shell and Dollar Rent-A-Car, among many others; his earlier spots took advantage of his serious and authoritative persona, while later commercials were more humorous, mirroring his transition to comedic acting roles.\nPersonal life.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"I'm afraid if I don't keep moving, they're going to catch me\u00a0... I am 81 years old and I want to see what's around the corner, and I don't see any reason in the world not to keep working. But I am starting to value my down time a great deal because I am realizing there might be other things to do that I am overlooking.\"\n\u2014Nielsen reflecting on his career in 2007\nNielsen married four times: to nightclub singer Monica Boyar (1950\u20131956), Alisande Ullman (1958\u20131973), Brooks Oliver (1981\u20131983), and Barbaree Earl (2001 \u2013 his death in 2010). He had two daughters from his second marriage.\nNielsen often played golf. He joked, \"I have no goals or ambition. I do, however, wish to work enough to maintain whatever celebrity status I have so that they will continue to invite me to golf tournaments.\" His interest in the sport led him to comedic instructional films.\nNielsen was a practical joker and known for pranking people with a portable hand-controlled fart machine. His epitaph reads \"Let 'er rip\", a final reference to his favorite practical joke.\nIn his later years, Nielsen and his wife Barbaree resided between homes in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, and Paradise Valley, Arizona.\nNielsen was legally deaf and wore hearing aids for most of his life. Because of this, he supported the Better Hearing Institute. Later in life, he had knee osteoarthritis. He participated in an educational video from The Arthritis Research Centre of Canada, demonstrating the physical examination of a patient with knee osteoarthritis.\nDeath.\nIn November 2010, Nielsen was admitted to Holy Cross Hospital, Fort Lauderdale, Florida. On November 28, his nephew Doug told Winnipeg radio station CJOB that he died in his sleep from pneumonia around 5:30 p.m. EST, aged 84, surrounded by family and friends.\nNielsen's body is interred in Fort Lauderdale's Evergreen Cemetery. As a final bit of humour, he chose \"Let 'er rip\" as his epitaph. On December 7, 2010, his funeral was held in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, during which the \"Naked Gun\" theme played.\nAchievements.\nAmong his awards, in 1995 Nielsen received UCLA's Jack Benny Award. In 1988, he became the 1,884th personality to receive a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6541 Hollywood Blvd. In 2001, he was inducted into Canada's Walk of Fame. The following year, he was made an Officer of the Order of Canada, although he was also a naturalized American citizen.\nDespite Nielsen's American citizenship, he maintained his Canadian heritage: \"There's no way you can be a Canadian and think you can lose it\u00a0... Canadians are a goodly group. They are very aware of caring and helping.\" On May 19, 2005, when Queen Elizabeth II visited his native Saskatchewan during the province's centennial gala, she was introduced to Nielsen.\nIn 1997, a Golden Palm Star on the Palm Springs, California, Walk of Stars was dedicated to him.\nOn February 20, 2002, Nielsen was named an honorary citizen of West Virginia and an Ambassador of Mountain State Goodwill. Nielsen visited the state many times to speak and visit friends. In 2003, in honour of Nielsen, Grant MacEwan College named its school of communications after him. Also in 2003, the Alliance of Canadian Cinema, Television and Radio Artists awarded him the ACTRA Award of Excellence.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55015", "revid": "5183450", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55015", "title": "Fusion reactor", "text": ""}
{"id": "55016", "revid": "31192532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55016", "title": "Ivo Andri\u0107", "text": "Yugoslav writer and Nobel laureate (1892\u20131975)\nIvo Andri\u0107 (, ; born Ivan Andri\u0107; 9 October 1892\u00a0\u2013 13 March 1975) was a Yugoslav novelist, poet and short story writer who won the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1961. His writings dealt mainly with life in his native Bosnia under Ottoman rule.\nBorn in Travnik in Austria-Hungary, modern-day Bosnia and Herzegovina, Andri\u0107 attended high school in Sarajevo, where he became an active member of several South Slav national youth organizations. Following the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand in June 1914, Andri\u0107 was arrested and imprisoned by the Austro-Hungarian police, who suspected his involvement in the plot. As the authorities were unable to build a strong case against him, he spent much of the war under house arrest, only being released following a general amnesty for such cases in July 1917. After the war, he studied South Slavic history and literature at universities in Zagreb and Graz, eventually attaining his PhD. in Graz in 1924. He worked in the diplomatic service of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia from 1920 to 1923 and again from 1924 to 1941. In 1939, he became Yugoslavia's ambassador to Germany, but his tenure ended in April 1941 with the German-led invasion of his country. Shortly after the invasion, Andri\u0107 returned to German-occupied Belgrade. He lived quietly in a friend's apartment for the duration of World War II, in conditions likened by some biographers to house arrest, and wrote some of his most important works, including \"Na Drini \u0107uprija\" (\"The Bridge on the Drina\").\nFollowing the war, Andri\u0107 was named to a number of ceremonial posts in Yugoslavia, which had since come under communist rule. In 1961, the Nobel Committee awarded him the Nobel Prize in Literature, selecting him over writers such as J. R. R. Tolkien, Robert Frost, John Steinbeck and E. M. Forster. The Committee cited \"the epic force with which he\u00a0... traced themes and depicted human destinies drawn from his country's history\". Afterwards, Andri\u0107's works found an international audience and were translated into a number of languages. In subsequent years, he received a number of awards in his native country. Andri\u0107's health declined substantially in late 1974 and he died in Belgrade the following March.\nIn the years following Andri\u0107's death, the Belgrade apartment where he spent much of World War II was converted into a museum and a nearby street corner was named in his honour. A number of other cities in the former Yugoslavia also have streets bearing his name. In 2012, filmmaker Emir Kusturica began construction of an ethno-town in eastern Bosnia that is named after Andri\u0107. As Yugoslavia's only Nobel Prize-winning writer, Andri\u0107 was well known and respected in his native country during his lifetime. In Bosnia and Herzegovina, beginning in the 1950s and continuing past the breakup of Yugoslavia, his works have been disparaged by Bosniak literary critics for their supposed anti-Muslim bias. In Croatia, his works had occasionally been blacklisted following Yugoslavia's dissolution in the 1990s, but were rehabilitated by the literary community. He is highly regarded in Serbia for his contributions to Serbian literature.\nEarly life.\nFamily.\nIvan Andri\u0107 was born in the village of Dolac, near Travnik, on 9 October 1892, while his mother, Katarina (n\u00e9e\u00a0Peji\u0107), was in the town visiting relatives. Andri\u0107's parents were both Catholic Croats. He was his parents' only child. His father, Antun, was a struggling silversmith who resorted to working as a school janitor in Sarajevo, where he lived with his wife and infant son. At the age of 32, Antun died of tuberculosis, like most of his siblings. Andri\u0107 was only two years old at the time. Widowed and penniless, Andri\u0107's mother took him to Vi\u0161egrad and placed him in the care of her sister-in-law Ana and brother-in-law Ivan Matkovi\u0107, a police officer. The couple were financially stable but childless, so they agreed to look after the infant and brought him up as their own. Meanwhile, Andri\u0107's mother returned to Sarajevo seeking employment.\nAndri\u0107 was raised in a country that had changed little since the Ottoman period despite being mandated to Austria-Hungary at the Congress of Berlin in 1878. Eastern and Western culture intermingled in Bosnia to a far greater extent than anywhere else in the Balkan peninsula. Having lived there from an early age, Andri\u0107 came to cherish Vi\u0161egrad, calling it \"my real home\". Though it was a small provincial town (or \"kasaba\"), Vi\u0161egrad proved to be an enduring source of inspiration. It was a multi-ethnic and multi-confessional town, the predominant groups being Serbs (Orthodox Christians) and Bosniaks (Muslims). From an early age, Andri\u0107 closely observed the customs of the local people. These customs, and the particularities of life in eastern Bosnia, would later be detailed in his works. Andri\u0107 made his first friends in Vi\u0161egrad, playing with them along the Drina River and the town's famous Mehmed Pa\u0161a Sokolovi\u0107 Bridge.\nPrimary and secondary education.\nAt age six, Andri\u0107 began primary school. He later recounted that these were the happiest days of his life. At the age of ten, he received a three-year scholarship from a Croat cultural group called \"Napredak\" (Progress) to study in Sarajevo. In the autumn of 1902, he was registered at the Great Sarajevo Gymnasium (), the oldest secondary school in Bosnia. While in Sarajevo, Andri\u0107 lived with his mother, who worked in a rug factory. At the time, the city was overflowing with civil servants from all parts of Austria-Hungary, and thus many languages could be heard in its restaurants, caf\u00e9s and on its streets. Culturally, the city boasted a strong Germanic element, and the curriculum in educational institutions was designed to reflect this. From a total of 83 teachers that worked at Andri\u0107's school over a twenty-year period, only three were natives of Bosnia and Herzegovina. \"The teaching program,\" biographer Celia Hawkesworth notes, \"was devoted to producing dedicated supporters of the [Habsburg] Monarchy\". Andri\u0107 disapproved. \"All that came\u00a0... at secondary school and university,\" he wrote, \"was rough, crude, automatic, without concern, faith, humanity, warmth or love.\"\nAndri\u0107 experienced difficulty in his studies, finding mathematics particularly challenging, and had to repeat the sixth grade. For a time, he lost his scholarship due to poor grades. Hawkesworth attributes Andri\u0107's initial lack of academic success at least partly to his alienation from most of his teachers. Nonetheless, he excelled in languages, particularly Latin, Greek and German. Although he initially showed substantial interest in natural sciences, he later began focusing on literature, likely under the influence of his two Croat instructors, writer and politician \u0110uro \u0160urmin and poet Tugomir Alaupovi\u0107. Of all his teachers in Sarajevo, Andri\u0107 liked Alaupovi\u0107 best, and the two became lifelong friends.\nAndri\u0107 felt he was destined to become a writer. He began writing in secondary school, but received little encouragement from his mother. He recalled that when he showed her one of his first works, she replied: \"Did you write this? What did you do that for?\" Andri\u0107 published his first two poems in 1911 in a journal called \"Bosanska vila\" (Bosnian Fairy), which promoted Serbo-Croat unity. At the time, he was still a secondary school student. Prior to World War I, his poems, essays, reviews, and translations appeared in journals such as \"Vihor\" (Whirlwind), \"Savremenik\" (The Contemporary), \"Hrvatski pokret\" (The Croatian Movement), and \"Knji\u017eevne novine\" (Literary News). One of Andri\u0107's favorite literary forms was lyrical reflective prose, and many of his essays and shorter pieces are prose poems. The historian Wayne S. Vucinich describes Andri\u0107's poetry from this period as \"subjective and mostly melancholic\". Andri\u0107's translations of August Strindberg, Walt Whitman, and a number of Slovene authors also appeared around this time.\nStudent activism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe whole of our society is snoring ungracefully; only the poets and revolutionaries are awake.\n\u2014\u2009Andri\u0107's view of pre-war Sarajevo.\nIn 1908, Austria-Hungary officially annexed Bosnia and Herzegovina, to the chagrin of South Slav nationalists like Andri\u0107. In late 1911, Andri\u0107 was elected the first president of the Serbo-Croat Progressive Movement (; SHNO), a Sarajevo-based secret society that promoted unity and friendship between Serb and Croat youth and opposed the Austro-Hungarian occupation. Its members were vehemently criticized by both Serb and Croat nationalists, who dismissed them as \"traitors to their nations\". Unfazed, Andri\u0107 continued agitating against the Austro-Hungarians. On 28 February 1912, he spoke before a crowd of 100 student protesters at Sarajevo's railway station, urging them to continue their demonstrations. The Austro-Hungarian police later began harassing and prosecuting SHNO members. Ten were expelled from their schools or penalized in some other way, though Andri\u0107 himself escaped punishment. Andri\u0107 also joined the South Slav student movement known as Young Bosnia, becoming one of its most prominent members.\nIn 1912, Andri\u0107 registered at the University of Zagreb, having received a scholarship from an educational foundation in Sarajevo. He enrolled in the department of mathematics and natural sciences because these were the only fields for which scholarships were offered, but was able to take some courses in Croatian literature. Andri\u0107 was well received by South Slav nationalists there, and regularly participated in on-campus demonstrations. This led to his being reprimanded by the university. In 1913, after completing two semesters in Zagreb, Andri\u0107 transferred to the University of Vienna, where he resumed his studies. While in Vienna, he joined South Slav students in promoting the cause of Yugoslav unity and worked closely with two Yugoslav student societies, the Serbian cultural society \"Zora\" (Dawn) and the Croatian student club \"Zvonimir\", which shared his views on \"integral Yugoslavism\" (the eventual assimilation of all South Slav cultures into one).\nDespite finding like-minded students in Vienna, the city's climate took a toll on Andri\u0107's health. He contracted tuberculosis and became seriously ill, then asked to leave Vienna on medical grounds and continue his studies elsewhere, though Hawkesworth believes he may actually have been taking part in a protest of South Slav students that were boycotting German-speaking universities and transferring to Slavic ones. For a time, Andri\u0107 had considered transferring to a school in Russia but ultimately decided to complete his fourth semester at Jagiellonian University in Krak\u00f3w. He transferred in early 1914. Andri\u0107 started his literary career as a poet. In 1914, he was one of the contributors to \"Hrvatska mlada lirika\" (Croatian Youth Lyrics) and continued to publish translations, poems and reviews.\nWorld War I.\nOn 28 June 1914, Andri\u0107 learned of the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand in Sarajevo. The assassin was Gavrilo Princip, a Young Bosnian and close friend of Andri\u0107 who had been one of the first to join the SHNO in 1911. Upon hearing the news, Andri\u0107 decided to leave Krak\u00f3w and return to Bosnia. He travelled by train to Zagreb, and in mid-July, departed for the coastal city of Split with his friend, the poet and fellow South Slav nationalist . Andri\u0107 and \u010cerina spent the rest of July at the latter's summer home. As the month progressed, the two became increasingly uneasy about the escalating political crisis that followed the Archduke's assassination and eventually led to the outbreak of World War I. They then went to Rijeka, where \u010cerina left Andri\u0107 without explanation, only saying he urgently needed to go to Italy. Several days later, Andri\u0107 learned that \u010cerina was being sought by the police.\nBy the time war was declared, Andri\u0107 had returned to Split feeling exhausted and ill. Given that most of his friends had already been arrested for nationalist activities, he was certain the same fate would befall him. Despite not being involved in the assassination plot, in late July or early August, Andri\u0107 was arrested for \"anti-state activities\", and imprisoned in Split. He was subsequently transferred to a prison in \u0160ibenik, then to Rijeka and finally to Maribor, where he arrived on 19 August. Plagued by tuberculosis, Andri\u0107 passed the time reading, talking to his cellmates and learning languages.\nBy the following year, the case against Andri\u0107 was dropped due to lack of evidence, and he was released from prison on 20 March 1915. The authorities exiled him to the village of Ov\u010darevo, near Travnik. He arrived there on 22 March and was placed under the supervision of local Franciscan friars. Andri\u0107 soon befriended the friar Alojzije Per\u010dinli\u0107 and began researching the history of Bosnia's Catholic and Orthodox Christian communities under Ottoman rule. Andri\u0107 lived in the parish headquarters, and the Franciscans gave him access to the monastery chronicles. In return, he assisted the parish priest and taught religious songs to pupils at the monastery school. Andri\u0107's mother soon came to visit him and offered to serve as the parish priest's housekeeper. \"Mother is very happy,\" Andri\u0107 wrote. \"It has been three whole years since she saw me. And she can't grasp all that has happened to me in that time, nor the whole of my crazy, cursed existence. She cries, kisses me and laughs in turn. Like a mother.\"\nAndri\u0107 was later transferred to a prison in Zenica, where Per\u010dinli\u0107 regularly visited him. The Austro-Hungarian Army declared Andri\u0107 a political threat in March 1917 and exempted him from armed service. He was thus registered with a non-combat unit until February of the following year. On 2 July 1917, Emperor Charles declared a general amnesty for all of Austria-Hungary's political prisoners. His freedom of movement restored, Andri\u0107 visited Vi\u0161egrad and reunited with several of his school friends. He remained in Vi\u0161egrad until late July, when he was mobilized. Because of his poor health, Andri\u0107 was admitted to a Sarajevo hospital and thus avoided service. He was then transferred to the \"Reservospital\" in Zenica, where he received treatment for several months before continuing to Zagreb. There, Andri\u0107 again fell seriously ill and sought treatment at the Sisters of Mercy hospital, which had become a gathering place for dissidents and former political prisoners.\nIn January 1918, Andri\u0107 joined several South Slav nationalists in editing a short-lived pan-Yugoslav periodical called \"Knji\u017eevni jug\" (Literary South). Here and in other periodicals, Andri\u0107 published book reviews, plays, verse, and translations. Over the course of several months in early 1918, Andri\u0107's health began to deteriorate, and his friends believed he was nearing death. However, he recovered and spent the spring of 1918 in Krapina writing \"Ex ponto\", a book of prose poetry that was published in July. It was his first book.\nInterwar period.\nThe end of World War I saw the disintegration of Austria-Hungary, which was replaced by a newly established South Slav state, the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (renamed Yugoslavia in 1929). In late 1918, Andri\u0107 re-enrolled at the University of Zagreb and resumed his studies. By January 1919, he fell ill again and was back in the hospital. Fellow writer Ivo Vojnovi\u0107 became worried for his friend's life and appealed to Andri\u0107's old schoolteacher Tugomir Alaupovi\u0107 (who had just been appointed the new kingdom's Minister of Religious Affairs) to use his connections and help Andri\u0107 pay for treatment abroad. In February, Andri\u0107 wrote Alaupovi\u0107 and asked for help finding a government job in Belgrade. Eventually, Andri\u0107 chose to seek treatment in Split, where he stayed for the following six months. During his time on the Mediterranean coast, Andri\u0107 completed a second volume of prose poetry, titled \"Nemiri\", which was published the following year. By the time Andri\u0107 left, he had almost fully recovered, and quipped that he was cured by the \"air, sun and figs.\" Troubled by news that his uncle was seriously ill, Andri\u0107 left Split in August and went to him in Vi\u0161egrad. He returned to Zagreb two weeks later.\nEarly diplomatic career.\nIn the immediate aftermath of the war, Andri\u0107's tendency to identify with Serbdom became increasingly apparent. In a correspondence dated December 1918, Vojnovi\u0107 described the young writer as \"a Catholic\u00a0... a Serb from Bosnia.\" By 1919, Andri\u0107 had acquired his undergraduate degree in South Slavic history and literature at the University of Zagreb. He was perennially impoverished, and earned a meagre sum through his writing and editorial work. By mid-1919, he realized that he would be unable to financially support himself and his aging mother, aunt and uncle for much longer, and his appeals to Alaupovi\u0107 for help securing a government job became more frequent. In September 1919, Alaupovi\u0107 offered him a secretarial position at the Ministry of Religion, which Andri\u0107 accepted.\nIn late October, Andri\u0107 left for Belgrade. He became involved in the city's literary circles and soon acquired the distinction of being one of Belgrade's most popular young writers. Though the Belgrade press wrote positively of him, Andri\u0107 disliked being a public figure, and went into seclusion and distanced himself from his fellow writers. At the same time, he grew dissatisfied with his government job and wrote to Alaupovi\u0107 asking for a transfer to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. On 20 February, Andri\u0107's request was granted and he was assigned to the Foreign Ministry's mission at the Vatican.\nAndri\u0107 left Belgrade soon after, and reported for duty in late February. At this time, he published his first short story, \"Put Alije \u0110erzeleza\" (The Journey of Alija \u0110erzelez). He complained that the consulate was understaffed and that he did not have enough time to write. All evidence suggests he had a strong distaste for the ceremony and pomp that accompanied his work in the diplomatic service, but according to Hawkesworth, he endured it with \"dignified good grace\". Around this time, he began writing in the Ekavian dialect used in Serbia, and ceased writing in the Ijekavian dialect used in his native Bosnia. Andri\u0107 soon requested another assignment, and in November, he was transferred to Bucharest. Once again, his health deteriorated. Nevertheless, Andri\u0107 found his consular duties there did not require much effort, so he focused on writing, contributed articles to a Romanian journal and even had time to visit his family in Bosnia. In 1922, Andri\u0107 requested another reassignment. He was transferred to the consulate in Trieste, where he arrived on 9 December. The city's damp climate only caused Andri\u0107's health to deteriorate further, and on his doctor's advice, he transferred to Graz in January 1923. He arrived in the city on 23 January, and was appointed vice-consul. Andri\u0107 soon enrolled at the University of Graz, resumed his schooling and began working on his doctoral dissertation in Slavic studies.\nAdvancement.\nIn August 1923, Andri\u0107 experienced an unexpected career setback. A law had been passed stipulating that all civil servants had to have a doctoral degree. As Andri\u0107 had not completed his dissertation, he was informed that his employment would be terminated. Andri\u0107's well-connected friends intervened on his behalf and appealed to Foreign Minister Mom\u010dilo Nin\u010di\u0107, citing Andri\u0107's diplomatic and linguistic abilities. In February 1924, the Foreign Ministry decided to retain Andri\u0107 as a day worker with the salary of a vice-consul. This gave him the opportunity to complete his Ph.D. Three months later, on 24 May, Andri\u0107 submitted his dissertation to a committee of examiners at the University of Graz, who gave it their approval. This allowed Andri\u0107 to take the examinations necessary for his Ph.D. to be confirmed. He passed both his exams, and on 13 July, received his Ph.D. The committee of examiners recommended that Andri\u0107's dissertation be published. Andri\u0107 chose the title \"Die Entwicklung des geistigen Lebens in Bosnien unter der Einwirkung der t\u00fcrkischen Herrschaft\" (The Development of Spiritual Life in Bosnia Under the Influence of Turkish Rule). In it, he characterized the Ottoman occupation as a yoke that still loomed over Bosnia. \"The effect of Turkish rule was absolutely negative,\" he wrote. \"The Turks could bring no cultural content or sense of higher mission, even to those South Slavs who accepted Islam.\"\nSeveral days after receiving his Ph.D., Andri\u0107 wrote the Foreign Minister asking to be reinstated and submitted a copy of his dissertation, university documents and a medical certification that deemed him to be in good health. In September, the Foreign Ministry granted his request. Andri\u0107 stayed in Graz until 31 October, when he was assigned to the Foreign Ministry's Belgrade headquarters. During the two years he was in Belgrade, Andri\u0107 spent much of his time writing. His first collection of short stories was published in 1924, and he received a prize from the Serbian Royal Academy (of which he became a full-fledged member in February 1926). In October 1926, he was assigned to the consulate in Marseille and again appointed vice-consul. On 9 December 1926, he was transferred to the Yugoslav embassy in Paris. Andri\u0107's time in France was marked by increasing loneliness and isolation. His uncle had died in 1924, his mother the following year, and upon arriving in France, he was informed that his aunt had died as well. \"Apart from official contacts,\" he wrote Alaupovi\u0107, \"I have no company whatever.\" Andri\u0107 spent much of his time in the Paris archives poring over the reports of the French consulate in Travnik between 1809 and 1814, material he would use in \"Travni\u010dka hronika\", one of his future novels.\nIn April 1928, Andri\u0107 was posted to Madrid as vice-consul. While there, he wrote essays on Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar and Francisco Goya, and began work on the novel \"Prokleta avlija\" (The Damned Yard). In June 1929, he was named secretary of the Yugoslav legation to Belgium and Luxembourg in Brussels. On 1 January 1930, he was sent to Switzerland as part of Yugoslavia's permanent delegation to the League of Nations in Geneva, and was named deputy delegate the following year. In 1933, Andri\u0107 returned to Belgrade; two years later, he was named head of the political department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. On 5 November 1937, Andri\u0107 became assistant to Milan Stojadinovi\u0107, Yugoslavia's Prime Minister and Foreign Minister. That year, France decorated him with the Order of the Grand Officer of the Legion of Honour.\nWorld War II.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nComposed\u00a0... of priceless elements from unknown worlds, a man is born\u00a0... to become a piece of nameless soot, and as such, to vanish. And we do not know for whose glory he is born, nor for whose amusement he is destroyed.\n\u2014\u2009An excerpt from Andri\u0107's only journal entry of 1940.\nAndri\u0107 was appointed Yugoslavia's ambassador to Germany in late March or early April 1939. This appointment, Hawkesworth writes, shows that he was highly regarded by his country's leadership. Yugoslavia's King Alexander had been assassinated in Marseille in 1934. He was succeeded by his ten-year-old son Peter, and a regency council led by Peter's uncle Paul was established to rule in his place until he turned 18. Paul's government established closer economic and political ties with Germany. In March 1941, Yugoslavia signed the Tripartite Pact, pledging support for Germany and Italy. Though the negotiations had occurred behind Andri\u0107's back, in his capacity as ambassador he was obliged to attend the document's signing in Berlin. Andri\u0107 had previously been instructed to delay agreeing to the Axis powers' demands for as long as possible. He was highly critical of the move, and on 17 March, wrote to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs asking to be relieved of his duties. Ten days later, a group of pro-Western Royal Yugoslav Air Force officers overthrew the regency and proclaimed Peter of age. This led to a breakdown in relations with Germany and prompted Adolf Hitler to order Yugoslavia's invasion. Given these circumstances, Andri\u0107's position was an extremely difficult one. Nevertheless, he used the little influence he had and attempted unsuccessfully to assist Polish prisoners following the German invasion of Poland in September 1939.\nPrior to their invasion of his country, the Germans had offered Andri\u0107 the opportunity to evacuate to neutral Switzerland. He declined on the basis that his staff would not be allowed to go with him. On 6 April 1941, the Germans and their allies invaded Yugoslavia. The country capitulated on 17 April and was subsequently partitioned between the Axis powers. In early June, Andri\u0107 and his staff were taken back to German-occupied Belgrade, where some were jailed. Andri\u0107 was retired from the diplomatic service, but refused to receive his pension or cooperate in any way with the puppet government that the Germans had installed in Serbia. He was spared jail, but the Germans kept him under close surveillance throughout the occupation. Because of his Croat heritage, they had offered him the chance to settle in Zagreb, then the capital of the fascist puppet state known as the Independent State of Croatia, but he declined. Andri\u0107 spent the following three years in a friend's Belgrade apartment in conditions that some biographers liken to house arrest. In August 1941, the puppet authorities in German-occupied Serbia issued the Appeal to the Serbian Nation, calling upon the country's inhabitants to abstain from the communist-led rebellion against the Germans; Andri\u0107 refused to sign. He directed most of his energies towards writing, and during this time completed two of his best known novels, \"Na Drini \u0107uprija\" (\"The Bridge on the Drina\") and \"Travni\u010dka hronika\".\nIn mid-1942, Andri\u0107 sent a message of sympathy to Dra\u017ea Mihailovi\u0107, the leader of the royalist Chetniks, one of two resistance movements vying for power in Axis-occupied Yugoslavia, the other being Josip Broz Tito's communist Partisans. In 1944, Andri\u0107 was forced to leave his friend's apartment during the Allied bombing of Belgrade and evacuate the city. As he joined a column of refugees, he became ashamed that he was fleeing by himself, in contrast to the masses of people accompanied by their children, spouses and infirm parents. \"I looked myself up and down,\" he wrote, \"and saw I was saving only myself and my overcoat.\" In the ensuing months, Andri\u0107 refused to leave the apartment, even during the heaviest bombing. That October, the Red Army and the Partisans drove the Germans out of Belgrade, and Tito proclaimed himself Yugoslavia's ruler.\nLater life.\nPolitical career and marriage.\nAndri\u0107 initially had a precarious relationship with the communists because he had previously been an official in the royalist government. He returned to public life only once the Germans had been forced out of Belgrade. \"Na Drini \u0107uprija\" was published in March 1945. It was followed by \"Travni\u010dka hronika\" that September and \"Gospo\u0111ica\" that November. \"Na Drini \u0107uprija\" came to be regarded as Andri\u0107's \"magnum opus\" and was proclaimed a classic of Yugoslav literature by the communists. It chronicles the history of the Mehmed Pa\u0161a Sokolovi\u0107 Bridge and the town of Vi\u0161egrad from the bridge's construction in the 16th century until the outbreak of World War I. The second novel, \"Travni\u010dka hronika\", follows a French diplomat in Bosnia during the Napoleonic Wars. The third, \"Gospo\u0111ica\", revolves around the life of a Sarajevan woman. In the post-war period, Andri\u0107 also published several short story collections, some travel memoirs, and a number of essays on writers such as Vuk Karad\u017ei\u0107, Petar II Petrovi\u0107-Njego\u0161, and Petar Ko\u010di\u0107.\nIn November 1946, Andri\u0107 was elected vice-president of the Society for the Cultural Cooperation of Yugoslavia with the Soviet Union. The same month, he was named president of the Yugoslav Writers' Union. The following year, he became a member of the People's Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In 1948, Andri\u0107 published a collection of short stories he had written during the war. His work came to influence writers such as Branko \u0106opi\u0107, Vladan Desnica, Mihailo Lali\u0107 and Me\u0161a Selimovi\u0107. In April 1950, Andri\u0107 became a deputy in the National Assembly of Yugoslavia. He was decorated by the Presidium of the National Assembly for his services to the Yugoslav people in 1952. In 1953, his career as a parliamentary deputy came to an end. The following year, Andri\u0107 published the novella \"Prokleta avlija\" (The Damned Yard), which tells of life in an Ottoman prison in Istanbul. That December, he was admitted into the League of Communists of Yugoslavia, the country's ruling party. According to Hawkesworth, it is unlikely he joined the party out of ideological conviction, but rather to \"serve his country as fully as possible\".\nOn 27 September 1958, the 66-year-old Andri\u0107 married Milica Babi\u0107, a costume designer at the National Theatre of Serbia who was almost twenty years his junior. Earlier, he had announced it was \"probably better\" that a writer never marry. \"He was perpetually persecuted by a kind of fear,\" a close friend recalled. \"It seemed as though he had been born afraid, and that is why he married so late. He simply did not dare enter that area of life.\"\nNobel Prize, international recognition and death.\nBy the late 1950s, Andri\u0107's works had been translated into a number of languages. In 1958 the Association of Writers of Yugoslavia nominated Andri\u0107 as its first ever candidate for the Nobel Prize in Literature. On 26 October 1961, he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature by the Swedish Academy. Documents released 50 years later revealed that the Nobel Committee had selected Andri\u0107 over writers such as J.R.R. Tolkien, Robert Frost, John Steinbeck and E.M. Forster. The Committee cited \"the epic force with which he has traced themes and depicted human destinies drawn from his country's history\". Once the news was announced, Andri\u0107's Belgrade apartment was swarmed by reporters, and he publicly thanked the Nobel Committee for selecting him as the winner of that year's prize. Andri\u0107 donated the entirety of his prize money, which amounted to some 30 million dinars, and prescribed that it be used to purchase library books in Bosnia and Herzegovina.\nThe Nobel Prize ensured Andri\u0107 received global recognition. The following March, he fell ill while on a trip to Cairo and had to return to Belgrade for an operation. He was obliged to cancel all promotional events in Europe and North America, but his works continued to be reprinted and translated into numerous languages. Judging by letters he wrote at the time, Andri\u0107 felt burdened by the attention but did his best not to show it publicly. Upon receiving the Nobel Prize, the number of awards and honours bestowed upon him multiplied. He received the Order of the Republic in 1962, as well as 27 July Award of Bosnia-Herzegovina, the AVNOJ Award in 1967, and the Order of the Hero of Socialist Labour in 1972. In addition to being a member of the Yugoslav and Serbian academies of sciences and arts, he also became a correspondent of their Bosnian and Slovenian counterparts, and received honorary doctorates from the universities of Belgrade, Sarajevo and Krak\u00f3w.\nAndri\u0107's wife died on 16 March 1968. His health deteriorated steadily and he travelled little in his final years. He continued to write until 1974, when his health took another turn for the worse. In December 1974, he was admitted to a Belgrade hospital. He soon fell into a coma, and died in the Military Medical Academy at 1:15\u00a0a.m. on 13 March 1975, aged 82. His remains were cremated, and on 24 April, the urn containing his ashes was buried at the Alley of Distinguished Citizens in Belgrade's New Cemetery. The ceremony was attended by about 10,000 residents of Belgrade.\nInfluences, style and themes.\nAndri\u0107 was an avid reader in his youth. The young Andri\u0107's literary interests varied greatly, ranging from the Greek and Latin Classics to the works of past and contemporary literary figures, including German and Austrian writers such as Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Heinrich Heine, Friedrich Nietzsche, Franz Kafka, Rainer Maria Rilke and Thomas Mann, the French writers Michel de Montaigne, Blaise Pascal, Gustave Flaubert, Victor Hugo and Guy de Maupassant, and the British writers Thomas Carlyle, Walter Scott and Joseph Conrad. Andri\u0107 also read the works of the Spanish writer Miguel de Cervantes, the Italian poet and philosopher Giacomo Leopardi, the Russian writer Nikolay Chernyshevsky, the Norwegian writer Henrik Ibsen, the American writers Walt Whitman and Henry James, and the Czechoslovak philosopher Tom\u00e1\u0161 Garrigue Masaryk. Andri\u0107 was especially fond of Polish literature, and later stated that it had greatly influenced him. He held several Serb writers in high esteem, particularly Karad\u017ei\u0107, Njego\u0161, Ko\u010di\u0107 and Aleksa \u0160anti\u0107. Andri\u0107 also admired the Slovene poets Fran Levstik, Josip Murn and Oton \u017dupan\u010di\u010d, and translated some of their works. Kafka appears to have had a significant influence on Andri\u0107's prose, and his philosophical outlook was informed strongly by the works of Danish philosopher S\u00f8ren Kierkegaard. At one point in his youth, Andri\u0107 even took an interest in Chinese and Japanese literature.\nMuch of Andri\u0107's work was inspired by the traditions and peculiarities of life in Bosnia, and examines the complexity and cultural contrasts of the region's Muslim, Serb and Croat inhabitants. His two best known novels, \"Na Drini \u0107uprija\" and \"Travni\u010dka hronika\", subtly contrast Ottoman Bosnia's \"oriental\" propensities to the \"Western atmosphere\" first introduced by the French and later the Austro-Hungarians. His works contain many words of Turkish, Arabic or Persian origin that found their way into the languages of the South Slavs during Ottoman rule. According to Vucinich, Andri\u0107 uses these words to \"express oriental nuances and subtleties that cannot be rendered as well in his own Serbo-Croatian\".\nIn the opinion of literary historian Nicholas Moravcevich, Andri\u0107's work \"frequently betrays his profound sadness over the misery and waste inherent in the passing of time\". \"Na Drini \u0107uprija\" remains his most famous novel and has received the most scholarly analysis of all his works. Most scholars have interpreted the eponymous bridge as a metonym for Yugoslavia, which was itself a bridge between East and West during the Cold War. In his Nobel acceptance speech, Andri\u0107 described the country as one \"which, at break-neck speed and at the cost of great sacrifices and prodigious efforts, is trying in all fields, including the field of culture, to make up for those things of which it has been deprived by a singularly turbulent and hostile past.\" In Andri\u0107's view, the seemingly conflicting positions of Yugoslavia's disparate ethnic groups could be overcome by knowing one's history. This, he surmised, would help future generations avoid the mistakes of the past, and was in line with his cyclical view of time. Andri\u0107 expressed hope that these differences could be bridged and \"histories demystified\".\nLegacy.\nShortly before his death, Andri\u0107 stated that he wished for all his possessions to be preserved as part of an endowment to be used for \"general cultural and humanitarian purposes\". In March 1976, an administrative committee decided that the purpose of the endowment would be to promote the study of Andri\u0107's work, as well as art and literature in general. The Ivo Andri\u0107 Foundation has since organized a number of international conferences, made grants to foreign scholars studying the writer's works and offered financial aid to cover the publication costs of books relating to Andri\u0107. An annual yearbook, titled \"Sveske Zadu\u017ebine Ive Andri\u0107a\" (The Journals of the Ivo Andri\u0107 Foundation), is published by the organization. Andri\u0107's will and testament stipulated that an award be given annually to the author of each subsequent year's best collection of short stories, which led to the Andri\u0107 Prize's founding in 1975. The street that runs beside Belgrade's New Palace, now the seat of the President of Serbia, was posthumously named \"Andri\u0107ev venac\" (Andri\u0107's Crescent) in his honour. It includes a life-sized statue of the writer. The flat in which Andri\u0107 spent his final years has been turned into a museum. Opened over a year after Andri\u0107's death, it houses books, manuscripts, documents, photographs and personal belongings.\nAndri\u0107 remains the only writer from the former Yugoslavia to have been awarded the Nobel Prize. Given his use of the Ekavian dialect, and the fact that most of his novels and short stories were written in Belgrade, his works have become associated almost exclusively with Serbian literature. The Slavonic studies professor Bojan Aleksov characterizes Andri\u0107 as one of Serbian literature's two central pillars, the other being Petar II Petrovi\u0107-Njego\u0161. \"The plasticity of his narrative,\" Moravcevich writes, \"the depth of his psychological insight, and the universality of his symbolism remain unsurpassed in all of Serbian literature.\" Due to his self-identification as a Serb, many in the Bosniak and Croat literary establishments have come to \"reject or limit Andri\u0107's association with their literatures\". In Croatia, Andri\u0107 was not generally seen as part of Croatian literature even in former Yugoslavia, though that started to change in the Croatian literary circles around 1990. Following Yugoslavia's disintegration in the early 1990s, Andri\u0107's works were among those that the Croatian Democratic Union activists had purged from some of the city libraries and schools in Croatia. Dubravka Ugre\u0161i\u0107 criticized the then-President Franjo Tu\u0111man for promoting the likes of Ivan Aralica over Ivo Andri\u0107, Slobodan \u0160najder, Slavenka Drakuli\u0107 and herself. The Croatian historian and politician Ivo Banac characterized Andri\u0107 as a writer who \"missed the Chetnik train by a very small margin\". Though Andri\u0107 remains a controversial figure in Croatia, the Croatian literary establishment largely rehabilitated his works.\nBosniak scholars have objected to the ostensibly negative portrayal of Muslim characters in Andri\u0107's works. During the 1950s, his most vocal Bosniak detractors accused him of being a plagiarist, homosexual and Serbian nationalist. Some went so far as to call for his Nobel Prize to be taken away. Most Bosniak criticism of his works appeared in the period immediately prior to the breakup of Yugoslavia and in the aftermath of the Bosnian War. In early 1992, a Bosniak nationalist in Vi\u0161egrad destroyed a statue of Andri\u0107 with a sledgehammer. In 2009, Nezim Halilovi\u0107, the imam of Sarajevo's King Fahd Mosque, derided Andri\u0107 as a \"Chetnik ideologue\" during a sermon. In 2012, the filmmaker Emir Kusturica and Bosnian Serb President Milorad Dodik unveiled another statue of Andri\u0107 in Vi\u0161egrad, this time as part of the construction of an ethno-town called Andri\u0107grad, sponsored by Kusturica and the Government of Republika Srpska. Andri\u0107grad was officially inaugurated in June 2014, on the occasion of the 100th anniversary of the assassination of Franz Ferdinand.\nStarting in the early 1990s, Andri\u0107's likeness began to appear on the banknotes of the Yugoslav dinar. His likeness is also featured on 1KM banknotes that were issued in Republika Srpska and 200KM banknotes that were issued at the national level in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as 20 dinar coins minted by Serbia in 2011 to mark the fiftieth anniversary of his being awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature.\nWorks.\nSource: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55017", "revid": "39915412", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55017", "title": "Fusion power", "text": "Electricity generation by nuclear fusion\nFusion power is a potential method of electric power generation from heat released by nuclear fusion reactions. In fusion, two light atomic nuclei combine to form a heavier nucleus and release energy. Devices that use this process are known as fusion reactors. \nResearch on fusion reactors began in the 1940s. As of 2025, the National Ignition Facility (NIF) in the United States is the only laboratory to have demonstrated a fusion energy gain factor above one, but efficiencies orders of magnitude higher are required to reach engineering breakeven (a net electricity-producing plant) or economic breakeven (where the net electricity pays for the plant's whole-life cost).\nThermonuclear fusion reactions require fuel in a plasma state and a confined environment with high temperature, pressure, and sufficient confinement time. The relationship between these parameters is expressed by the Lawson criterion. In stars, gravity provides the conditions for fusing hydrogen isotopes. Experimental reactors use deuterium and tritium, heavier isotopes of hydrogen, in a process known as DT fusion. This reaction forms a helium nucleus and an energetic neutron. \nFusion fuel is extremely energy-dense, but tritium is scarce on Earth and decays with a half-life of about 12.3 years. Future reactors plan to use lithium breeding blankets that generate tritium when exposed to neutron radiation. \nFusion offers advantages compared with nuclear fission. It produces minimal high-level radioactive waste and involves lower inherent safety risks. However, the process generates intense neutron radiation that gradually damages the inner walls of a reactor. Achieving sustained energy gain beyond breakeven and converting it efficiently into electricity remain major technical challenges. \nResearch focuses mainly on two methods: magnetic confinement fusion (MCF) and inertial confinement fusion (ICF). MCF devices use magnetic fields to contain plasma. Early concepts included the z-pinch, stellarator, and magnetic mirror, with the tokamak design becoming dominant after Soviet experiments in the 1960s. ICF compresses and heats small fuel pellets using high-energy lasers, developed primarily since the 1970s. The largest active projects are ITER in France and the National Ignition Facility in the United States. Commercial and academic teams are also studying alternatives such as magnetized target fusion and modern stellarator designs.\nTerminology.\nThe terms \"fusion experiment\" and \"fusion device\" refer to the collection of technologies used for scientific investigation of plasma, and technical advancement. Not all are capable of, or routinely used for, producing thermonuclear reactions i.e. fusion.\nThe term \"fusion reactor\" is used interchangeably to mean the above experiments, or to mean a hypothetical power-producing version, at the center of a commercial power plant, requiring additions such as a breeding blanket and heat engine.\nBackground.\nMechanism.\nFusion reactions occur when two or more atomic nuclei come close enough for long enough that the nuclear force pulling them together exceeds the electrostatic force pushing them apart, fusing them into heavier nuclei. For nuclei heavier than iron-56, the reaction is endothermic, requiring an input of energy. The heavy nuclei bigger than iron have many more protons resulting in a greater repulsive force. For nuclei lighter than iron-56, the reaction is exothermic, releasing energy when they fuse. Since hydrogen has a single proton in its nucleus, it requires the least effort to attain fusion, and yields the most net energy output. Also, since it has one electron, hydrogen is the easiest fuel to fully ionize.\nThe repulsive electrostatic interaction between nuclei operates across larger distances than the strong force, which has a range of roughly one femtometer\u2014the diameter of a proton or neutron. The fuel atoms must be supplied enough kinetic energy to approach one another closely enough for the strong force to overcome the electrostatic repulsion in order to initiate fusion. The \"Coulomb barrier\" is the quantity of kinetic energy required to move the fuel atoms near enough. Atoms can be heated to extremely high temperatures or accelerated in a particle accelerator to produce this energy.\nAn atom loses its electrons once it is heated past its ionization energy. The resultant bare nucleus is a type of ion. The result of this ionization is plasma, which is a heated cloud of bare nuclei and free electrons that were formerly bound to them. Plasmas are electrically conducting and magnetically controlled because the charges are separated. This is used by several fusion devices to confine the hot particles.\nCross section.\nA reaction's cross section, denoted \u03c3, measures the probability that a fusion reaction will happen. This depends on the relative velocity of the two nuclei. Higher relative velocities generally increase the probability, but the probability begins to decrease again at very high energies.\nIn a plasma, particle velocity can be characterized using a probability distribution. If the plasma is thermalized, the distribution looks like a Gaussian curve, or Maxwell\u2013Boltzmann distribution. In this case, it is useful to use the average particle cross section over the velocity distribution. This is entered into the volumetric fusion rate:\nformula_1\nwhere:\nLawson criterion.\nThe Lawson criterion considers the energy balance between the energy produced in fusion reactions to the energy being lost to the environment. In order to generate usable energy, a system would have to produce more energy than it loses. Lawson assumed an energy balance, shown below.\nformula_5\nwhere:\nThe rate of fusion, and thus Pfusion, depends on the temperature and density of the plasma. The plasma loses energy through conduction and radiation. Conduction occurs when ions, electrons, or neutrals impact other substances, typically a surface of the device, and transfer a portion of their kinetic energy to the other atoms. The rate of conduction is also based on the temperature and density. Radiation is energy that leaves the cloud as light. Radiation also increases with temperature as well as the mass of the ions. Fusion power systems must operate in a region where the rate of fusion is higher than the losses.\nTriple product: density, temperature, time.\nThe Lawson criterion argues that a machine holding a thermalized and quasi-neutral plasma has to generate enough energy to overcome its energy losses. The amount of energy released in a given volume is a function of the temperature, and thus the reaction rate on a per-particle basis, the density of particles within that volume, and finally the confinement time, the length of time that energy stays within the volume. This is known as the \"triple product\": the plasma density, temperature, and confinement time.\nIn magnetic confinement, the density is low, on the order of a \"good vacuum\". For instance, in the ITER device the fuel density is about 1.0 \u00d7 1019 m\u22123, which is about one-millionth atmospheric density. This means that the temperature and/or confinement time must increase. Fusion-relevant temperatures have been achieved using a variety of heating methods that were developed in the early 1970s. In modern machines, as of 2019[ [update]], the major remaining issue was the confinement time. Plasmas in strong magnetic fields are subject to a number of inherent instabilities, which must be suppressed to reach useful durations. One way to do this is to simply make the reactor volume larger, which reduces the rate of leakage due to classical diffusion. This is why ITER is so large.\nIn contrast, inertial confinement systems approach useful triple product values via higher density, and have short confinement intervals. In NIF, the initial frozen hydrogen fuel load has a density less than water that is increased to about 100 times the density of lead. In these conditions, the rate of fusion is so high that the fuel fuses in the microseconds it takes for the heat generated by the reactions to blow the fuel apart. Although NIF is also large, this is a function of its \"driver\" design, not inherent to the fusion process.\nEnergy capture.\nMultiple approaches have been proposed to capture the energy that fusion produces. The simplest is to heat a fluid. The commonly targeted D\u2013T reaction releases much of its energy as fast-moving neutrons. Electrically neutral, the neutron is unaffected by the confinement scheme. In most designs, it is captured in a thick \"blanket\" of lithium surrounding the reactor core. When struck by a high-energy neutron, the blanket heats up. It is then actively cooled with a working fluid that drives a turbine to produce power.\nAnother design proposed to use the neutrons to breed fission fuel in a blanket of nuclear waste, a concept known as a fission-fusion hybrid. In these systems, the power output is enhanced by the fission events, and power is extracted using systems like those in conventional fission reactors.\nDesigns that use other fuels, notably the proton-boron aneutronic fusion reaction, release much more of their energy in the form of charged particles. In these cases, power extraction systems based on the movement of these charges are possible. Direct energy conversion was developed at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) in the 1980s as a method to maintain a voltage directly using fusion reaction products. This has demonstrated energy capture efficiency of 48 percent.\nPlasma behavior.\nPlasma is an ionized gas that conducts electricity. In bulk, it is modeled using magnetohydrodynamics, which is a combination of the Navier\u2013Stokes equations governing fluids and Maxwell's equations governing how magnetic and electric fields behave. Fusion exploits several plasma properties, including:\nMethods.\nNegative power methods.\nThese methods inherently consume more power than they can provide via fusion.\nCommon tools.\nMany approaches, equipment, and mechanisms are employed across multiple projects to address fusion heating, measurement, and power production.\nMachine learning.\nA deep reinforcement learning system has been used to control a tokamak-based reactor. The system was able to manipulate the magnetic coils to manage the plasma. The system was able to continuously adjust to maintain appropriate behavior (more complex than step-based systems). In 2014, Google began working with California-based fusion company TAE Technologies to control the Joint European Torus (JET) to predict plasma behavior. DeepMind has also developed a control scheme with TCV.\nMeasurement.\nThe diagnostics of a fusion scientific reactor are extremely complex and varied. The diagnostics required for a fusion power reactor will be various but less complicated than those of a scientific reactor as by the time of commercialization, many real-time feedback and control diagnostics will have been perfected. However, the operating environment of a commercial fusion reactor will be harsher for diagnostic systems than in a scientific reactor because continuous operations may involve higher plasma temperatures and higher levels of neutron irradiation. In many proposed approaches, commercialization will require the additional ability to measure and separate diverter gases, for example helium and impurities, and to monitor fuel breeding, for instance the state of a tritium breeding liquid lithium liner. The following are some basic techniques.\nPower production.\nNeutron blankets absorb neutrons, which heats the blanket. Power can be extracted from the blanket in various ways:\nConfinement.\nConfinement refers to all the conditions necessary to keep a plasma dense and hot long enough to undergo fusion. General principles:\nTo produce self-sustaining fusion, part of the energy released by the reaction must be used to heat new reactants and maintain the conditions for fusion.\nMagnetic confinement.\nMagnetic confinement fusion uses magnetic fields to confine the plasma.\nMagnetic mirror.\nIn a magnetic mirror reactor, a configuration of electromagnets is used to create an area with an increasing density of magnetic field lines at either end of the confinement volume. Particles approaching the ends experience an increasing force that eventually causes them to reverse direction and return to the confinement area, like light reflected from a mirror. Several devices apply this effect. The most famous was the magnetic mirror machines, a series of devices built at LLNL from the 1960s to the 1980s. Other examples include magnetic bottles and the biconic cusp. Because the mirror machines were straight, they had some advantages over ring-shaped designs. The mirrors were easier to construct and maintain and direct conversion energy capture was easier to implement. Poor confinement has led this approach to be abandoned, except in the polywell design.\nMagnetic loops.\nMagnetic loops bend the field lines back on themselves, either in circles or more commonly in nested toroidal surfaces. The most highly developed systems of this type are the tokamak, the stellarator, and the reversed field pinch. Compact toroids, especially the field-reversed configuration and the spheromak, attempt to combine the advantages of toroidal magnetic surfaces with those of a simply connected (non-toroidal) machine, resulting in a mechanically simpler and smaller confinement area.\nInertial confinement.\nInertial confinement fusion is the use of rapid implosion to heat and confine plasma. A shell surrounding the fuel is imploded using a direct laser blast (direct drive), a secondary x-ray blast (indirect drive), or heavy beams. The fuel must be compressed to about 30 times solid density with energetic beams. Direct drive can in principle be efficient, but insufficient uniformity has prevented success.:19\u201320 Indirect drive uses beams to heat a shell, driving the shell to radiate x-rays, which then implode the pellet. The beams are commonly laser beams, but ion and electron beams have been investigated.:182\u2013193\nElectrostatic confinement.\nElectrostatic confinement fusion devices use electrostatic fields. The best known is the fusor. This device has a cathode inside an anode wire cage. Positive ions fly towards the negative inner cage, and are heated by the electric field in the process. If they miss the inner cage they can collide and fuse. Ions typically hit the cathode, however, creating prohibitory high conduction losses. Fusion rates in fusors are low because of competing physical effects, such as energy loss in the form of light radiation. Designs have been proposed to avoid the problems associated with the cage, by generating the field using a non-neutral cloud. These include a plasma oscillating device, a magnetically shielded-grid, a penning trap, the polywell, and the F1 cathode driver concept.\nFuels.\nThe fuels considered for fusion power are mainly the heavier isotopes of hydrogen\u2014deuterium and tritium. Deuterium is abundant on earth in the form of semiheavy water. Tritium, decaying with a half-life of 12 years, must be produced. Fusion reactor concepts assume as a component a proposed lithium \"breeding blanket\" technology surrounding the reactor. Helium-3 is a more speculative fuel, which must be mined extraterrestrially or produced by other nuclear reactions. The protium\u2013boron-11 reaction is extremely speculative, but minimizes neutron radiation.\nDeuterium, tritium.\nThe easiest nuclear reaction, at the lowest energy, is D+T:\n[&lt;noinclude /&gt;[deuterium|D]&lt;noinclude /&gt;] + [&lt;noinclude /&gt;[tritium|T]&lt;noinclude /&gt;] \u2192 [&lt;noinclude /&gt;[helium|He]&lt;noinclude /&gt;] (3.5 MeV) + (14.1 MeV)\nThis reaction is common in research, industrial and military applications, usually as a neutron source. Deuterium is a naturally occurring isotope of hydrogen and is commonly available. The large mass ratio of the hydrogen isotopes makes their separation easy compared to the uranium enrichment process. Tritium is a natural isotope of hydrogen, but because it has a short half-life of 12.32 years, it is hard to find, store, produce, and is expensive. Consequently, the deuterium-tritium fuel cycle requires the breeding of tritium from lithium using one of the following reactions:\n + Li \u2192 T + He\n + Li \u2192 T + He + \nThe reactant neutron is supplied by the D\u2013T fusion reaction shown above, and the one that has the greatest energy yield. The reaction with 6Li is exothermic, providing a small energy gain for the reactor. The reaction with 7Li is endothermic, but does not consume the neutron. Neutron multiplication reactions are required to replace the neutrons lost to absorption by other elements. Leading candidate neutron multiplication materials are beryllium and lead, but the 7Li reaction helps to keep the neutron population high. Natural lithium is mainly 7Li, which has a low tritium production cross section compared to 6Li so most reactor designs use breeding blankets with enriched 6Li.\nDrawbacks commonly attributed to D\u2013T fusion power include:\nThe neutron flux expected in a commercial D-T fusion reactor is about 100 times that of fission power reactors, posing problems for material design. After a series of D\u2013T tests at JET, the vacuum vessel was sufficiently radioactive that it required remote handling for the year following the tests.\nIn a production setting, the neutrons would react with lithium in the breeding blanket composed of lithium ceramic pebbles or liquid lithium, yielding tritium. The energy of the neutrons ends up in the lithium, which would then be transferred to drive electrical production. The lithium blanket protects the outer portions of the reactor from the neutron flux. Newer designs, the advanced tokamak in particular, use lithium inside the reactor core as a design element. The plasma interacts directly with the lithium, preventing a problem known as \"recycling\". The advantage of this design was demonstrated in the Lithium Tokamak Experiment.\nDeuterium.\nFusing two deuterium nuclei is the second easiest fusion reaction. The reaction has two branches that occur with nearly equal probability:\nD + D \u2192 T + H\nD + D \u2192 He + \nThis reaction is also common in research. The optimum energy to initiate this reaction is 15\u00a0keV, only slightly higher than that for the D-T reaction. The first branch produces tritium, so that a D-D reactor is not tritium-free, even though it does not require an input of tritium or lithium. Unless the tritons are quickly removed, most of the tritium produced is burned in the reactor, which reduces the handling of tritium, with the disadvantage of producing more, and higher-energy, neutrons. The neutron from the second branch of the D-D reaction has an energy of only , while the neutron from the D\u2013T reaction has an energy of , resulting in greater isotope production and material damage. When the tritons are removed quickly while allowing the 3He to react, the fuel cycle is called \"tritium suppressed fusion\". The removed tritium decays to 3He with a 12.5-year half-life. By recycling the 3He decay product into the reactor, the fusion reactor does not require materials resistant to fast neutrons.\nAssuming complete tritium burn-up, the reduction in the fraction of fusion energy carried by neutrons would be only about 18%, so that the primary advantage of the D\u2013D fuel cycle is that tritium breeding is not required. Other advantages are independence from lithium resources and a somewhat softer neutron spectrum. The disadvantage of D\u2013D compared to D\u2013T is that the energy confinement time (at a given pressure) must be 30 times longer and the power produced (at a given pressure and volume) is 68 times less.\nAssuming complete removal of tritium and 3He recycling, only 6% of the fusion energy is carried by neutrons. The tritium-suppressed D\u2013D fusion requires an energy confinement that is 10 times longer compared to D\u2013T and double the plasma temperature.\nDeuterium, helium-3.\nA second-generation approach to controlled fusion power involves combining helium-3 (3He) and deuterium (2H):\nD + He \u2192 He + H\nThis reaction produces 4He and a high-energy proton. As with the p-11B aneutronic fusion fuel cycle, most of the reaction energy is released as charged particles, reducing activation of the reactor housing and potentially allowing more efficient energy harvesting (via any of several pathways). In practice, D\u2013D side reactions produce a significant number of neutrons, leaving p-11B as the preferred cycle for aneutronic fusion.\nProton, boron-11.\nBoth material science problems and non-proliferation concerns are greatly diminished by aneutronic fusion. Theoretically, the most reactive aneutronic fuel is 3He. However, obtaining reasonable quantities of 3He implies large scale extraterrestrial mining on the Moon or in the atmosphere of Uranus or Saturn. Therefore, the most promising candidate fuel for such fusion is fusing the readily available protium (i.e. a proton) and boron. Their fusion releases no neutrons, but produces energetic charged alpha (helium) particles whose energy can directly be converted to electrical power:\nH + B \u2192 3 He\nSide reactions are likely to yield neutrons that carry only about 0.1% of the power,:177\u2013182 which means that neutron scattering is not used for energy transfer and material activation is reduced several thousand-fold. The optimum temperature for this reaction of 123 keV is nearly ten times higher than that for pure hydrogen reactions, and energy confinement must be 500 times better than that required for the D\u2013T reaction. In addition, the power density is 2500 times lower than for D\u2013T, although per unit mass of fuel, this is still considerably higher compared to fission reactors.\nBecause the confinement properties of the tokamak and laser pellet fusion are marginal, most proposals for aneutronic fusion are based on radically different confinement concepts, such as the Polywell and the Dense Plasma Focus. In 2013, a research team led by Christine Labaune at \u00c9cole Polytechnique, reported a new fusion rate record for proton-boron fusion, with an estimated 80\u00a0million fusion reactions during a 1.5 nanosecond laser fire, 100 times greater than reported in previous experiments.\nMaterial selection.\nStructural material stability is a critical issue. Materials that can survive the high temperatures and neutron bombardment experienced in a fusion reactor are considered key to success. The principal issues are the conditions generated by the plasma, neutron degradation of wall surfaces, and the related issue of plasma-wall surface conditions. Reducing hydrogen permeability is seen as crucial to hydrogen recycling and control of the tritium inventory. Materials with the lowest bulk hydrogen solubility and diffusivity provide the optimal candidates for stable barriers. A few pure metals, including tungsten and beryllium, and compounds such as carbides, dense oxides, and nitrides have been investigated. Research has highlighted that coating techniques for preparing well-adhered and perfect barriers are of equivalent importance. The most attractive techniques are those in which an ad-layer is formed by oxidation alone. Alternative methods utilize specific gas environments with strong magnetic and electric fields. Assessment of barrier performance represents an additional challenge. Classical coated membranes gas permeation continues to be the most reliable method to determine hydrogen permeation barrier (HPB) efficiency. In 2021, in response to increasing numbers of designs for fusion power reactors for 2040, the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority published the https://, focusing on five priority areas, with a focus on tokamak family reactors:\nSuperconducting materials.\nIn a plasma that is embedded in a magnetic field (known as a magnetized plasma) the fusion rate scales as the magnetic field strength to the 4th power. For this reason, many fusion companies that rely on magnetic fields to control their plasma are trying to develop high temperature superconducting devices. In 2021, SuperOx, a Russian and Japanese company, developed a new manufacturing process for making superconducting YBCO wire for fusion reactors. This new wire was shown to conduct between 700 and 2000 Amps per square millimeter. The company was able to produce 186 miles of wire in nine months.\nContainment considerations.\nEven on smaller production scales, the containment apparatus is blasted with matter and energy. Designs for plasma containment must consider:\nDepending on the approach, these effects may be higher or lower than fission reactors. One estimate put the radiation at 100 times that of a typical pressurized water reactor. Depending on the approach, other considerations such as electrical conductivity, magnetic permeability, and mechanical strength matter. Materials must also not end up as long-lived radioactive waste.\nPlasma-wall surface conditions.\nFor long term use, each atom in the wall is expected to be hit by a neutron and displaced about 100 times before the material is replaced. These high-energy neutron collisions with the atoms in the wall result in the absorption of the neutrons, forming unstable isotopes of the atoms. When the isotope decays, it may emit alpha particles, protons, or gamma rays. Alpha particles, once stabilized by capturing electrons, form helium atoms which accumulate at grain boundaries and may result in swelling, blistering, or embrittlement of the material.\nSelection of materials.\nTungsten is widely regarded as the optimal material for plasma-facing components in next-generation fusion devices due to its unique properties and potential for enhancements. Its low sputtering rates and high melting point make it particularly suitable for the high-stress environments of fusion reactors, allowing it to withstand intense conditions without rapid degradation. Additionally, tungsten's low tritium retention through co-deposition and implantation is essential in fusion contexts, as it helps to minimize the accumulation of this radioactive isotope.\nLiquid metals (lithium, gallium, tin) have been proposed, e.g., by injection of 1\u20135\u00a0mm thick streams flowing at 10\u00a0m/s on solid substrates.\nGraphite features a gross erosion rate due to physical and chemical sputtering amounting to many meters per year, requiring redeposition of the sputtered material. The redeposition site generally does not exactly match the sputter site, allowing net erosion that may be prohibitive. An even larger problem is that tritium is redeposited with the redeposited graphite. The tritium inventory in the wall and dust could build up to many kilograms, representing a waste of resources and a radiological hazard in case of an accident. Graphite found favor as material for short-lived experiments, but appears unlikely to become the primary plasma-facing material (PFM) in a commercial reactor.\nCeramic materials such as silicon carbide (SiC) have similar issues like graphite. Tritium retention in silicon carbide plasma-facing components is approximately 1.5-2 times higher than in graphite, resulting in reduced fuel efficiency and heightened safety risks in fusion reactors. SiC tends to trap more tritium, limiting its availability for fusion and increasing the risk of hazardous accumulation, complicating tritium management. Furthermore, the chemical and physical sputtering of SiC remains significant, contributing to tritium buildup through co-deposition over time and with increasing particle fluence. As a result, carbon-based materials have been excluded from ITER, DEMO, and similar devices. \nTungsten's sputtering rate is orders of magnitude smaller than carbon's, and tritium is much less incorporated into redeposited tungsten. However, tungsten plasma impurities are much more damaging than carbon impurities, and self-sputtering can be high, requiring the plasma in contact with the tungsten not be too hot (a few tens of eV rather than hundreds of eV). Tungsten also has issues around eddy currents and melting in off-normal events, as well as some radiological issues.\nRecent advances in materials for containment apparatus materials have found that certain ceramics can actually improve the longevity of the material of the containment apparatus. Studies on MAX phases, such as titanium silicon carbide, show that under the high operating temperatures of nuclear fusion, the material undergoes a phase transformation from a hexagonal structure to a face-centered-cubic (FCC) structure, driven by helium bubble growth. Helium atoms preferentially accumulate in the Si layer of the hexagonal structure, as the Si atoms are more mobile than the Ti\u2013C slabs. As more atoms are trapped, the Ti\u2013C slab is peeled off, causing the Si atoms to become highly mobile interstitial atoms in the new FCC structure. Lattice strain induced by the He bubbles cause Si atoms to diffuse out of compressive areas, typically towards the surface of the material, forming a protective silicon dioxide layer.\nDoping vessel materials with iron silicate has emerged as a promising approach to enhance containment materials in fusion reactors, as well. This method targets helium embrittlement at grain boundaries, a common issue that arises as helium atoms accumulate and form bubbles. Over time, these bubbles coalesce at grain boundaries, causing them to expand and degrade the material's structural integrity. By contrast, introducing iron silicate creates nucleation sites within the metal matrix that are more thermodynamically favorable for helium aggregation. This localized congregation around iron silicate nanoparticles induces matrix strain rather than weakening grain boundaries, preserving the material's strength and longevity.\nAccident scenarios and the environment.\nAccident potential.\nAccident potential and effect on the environment are critical to social acceptance of nuclear fusion, also known as a social license. Fusion reactors are not subject to catastrophic meltdown. It requires precise and controlled temperature, pressure and magnetic field parameters to produce net energy, and any damage or loss of required control would rapidly quench the reaction. Fusion reactors operate with seconds or even microseconds worth of fuel at any moment. Without active refueling, the reactions immediately quench.\nThe same constraints prevent runaway reactions. Although the plasma is expected to have a volume of or more, the plasma typically contains only a few grams of fuel. By comparison, a fission reactor is typically loaded with enough fuel for months or years, and no additional fuel is necessary to continue the reaction. This large fuel supply is what offers the possibility of a meltdown.\nIn magnetic containment, strong fields develop in coils that are mechanically held in place by the reactor structure. Failure of this structure could release this tension and allow the magnet to \"explode\" outward. The severity of this event would be similar to other industrial accidents or an MRI machine quench/explosion, and could be effectively contained within a containment building similar to those used in fission reactors.\nIn laser-driven inertial containment the larger size of the reaction chamber reduces the stress on materials. Although failure of the reaction chamber is possible, stopping fuel delivery prevents catastrophic failure.\nMagnet quench.\nA magnet quench is an abnormal termination of magnet operation that occurs when part of the superconducting coil exits the superconducting state (becomes normal). This can occur because the field inside the magnet is too large, the rate of change of field is too large (causing eddy currents and resultant heating in the copper support matrix), or a combination of the two.\nMore rarely a magnet defect can cause a quench. When this happens, that particular spot is subject to rapid Joule heating from the current, which raises the temperature of the surrounding regions. This pushes those regions into the normal state as well, which leads to more heating in a chain reaction. The entire magnet rapidly becomes normal over several seconds, depending on the size of the superconducting coil. This is accompanied by a loud bang as the energy in the magnetic field is converted to heat, and the cryogenic fluid boils away. The abrupt decrease of current can result in kilovolt inductive voltage spikes and arcing. Permanent damage to the magnet is rare, but components can be damaged by localized heating, high voltages, or large mechanical forces.\nIn practice, magnets usually have safety devices to stop or limit the current when a quench is detected. If a large magnet undergoes a quench, the inert vapor formed by the evaporating cryogenic fluid can present a significant asphyxiation hazard to operators by displacing breathable air.\nA large section of the superconducting magnets in CERN's Large Hadron Collider unexpectedly quenched during start-up operations in 2008, destroying multiple magnets. In order to prevent a recurrence, the LHC's superconducting magnets are equipped with fast-ramping heaters that are activated when a quench event is detected. The dipole bending magnets are connected in series. Each power circuit includes 154 individual magnets, and should a quench event occur, the entire combined stored energy of these magnets must be dumped at once. This energy is transferred into massive blocks of metal that heat up to several hundred degrees Celsius\u2014because of resistive heating\u2014in seconds. A magnet quench is a \"fairly routine event\" during the operation of a particle accelerator.\nAtmospheric tritium release.\nThe natural product of the fusion reaction is a small amount of helium, which is harmless to life. Hazardous tritium is difficult to retain completely.\nAlthough tritium is volatile and biologically active, the health risk posed by a release is much lower than that of most radioactive contaminants, because of tritium's short half-life (12.32 years) and very low decay energy (~14.95\u00a0keV), and because it does not bioaccumulate (it cycles out of the body as water, with a biological half-life of 7 to 14 days). ITER incorporates total containment facilities for tritium.\nCalculations suggest that about of tritium and other radioactive gases in a typical power station would be present. The amount is small enough that it would dilute to legally acceptable limits by the time they reached the station's perimeter fence.\nThe likelihood of small industrial accidents, including the local release of radioactivity and injury to staff, are estimated to be minor compared to fission. They would include accidental releases of lithium or tritium or mishandling of radioactive reactor components.\nRadioactive waste.\nFusion reactors create far less radioactive material than fission reactors. Further, the material it creates is less damaging biologically, and the radioactivity dissipates within a time period that is well within existing engineering capabilities for safe long-term waste storage. In specific terms, except in the case of aneutronic fusion, the neutron flux turns the structural materials radioactive. The amount of radioactive material at shut-down may be comparable to that of a fission reactor, with important differences. The half-lives of fusion and neutron activation radioisotopes tend to be less than those from fission, so that the hazard decreases more rapidly. Whereas fission reactors produce waste that remains radioactive for thousands of years, the radioactive material in a fusion reactor (other than tritium) would be the reactor core itself and most of this would be radioactive for about 50 years, with other low-level waste being radioactive for another 100 years or so thereafter. The fusion waste's short half-life eliminates the challenge of long-term storage. By 500 years, the material would have the same radiotoxicity as coal ash.\nNonetheless, classification as intermediate level waste rather than low-level waste may complicate safety discussions.\nThe choice of materials is less constrained than in conventional fission, where many materials are required for their specific neutron cross-sections. Fusion reactors can be designed using \"low activation\", materials that do not easily become radioactive. Vanadium, for example, becomes much less radioactive than stainless steel. Carbon fiber materials are also low-activation, are strong and light, and are promising for laser-inertial reactors where a magnetic field is not required.\nFuel reserves.\nFusion power commonly proposes the use of deuterium as fuel and many current designs also use lithium. Assuming a fusion energy output equal to the 1995 global power output of about 100 EJ/yr (= 1 \u00d7 1020 J/yr) and that this does not increase in the future, which is unlikely, then known current lithium reserves would last 3000 years. Lithium from sea water would last 60\u00a0million years, however, and a more complicated fusion process using only deuterium would have fuel for 150\u00a0billion years. \nPotential military usage.\nIn some scenarios, fusion power technology could be adapted to produce materials for military purposes. A huge amount of tritium could be produced by a fusion power station; tritium is used in the trigger of hydrogen bombs and in modern boosted fission weapons, but it can be produced in other ways. The energetic neutrons from a fusion reactor could be used to breed weapons-grade plutonium or uranium for an atomic bomb (for example by transmutation of 238U to 239Pu, or 232Th to 233U).\nA study conducted in 2011 assessed three scenarios:\nAnother study concluded \"...large fusion reactors\u2014even if not designed for fissile material breeding\u2014could easily produce several hundred kg Pu per year with high weapon quality and very low source material requirements.\" It was emphasized that the implementation of features for intrinsic proliferation resistance might only be possible at an early phase of research and development. The theoretical and computational tools needed for hydrogen bomb design are closely related to those needed for inertial confinement fusion, but have very little in common with magnetic confinement fusion.\nEconomics.\nThe European Union spent almost \u20ac10 billion through the 1990s. ITER represents an investment of over twenty billion dollars, and possibly tens of billions more, including in kind contributions. Under the European Union's Sixth Framework Programme, nuclear fusion research received \u20ac750 million (in addition to ITER funding), compared with \u20ac810 million for sustainable energy research, putting research into fusion power well ahead of that of any single rival technology. The United States Department of Energy has allocated $US367M\u2013$US671M every year since 2010, peaking in 2020, with plans to reduce investment to $US425M in its FY2021 Budget Request. About a quarter of this budget is directed to support ITER.\nThe size of the investments and time lines meant that fusion research was traditionally almost exclusively publicly funded. However, starting in the 2010s, the promise of commercializing a paradigm-changing low-carbon energy source began to attract a raft of companies and investors. Over two dozen start-up companies attracted over one billion dollars from roughly 2000 to 2020, mainly from 2015, and a further three billion in funding and milestone related commitments in 2021, with investors including Jeff Bezos, Peter Thiel, and Bill Gates, as well as institutional investors including Legal &amp; General, and energy companies including Equinor, Eni, Chevron, and the Chinese ENN Group. In 2021, Commonwealth Fusion Systems (CFS) obtained $1.8 billion in scale-up funding, and Helion Energy obtained a half-billion dollars with an additional $1.7 billion contingent on meeting milestones.\nScenarios developed in the 2000s and early 2010s discussed the effects of the commercialization of fusion power on the future of human civilization. Using nuclear fission as a guide, these saw ITER and later DEMO as bringing online the first commercial reactors around 2050 and a rapid expansion after mid-century. Some scenarios emphasized \"fusion nuclear science facilities\" as a step beyond ITER. However, the economic obstacles to tokamak-based fusion power remain immense, requiring investment to fund prototype tokamak reactors and development of new supply chains, a problem which will affect any kind of fusion reactor. Tokamak designs appear to be labour-intensive, while the commercialization risk of alternatives like inertial fusion energy is high due to the lack of government resources.\nScenarios since 2010 note computing and material science advances enabling multi-phase national or cost-sharing \"Fusion Pilot Plants\" (FPPs) along various technology pathways, such as the UK Spherical Tokamak for Energy Production, within the 2030\u20132040 time frame. Notably, in June 2021, General Fusion announced it would accept the UK government's offer to host the world's first substantial public-private partnership fusion demonstration plant, at Culham Centre for Fusion Energy. The plant will be constructed from 2022 to 2025 and is intended to lead the way for commercial pilot plants in the late 2025s. The plant will be 70% of full scale and is expected to attain a stable plasma of 150 million degrees. In the United States, cost-sharing public-private partnership FPPs appear likely, and in 2022 the DOE announced a new Milestone-Based Fusion Development Program as the centerpiece of its Bold Decadal Vision for Commercial Fusion Energy, which envisages private sector-led teams delivering FPP pre-conceptual designs, defining technology roadmaps, and pursuing the R&amp;D necessary to resolve critical-path scientific and technical issues towards an FPP design. Compact reactor technology based on such demonstration plants may enable commercialization via a fleet approach from the 2030s if early markets can be located.\nThe widespread adoption of non-nuclear renewable energy has transformed the energy landscape. Such renewables are projected to supply 74% of global energy by 2050. The steady fall of renewable energy prices challenges the economic competitiveness of fusion power.\nSome economists suggest fusion power is unlikely to match other renewable energy costs. Fusion plants are expected to face large start up and capital costs. Moreover, operation and maintenance are likely to be costly. While the costs of the China Fusion Engineering Test Reactor are not well known, an EU DEMO fusion concept was projected to feature a levelized cost of energy (LCOE) of $121/MWh.\nFuel costs are low, but economists suggest that the energy cost for a one-gigawatt plant would increase by $16.5 per MWh for every $1 billion increase in the capital investment in construction. There is also the risk that easily obtained lithium will be used up making batteries. Obtaining it from seawater would be very costly and might require more energy than the energy that would be generated.\nIn contrast, renewable levelized cost of energy estimates are substantially lower. For instance, the 2019 levelized cost of energy of solar energy was estimated to be $40-$46/MWh, on shore wind was estimated at $29\u201356/MWh, and offshore wind was approximately $92/MWh.\nHowever, fusion power may still have a role filling energy gaps left by renewables, depending on how administration priorities for energy and environmental justice influence the market. In the 2020s, socioeconomic studies of fusion that began to consider these factors emerged, and in 2022 EUROFusion launched its Socio-Economic Studies and Prospective Research and Development strands to investigate how such factors might affect commercialization pathways and timetables. Similarly, in April 2023 Japan announced a national strategy to industrialise fusion. Thus, fusion power may work in tandem with other renewable energy sources rather than becoming the primary energy source. In some applications, fusion power could provide the base load, especially if including integrated thermal storage and cogeneration and considering the potential for retrofitting coal plants.\nRegulation.\nAs fusion pilot plants move within reach, legal and regulatory issues must be addressed. In September 2020, the United States National Academy of Sciences consulted with private fusion companies to consider a national pilot plant. The following month, the United States Department of Energy, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) and the Fusion Industry Association co-hosted a public forum to begin the process. In November 2020, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) began working with various nations to create safety standards such as dose regulations and radioactive waste handling. In January and March 2021, NRC hosted two public meetings on regulatory frameworks. A public-private cost-sharing approach was endorsed in the December 27 H.R.133 Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021, which authorized $325 million over five years for a partnership program to build fusion demonstration facilities, with a 100% match from private industry.\nSubsequently, the UK Regulatory Horizons Council published a report calling for a fusion regulatory framework by early 2022 in order to position the UK as a global leader in commercializing fusion power. This call was met by the UK government publishing in October 2021 both its \"Fusion Green Paper\" and its \"Fusion Strategy\", to regulate and commercialize fusion, respectively. Then, in April 2023, in a decision likely to influence other nuclear regulators, the NRC announced in a unanimous vote that fusion energy would be regulated not as fission but under the same regulatory regime as particle accelerators.\nThen, in October 2023 the UK government, in enacting the Energy Act 2023, made the UK the first country to legislate for fusion separately from fission, to support planning and investment, including the UK's planned prototype fusion power plant for 2040; STEP the UK is working with Canada and Japan in this regard. Meanwhile, in February 2024 the US House of Representatives passed the Atomic Energy Advancement Act, which includes the Fusion Energy Act, which establishes a regulatory framework for fusion energy systems.\nGeopolitics.\nGiven the potential of fusion to transform the world's energy industry and mitigate climate change, fusion science has traditionally been seen as an integral part of peace-building science diplomacy. However, technological developments and private sector involvement has raised concerns over intellectual property, regulatory administration, global leadership; equity, and potential weaponization. These challenge ITER's peace-building role and led to calls for a global commission. Fusion power significantly contributing to climate change by 2050 seems unlikely without substantial breakthroughs and a space race mentality emerging, but a contribution by 2100 appears possible, with the extent depending on the type and particularly cost of technology pathways.\nDevelopments from late 2020 onwards have led to talk of a \"new space race\" with multiple entrants, pitting the US against China and the UK's STEP FPP, with China now outspending the US and threatening to leapfrog US technology. On September 24, 2020, the United States House of Representatives approved a research and commercialization program. The Fusion Energy Research section incorporated a milestone-based, cost-sharing, public-private partnership program modeled on NASA's COTS program, which launched the commercial space industry. In February 2021, the National Academies published \"Bringing Fusion to the U.S. Grid\", recommending a market-driven, cost-sharing plant for 2035\u20132040, and the launch of the Congressional Bipartisan Fusion Caucus followed.\nIn December 2020, an independent expert panel reviewed EUROfusion's design and R&amp;D work on DEMO, and EUROfusion confirmed it was proceeding with its Roadmap to Fusion Energy, beginning the conceptual design of DEMO in partnership with the European fusion community, suggesting an EU-backed machine had entered the race.\nIn October 2023, the UK-oriented Agile Nations group announced a fusion working group. One month later, the UK and the US announced a bilateral partnership to accelerate fusion energy. Then, in December 2023 at COP28 the US announced a US global strategy to commercialize fusion energy. Then, in April 2024, Japan and the US announced a similar partnership, and in May of the same year, the G7 announced a G7 Working Group on Fusion Energy to promote international collaborations to accelerate the development of commercial energy and promote R&amp;D between countries, as well as rationalize fusion regulation. Later the same year, the US partnered with the IAEA to launch the https://, to collaboratively crowdsource ideas to accelerate commercial fusion energy, in line with the US COP28 statement.\nSpecifically to resolve the tritium supply problem, in February 2024, the UK (UKAEA) and Canada (Canadian Nuclear Laboratories) announced an agreement by which Canada could refurbish its Candu deuterium-uranium tritium-generating heavywater nuclear plants and even build new ones, guaranteeing a supply of tritium into the 2070s, while the UKAEA would test breeder materials and simulate how tritium could be captured, purified, and injected back into the fusion reaction.\nIn 2024, both South Korea and Japan announced major initiatives to accelerate their national fusion strategies, by building electricity-generating public-private fusion plants in the 2030s, aiming to begin operations in the 2040s and 2030s respectively.\nAdvantages.\nFusion power promises to provide more energy for a given weight of fuel than any fuel-consuming energy source currently in use. The fuel (primarily deuterium) exists abundantly in the ocean: about 1 in 6500 hydrogen atoms in seawater is deuterium. Although this is only about 0.015%, seawater is plentiful and easy to access, implying that fusion could supply the world's energy needs for millions of years.\nFirst generation fusion plants are expected to use the deuterium-tritium fuel cycle. This will require the use of lithium for breeding of the tritium. It is not known for how long global lithium supplies will suffice to supply this need as well as those of the battery and metallurgical industries. It is expected that second generation plants will move on to the more formidable deuterium-deuterium reaction. The deuterium-helium-3 reaction is also of interest, but the light helium isotope is practically non-existent on Earth. It is thought to exist in useful quantities in the lunar regolith, and is abundant in the atmospheres of the gas giant planets.\nFusion power could be used for so-called \"deep space\" propulsion within the Solar System and for interstellar space exploration where solar energy is not available, including via antimatter-fusion hybrid drives.\nHelium production.\nDeuterium\u2013tritium fusion produces helium-4 as a by-product.\nDisadvantages.\nFusion power has a number of disadvantages. Because 80 percent of the energy in any reactor fueled by deuterium and tritium appears in the form of neutron streams, such reactors share many of the drawbacks of fission reactors. This includes the production of large quantities of radioactive waste and serious radiation damage to reactor components. Additionally, naturally occurring tritium is extremely rare. While the hope is that fusion reactors can breed their own tritium, tritium self-sufficiency is extremely challenging, not least because tritium is difficult to contain (tritium has leaked from 48 of 65 nuclear sites in the US). In any case the reserve and start-up tritium inventory requirements are likely to be unacceptably large.\nIf reactors can be made to operate using only deuterium fuel, then the tritium replenishment issue is eliminated and neutron radiation damage may be reduced. However, the probabilities of deuterium-deuterium reactions are about 20 times lower than for deuterium-tritium. Additionally, the temperature needed is about 3 times higher than for deuterium-tritium (see cross section). The higher temperatures and lower reaction rates thus significantly complicate the engineering challenges.\nHistory.\nEarly experiments.\nThe first machine to achieve controlled thermonuclear fusion was a pinch machine at Los Alamos National Laboratory called Scylla I at the start of 1958. The team that achieved it was led by a British scientist named James Tuck and included a young Marshall Rosenbluth. Tuck had been involved in the Manhattan project, but had switched to working on fusion in the early 1950s. He applied for funding for the project as part of a White House sponsored contest to develop a fusion reactor along with Lyman Spitzer. The previous year, 1957, the British had claimed that they had achieved thermonuclear fusion reactions on the Zeta pinch machine. However, it turned out that the neutrons they had detected were from beam-target interactions, not fusion, and they withdrew the claim. A CERN-sponsored study group on controlled thermonuclear fusion met from 1958 to 1964. This group ceased when it became clear that CERN discontinued its limited support for plasma physics.\nScylla I was a classified machine at the time, so the achievement was hidden from the public. A traditional Z-pinch passes a current down the center of a plasma, which makes a magnetic force around the outside which squeezes the plasma to fusion conditions. Scylla I was a \u03b8-pinch, which used deuterium to pass a current around the outside of its cylinder to create a magnetic force in the center. After the success of Scylla I, Los Alamos went on to build multiple pinch machines over the next few years.\nSpitzer continued his stellarator research at Princeton. While fusion did not immediately transpire, the effort led to the creation of the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory.\nFirst tokamak.\nIn the early 1950s, Soviet physicists I.E. Tamm and A.D. Sakharov developed the concept of the tokamak, combining a low-power pinch device with a low-power stellarator.\nA.D. Sakharov's group constructed the first tokamaks, achieving the first quasistationary fusion reaction.:90\nOver time, the \"advanced tokamak\" concept emerged, which included non-circular plasma, internal diverters and limiters, superconducting magnets, operation in the \"H-mode\" island of increased stability, and the compact tokamak, with the magnets on the inside of the vacuum chamber.\nFirst inertial confinement experiments.\nLaser fusion was suggested in 1962 by scientists at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL), shortly after the invention of the laser in 1960. Inertial confinement fusion experiments using lasers began as early as 1965. Several laser systems were built at LLNL, including the Argus, the Cyclops, the Janus, the long path, the Shiva laser, and the Nova.\nLaser advances included frequency-tripling crystals that transformed infrared laser beams into ultraviolet beams and \"chirping\", which changed a single wavelength into a full spectrum that could be amplified and then reconstituted into one frequency. Laser research cost over one billion dollars in the 1980s.\n1980s.\nThe PLT, TFTR,Tore Supra, JET, T-15, and JT-60 tokamaks were built and operated in the 1980s.\n In 1984, Martin Peng of ORNL proposed the spherical tokamak with a much smaller radius. It used a single large conductor in the center, with magnets as half-rings off this conductor. The aspect ratio fell to as low as 1.2.:B247:225 Peng's advocacy caught the interest of Derek Robinson, who built the Small Tight Aspect Ratio Tokamak, (START).\n1990s.\nIn 1991, the Preliminary Tritium Experiment at the Joint European Torus achieved the world's first controlled release of fusion power.\nIn 1993, TFTR became the first tokamak to conduct experiments with significant mixes of deuterium and tritium. In 1994 these experiments resulted in a discharge with the world record 10.1 MW fusion power with 39.9 MW of neutral beam heating power. The ratio Q is 0.26. The ratio in the plasma core, Q was approximately 0.8.\nIn 1996, Tore Supra created a plasma for two minutes with a current of almost 1\u00a0million amperes, totaling 280 MJ of injected and extracted energy.\nIn 1997, JET produced a peak of 16.1\u00a0MW of fusion power (65% of heat to plasma), with fusion power of over 10\u00a0MW sustained for over 0.5\u00a0sec.\n2000s.\n\"Fast ignition\" saved power and moved ICF into the race for energy production.\nIn 2006, China's Experimental Advanced Superconducting Tokamak (EAST) test reactor was completed. It was the first tokamak to use superconducting magnets to generate both toroidal and poloidal fields.\nIn March 2009, the laser-driven ICF NIF became operational.\nIn the 2000s, privately backed fusion companies entered the race, including TAE Technologies, General Fusion, and Tokamak Energy.\n2010s.\nPrivate and public research accelerated in the 2010s. General Fusion developed plasma injector technology and Tri Alpha Energy tested its C-2U device. The French Laser M\u00e9gajoule began operation. NIF achieved net energy gain in 2013, as defined in the very limited sense as the hot spot at the core of the collapsed target, rather than the whole target.\nIn 2014, Phoenix Nuclear Labs sold a high-yield neutron generator that could sustain 5\u00d71011 deuterium fusion reactions per second over a 24-hour period.\nIn 2015, MIT announced a tokamak it named the ARC fusion reactor, using rare-earth barium-copper oxide (REBCO) superconducting tapes to produce high-magnetic field coils that it claimed could produce comparable magnetic field strength in a smaller configuration than other designs.\nIn October, researchers at the Max Planck Institute of Plasma Physics in Greifswald, Germany, completed building the largest stellarator to date, the Wendelstein 7-X (W7-X). The W7-X stellarator began Operational phase 1 (OP1.1) on December 10, 2015, successfully producing helium plasma. The objective was to test vital systems and understand the machine's physics. By February 2016, hydrogen plasma was achieved, with temperatures reaching up to 100 million Kelvin. The initial tests used five graphite limiters. After over 2,000 pulses and achieving significant milestones, OP1.1 concluded on March 10, 2016. An upgrade followed, and OP1.2 in 2017 aimed to test an uncooled divertor. By June 2018, record temperatures were reached. W7-X concluded its first campaigns with limiter and island divertor tests, achieving notable advancements by the end of 2018. It soon produced helium and hydrogen plasmas lasting up to 30 minutes.\nIn 2017, Helion Energy's fifth-generation plasma machine went into operation. The UK's Tokamak Energy's ST40 generated \"first plasma\". The next year, Eni announced a $50\u00a0million investment in Commonwealth Fusion Systems, to attempt to commercialize MIT's ARC technology.\n2020s.\nIn January 2021, SuperOx announced the commercialization of a new superconducting wire with more than 700 A/mm2 current capability.\nTAE Technologies announced results for its Norman device, holding a temperature of about 60\u00a0MK for 30 milliseconds, 8 and 10 times higher, respectively, than the company's previous devices.\nIn October, Oxford-based First Light Fusion revealed its projectile fusion project, which fires an aluminum disc at a fusion target, accelerated by a 9 mega-amp electrical pulse, reaching speeds of . The resulting fusion generates neutrons whose energy is captured as heat.\nOn November 8, in an invited talk to the 63rd Annual Meeting of the APS Division of Plasma Physics, the National Ignition Facility claimed to have triggered fusion ignition in the laboratory on August 8, 2021, for the first time in the 60+ year history of the ICF program. The shot yielded 1.3 MJ of fusion energy, an over 8X improvement on tests done in spring of 2021. NIF estimates that 230\u00a0kJ of energy reached the fuel capsule, which resulted in an almost 6-fold energy output from the capsule. A researcher from Imperial College London stated that the majority of the field agreed that ignition had been demonstrated.\nIn November 2021, Helion Energy reported receiving $500 million in Series E funding for its seventh-generation Polaris device, designed to demonstrate net electricity production, with an additional $1.7\u00a0billion of commitments tied to specific milestones, while Commonwealth Fusion Systems raised an additional $1.8\u00a0billion in Series B funding to construct and operate its SPARC tokamak, the single largest investment in any private fusion company.\nIn April 2022, First Light announced that their hypersonic projectile fusion prototype had produced neutrons compatible with fusion. Their technique electromagnetically fires projectiles at Mach 19 at a caged fuel pellet. The deuterium fuel is compressed at Mach 204, reaching pressure levels of 100 TPa.\nOn December 13, 2022, the US Department of Energy reported that researchers at the National Ignition Facility had achieved a net energy gain from a fusion reaction. The reaction of hydrogen fuel at the facility produced about 3.15 MJ of energy while consuming 2.05 MJ of input. However, while the fusion reactions may have produced more than 3 megajoules of energy\u2014more than was delivered to the target\u2014NIF's 192 lasers consumed 322 MJ of grid energy in the conversion process.\nIn May 2023, the United States Department of Energy (DOE) provided a grant of $46 million to eight companies across seven states to support fusion power plant design and research efforts. This funding, under the Milestone-Based Fusion Development Program, aligns with objectives to demonstrate pilot-scale fusion within a decade and to develop fusion as a carbon-neutral energy source by 2050. The granted companies are tasked with addressing the scientific and technical challenges to create viable fusion pilot plant designs in the next 5\u201310 years. The recipient firms include Commonwealth Fusion Systems, Focused Energy Inc., Princeton Stellarators Inc., Realta Fusion Inc., Tokamak Energy Inc., Type One Energy Group, Xcimer Energy Inc., and Zap Energy Inc. \nIn December 2023, the largest and most advanced tokamak JT-60SA was inaugurated in Naka, Japan. The reactor is a joint project between Japan and the European Union. The reactor had achieved its first plasma in October 2023. Subsequently, South Korea's fusion reactor project, the Korean Superconducting Tokamak Advanced Research, successfully operated for 102 seconds in a high-containment mode (H-mode) containing high ion temperatures of more than 100 million degrees in plasma tests conducted from December 2023 to February 2024.\nIn January 2025, EAST fusion reactor in China was reported to maintain a steady-state high-confinement plasma operation for 1066 seconds. In February 2025, the French Alternative Energies and Atomic Energy Commission (CEA) announced that its WEST tokamak had maintained a stable plasma for 1,337 seconds\u2014over 22 minutes.\nFuture development.\nClaims of commercially viable fusion power being relatively imminent have often attracted ridicule within the scientific community. A common joke is that human-engineered fusion has always been promised as 30 years away since the concept was first discussed, or that it has been \"20 years away for 50 years\".\nIn 2024, Commonwealth Fusion Systems announced plans to build the world's first grid-scale commercial nuclear fusion power plant at the James River Industrial Center in Chesterfield County, Virginia, which is part of the Greater Richmond Region; the plant is designed to produce about 400 MW of electric power, and is intended to come online in the early 2030s.\nIn 2025, Helion Energy, a startup company backed by OpenAI, announced plans for construction of a nuclear fusion power plant in Malaga, Washington that will supply power to Microsoft data centers by 2028. It will take advantage of grid infrastructure already in place for the nearby Rock Island Dam hydroelectric plant.\nRecords.\nFusion power records vary across confinement systems. They include records pertaining to fusion energy release, and more broadly, any plasma confinement parameters, such as temperature and pressure, or discharge time (not confinement time). \nThe record for MCF fusion energy release is 69 MJ, over 6 seconds, set by the Joint European Torus tokamak in 2023.\nThe record for ICF fusion energy release is 3.15 MJ, over 100 picoseconds, set by the National Ignition Facility in 2022, which also achieved Q values greater than unity.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55020", "revid": "3138265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55020", "title": "Jin dynasty (266\u2013420)", "text": "Chinese dynasty\nThe Jin dynasty or the Jin Empire, officially Jin, sometimes distinguished as the Sima Jin or the Two Jins, was an imperial dynasty in China that existed from 266 to 420. It was founded by Sima Yan, eldest son of Sima Zhao, who had previously been declared the King of Jin. There are two main divisions in the history of the dynasty. The Western Jin (266\u2013316) was established as the successor to Cao Wei after Sima Yan usurped the throne from Cao Huan. The capital of the Western Jin was initially in Luoyang, though it later moved to Chang'an (modern Xi'an). In 280, after conquering Eastern Wu, the Western Jin ended the Three Kingdoms period and reunited China proper for the first time since the end of the Han dynasty.\nFrom 291 to 306, a series of civil wars known as the War of the Eight Princes were fought over control of the Jin state which weakened it considerably. In 304, the dynasty experienced a wave of rebellions by non-Han ethnicities termed by exonym as \"Five Barbarians\". The \"barbarians\" went on to establish nonpermanent dynastic states in northern China. This helped to usher in the Sixteen Kingdoms era of Chinese history, in which states in the north rose and fell in rapid succession, constantly fighting both one another and the Jin. Han-Zhao, one of the northern states established during the disorder, sacked Luoyang in 311, captured Chang'an in 316, and executed Emperor Min of Jin in 318, ending the Western Jin era. Sima Rui, who succeeded Emperor Min, then reestablished the Jin dynasty with its capital in Jiankang (modern Nanjing), inaugurating the Eastern Jin (317\u2013420).\nThe Eastern Jin dynasty remained in near-constant conflict with its northern neighbors for most of its existence, and it launched several invasions of the north with the aim of recovering its lost territories. In 383, the Eastern Jin inflicted a devastating defeat on the Former Qin, a Di-ruled state that had briefly unified northern China. In the aftermath of that battle, the Former Qin state splintered, and Jin armies recaptured the lands south of the Yellow River. The Eastern Jin was eventually usurped by General Liu Yu in 420 replaced with the Liu Song dynasty. The Eastern Jin dynasty is considered the second of the Six Dynasties.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nDuring the Three Kingdoms period, the Sima clan\u2014with its most accomplished individual being Sima Yi\u2014rose to prominence within the kingdom of Cao Wei that dominated northern China. Sima Yi was the regent of Cao Wei, and in 249 he instigated a coup d'\u00e9tat known as the Incident at the Gaoping Tombs, the Sima clan began to surpass the Cao clan's power in the kingdom. After Sima Yi's death in 251, Sima Yi's eldest son Sima Shi succeeded his father as regent of Cao Wei, maintaining the Sima clan's tight grip on the Cao Wei political scene. After Sima Shi's death in 255, Sima Shi's younger brother Sima Zhao became the regent of Cao Wei. Sima Zhao further assisted his clans' interests by suppressing rebellions and dissent.\nIn 263, he directed Cao Wei forces in conquering Shu Han and capturing Liu Shan (the son of Liu Bei), marking the first demise of one of the Three Kingdoms. Sima Zhao's actions awarded him the title of King of Jin, the last achievable rank beneath that of emperor. He was granted the title because his ancestral home was located in Wen County, on the territory of the Zhou-era state of Jin, which was centered on the Jin River in Shaanxi. Sima Zhao's ambitions for the throne were visible, but he died in 265 before any usurpation attempt could be made, passing the opportunity to his ambitious son Sima Yan.\nWestern Jin (266\u2013316).\nFounding.\nThe Jin dynasty was founded by Sima Yan, who was known posthumously as Emperor Wu (the \"Martial Emperor of Jin\"). After succeeding his father as the King of Jin and regent of Cao Wei in 265, Sima Yan declared himself emperor of the Jin dynasty in February 266 and forced the final Wei ruler Cao Huan to abdicate. Emperor Wu permitted Cao Huan to live with honour as the Prince of Chenliu, and buried him with imperial ceremony. Under Emperor Wu, the Jin dynasty conquered Eastern Wu in 280 and united China proper, thus ending the Three Kingdoms period. The period of unity was relatively short-lived, as the Jin state was soon weakened by corruption, political turmoil, and internal conflicts. Emperor Wu's son Zhong, posthumously known as Emperor Hui, was developmentally disabled.\nDecline.\nEmperor Wu died in 290, and in 291 conflict over his succession caused the devastating War of the Eight Princes. The dynasty was greatly weakened by this civil conflict, and it soon faced more upheaval when the Upheaval of the Five Barbarians began in 304. During this unrest, the Jin capital Luoyang was sacked by Han-Zhao ruler Liu Cong in 311, and Jin emperor Sima Chi, posthumously known as Emperor Huai, was captured and later executed. Emperor Huai's successor Sima Ye, posthumously known as Emperor Min, was then also captured and executed by Han-Zhao forces when they seized Chang'an (present-day Xi'an) in 316. This event marked the end of the Western Jin. The surviving members of the Jin imperial family, as well as large numbers of Han Chinese from the North China Plain, subsequently fled to southern China. These refugees had a large impact on the lands they moved to\u2014for example, they gave Quanzhou's Jin River its name upon their settlement there.\nEastern Jin (317\u2013420).\nEstablishment.\nAfter the fall of Chang'an and the execution of Emperor Min of Jin, Sima Rui, posthumously known as Emperor Yuan, was enthroned as Jin emperor in 318. He reestablished the Jin government at Jiankang (modern Nanjing), which became the dynasty's new capital and marked the beginning of the Eastern Jin period. Since one of Sima Rui's titles was the prince of Langya, the newly established northern states, which denied the legitimacy of his succession, sometimes referred to his empire as \"Langya\".\nThe Eastern Jin period saw the peak of \"menfa\" ( 'gentry clan') politics. The authority of the emperors was limited, while national affairs were controlled by powerful immigrant elite clans like the Wang () clans of Langya and Taiyuan, the Xie () clan of Chenliu, the Huan () clan of Qiao Commandery, and the Yu () clan of Yingchuan. Among the people, a common remark was that \"Wang Dao and Sima Rui, they dominate the nation together\" (). It was said that when Emperor Yuan was holding court, he even invited Wang Dao to sit by his side so they could jointly accept congratulations from ministers, but Wang Dao declined the offer.\nWars with the north.\nIn order to recover the lands lost during the fall of the Western Jin, the Eastern Jin dynasty launched several military campaigns against the northern states, such as the expeditions led by Huan Wen from 354 to 369. Most notably, in 383, a heavily outnumbered Eastern Jin force inflicted a devastating defeat on the state of Former Qin at the Battle of Fei River. After this battle, the Former Qin\u2014which had recently unified northern China\u2014began to collapse, and the Jin dynasty recovered the lands south of the Yellow River. Some of these lands were later lost, but the Jin regained them once more when Liu Yu defeated the northern states in his northern expeditions of 409\u2013416.\nDespite successes against the northern states like the Battle of Fei River, paranoia in the royal family and a constant disruptions to the throne often caused loss of support for northern campaigns. For example, lack of support by the Jin court was a major cause of Huan Wen's failure to recover the north in his expeditions. Additionally, internal military crises\u2014including the rebellions of generals Wang Dun and Su Jun, but also lesser \"fangzhen\" ( 'military command') revolts\u2014plagued the Eastern Jin throughout its 104-year existence.\nMass migration to the south.\nThe local aristocrat clans of the south were often at odds with the immigrants from the north. As such, tensions increased, and rivalry between the immigrants and southern locals loomed large in the domestic politics of the Jin. Two of the most prominent local clans, the Zhou () clan of Yixing and the Shen () clan of Wuxing, were dealt a bitter blow from which they never quite recovered. There was also conflict between the various northern immigrant clans. This led to a virtual balance of power, which somewhat benefited the emperor's rule.\nSpecial \"commanderies of immigrants\" and \"white registers\" were created for the massive amounts of northern Han Chinese who moved south during the Eastern Jin. The southern Chinese aristocracy was formed from the offspring of these migrants. Particularly in the Jiangnan region, Celestial Masters and the nobility of northern China subdued the nobility of southern China during the Jin dynasty. Southern China overtook the north in population due to depopulation of the north and the migration of northern Chinese to southern China. Different waves of migration of aristocratic Chinese from northern China to the south at different times resulted in distinct groups of aristocratic lineages.\nDemise.\nIn 403, Huan Xuan, the son of esteemed general Huan Wen, usurped the Jin throne and declared the dynasty of Huan Chu. Huan Xuan was soon toppled by Liu Yu, who reinstated Jin rule by installing Sima Dezong on the throne, posthumously known as Emperor An. Meanwhile, the civilian administration suffered, as there were further revolts led by Sun En and Lu Xun, and Western Shu became an independent kingdom under Qiao Zong. In 419, Liu Yu had Sima Dezong strangled and replaced by his brother Sima Dewen, posthumously known as Emperor Gong. Finally, in 420, Sima Dewen abdicated in favour of Liu Yu, who declared himself the ruler of the new Song dynasty (which is referred to as the Liu Song dynasty by historians in order to prevent confusion with the Song dynasty established in 960). Sima Dewen was then asphyxiated with a blanket in the following year. In the north, Northern Liang, the last of the Sixteen Kingdoms, was conquered by Northern Wei in 439, ushering in the Northern dynasties period.\nThe Xianbei Northern Wei accepted the Jin refugees Sima Fei () and Sima Chuzhi (). They both married Xianbei princesses. Sima Fei's wife was named Huayang (), who was a daughter of Emperor Xiaowen; Sima Chuzhi's son was Sima Jinlong, who married a Northern Liang princess who was a daughter of the Lushuihu king Juqu Mujian. More than fifty percent of Tuoba Xianbei princesses of the Northern Wei were married to southern Han Chinese men from the imperial families and aristocrats from southern China of the Southern dynasties who defected and moved north to join the Northern Wei. Much later, Sima Guang (1019\u20131086), who served as chancellor for the Song and created the comprehensive history \"Zizhi Tongjian\", claimed descent from the Jin dynasty (specifically, Sima Fu, brother of Sima Yi).\nGovernment and demography.\n\"Qiaoren\" and \"baiji\".\nThe uprising of the five barbarians led to one in eight northerners migrating to the south. These immigrants were called \"qiaoren\" ( 'lodged people'), accounting for one-sixth of the population of the south at the time. With consideration of the material loss refugees had experienced before arrival, they were exempt from the \"diao\" () tax, and other services. Those whose registers were bound in white paper were called \"baiji\" (), while the others with registers bound in yellow paper were called \"huangji\" (). When the crisis had subsided, this preferential increasingly seemed a heavy burden on the people, arousing dissatisfaction in the natives. Hence, \"tu duan\" was an increasingly important issue for the Eastern Jin.\nLodged administrative divisions.\nThe Eastern Jin court established three levels of administrative divisions which served as strongholds for the \"qiaoren\": the \"qiaozhou\" (, 'province'), \"qiaojun\" (, 'commandery'), and qiaoxian (, the lodged county), these lodged administrative divisions were merely nominal without possessing actual domain, or rather, they were local government in exile; what could scarcely be denied was their significance in Jin's legitimacy for the northern territory as somewhat an announcement. Furthermore, it was also an action done to appease the refugees' homesickness, which was evoking their desire to reacquire what had been lost.\nDuring the rule of Emperor Yuan, Emperor Ming, and Emperor Cheng, the lodged administrative divisions were concentrated in the area south of the Huai River and the Lower Yangtze Plain. At first there was the lodged Langya Commandery within lodged Fei County in Jiankang, but when it began is not exactly known. Then the lodged Huaide County was also established in Jiankang, around 320. According to the \"Book of Song\":\u6649\u6c38\u5609\u5927\u4e82\uff0c\u5e7d\u3001\u5180\u3001\u9752\u3001\u4e26\u3001\u5157\u5dde\u53ca\u5f90\u5dde\u4e4b\u6dee\u5317\u6d41\u6c11\uff0c\u76f8\u7387\u904e\u6dee\uff0c\u4ea6\u6709\u904e\u6c5f\u5728\u6649\u9675\u90e1\u754c\u8005\u2026\u2026\u53c8\u5f99\u6d41\u6c11\u4e4b\u5728\u6dee\u5357\u8005\u4e8e\u6649\u9675\u8af8\u7e23\uff0c\u5176\u5f99\u904e\u6c5f\u5357\u53ca\u7559\u5728\u6c5f\u5317\u8005\uff0c\u4e26\u7acb\u50d1\u90e1\u7e23\u4ee5\u53f8\u7267\u4e4b\u3002\u5f90\u3001\u5157\u4e8c\u5dde\u6216\u6cbb\u6c5f\u5317\uff0c\u6c5f\u5317\u53c8\u50d1\u7acb\u5e7d\u3001\u5180\u3001\u9752\u3001\u4e26\u56db\u5dde\u2026\u2026(After Disaster of Yongjia, the refugees from You, Ji, Qing, Bing, Yan and Xu provinces came across the Huai River, some even came across the Yangtze River and stayed in Jinling Commandery... The lodged administrative divisions were established to govern them. The seats of Xu and Yan provinces perhaps were moved to the area north of the Yangtze River, where the lodged You, Ji, Qing, Bing provinces were established.)\nThe lodged Pei, Qinghe, Xiapi, Dongguang, Pingchang, Jiyin, Puyang, Guangping, Taishan, Jiyang, and Lu commanderies were established when Emperor Ming ruled. The rebellions and invasions occurring in Jianghuai area led to more refugees switching to settle in the south of the Yangtze River, where the lodged Huainan Commandery was established afterwards.\nHowever, carrying these out was more complex than the policy was formulated. Several actual counties were under the jurisdiction of the lodged commanderies.\nA few lodged administrative divisions are still retained in China nowadays. For instance, Dangtu County was originally located in the area of Bengbu, however, the lodged Dangtu County was established in where it is now, and the latter replaced the former, inheriting its place name.\nTu Duan policy.\nThe \"tu duan\" () is the abbreviation for \"yi tu duan\" (, means classifying people according to their present habitation to register). It was a policy to ensure the ancient hukou system working since the Western Jin. These terms were first recorded in the biographies of Wei Guan and Li Chong included in the \"Book of Jin\":\u4eca\u4e5d\u57df\u540c\u898f\uff0c\u5927\u5316\u65b9\u59cb\uff0c\u81e3\u7b49\u4ee5\u70ba\u5b9c\u7686\u8569\u9664\u672b\u6cd5\uff0c\u4e00\u64ec\u53e4\u5236\uff0c\u4ee5\u571f\u65b7\uff0c\u5b9a\u81ea\u516c\u537f\u4ee5\u4e0b\uff0c\u7686\u4ee5\u6240\u5c45\u70ba\u6b63\uff0c\u7121\u5fa9\u61f8\u5ba2\u9060\u5c6c\u7570\u571f\u8005\u3002\u7136\u627f\u9b4f\u6c0f\u51cb\u5f0a\u4e4b\u8de1\uff0c\u4eba\u7269\u64ad\u8d8a\uff0c\u4ed5\u7121\u5e38\u671d\uff0c\u4eba\u7121\u5b9a\u8655\uff0c\u90ce\u540f\u84c4\u65bc\u8ecd\u5e9c\uff0c\u8c6a\u53f3\u805a\u65bc\u90fd\u9091\uff0c\u4e8b\u9ad4\u99c1\u932f\uff0c\u8207\u53e4\u4e0d\u540c\u3002\u8b02\u4e5d\u54c1\u65e2\u9664\uff0c\u5b9c\u5148\u958b\u79fb\u5f99\uff0c\u807d\u76f8\u4e26\u5c31\u3002\u4e14\u660e\u8ca2\u8209\u4e4b\u6cd5\uff0c\u4e0d\u6feb\u65bc\u5883\u5916\uff0c\u5247\u51a0\u5e36\u4e4b\u502b\u5c07\u4e0d\u5206\u800c\u81ea\u5747\uff0c\u5373\u571f\u65b7\u4e4b\u5be6\u884c\u77e3\u3002Hence, it was perhaps initially proposed by these two people, but was only seriously implemented during the Eastern Jin and the Southern dynasties.\nSociety and culture.\nReligion.\nTaoism was polarised in the Jin dynasty. The Jin emperors repressed Taoists harshly, but also tried to exploit it, given the way it had been used near the end of the Han era in the Yellow Turban Rebellion. Amidst the political turmoil of the era, many successful merchants, small landowners, and other moderately comfortable people found great solace in Taoist teachings and a number of major clans and military officers also took up the faith. Ge Hong emphasized loyalty to the emperor as a Taoist virtue; he even taught that rebels could never be Taoist immortals, which made Taoism more palatable to the imperial hierarchy. As a result, popular Taoist religions were considered heterodoxy while the official schools of the court were supported, but the popular schools like Tianshi Taoism were still secretly held dear and promulgated amongst ordinary people.\nDisunity, disintegration, and chaos also made Buddhism more popular, in part due to the focus on addressing suffering. The Jin dynasty marked a critical era for the Mahayana school in China. Dharmarak\u1e63a's 286 translation of the \"Lotus Sutra\" was the most important one before Kum\u0101raj\u012bva's 5th-century translation. It was said that there were 1,768 Buddhist temples in the Eastern Jin.\nFurthermore, Taoism advanced chemistry and medicine in China, whereas the contribution of Mahayana was concentrated in philosophy and literature.\nMaterial culture.\nThe Jin dynasty is well known for the quality of its greenish celadon porcelain wares, which immediately followed the development of proto-celadon. Jar designs often incorporated animal, as well as Buddhist, figures. Examples of Yue ware are also known from the Jin dynasty.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55021", "revid": "34452882", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55021", "title": "Josquin des Prez", "text": "Composer of the Renaissance (c. 1450\u20131521)\nJosquin Lebloitte dit des Prez (c.\u20091450\u20131455 \u2013 27 August 1521) was a composer of Renaissance music, who is variously described as French or Franco-Flemish. Considered one of the greatest composers of the Renaissance, he was a central figure of the Franco-Flemish School and had a profound influence on the music of 16th-century Europe. Building on the work of his predecessors Guillaume Du Fay and Johannes Ockeghem, he developed a complex style of expressive\u2014and often imitative\u2014movement between independent voices (polyphony) which informs much of his work. He further emphasized the relationship between text and music, and departed from the early Renaissance tendency towards lengthy melismatic lines on a single syllable, preferring to use shorter, repeated motifs between voices. Josquin was a singer, and his compositions are mainly vocal. They include masses, motets and secular chansons.\nJosquin's biography has been continually revised by modern scholarship, and remains highly uncertain. Little is known of his early years; he was born in the French-speaking area of Flanders, and he may have been an altar boy and have been educated at the Cambrai Cathedral, or taught by Ockeghem. By 1477 he was in the choir of Ren\u00e9 of Anjou and then probably served under Louis XI of France. In the 1480s Josquin traveled Italy with the Cardinal Ascanio Sforza, may have worked in Vienna for the Hungarian king Matthias Corvinus, and wrote the motet \"Ave Maria ... Virgo serena\", and the popular chansons \"Adieu mes amours\" and \"Que vous ma dame\". He served Pope Innocent VIII and Pope Alexander VI in Rome, Louis XII in France, and Ercole I d'Este in Ferrara. Many of his works were printed and published by Ottaviano Petrucci in the early 16th century, including the \"Missa Hercules Dux Ferrariae\". In his final years in Cond\u00e9, Josquin produced some of his most admired works, including the masses \"Missa de Beata Virgine\" and \"Missa Pange lingua\"; the motets \"Benedicta es\", \"Inviolata\", \"Pater noster\u2013Ave Maria\" and \"Praeter rerum seriem\"; and the chansons \"Mille regretz\", \"Nimphes, napp\u00e9s\" and \"Plus nulz regretz\".\nInfluential both during and after his lifetime, Josquin has been described as the first Western composer to retain posthumous fame. His music was widely performed and imitated in 16th-century Europe, and was highly praised by Martin Luther and the music theorists Heinrich Glarean and Gioseffo Zarlino. In the Baroque era, Josquin's reputation became overshadowed by the Italian composer Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina, though he was still studied by some theorists and music historians. During the 20th-century early music revival, publications by August Wilhelm Ambros, Albert Smijers, Helmuth Osthoff and Edward Lowinsky, and a successful academic conference, caused his reevaluation as a central figure in Renaissance music. This has led to controversy over whether he has been unrealistically elevated over his contemporaries, particularly in light of over a hundred attributions now considered dubious. He continues to draw interest in the 21st century and his music is frequently recorded, central in the repertoire of early music vocal ensembles, and the subject of continuing scholarship. He was celebrated worldwide on the 500th anniversary of his death in 2021.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nName.\nJosquin's full name, Josquin Lebloitte dit des Prez, became known in the late 20th century from a pair of 1483 documents found in Cond\u00e9-sur-l'Escaut, where he is referred to as the nephew of Gille Lebloitte dit des Prez and the son of Gossard Lebloitte dit des Prez. His first name Josquin is a diminutive form of Josse, the French form of the name of Judoc, a Breton saint of the 7th century. Josquin was a common name in Flanders and Northern France in the 15th and 16th centuries. Other documents indicate that the surname des Prez had been used by the family for at least two generations, perhaps to distinguish them from other branches of the Lebloitte family. At the time, the name Lebloitte was rare and the reason that Josquin's family took up the more common surname des Prez as their dit name remains uncertain.\nHis name has many spellings in contemporary records: his first name is spelled as Gosse, Gossequin, Jodocus, Joskin, Josquinus, Josse, Jossequin, Judocus and Juschino; and his surname is given as a Prato, de Prato, Pratensis, de Pr\u00e9s, Desprez, des Pr\u00e9s and des Pr\u00e8s. In his motet \"Illibata Dei virgo nutrix\", he includes an acrostic of his name, where it is spelled IOSQVIN Des PREZ. Documents from Cond\u00e9, where he lived for the last years of his life, refer to him as \"Maistre Josse Desprez\". These include a letter written by the chapter of Notre-Dame of Cond\u00e9 to Margaret of Austria where he is named as \"Josquin Desprez\". Scholarly opinion differs on whether his surname should be written as one word (Desprez) or two (des Prez), with publications from continental Europe preferring the former and English-language publications the latter. Modern scholarship typically refers to him as Josquin.\nLife.\nEarly life.\nBirth and background.\nLittle is known about Josquin's early years. The specifics of his biography have been debated for centuries. The musicologist William Elders noted that \"it could be called a twist of fate that neither the year, nor the place of birth of the greatest composer of the Renaissance is known\". A now-outdated theory is that he was born around 1440, based on a mistaken association with Jushinus de Kessalia, recorded in documents as \"Judocus de Picardia\". A reevaluation of his later career, name and family background has discredited this claim. He is now thought to have been born around 1450, and at the latest 1455, making him \"a close contemporary\" of composers Loyset Comp\u00e8re and Heinrich Isaac, and slightly older than Jacob Obrecht.\nJosquin's father Gossart dit des Prez was a policeman in the castellany of Ath, who was accused of numerous offenses, including complaints of undue force, and disappears from the records after 1448. Nothing is known of Josquin's mother, who is absent from surviving documents, suggesting that she was either not considered Josquin's legitimate mother, or that she died soon after, or during, his birth. Around 1466, perhaps on the death of his father, Josquin was named by his uncle and aunt, Gille Lebloitte dit des Prez and Jacque Banestonne, as their heir.\nJosquin was born in the French-speaking area of Flanders, in modern-day northeastern France or Belgium. Despite his association with Cond\u00e9 in his later years, Josquin's own testimony indicates that he was not born there. The only firm evidence for his birthplace is a later legal document in which Josquin described being born beyond Noir Eauwe, meaning 'Black Water'. This description has puzzled scholars, and there are various theories on which body of water is being referred to. L'Eau Noire river in the Ardennes has been proposed, and there was a village named Prez there, though the musicologist David Fallows contends that the complications surrounding Josquin's name make a surname connection irrelevant, and that the river is too small and too far from Cond\u00e9 to be a candidate. Fallows proposes a birthplace near the converging Escaut and Haine rivers at Cond\u00e9, preferring the latter since it was known for transporting coal, perhaps fitting the \"Black Water\" description. Other theories include a birth near Saint-Quentin, Aisne, due to his early association with the Collegiate Church of Saint-Quentin, or in the small village of Beaurevoir, which is near the Escaut, a river that may be referred to in an acrostic in his later motet \"Illibata Dei virgo nutrix\".\nYouth.\nThere is no documentary evidence covering Josquin's education or upbringing. Fallows associates him with Goseequin de Condent, an altar boy at the collegiate church of Saint-G\u00e9ry, Cambrai until mid-1466. Other scholars such as Gustave Reese relay a 17th-century account from Cardinal Richelieu's friend Claude H\u00e9mer\u00e9, suggesting that Josquin became a choirboy with his friend Jean Mouton at the Collegiate Church of Saint-Quentin; this account has been questioned. The collegiate chapel there was an important center of royal patronage and music for the area. All records from Saint-Quentin were destroyed in 1669, and Josquin may have acquired his later connections with the French royal chapel through an early association with Saint-Quentin. He may have studied under Johannes Ockeghem, a leading composer whom he greatly admired throughout his life. This is claimed by later writers such as Gioseffo Zarlino and Lodovico Zacconi; Josquin wrote a lamentation on the death of Ockeghem, \"Nymphes des bois\". There is no concrete evidence for this tutorship, and later commentators may only have meant that Josquin \"learnt from the older composer's example\". Josquin musically quoted Ockeghem several times, most directly in his double motet \"Alma Redemptoris mater/Ave regina caelorum\", which shares an opening line with Ockeghem's motet \"Alma Redemptoris mater\".\nJosquin could have been associated with Cambrai Cathedral, as there is a \"des Prez\" among the cathedral's musicians listed in \"Omnium bonorum plena\", a motet by Comp\u00e8re. The motet was composed before 1474 and names many important musicians of the time, including Antoine Busnois, Johannes Tinctoris, Johannes Regis, Ockeghem and Guillaume Du Fay. The motet may refer to the singer Pasquier Desprez, but Josquin is a likelier candidate. Josquin was certainly influenced by Du Fay's music; the musicologist Alejandro Planchart suggests that the impact was not particularly large.\nEarly career.\nThe first firm record of Josquin's employment is from 19 April 1477 when he was a singer in the chapel of Ren\u00e9 of Anjou, in Aix-en-Provence. Other evidence may place him in Aix as early as 1475. Josquin remained there until at least 1478, after which his name disappears from historical records for five years. He may have remained in Ren\u00e9's service, joining his other singers to serve Louis XI, who sent them to the Sainte-Chapelle of Paris. A further connection to Louis XI may perhaps be inferred from Josquin's early motet \"Misericordias Domini in aeternum cantabo\", which could have been a musical tribute to the king, since it ends with the phrase \"In te Domine speravi, non confundar in aeternum\", words from Psalm 30:2 that Louis commissioned Jean Bourdichon to write on 50 scrolls in the Ch\u00e2teau de Plessis-lez-Tours. A less accepted theory for Josquin's activities between 1478 and 1483 is that he had already entered the household of his future employer Ascanio Sforza in 1480. In that case, Josquin would have been with Ascanio in Ferrara and might have written his \"Missa Hercules Dux Ferrariae\" at this time for Ercole d'Este. Around this period the \"Casanatense chansonnier\" was collected in Ferrara, which includes six chansons by Josquin, \"Adieu mes amours\", \"En l'ombre d'ung buissonet\", \"Et trop penser\", \"Ile fantazies de Joskin\", \"Que vous ma dame\" and \"Une mousque de Biscaye\". \"Adieu mes amours\" and \"Que vous ma dame\" are thought to have been particularly popular, given their wide dissemination in later sources.\nIn February 1483 Josquin returned to Cond\u00e9 to claim his inheritance from his aunt and uncle, who may have been killed when the army of Louis XI besieged the town in May 1478 and had the population locked and burned in a church. In the same document, the collegiate church of Cond\u00e9 is reported to have given \"vin d'honneur\" (lit.\u2009'wine of honor') to Josquin, because \"as a musician who had already served two kings, he was now a distinguished visitor to the little town\". Josquin hired at least 15 procurators to deal with his inheritance, suggesting he was then wealthy. This would explain how later in his life he was able to travel frequently and did not have to compose greatly demanded mass cycles like contemporaries Isaac and Ludwig Senfl.\nItaly and travels.\nMilan and elsewhere.\nA surviving record indicates that Josquin was in Milan by 15 May 1484, perhaps just after his 1483 trip to Cond\u00e9. In March 1484 he may have visited Rome. Fallows speculates that Josquin left Cond\u00e9 for Italy so quickly because his inheritance gave him more freedom and allowed him to avoid serving a king who he suspected had caused the deaths of his aunt and uncle. By then, the sacred music of Milan Cathedral had a reputation for excellence. Josquin was employed by the House of Sforza, and on 20 June 1484 came into the service of Cardinal Ascanio Sforza. Josquin's renown as a composer, a strong recommendation from a patron of fellow musician, or the use of his wealth, might have helped him get this prestigious and long-term position. While working for Ascanio, on 19 August Josquin successfully requested a previously rejected dispensation to be rector at the parish church Saint Aubin without having been ordained a priest. Joshua Rifkin dates the well-known motet \"Ave Maria ... Virgo serena\" to this time, c.\u20091485.\nJosquin went to Rome with Ascanio in July 1484 for a year, and may have gone to Paris for a litigation suit involving the benefice in Saint Aubin during the later 1480s. Around this time the poet Serafino dell'Aquila wrote his sonnet to Josquin, \"Ad Jusquino suo compagno musico d'Ascanio\" (\"To Josquin, his fellow musician of Ascanio\"), which asks him \"not to be discouraged if his 'genius so sublime' seemed poorly remunerated\". Between 1485 and 1489 Josquin may have served under the Hungarian king Matthias Corvinus in Vienna; an account by the Cardinal Girolamo Aleandro in 1539 recalls the archbishop of Esztergom Pal Varday stating that the court of Matthias included \"excellent painters and musicians, among them even Josquin himself\". Some scholars suggest Aleandro was repeating a false rumor, or that Varday confused Josquin des Prez for Josquin Dor or Johannes de Stokem. Fallows contends that it is unlikely that Varday, who was well-educated and a musician, would have made such a mistake, but concedes that it is possible. The court of Matthias had a high standard of music and employed numerous musicians, many of them from Italy. Though Fallows asserts that Josquin's presence in the Hungarian king's service is likely, the evidence is circumstantial, and no original documents survive to confirm the claim. Josquin was in Milan again in January 1489, probably until early May, and met the theorist and composer Franchinus Gaffurius there.\nRome.\nFrom June 1489 until at least April 1494, Josquin was a member of the papal choir in Rome, under Pope Innocent VIII then the Borgia pope Alexander VI. Josquin may have arrived there due to an exchange of singers between Ludovico Sforza and Pope Innocent, where the latter sent Gaspar van Weerbeke to Milan, presumably in return for Josquin. Josquin's arrival brought much-needed prestige to the choir, as the composers Gaspar and Stokem had left recently and the only other choristers known to be composers were Marbrianus de Orto and Bertrandus Vaqueras. Two months after his arrival, Josquin laid claim to the first of various benefices on 18 August. Holding three unrelated benefices at once, without having residency there or needing to speak that area's language, was a special privilege that Josquin's tenure and position offered; many of his choir colleagues had also enjoyed such privileges. His claims included a canonry at the Notre-Dame de Paris; Saint Omer, Cambrai; a parish in the gift of Saint-Ghislain Abbey; the Basse-Yttre parish church; two parishes near Frasnes, Hainaut; and Saint-G\u00e9ry, Cambrai. Surviving papal letters indicate that some of these claims were approved, but he does not appear to have taken up any of the canonries. The Sistine Chapel's monthly payment records give the best record of Josquin's career, but all papal chapel records from April 1494 to November 1500 are lost, making it unknown when he left Rome.\nAfter restorations from 1997 to 1998, the name was found as a graffito on the wall of the Sistine Chapel's \"cantoria\" (choir gallery). It is one of almost four hundred names inscribed in the chapel, around a hundred of which can be identified with singers of the papal choir. They date from the 15th to 18th centuries, and the signature is in the style of the former. There is some evidence suggesting the name refers to Josquin des Prez; it may be interpreted as either \"Josquin\" or \"Josquinus\", depending on whether the curved line on the far right is read as the abbreviation for \"us\". Other choristers named Josquin tended to sign their name in full, whereas Josquin des Prez is known to have done so mononymously on occasion. Andrea Adami da Bolsena notes in his 1711 \"Osservazioni per ben regolare il coro dei cantori della Cappella Pontificia\" that in his time Josquin's name was visibly 'sculpted' in the Sistine Chapel's choir room. The musicologist Richard Sherr writes that \"while this is not a true autograph signature, the possibility that Josquin des Prez actually produced it during his stay in the papal chapel is very high\", and Fallows says that \"it hardly counts as an autograph, but it may be the closest we can get.\"\nFrance.\nDocuments found since the late 20th century have shed some light on Josquin's life and works between 1494 and 1503; at some point he was ordained a priest. In August 1494 he went to Cambrai, as attested by a \"vin d'honneur\" (lit.\u2009'wine of honor') record, and he may have returned to Rome soon after. From then to 1498 there is no firm evidence for his activities; Fallows suggests he stayed in Cambrai for these four years, citing Johannes Manlius's 1562 book \"Locorum communium collectanea\", which associates Josquin with Cambrai's musical establishment. This assertion would fit with Josquin's possible youthful connections in Cambrai and later \"vin d'honneur\" there. Manlius cites the reformer Philip Melanchthon as the source for many of his stories, strengthening the authenticity of his Josquin anecdotes; Melanchthon was close to musical figures of his time, including the publisher Georg Rhau and the composer Adrianus Petit Coclico.\nTwo letters between members of the House of Gonzaga and Ascanio Sforza suggest that Josquin may have re-entered the service of the Sforza family in Milan around 1498; they refer to a servant Juschino who delivered the hunting dogs to the Gonzagas. Circumstantial evidence suggests Juschino may have been Josquin des Prez, but he is not known to have been qualified for such a task, and it would be unusual to refer to him as a servant rather than a musician or singer. Josquin probably did not stay in Milan long, since his former employers were captured during Louis XII's 1499 invasion. Before he left, he most likely wrote two secular compositions, the well-known frottola \"El Grillo\" (\"The Cricket\"), and \"In te Domine speravi\" (\"I have placed my hope in you, Lord\"), based on Psalm 31. The latter might be a veiled reference to the religious reformer Girolamo Savonarola, who had been burned at the stake in Florence in 1498, and for whom Josquin seems to have had a special reverence; the text was Savonarola's favorite psalm, a meditation on which he left unfinished in prison when he was executed.\nJosquin was probably in France during the early 16th century; documents found in 2008 indicate that he visited Troyes twice between 1499 and 1501. The long doubted account from H\u00e9mer\u00e9 that Josquin had a canonry at Saint-Quentin was confirmed by documentary evidence that he had exchanged it by 30 May 1503. Canonries at Saint-Quentin were almost always gifts from the French king to royal household members, suggesting Josquin had been employed by Louis XII. According to Glarean in the \"Dodecachordon\" of 1547, the motet \"Memor esto verbi tui servo tuo\" (\"Remember thy promise unto thy servant\") was composed as a gentle reminder to the king to keep his promise of a benefice to Josquin. Glarean claimed that on receiving the benefice, Josquin wrote a motet on the text \"Bonitatem fecisti cum servo tuo, Domine\" (\"Lord, thou hast dealt graciously with thy servant\") to show his gratitude to the king, either Louis XI or Louis XII. Although such a motet survives and is mentioned with Josquin's \"Memor esto\" in many sources, \"Bonitatem fecisti\" is now attributed to Carpentras. Some of Josquin's other compositions have been tentatively dated to his French period, such as \"Vive le roy\", and \"In exitu Israel\", which resembles the style of other composers of the French court. The five-voice \"De profundis\", a setting of Psalm 130, seems to have been written for a royal funeral, perhaps that of Louis XII, Anne of Brittany or Philip I of Castile.\nFerrara.\nJosquin arrived in Ferrara by 30 May 1503, to serve Ercole I d'Este, Duke of Ferrara, an arts patron who had been trying for many years to replace the composer and choirmaster Johannes Martini, who had recently died. No extant documents record Josquin as having worked in Ferrara before, though his earlier associations with Ercole suggest prior employment there; he signed a deed indicating he did not intend to stay there for long. Ercole is known to have met with Josquin's former employer Louis XII throughout 1499 to 1502, and these meetings may have led to his service for the Duke. Two letters survive explaining the circumstances of his arrival, both from courtiers who scouted musical talent in the service of Ercole. The first of these was from Girolamo da Sestola (nicknamed \"Coglia\") to Ercole, explaining: \"My lord, I believe that there is neither lord nor king who will now have a better chapel than yours if your lordship sends for Josquin [...] and by having Josquin in our chapel I want to place a crown upon this chapel of ours\" (14 August 1502). The second letter, from the courtier Gian de Artiganova, criticized Josquin and suggested Heinrich Isaac instead:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"To me [Isaac] seems well suited to serve your lordship, more so than Josquin, because he is more good-natured and companionable, and will compose new works more often. It is true that Josquin composes better, but he composes when he wants to and not when one wants him to, and he is asking 200 ducats in salary while Isaac will come for 120\u2014but your lordship will decide.\"\u2014\u200a\nAround three months later, Josquin was chosen; his salary of 200 ducats was the highest ever for a ducal chapel member. The Artiganova letter is a unique source for Josquin's personality, and the musicologist Patrick Macey interprets it as meaning he was a \"difficult colleague and that he took an independent attitude towards producing music for his patrons\". Edward Lowinsky connected his purportedly difficult behavior with musical talent, and used the letter as evidence that Josquin's contemporaries recognized his genius. Musicologist Rob Wegman questions whether meaningful conclusions can be drawn from such an anecdote. In a later publication, Wegman notes the largely unprecedented nature of such a position and warns \"yet of course the letter could equally well be seen to reflect the attitudes and expectations of its recipient, Ercole d'Este\".\nWhile in Ferrara, Josquin wrote some of his most famous compositions, including the austere, Savonarola-influenced \"Miserere mei, Deus\", which became one of the most widely distributed motets of the 16th century. Also probably from this period was the virtuoso motet \"Virgo salutiferi\", set to a poem by Ercole Strozzi, and \"O virgo prudentissima\" based on a poem by Poliziano. Due to its stylistic resemblance to \"Miserere\" and \"Virgo salutiferi\", the \"Missa Hercules Dux Ferrariae\" is also attributed to this time; it was previously thought to have been written in the early 1480s. Josquin did not stay in Ferrara long. An outbreak of the plague in 1503 prompted the evacuation of the Duke and his family, as well as two-thirds of the citizens, and Josquin left by April 1504. His replacement, Obrecht, died of the plague in mid-1505.\nCond\u00e9.\n A 1545 map of Cond\u00e9-sur-l'Escaut by Jacob van Deventer\nJosquin probably moved from Ferrara to his home region of Cond\u00e9-sur-l'Escaut, and became provost of the collegiate church of Notre-Dame on 3 May 1504; he may have obtained the post from Philip I's sponsorship. His role gave him political responsibility, and put him in charge of a workforce which included a dean, a treasurer, 25 canons, 18 chaplains, 16 vicars, 6 choir-boys and other priests. This was an appealing place for his old age: it was near his birthplace, had a renowned choir and was the leading musical establishment in Hainaut, besides St. Vincent at Soignies and Cambrai Cathedral. Very few records of his activity survive from this time; he bought a house in September 1504, and sold it (or a different one) in November 1508. The Josquin mentioned may be the Joskin who traveled to present chansons to Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor in Brussels or Mechelen.\nIn his later years Josquin composed many of his most admired works. They include the masses \"Missa de Beata Virgine\" and \"Missa Pange lingua\"; the motets \"Benedicta es\", \"Inviolata\", \"Pater noster\u2013Ave Maria\" and \"Praeter rerum seriem\"; and the chansons \"Mille regretz\", \"Nimphes, napp\u00e9s\" and \"Plus nulz regretz\". The last of these, \"Plus nulz regretz\", is set to a poem by Jean Lemaire de Belges that celebrates the future engagement between Charles V and Mary Tudor. In his last years Josquin's music saw European-wide dissemination through publications by the printer Ottaviano Petrucci. Josquin's compositions were given a prominent place by Petrucci, and were reissued numerous times.\nOn his deathbed, Josquin left an endowment for the performance of his work, \"Pater noster\", at all general processions when townsfolk passed his house, stopping to place a wafer on the marketplace altar to the Holy Virgin. He died on 27 August 1521 and left his possessions to Cond\u00e9's chapter of Notre Dame. He was buried in front of the church's high altar, but his tomb was destroyed, either during the French Wars of Religion (1562\u20131598) or in 1793 when the church was demolished amid the French Revolution.\nMusic.\nJosquin was a professional singer throughout his life, and his compositions are almost exclusively vocal. He wrote in primarily three genres: the mass, motet, and chanson (with French text). In his 50-year career, Josquin's body of work is larger than that of any other composer of his period, besides perhaps Isaac and Obrecht. Establishing a chronology of his compositions is difficult; the sources in which they were published offer little evidence, and historical and contextual connections are meager. Few manuscripts of Josquin's music date from before the 16th century, due to, according to Noble, \"time, war and enthusiasm (both religious and anti-religious)\". Identifying earlier works is particularly difficult, and later works only occasionally offer any more certainty. The musicologist Richard Taruskin writes that modern scholarship is \"still nowhere near a wholly reliable chronology and unlikely ever to reach it\", and suggests that the current tentative models \"tell us more about ourselves, and the way in which we come to know what we know, than they do about Josquin\".\nAfter Du Fay died in 1474, Josquin and his contemporaries lived in a musical world of frequent stylistic change, in part due to the movement of musicians between different regions of Europe. A line of musicologists credits Josquin with three primary developments:\nThe musicologist Jeremy Noble concludes that these innovations demonstrate the transition from the earlier music of Du Fay and Ockeghem, to Josquin's successors Adrian Willaert and Jacques Arcadelt, and eventually to the late Renaissance composers Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina and Orlande de Lassus.\nMasses.\nThe mass is the central rite of the Catholic Church, and polyphonic settings of the ordinary of the mass\u2014the Kyrie, Gloria, Credo, Sanctus and Agnus Dei\u2014increased in popularity in the 14th century. From the 15th century, composers treated it as a central genre in Western classical music in accordance with greater demand. By Josquin's time, masses were generally standardized into substantial, polyphonic five-movement works, making it difficult for composers to satisfy both liturgical and musical demands. Previous examples in the genre by composers such as Du Fay and Ockeghem were widely admired and emulated.\nJosquin and Obrecht led an intensive development of the genre. Josquin's masses are generally less progressive than his motets\u2014though he is credited with numerous innovations in the genre. His less radical approach may be explained by most of the masses being earlier works, or the structural and textual limitations of the genre. Almost all are for four voices.\nThe \"Josquin Companion\" categorizes the composer's masses into the following styles:\nJosquin began his career at a time when composers started to find strict \"cantus firmus\" masses limiting. He pioneered paraphrase and parody masses, which were not well established before the 16th century. Many of his works combine the \"cantus firmus\" style with paraphrase and parody, making strict categorization problematic. Reflecting on Josquin's masses, Noble notes that \"In general his instinct, at least in his mature works, seems to be to extract as much variety as possible from his given musical material, sacred or secular, by any appropriate means.\"\nCanonic masses.\nJosquin's predecessors and contemporaries wrote masses based on canonic imitation. The canonic voices in these masses derive from pre-existing melodies such as the \"L'homme arm\u00e9\" song (Faugues, Comp\u00e8re and Forestier), or chant (Fevin and La Rue's \"Missae de feria\"). Josquin's two canonic masses are not based on existing tunes, and so stand apart from the mainstream. They are closer to the \"Missa prolationum\" written by Ockeghem, and \"Missa ad fugam\" by de Orto, both of which use original melodies in all the voices.\nJosquin's two canonic masses were published in Petrucci's third book of Josquin masses in 1514; the \"Missa ad fugam\" is the earlier of the two. It has a head-motif consisting of the whole first Kyrie which is repeated in the beginning of all five movements. The canon is restricted to the highest voice, and the pitch interval between the voices is fixed while the temporal interval varies between only two values; the two free voices generally do not participate in the imitation. The precise relationship of Josquin's mass to de Orto's is uncertain, as is Josquin's authorship of the mass.\nNo questions of authenticity cloud the \"Missa sine nomine\", written during Josquin's final years in Cond\u00e9. In contrast to the inflexibility of the canonic scheme in the \"Missa ad fugam\", the temporal and pitch interval of the canon, along with the voices that participate in it, are varied throughout. The free voices are more fully integrated into the texture, and frequently participate in imitation with the canonic voices, sometimes preemptively.\n\"Cantus firmus\" masses.\nPrior to Josquin's mature period, the most common technique for writing masses was the \"cantus firmus\", a technique which had been in use for most of the 15th century. Josquin used the technique early in his career, with the \"Missa L'ami Baudichon\" considered to be one of his earliest masses. This mass is based on a secular tune similar to \"Three Blind Mice\". Basing a mass on such a source was an accepted procedure, as evidenced by the existence of the mass in Sistine Chapel part-books copied during the papacy of Julius II (1503\u20131513).\nJosquin's most famous \"cantus firmus\" masses are the two based on the \"L'homme arm\u00e9\" (lit.\u2009'the armed man'), a popular tune for mass composition throughout the Renaissance. Though both are relatively mature compositions, they are very different. \"Missa L'homme arm\u00e9 super voces musicales\", is a technical tour-de-force on the tune, containing numerous mensuration canons and contrapuntal display. Throughout the work, the melody is presented on each note of the natural hexachord: C, D, E, F, G and A. The later \"Missa L'homme arm\u00e9 sexti toni\" is a \"fantasia on the theme of the armed man.\" While based on a \"cantus firmus\", it is also a paraphrase mass, for fragments of the tune appear in all voices; throughout the work the melody appears in a wide variety of tempos and rhythms. Technically it is almost restrained, compared to the other \"L'homme arm\u00e9\" mass, until the closing Agnus Dei, which contains a complex canonic structure including a rare retrograde canon, around which other voices are woven.\nParaphrase masses.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nParaphrase masses by Josquin\n \"Early works\"\n \"Later works\"\nThe paraphrase mass differed from the \"cantus firmus\" technique in that the source material, though still monophonic, could be (by Josquin's time) highly embellished, often with ornaments. As in the \"cantus firmus\" technique, the source tune may appear in many voices of the mass. Several of Josquin's masses feature the paraphrase technique, such as the early \"Missa Gaudeamus\", which also includes \"cantus firmus\" and canonic elements. The \"Missa Ave maris stella\", also probably an early work, paraphrases the Marian antiphon of the same name; it is one of his shortest masses. The late \"Missa de Beata Virgine\" paraphrases plainchants in praise of the Virgin Mary. As a Lady Mass, it is a votive mass for Saturday performance, and was his most popular mass in the 16th century.\nThe best known of Josquin's paraphrase masses, and one of the most famous mass settings of the Renaissance, is the \"Missa Pange lingua\", based on a hymn by Thomas Aquinas for the Vespers of Corpus Christi. It was probably the last mass Josquin composed. This mass is an extended fantasia on the tune, using the melody in all voices and all parts of the mass, in elaborate and ever-changing polyphony. One of the high points of the mass is the \"et incarnatus est\" section of the Credo, where the texture becomes homophonic, and the tune appears in the topmost voice. Here the portion which would normally set\u2014\"Sing, O my tongue, of the mystery of the divine body\"\u2014is instead given the words \"And he became incarnate by the Holy Ghost from the Virgin Mary, and was made man.\" Noble comments that \"The vigour of the earlier masses can still be felt in the rhythms and the strong drive to cadences, perhaps more so than in the \"Missa de Beata Virgine\", but essentially the two contrasting strains of Josquin's music\u2014fantasy and intellectual control\u2014are so blended and balanced in these two works that one can see in them the beginnings of a new style: one which reconciles the conflicting aims of the great 15th-century composers in a new synthesis that was in essence to remain valid for the whole of the 16th century.\"\nParody masses.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nParody masses by Josquin\nDu Fay was one of the first to write masses based on secular songs (a parody mass), and his \"Missa Se la face ay pale\", dates to the decade of Josquin's birth. By the turn of the 16th century, composers were moving from quoting single voice lines, to widen their reference to all voices in the piece. This was part of the transition from the medieval \"cantus firmus\" mass, where the voice bearing the preexisting melody stood aloof from the others, to the Renaissance parody masses, where all the voices formed an integrated texture. In such masses, the source material was not a single line, but motifs and points of imitation from all voices within a polyphonic work. By the time Josquin died, these parody masses had become well established and Josquin's works demonstrate the variety of methods in musical borrowing during this transition period.\nSix works are generally attributed to Josquin which borrow from polyphonic pieces, two of which also include canonic features. One of these\u2014the \"Missa Di dadi\", which includes a canon in the \"Benedictus\"\u2014is based on a chanson by Robert Morton and has the rhythmic augmentation of the borrowed tenor part indicated by dice faces, which are printed next to the staff. Canon can also be found in the \"Osanna\" of the \"Missa Faisant regretz\" which is based on Walter Frye's \"Tout a par moy\". The \"Missa Fortuna desperata\" is based on the popular three-voice Italian song \"Fortuna desperata\". In this mass, Josquin used each of the Italian song's voices as \"cantus firmi\", varying throughout the work. A similar variation in the source material's voices is used in the \"Missa Malheur me bat\", based on a chanson variously attributed to Martini or Abertijne Malcourt. The dating of \"Missa Malheur me bat\" remains controversial, with some scholars calling it an early composition, and others a later one. The \"Missa Mater Patris\", based on a three-voice motet by Antoine Brumel, is probably the earliest true parody mass by any composer, as it no longer contains any hint of a \"cantus firmus\". \"Missa D'ung aultre amer\" is based on a popular chanson of the same name by Ockeghem, and is one of Josquin's shortest masses.\nSolmization mass.\nA solmization mass is a polyphonic mass which uses notes drawn from a word or phrase. The style is first described by Zarlino in 1558, who called it \"soggetto cavato\", from \"soggetto cavato dalle parole\", meaning \"carved out of the words\". The earliest known mass by any composer using solmization syllables is the \"Missa Hercules Dux Ferrariae\", which Josquin wrote for Ercole I. It is based on a \"cantus firmus\" of musical syllables of the Duke's name, 'Ercole, Duke of Ferrara', which in Latin is 'Hercules Dux Ferrarie'. Taking the solmization syllables with the same vowels gives: Re\u2013Ut\u2013Re\u2013Ut\u2013Re\u2013Fa\u2013Mi\u2013Re, which is D\u2013C\u2013D\u2013C\u2013D\u2013F\u2013E\u2013D in modern nomenclature. The \"Missa Hercules Dux Ferrariae\" remains the best known work to use this device and was published by Petrucci in 1505, relatively soon after its composition. Taruskin notes that the use of Ercole's name is Josquin's method of memorialization for his patron, akin to a portrait painting.\nThe other Josquin mass to prominently use this technique is the \"Missa La sol fa re mi\", based on the musical syllables contained in \" (\"let me take care of it\"). Essentially the entire mass's content is related to this phrase, and the piece is thus something of an ostinato. The traditional story, as told by Glarean in 1547, was that an unknown aristocrat used to order suitors away with this phrase, and Josquin immediately wrote an \"exceedingly elegant\" mass on it as a jab at him. Scholars have proposed different origins for the piece; Lowinsky has connected it to the court of Ascanio Sforza, and the art historian Dawson Kiang connected it to the Turkish prince Cem Sultan's promise to the pope to overthrow his brother Bayezid II.\nMotets.\nJosquin's motets are his most celebrated and influential works. Their style varies considerably, but can generally be divided into homophonic settings with block chords and syllabic text declamation; ornate\u2014and often imitative\u2014contrapuntal fantasias in which the text is overshadowed by music; and psalm settings which combined these extremes with the addition of rhetorical figures and text-painting that foreshadowed the later development of the madrigal. He wrote most of them for four voices, which had become the compositional norm by the mid-15th century, and descended from the four-part writing of Guillaume de Machaut and John Dunstaple in the late Middle Ages. Josquin was also a considerable innovator in writing motets for five and six voices.\nMany of the motets use compositional constraint on the process; others are freely composed. Some use a \"cantus firmus\" as a unifying device, some are canonic, others use a motto which repeats throughout, and some use several of these methods. In some motets which use canon, it is designed to be heard and appreciated as such; in others a canon is present, but difficult to hear. Josquin frequently used imitation in writing his motets, with sections akin to fugal expositions occurring on successive lines of the text he was setting. This is prominent in his motet \"Ave Maria ... Virgo serena\", an early work where each voice enters by restating the line sung before it. Other early works such as a \"Alma Redemptoris mater/Ave regina caelorum\" show prominent imitation, as do later ones such as his setting of \"Dominus regnavit\" (Psalm 93) for four voices. Josquin favored the technique throughout his career.\nFew composers before Josquin had written polyphonic psalm settings, and these form a large proportion of his later motets. Josquin's settings include the famous \"Miserere\" (Psalm 51); \"Memor esto verbi tui\", based on Psalm 119; and two settings of \"De profundis\" (Psalm 130), which are often considered to be among his most significant accomplishments. Josquin wrote several examples of a new type of piece developed in Milan, the motet-chanson. Though similar to 15th-century works based on the \"formes fixes\" mold which were completely secular, Josquin's motet-chansons contained a chant-derived Latin \"cantus firmus\" in the lowest of the three voices. The other voices sang a secular French text, which had either a symbolic relationship to the sacred Latin text, or commented on it. Josquin's three known motet-chansons are \"Que vous madame/In pace\", \"A la mort/Monstra te esse matrem\" and \"Fortune destrange plummaige/Pauper sum ego\".\nSecular music.\nJosquin left numerous French chansons, for three to six voices, some of which were probably intended for instrumental performance as well. In his chansons, he often used a \"cantus firmus\", sometimes a popular song whose origin can no longer be traced, as in \"Si j'avoye Marion\". In other works he used a tune originally associated with a separate text, or freely composed an entire song, using no apparent external source material. Another technique Josquin used was to take a popular song and write it as a canon with itself, in two inner voices, and write new melodic material above and around it, to a new text: he did this in one of his most famous chansons, \"Faulte d'argent\".\nJosquin's earliest chansons were probably composed in northern Europe, under the influence of composers such as Ockeghem and Busnois. Unlike them, he never adhered strictly to the conventions of the \"formes fixes\"\u2014the rigid and complex repetition patterns of the rondeau, virelai, and ballade\u2014instead he often wrote his early chansons in strict imitation, as with many of his sacred works. He was one of the first to write chansons with all voices equal parts of the texture, and many contain points of imitation, similar to his motets. He also used melodic repetition, especially where the lines of text rhymed, and many of his chansons had a lighter texture and faster tempo than his motets. Some of his chansons were almost certainly designed to be performed with instruments; Petrucci published many of them without text, and some of the pieces (for example, the fanfare-like \"Vive le roy\") contain writing more idiomatic for instruments than voices. Josquin's most famous chansons circulated widely in Europe; some of the better-known include his lament on the death of Ockeghem, \"Nymphes des bois/Requiem aeternam\"; \"Mille regretz\", an uncertain attribution to Josquin; \"Nimphes, napp\u00e9s\"; and \"Plus nulz regretz\".\nJosquin also wrote at least three pieces in the manner of the frottola, a popular Italian song form which he would have heard during his years in Milan. These songs include \"Scaramella\", \"El grillo\" and \"In te domine speravi\". They are even simpler in texture than his French chansons, being almost uniformly syllabic and homophonic, and they remain among his most frequently performed pieces.\nPortraits.\nA small woodcut portraying Josquin is the most reproduced image of any Renaissance composer. Printed in Petrus Opmeer's 1611 \"Opus chronographicum orbis universi\", the woodcut is the earliest known depiction of Josquin and presumably based on an oil painting which Opmeer says was kept in the collegiate church of St. Goedele. Church documents discovered in the 1990s have corroborated Opmeer's statement about the painting's existence. It may have been painted during Josquin's lifetime and was owned by Petrus Jacobi (d.\u20091568), a cantor and organist at the Church of St. Michael and St. Gudula (now Brussels' cathedral). Following the will's instructions, the altarpiece was placed next to Jacobi's tomb, but it was destroyed in the late 16th century by Protestant iconoclasts. Whether the woodcut is a realistic likeness of the oil painting remains uncertain; Elders notes that comparisons between contemporaneous woodcuts based on original paintings that do survive often show incompetent realizations, putting the accuracy of the woodcut in question.\nThe \"Portrait of a Musician\", widely attributed to Leonardo da Vinci, depicts a man holding sheet music, which has led many scholars to identify him as a musician. The work is usually dated to the mid-1480s, and numerous candidates have been proposed, including Franchinus Gaffurius and Atalante Migliorotti, though none have achieved wide approval. In 1972, the Belgian musicologist Suzanne Clercx-Lejeune argued the subject is Josquin; she interpreted the words on the sitter's sheet music as \"Cont\" (an abbreviation of \"Contratenor\"), \"Cantuz\" (Cantus) and \"A Z\" (an abbreviation of \"Altuz\"), and she identified the music as Josquin's \"llibata Dei Virgo nutrix\". Several factors make this unlikely: the painting does not resemble the Opmeer portrait, the notation is largely illegible, and as a priest in his mid-thirties Josquin does not seem like the younger layman in the portrait. Fallows disagrees, noting that \"a lot of new details point to Josquin, who was the right age, in the right place, had already served at least two kings, and was now rich enough to have his portrait painted by the best\", but concludes that \"we shall probably never know who Leonardo's musician was\".\nA portrait from the early 16th century kept in the Galleria nazionale di Parma is often related to Josquin. It is usually attributed to Filippo Mazzola, and is thought to depict the Italian music theorist Nicol\u00f2 Burzio, though neither the attribution nor sitter are certain. The man in the painting is holding an altered version of Josquin's canon \"Guillaume se va chauffer\". Fallows notes that the subject has similar facial features to the portrait printed by Opmeer, but concludes that there is not enough evidence to conclude Josquin is the sitter. Clercx-Lejeune also suggested Josquin was depicted in Jean Perr\u00e9al's fresco of the liberal arts in Le Puy Cathedral, but this has not achieved acceptance from other scholars. An 1811 painting by Charles-Gustave Housez depicts Josquin; it was created long after the composer's death, but Clercx-Lejeune has contended that it is an older portrait which Housez restored and modified.\nLegacy.\nInfluence.\nElders described Josquin as \"the first composer in the history of Western music not to have been forgotten after his death\", while John Milsom called him \"the towering composer of the Renaissance\". Fallows wrote that his influence on 16th century European music is comparable to that of Beethoven on the 19th and Igor Stravinsky on the 20th century. Comparisons with Beethoven are particularly common, though Taruskin cautions that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Drawing parallels between [Josquin and Beethoven] is easy; doing so has become traditional in music historiography. Unease with this tradition has occasionally been expressed by those who see in it a danger to an unprejudiced view of Josquin and his time [...] To think of Josquin merely as a fifteenth- or sixteenth-century Beethoven would be like placing him behind the nearer figure and thereby obscuring him from view.\"\nHis popularity led to imitation by fellow composers, and some publishers (especially in Germany) misattributed works to him after his death to meet the demand for new Josquin compositions. This inspired a well-known remark that \"now that Josquin is dead, he is producing more compositions than when he was still alive\". Fallows asserts that the issue was more complex than publishers attempting to increase their profits: similar names of composers and compositions caused confusion, as did works which quoted Josquin, or student works which imitated his style. Josquin's pupils may have included Jean Lh\u00e9ritier and Nicolas Gombert; Coclico claimed to be his student, though his statements are notoriously unreliable.\nNumerous composers wrote laments after his death, three of which were published by Tielman Susato in a 1545 edition of Josquin's music. These included works by Benedictus Appenzeller, Gombert, Jacquet of Mantua and Jheronimus Vinders, as well as the anonymous \"Absolve, quaesumus\", while Jean Richafort's requiem musically quoted him. Josquin's compositions traveled widely after his death, more so than those of Du Fay, Ockeghem and Obrecht combined. Surviving copies of his motets and masses in Spanish cathedrals date from the mid-16th century, and the Sistine Chapel is known to have performed his works regularly throughout the late 16th century and into the 17th. Instrumental arrangements of his works were often published from the 1530s to the 1590s. Josquin was described by Taruskin as the \"master architect\" of High Renaissance music, and his compositions were parodied or quoted throughout Europe by almost every major composer of the later Renaissance, including Arcadelt, Brumel, Bartolom\u00e9 de Escobedo, Antoine de F\u00e9vin, Robert de F\u00e9vin, George de La H\u00e8le, Lupus Hellinck, Pierre Hesdin, Lassus, Jacquet, Claudio Merulo, Philippe de Monte, Pierre Moulu, Philippe Rogier, Palestrina, Cipriano de Rore, Nicola Vicentino and Willaert.\nReputation.\nCommendation, decline and reconsideration.\nThere is little information on Josquin's reputation during his lifetime. His composition of masses was commended by Paolo Cortesi, and the poet Jean Molinet and the music theorists Gaffurius and Pietro Aron wrote about his works. Josquin's popularity during his lifetime is also suggested by publications: Petrucci's \"Misse Josquin\" of 1502 was the first single-composer mass anthology, and Josquin was the only composer whose masses merited a second and a third volume. Fallows asserts that Josquin gained European renown between 1494 and 1503, since the Petrucci publications and references by Gaffurius and Molinet occurred during this time. After Josquin's death, humanists such as Cosimo Bartoli, Baldassare Castiglione and Fran\u00e7ois Rabelais praised him, with Bartoli describing him as Michelangelo's equal in music. Josquin was championed by the later theorists Heinrich Glarean and Gioseffo Zarlino, and the theologian Martin Luther declared \"he is the master of the notes. They must do as he wills; as for the other composers, they have to do as the notes will.\"\nUpon the emergence of Baroque music in the 17th century, Josquin's dominance began to lessen. He was overshadowed by Palestrina, who dominated the pre-common practice period musical narrative, and whose compositions were considered the summit of polyphonic refinement. Until the 20th century, discussion of Josquin's music was mainly limited to music scholars such as the theorists Angelo Berardi in the 1680s\u20131690s, and Johann Gottfried Walther in 1732. The late 18th century saw a new interest in Netherlandish music: studies from Charles Burney, Johann Nikolaus Forkel, Raphael Georg Kiesewetter and Fran\u00e7ois-Joseph F\u00e9tis gave Josquin more prominence. The music historian August Wilhelm Ambros described Josquin in the 1860s as \"one of the towering figures of Western music history, not merely a forerunner of Palestrina but his equal\", and his research established the foundation for modern Josquin scholarship. In the early 20th century, leading musicologists such as Alfred Einstein and Carl Dahlhaus largely dismissed Josquin. Various publications then began to raise his status, beginning with a new edition of his complete works by Albert Smijers (1920s) and high evaluation by Friedrich Blume in the \"Das Chorwerk\" series. The early music revival raised Josquin's status, and brought the first major study on him by Helmuth Osthoff (Vol 1 1962/Vol 2 1965), an influential article by Lowinsky (1964), and debates between the musicologist Joseph Kerman and Lowinsky (1965). The 1971 International Josquin Festival-Conference firmly established Josquin in the center of Renaissance music, a position later cemented by Lowinsky's 1976 monograph. The \"New Josquin Edition\" began publication in 1987.\nSkepticism and revision.\nReflecting on the sentiment that Josquin was \"the greatest composer of his generation, and the most important, innovative, and influential composer of the late 15th and early 16th centuries\", Sherr notes growing dissent from that position in the early 21st century. Josquin's 2001 article in \"Grove Music Online\" lists fewer than 200 works attributed to him, down from more than 370. These revisions of Josquin's \"oeuvre\" have compromised some earlier scholarship which analyzed Josquin's style with works now not considered his. Major revision has also occurred in Josquin's biography, with entire portions of it being rewritten due to Josquin having been confused with people with similar names. Controversy has arisen about the extent of Josquin's influence; there is no doubt about his importance in Western music, but some scholars have contended that the extent of his reevaluation has unrealistically apotheosized him over his contemporaries. Wegman asserts that Obrecht was more highly regarded in Josquin's time, to which Noble has noted that Josquin's prestigious positions, publications and employers \"scarcely looks like the career of an unregarded composer\". Reflecting on the dispute, Sherr has concluded that Josquin's reputation is somewhat lessened, but on the basis of his most admired and firmly attributed works \"he remains one of the towering figures in the history of music\".\nSince the 1950s, Josquin's music has become central to the repertoire of many early music vocal ensembles and has been increasingly featured in recordings, with those by the Hilliard Ensemble, Orlando Consort, and A Sei Voci recommended by critics in the \"1001 Classical Recordings You Must Hear Before You Die\" (2017) survey. The Tallis Scholars have recorded all of Josquin's masses, and won the \"Gramophone\" \"record of the year\" in 1987 for their recording of \"Missa Pange lingua\", the only early music group to do so. Josquin's presence in 21st-century scholarship remains strong; he was the subject of David Fallows's major monograph (2009), which is currently the standard biography for the composer, and he and Machaut were the only pre-Baroque composers to have entire chapters in Taruskin's \"Oxford History of Western Music\" (2005). The 500th anniversary of Josquin's death in 2021 was widely commemorated.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBooks\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJournal and encyclopedia articles\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n\"See and for extensive bibliographies\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nScores"}
{"id": "55022", "revid": "46977059", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55022", "title": "Gait", "text": "Pattern of movement of the limbs of animals\nGait is the pattern of movement of the limbs of animals, including humans, during locomotion over a solid substrate. Most animals use a variety of gaits, selecting gait based on speed, terrain, the need to maneuver, and energetic efficiency. Different animal species may use different gaits due to differences in anatomy that prevent use of certain gaits, or simply due to evolved innate preferences as a result of habitat differences. While various gaits are given specific names, the complexity of biological systems and interacting with the environment make these distinctions \"fuzzy\" at best. Gaits are typically classified according to footfall patterns, but recent studies often prefer definitions based on mechanics. The term typically does not refer to limb-based propulsion through fluid mediums such as water or air, but rather to propulsion across a solid substrate by generating reactive forces against it (which can apply to walking while underwater as well as on land).\nDue to the rapidity of animal movement, simple direct observation is rarely sufficient to give any insight into the pattern of limb movement. In spite of early attempts to classify gaits based on footprints or the sound of footfalls, it was not until Eadweard Muybridge and \u00c9tienne-Jules Marey began taking rapid series of photographs that proper scientific examination of gaits could begin.\nOverview.\nMilton Hildebrand pioneered the contemporary scientific analysis and the classification of gaits. The movement of each limb was partitioned into a stance phase, where the foot was in contact with the ground, and a swing phase, where the foot was lifted and moved forwards. Each limb must complete a cycle in the same length of time, otherwise one limb's relationship to the others can change with time, and a steady pattern cannot occur. Thus, any gait can completely be described in terms of the beginning and end of stance phase of three limbs relative to a cycle of a reference limb, usually the left hindlimb.\nVariables.\nGaits are generally classed as \"symmetrical\" and \"asymmetrical\" based on limb movement. These terms have nothing to do with left-right symmetry. In a symmetrical gait, the left and right limbs of a pair alternate, while in an asymmetrical gait, the limbs move together. Asymmetrical gaits are sometimes termed \"leaping gaits\", due to the presence of a suspended phase.\nThe key variables for gait are the duty factor and the forelimb-hindlimb phase relationship. Duty factor is simply the percent of the total cycle which a given foot is on the ground. This value will usually be the same for forelimbs and hindlimbs unless the animal is moving with a specially trained gait or is accelerating or decelerating. Duty factors over 50% are considered a \"walk\", while those less than 50% are considered a run. Forelimb-hindlimb phase is the temporal relationship between the limb pairs. If the same-side forelimbs and hindlimbs initiate stance phase at the same time, the phase is 0 (or 100%). If the same-side forelimb contacts the ground half of the cycle later than the hindlimb, the phase is 50%.\nPhysiological effects of gait.\nGait choice can have effects beyond immediate changes in limb movement and speed, notably in terms of ventilation. Because they lack a diaphragm, lizards and salamanders must expand and contract their body wall in order to force air in and out of their lungs, but these are the same muscles used to laterally undulate the body during locomotion. Thus, they cannot move and breathe at the same time, a situation called Carrier's constraint, though some, such as monitor lizards, can circumvent this restriction via buccal pumping. In contrast, the spinal flexion of a galloping mammal causes the abdominal viscera to act as a piston, inflating and deflating the lungs as the animal's spine flexes and extends, increasing ventilation and allowing greater oxygen exchange.\nDifferences between species.\nAnimals typically use different gaits in a speed-dependent manner. Almost all animals are capable of symmetrical gaits, while asymmetrical gaits are largely confined to mammals, who are capable of enough spinal flexion to increase stride length (though small crocodilians are capable of using a bounding gait). Lateral sequence gaits during walking and running are most common in mammals,[3] but arboreal mammals such as monkeys, some opossums, and kinkajous use diagonal sequence walks for enhanced stability.[3] Diagonal sequence walks and runs (aka trots) are most frequently used by sprawling tetrapods such as salamanders and lizards, due to the lateral oscillations of their bodies during movement. Bipeds are a unique case, and most bipeds will display only three gaits\u2014walking, running, and hopping\u2014during natural locomotion. Other gaits, such as human skipping, are not used without deliberate effort.\nHexapod gaits have also been well characterized, particularly for drosophila and stick insects (Phasmatodea). Drosophila use a tripod gait where 3 legs swing together while 3 legs remain on the ground in stance. However, variability in gait is continuous. Flies do not show distinct transitions between gaits but are more likely to walk in a tripod configuration at higher speeds. At lower speeds, they are more likely to walk with 4 or 5 legs in stance. Tetrapod coordination (when 4 legs are in stance) is where diagonally opposite pairs of legs swing together. Wave (sometimes called a metachronal wave) describes walking where only 1 leg enters swing at a time. This movement propagates from back to front on one side of the body and then the opposite. Stick Insects, a larger hexapod, only shows a tripod gait during the larval stage. As adults at low speeds, they are most likely to walk in a metachronal wave, where only 1 leg swings at a time. At higher speeds, they walk in a tetrapod coordination with 2 legs paired in swing or a metachronal wave, only moving one leg at a time.\nEnergy-based gait classification.\nWhile gaits can be classified by footfall, new work involving whole-body kinematics and force-plate records has given rise to an alternative classification scheme, based on the mechanics of the movement. In this scheme, movements are divided into walking and running. Walking gaits are all characterized by a \"vaulting\" movement of the body over the legs, frequently described as an inverted pendulum (displaying fluctuations in kinetic and potential energy which are out of phase), a mechanism described by Giovanni Cavagna. In running, the kinetic and potential energy fluctuate in-phase, and the energy change is passed on to muscles, bones, tendons and ligaments acting as springs (thus it is described by the spring-mass model).\nEnergetics.\nSpeed generally governs gait selection, with quadrupedal mammals moving from a walk to a run to a gallop as speed increases. Each of these gaits has an optimum speed, at which the minimum calories per metre are consumed, and costs increase at slower or faster speeds. Gait transitions occur near the speed where the cost of a fast walk becomes higher than the cost of a slow run. Unrestrained animals will typically move at the optimum speed for their gait to minimize energy cost. The cost of transport is used to compare the energetics of different gaits, as well as the gaits of different animals.\nNon-tetrapod gaits.\nIn spite of the differences in leg number shown in terrestrial vertebrates, according to the inverted pendulum model of walking and spring-mass model of running, \"walks\" and \"runs\" are seen in animals with 2, 4, 6, or more legs. The term \"gait\" has even been applied to flying and swimming organisms that produce distinct patterns of wake vortices.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55023", "revid": "32251677", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55023", "title": "Jin dynasty (1115\u20131234)", "text": "Jurchen-led imperial dynasty of China\nThe Jin dynasty (, ), officially the Great Jin (), was a Jurchen-led imperial dynasty of China and empire ruled by the Wanyan clan that existed between 1115 and 1234. It is also often called the Jurchen dynasty or the Jurchen Jin after the ruling Jurchen people. At its peak, the empire extended from Outer Manchuria in the north to the Qinling\u2013Huaihe Line in the south.\nThe Jin dynasty emerged from Wanyan Aguda's rebellion against the Liao dynasty (916\u20131125), which held sway over northern China until being driven by the nascent Jin to the Western Regions, where they would become known in Chinese historiography as the Western Liao. After conquering the Liao territory, the Jin launched a century-long campaign against the Song dynasty (960\u20131279) based in southern China, whose rulers were ethnically Han Chinese. Over the course of the Jin's rule, their emperors adapted to Han customs and even fortified the Great Wall against the ascendant Mongol Empire. The Jin also oversaw a number of internal cultural advances, such as the revival of Confucianism.\nIn 1211, the Mongols, led by Genghis Khan, invaded the Jin Empire, winning several victories. Over the span of 23 years, the Jin faced several defeats, internal revolts, defections, and coups. They were finally conquered by the Mongols in 1234.\nName.\nThe Jin dynasty was officially known as the \"Great Jin\" (), with \"Jin\" meaning \"gold\". The Jurchen word for \"gold\" was \"alchun\", which Aguda adopted as the name of his state. \"Alchun\" may refer to the \"Anchuhu\" River, which meant \"golden\" in Jurchen. This river, known as Alechuka in modern Chinese, is a tributary of the Songhua River east of Harbin. \"Alechuka\" () is a transliteration of its Manchu name \"alchuqa\" (), suggesting that the Jurchen name for the river sounded more similar to \"alchuhu\" rather than \"anchuhu\". It was common for Chinese translators at the time to use the final \"-n\" sound at the end of a Chinese character to transliterate \"-l\", \"-r\", \"-s\", \"-z\" etc. at the end of a syllable in foreign words.\nAfter conquering Kaifeng and occupying northern China, one of the suggestions on which of the \"wuxing\" ('five elements') to choose for their state was \"metal\" due to its association with \"gold\", their state name. This suggestion came as a nativist current that distanced the Jin from the Song and interpreted the Jin as an indigenous development rooted in Northeast Asia unrelated to the precedents of previous Chinese dynasties. However, the emperor dismissed the suggestion of adopting \"metal\" as their \"wuxing\" element. Instead the Jin deliberately chose earth as its dynastic element and yellow as its royal color. According to the \"wuxing\" theory, the earth element follows the fire, the dynastic element of the Song, in the sequence of elemental creation. This ideological move shows that the Jin regarded the Song reign of China as officially over and saw themselves as the rightful ruler of China Proper.\nThe Mongols called the ruler of the Jin dynasty the \"Golden khan\" (Altan khan). Through the Mongols, the Jin dynasty became the first Chinese dynasty to be known in Europe by their dynastic name. Marco Polo rendered the Mongol name for the Jin ruler as \"roi d'or\", or \"gold king\".\nThe Jin emperors also referred to their state as China, \"Zhongguo\" () (\u201cMiddle Kingdom\u201d), just as some other non-Han dynasties. Non-Han rulers expanded the definition of \"China\" to include non-Han peoples in addition to Han people whenever they ruled China. Jin documents indicate that the usage of \"China\" by dynasties to refer to themselves began earlier than previously thought.\nOrigin.\nMohe people.\nThe Tungusic speaking Mohe people who lived in what is now Northeast China are the most commonly cited progenitors of the Jin dynasty and its ruling Jurchen ethnic group. They were mentioned in Chinese texts by the late 5th century AD. The Mohe were a primarily sedentary people who practiced hunting, pig farming, and grew crops such as soybean, wheat, millet, and rice. Horses were rare in the region until the Tang period and pastoralism was not widespread until the 10th century under the domination of the Khitans. The Mohe exported reindeer products and may have ridden them as well. They practiced mass slavery and used the slaves to aid in hunting and agricultural work. The Tang described the Mohe as a fierce and uncultured people who used poisoned arrows.\nThe two most powerful groups of Mohe were the Heishui Mohe (Blackwater Mohe) in the north, named after the Heilong River (Black River), and the Sumo Mohe in the south, named after the Songhua River. According to the ancestral traditions of early 12th century Jurchens, their people emerged from the Heishui Mohe in the forested mountain areas of eastern Manchuria and Russia's Primorsky Krai. In the 10th century, the Mohe formed a group known as the Wuguo () (\"Five Nations\") federation to the northeast of modern Jilin that is also considered to have contributed to rise of the Jurchens. The Jurchens may have been mentioned as the Little Ruzhe people who presented silver and gold to the Tang court in 748, otherwise the Jurchens do not appear in historical records until the 10th century as tribute bearers to the Liao, Later Tang, and Song courts. A Jurchen embassy to Later Tang is recorded in 925 and an embassy to the Song in 961 that arrived by sea via the Liaodong peninsula. They practiced hunting, fishing, and kept domestic oxen while their primary export was horses. They had no script, calendar, or offices during the mid-11th century. The Jurchens were minor political actors in the international system at the time. By the 10th century, the Jurchens had become vassals of the Liao dynasty, but they also sent a number of tributary and trade missions to the Song capital of Kaifeng, which the Liao tried unsuccessfully to prevent. Some Jurchens paid tribute to Goryeo and sided with the latter during the Goryeo\u2013Khitan War. They offered tribute to both courts out of political necessity and for material benefits.\nIn the 11th century, there was widespread discontent against Khitan rule among the Jurchens as the Liao violently extorted annual tribute from the Jurchen tribes. Leveraging the Jurchens' desire for independence from the Khitans, chief Wugunai (1021\u20131074) of the Wanyan clan rose to prominence, dominating all of eastern Manchuria from Mount Changbai to the Wuguo tribes. According to tradition, Wugunai was a sixth generation descendant of Hanpu while his father held a military title from the Liao court, although the title did not confer or hold any real power. His grandson Aguda eventually founded the Jin dynasty.\nBalhae.\nEthnicity.\nThe Mohe (Kr. Malgal) people made up part of the population of the Northeast Asian state of Balhae (698\u2013926), also rendered as \"Bohai\". The exact significance and role of the Mohe people in Balhae's social structure is disputed as part of the Balhae controversies. The controversy revolves around the ethnic makeup and social structure of Balhae, which various states such as China, Russia, Korea, and Japan have given different views on through different interpretations of historical sources. While each perspective can vary significantly, most scholars agree that Balhae's population was at least partially composed of Goguryeo remnants and Mohe people.\nDue to the scarcity of indigenous Balhae sources, the study of Balhae draws on a wide range of textual sources from outside of Balhae, and investigations into Balhae's ethnic makeup usually start from the two official histories of the Tang dynasty. The \"Old Book of Tang\" states that Dae Joyeong (C. Da Zuorong), the founder of Balhae, was ethnically Mohe but adds that he was \"'gaoli biezhong\" (). Literally speaking, \"biezhong\" means \"separate kind.\" Due to the ambiguity of the wording, the term has been interpreted as meaning \"a branch of the Goguryeo people\" by South and North Korean historians, but as \"distinct from Goguryeo\" by Chinese researchers. The \"New Book of Tang\" refers to Dae Joyeong and his state as Sumo Mohe affiliated with Goguryeo before it received investiture from China and assumed the name \"Bohai\". According to historian Jesse D. Sloane, Tang sources divided Balhae's population into two categories, Goguryeo and Mohe. The royalty and upper class were composed of Goguryeo remnants while the majority of Balhae's population were Mohe.\nOther historical sources also present different views on Balhae's relationship to Goguryeo and the Mohe. According to Ch'oe Ch'iw\u014fn (b. 857), a scholar from the Korean kingdom of Silla, the people of Balhae were Mohe. In the conflict between the joint Tang-Silla forces against Balhae, Silla described Balhae as \"rebellious barbarians.\" Sillan aristocracy tended to view the Balhae population as consisting of solely Mohe people, but this could be due to the antagonistic relations between the two states causing the Sillan nobility to ignore Goguryeo elements of Balhae ethnic composition. The \"Samguk sagi\", written in the 12th century by Kim Pusik, did not consider Balhae a Korean state. The \"Samguk yusa\", a 13th-century collection of Korean history and legends, describes Dae as a Sumo Mohe leader. However, it gives another account of Dae being a former Goguryeo general, citing a now-lost Sillan record.\nIn a diplomatic mission to Japan in 727 or 728, the Balhae envoy said that Balhae has \"recovered the lost land of Goguryeo and inherited the old traditions of Buyeo.\" Japanese diplomatic communications with Balhae recognized it as a \"state of Go[gu]ryeo.\" The \"Ruij\u016b Kokushi\", a 9th-century Japanese text, says that when Balhae was founded, it spanned 2,000 \"li\" and was filled with villages, each of which were Mohe tribes.\nRelationship to the Jurchens.\nIn the early 12th century, the Jurchen leader Aguda sent ambassadors to the Liao dynasty to call on the Balhae people there to rebel against the Liao by appealing to a common origin between the Jurchens and Balhae. Aguda claimed that \"the Jurchens and Bohai were originally of the same family\" () and that they were \"actually one family, because in origin they were consisted of seven Wuji tribes.\" The appeal states that both the Jurchens and Balhae people descended from the seven Wuji (Kr. Mulgil) tribes. However, according to Alexander Kim, this only applied to the Mohe portion of Balhae's population and not the Goguryeo people, who were not included in the seven Wuji tribes. The call for Balhae cooperation against the Liao Khitans was a success. A Song observer notes that due to discrimination in the Liao government against Balhae people, they were the first to defect to the Jin.\nFamilies of Balhae descent were able to rise high in the Jin hierarchy. Aguda was advised by a Balhae man named Yang Pu who aided him in establishing an imperial court. Another Balhae man named Gao Qinyi became the advisor of Wanyan Zonghan, a Jurchen general and close friend of Aguda. An 1125 embassy noted that Jin protocol officers included Khitans, Jurchens, as well as Balhae. They all spoke Chinese. A descendant of the Balhae royal family, Da Gao (1086\u20131153), served in the Jin army and was given command of eight Balhae battalions in the war against the Song. One Balhae commander, Guo Yaoshi (active 1116\u20131132), fought in each of the Liao, Jin, and Song armies at one point or another. Another named Li Yin became \"jinshi\" in 1194 and died in 1214 fighting against the Mongols. Balhae men such as Zhang Rulin (d. 1190) and Zhang Rubi (d. 1187) were key advisers of Emperor Shizong and played a critical role in supporting his accession to the throne. Many Balhae literati-officials such as Gao Kan (d. 1167), Gao Xian (\"jinshi\" 1203), Zhang Rulin, Zhang Runeng, Zhang Ruwei (fl. 1150), Zhang Rufang, and Wang Tingyun (1151\u20131202) were entrusted as arbiters of culture and cultivated taste. Some of the Jin emperors had direct familial connections to Balhae people through their mother's lineage. The fourth, fifth and seventh emperors of the Jin dynasty were mothered by Balhae consorts.\nDespite the greater incorporation of Balhae people into the Jin state apparatus, they continued to exist as a people apart from the Jurchens. There were still limitations on Balhae people in the Jin dynasty. In 1136, the Jurchen official Wanyan Puluhu revoked the pardon of a man when his origin was determined to be Balhae. In 1140, an edict abolished Han Chinese and Balhae hereditary military posts but not Kumo Xi and Khitan posts. The Jin government also targeted the Balhae population for relocation. Over the years, groups of Balhae who were once moved outside to areas near the Liao supreme or central capital regions were resettled east of the Taihang Mountains, which was completed by 1141. Another relocation south of Zhongdu was planned in 1149, but the Balhae court attendant Gao Shouxing protested to Empress Daoping, who told the emperor, resulting in the beating and death of the two officials planning the relocation. A substantial Jin military presence was bought to Liaodong in which as many as 30,000 Jurchen soldiers and their families of the retinues were moved to garrisons in the Eastern Capital Circuit. The southward migration of Jurchens, especially Jurchen aristocrats, may have contributed to a decline of people who identified as Balhae. In 1177, a decree was passed to abolish the \"old Bohai custom\" of marriage through mock abduction. Although the Balhae experienced less restrictions under the Jin, there was also less emphasis on Balhae as a distinct group. During the later Jin era, the strong association between Balhae and Liaodong declined as Liaodong became dominated by other identities.\nMany Balhae people who were deeply integrated into the Jin state eventually rejected their Balhae identity and chose to identify as Chinese. By the time of Balhae's demise, its people's way of living had come to resemble that of the northern Chinese. The Liao dynasty classified the Balhae population as Han in legal and taxation contexts, the same as those whose ancestry was traced to the Tang empire. Some Mohe groups did not adopt this manner of life and were excluded from the Liao's designation of Balhae. Instead, they remained as Mohe, and possibly became one of the groups that eventually coalesced into the Jurchen people. In 1135, a Balhae man named Nansali was chosen as an emissary to Goryeo, for which he changed his name to the Sinitic Wang Zheng. Another Balhae individual named Wang Tingyun invented a genealogy record on his epitaph tracing his lineage to Taiyuan rather than Liaodong. The epitaph acknowledges that his most recent ancestors were in the employ of Balhae but added that they only \"lived dispersed among the eastern barbarians\". The practice of inventing fictitious genealogies to hide ancestry outside of the \"Central Territories\" was widespread from Song times onward.\nThe later Qing dynasty, ruled by Manchu descendants of the Jurchens, made efforts to solidify Balhae as part of their ancestral background. In 1778, the Qianlong Emperor reviewed various history books and commissioned a new comprehensive history of the Manchus, the \"Researches on Manchu Origins\". Part of this endeavor was to create a new imperial history of Manchus that was glorious in its own right and not a frontier imitation of Chinese civilization. This new history placed their Jin ancestors, the Jin imperial clan, among the population of the Mohe, who lived in the Changbai Mountains and along the Amur. Qianlong repeatedly made references to the Balhae as the origin of various organizational features such as the use of \"the five-capitals, a writing system, and a leadership hierarchy that he believed was evident in early Qing history and still in use among Northeastern peoples.\"\nArchaeological materials from the Anan'evskoe site also support the existence of ancestral relations between the Jurchens and Balhae people. Several South Korean scholars suggest that after Balhae's destruction in 926, its population was divided into two groups. Influential Balhae families were sent to the inner part of the Liao dynasty and were referred to as Balhae people while those who remained under indirect management were called Jurchen. Soviet and Russian scholars agree that there were hereditary relationships between the Mohe and Jurchen and that the Balhae population certainly contributed culturally to the ethnogenesis of the Jurchen. However, some differences remain between the two populations. The Balhae refugee population was received well in the Korean kingdom of Goryeo while they had a combative relationship with the Jurchens. In diplomatic communications with the Song dynasty, Goryeo referred to the Jurchens as greedy liars and other insulting names. The Jurchens likewise described Goryeo people as enemies and often came into military conflict with them. The Jurchen and Balhae people also differed in their level of technological and societal sophistication. Chinese sources describe the Jurchens as lacking law, governors, kings, or dignitaries. Prior to the reign of Wanyan Wugunai (1021\u20131074) in the early 11th century, the Jurchens could not produce iron armor and had to trade for it from other tribes.\nWanyan clan.\nWanyan origin.\nThere is no dated evidence of the Jurchens before the time of Wugunai (1021\u201374), when the Jurchens began to coalesce into a nation-like federation. According to tradition passed down via oral transmission, Wugunai was the 6th generation descendant of Hanpu, the founder of the Wanyan clan, who therefore must have lived around the year 900. Hanpu originally came from the Heishui Mohe tribe of Balhae. According to the \"History of Jin\", when he came to the Wanyan tribe, it was a form of compensation for the repayment of a murder. He had two brothers, one who stayed in Goryeo and the other in Balhae when he left. By the time he arrived and settled among the Wanyan, he was already 60 years old and accepted as a \"wise man\". He succeeded in settling a dispute between two families without resorting to violence, and as a reward, was betrothed to a worthy unmarried maiden also 60 years old. The marriage was blessed with the gift of a dark ox, which was revered in Jurchen culture, and from this union came one daughter and three sons. With this, Hanpu became the chief of the Wanyan and his descendants became formal members of the Wanyan clan.\nBecause Hanpu arrived from Goryeo, some South Korean scholars have claimed that Hanpu hailed from Goryeo. According to Alexander Kim, this cannot be easily identified as him being Korean because many Balhae people lived in Goryeo at that time. Later when Aguda appealed to the Balhae people in the Liao dynasty for support by emphasizing their common origin, he only mentioned those who descended from the \"seven Wuji tribes\", which the Goguryeo people were not a part of. It seems by that point, the Jurchens saw only the Mohe tribes as a related people. Some western scholars consider the origin of Hanpu to be legendary in nature. Herbert Franke described the narrative provided in the \"History of Jin\" as an \"ancestral legend\" with a historical basis in that the Wanyan clan had absorbed immigrants from Goryeo and Balhae during the 10th century. Frederick W. Mote described it as a \"tribal legend\" that may have born the tribe's memories. The two brothers remaining in Goryeo and Balhae may represent ancestral ties to those two peoples while Hanpu's marriage may represent the tribe's transformation from a matrilineal to patrilineal society.\nWugunai was a sixth generation descendant of Hanpu. He and his father had received military titles from the Liao court but they held no real power or functions other than recognition of the Liao's loose sovereignty. According to Jin sources, the Jurchens had no writing, calendar, or offices in the 11th century. In those times, a significant number of place names were simply named the \"town of such and such a person\". Wugunai is described as \"a brave warrior, a great eater and drinker, and a lover of women\". He extended his rule from the Changbai Mountains in the south to the Wuguo \"Five Nations\" in the north. The Liao appointed him as the military governor of the Uncivilized Jurchens.\nGoryeo-Jurchen war.\nThe Jurchens in the Yalu River region had been tributaries of Goryeo since the reign of Taejo of Goryeo (r. 918-943), who called upon them during the wars of the Later Three Kingdoms period. Taejo relied heavily on a large Jurchen cavalry force to defeat Later Baekje. The Jurchens switched allegiances between Liao and Goryeo multiple times depending on which they deemed the most appropriate. The Liao and Goryeo competed to gain the allegiance of Jurchen settlers who effectively controlled much of the border area beyond Goryeo and Liao fortifications. These Jurchens offered tribute but expected to be rewarded richly by Goryeo in return. However the Jurchens who offered tribute were often the same ones who raided Goryeo's borders. In one instance, the Goryeo court discovered that a Jurchen leader who had brought tribute had been behind the recent raids on their territory. The frontier was largely outside of direct control and lavish gifts were doled out as a means of controlling the Jurchens. Goryeo inhabitants were forbidden from trading with Jurchens. Sometimes Jurchens submitted to Goryeo and were given citizenship.\nThe tributary relations between Jurchens and Goryeo began to change under the reign of Jurchen leader Wuyashu (r. 1103\u20131113) of the Wanyan clan. The Wanyan clan was intimately aware of the Jurchens who had submitted to Goryeo and used their power to break the clans' allegiance to Goryeo, unifying the Jurchens. The resulting conflict between the two powers led to Goryeo's withdrawal from Jurchen territory and acknowledgment of Jurchen control over the contested region.\nAs the geopolitical situation shifted, Goryeo unleashed a series of military campaigns in the early 12th century to regain control of its borderlands. Goryeo had already been in conflict with the Jurchens before. In 984, Goryeo failed to control the Yalu River basin due to conflict with the Jurchens. In 1056, Goryeo repelled the Eastern Jurchens and afterward destroyed their stronghold of over 20 villages. In 1080, Munjong of Goryeo led a force of 30,000 to conquer ten villages. However by the rise of the Wanyan clan, the quality of Goryeo's army had degraded and it mostly consisted of infantry. There were several clashes with the Jurchens, usually resulting in Jurchen victory with their mounted cavalrymen. In 1104, the Wanyan Jurchens reached Chongju while pursuing tribes resisting them. Goryeo sent Lim Gan to confront the Jurchens, but his untrained army was defeated, and the Jurchens took Chongju castle. Lim Gan was dismissed from office and reinstated, dying as a civil servant in 1112. The war effort was taken up by Yun Kwan, but the situation was unfavorable and he returned after making peace.\nYun Kwan believed that the loss was due to their inferior cavalry and proposed to the king that an elite force known as the Byeolmuban (; \"Special Warfare Army\") be created. it existed apart from the main army and was made up of cavalry, infantry, and a \"Hangmagun\" (\"Subdue Demon Corps\"). In December 1107, Yun Kwan and O Y\u014fnch\u2019on set out with 170,000 soldiers to conquer the Jurchens. The army won against the Jurchens and built Nine Fortresses over a wide area on the frontier encompassing Jurchen tribal lands, and erected a monument to mark the boundary. However due to unceasing Jurchen attacks, diplomatic appeals, and court intrigue, the Nine Fortresses were handed back to the Jurchens. In 1108, Yun Kwan was removed from office and the Nine Fortresses were turned over to the Wanyan clan. It is plausible that the Jurchens and Goryeo had some sort of implicit understanding where the Jurchens would cease their attacks while Goryeo took advantage of the conflict between the Jurchens and Khitans to gain territory. According to Breuker, Goryeo never really had control of the region occupied by the Nine Fortresses in the first place and maintaining hegemony would have meant a prolonged conflict with militarily superior Jurchen troops that would prove very costly. The Nine Fortresses were exchanged for Poju (Uiju), a region the Jurchens later contested when Goryeo hesitated to recognize them as their suzerain.\nLater, when Wuyashu's younger brother Aguda founded the Jin dynasty (1115\u20131234), the Jurchens called Goryeo their \"parent country\" or \"father and mother\" country. This was because it had traditionally been part of their system of tributary relations, its rhetoric, advanced culture, as well as the idea that it was \"bastard offspring of Kory\u014f\". The Jin pressured Goryeo to become their subject. While many in Goryeo were against this, Yi Cha-gy\u00f6m was in power at the time and judged peaceful relations with the Jin to be beneficial to his own political power. He accepted the Jin demands and in 1126, the king of Goryeo declared himself a Jin vassal (tributary). However the Goryeo king retained his position as \"Son of Heaven\" within Goryeo. By incorporating Jurchen history into that of Goryeo and emphasizing the Jin emperors as bastard offspring of Goryeo, and placing the Jin within the template of a \"northern dynasty\", the imposition of Jin suzerainty became more acceptable.\nConflict with the Khitan Liao.\nThe Jurchens had been in conflict with the Khitans since the rise of the Liao dynasty (916\u20131125). As early as the 9th century, the Khitans had attacked the Jurchens during their rise to power. In the early 10th century, the founder of the Liao dynasty, Abaoji, attacked the Jurchens as well as several other neighboring peoples like the Shiwei, Kumo Xi, and the Tang dynasty. With the annexation of Balhae by the Liao in 926, the Jurchens became direct subjects of the Liao. In 973 and 976, the Jurchens looted Liao territory. In 991, the Khitans tried to prevent their Jurchen tributaries from trading with the Song by building palisades cutting off a land route that the Jurchens had to pass through. However, Jurchen-Song relations continued via a sea route until the early 11th century. In 1029, a group of Jurchens joined Da Yanlin, a descendant of Balhae royalty, in rebelling against the Liao dynasty. Da Yanlin's rebel Xingliao state was defeated the next year.\nThe Liao categorized the Jurchens into three groups: \"civilized\" Jurchens (\"shu n\u00fczhi\") descended from tribes captured by the Liao in the 10th century and assimilated into Khitan society, \"obedient\" Jurchens (\"shun n\u00fczhi\") subordinate to the Liao and had regular contact with the court, and \"wild\" Jurchens (\"sheng n\u00fczhi\") who inhabited the lower Songhua River valley and the eastern mountains of modern Heilongjiang. The wild Jurchens were nominally subordinate to the Liao but were functionally independent. During the 11th century, the Wanyan clan established dominance over their neighbors and created a semblance of Jurchen unity. The Liao court recognized this and conferred on their chieftains the title of military governor.\nAs the Wanyan clan consolidated their control over the Jurchens, relations with the Liao became increasingly strained. The Jurchens resented the behavior of Liao officials at Ningjiang, the main border trading post, who constantly cheated them. The Liao also placed on them the obligation of supplying the Liao emperor with gyrfalcons called , only bred on the coastal regions, which required the Jurchens to fight across the territory of their neighbors, the Five Nations, to access. Liao envoys also habitually beat their village elders and abused their women. One of the primary causes of the Jurchen rebellion was the custom of raping married Jurchen women and Jurchen girls by Khitan envoys, which caused resentment from the Jurchens. The custom of having sex with unmarried girls was not a problem by Khitans, since the practice of guest prostitution\u00a0\u2013 giving female companions, food and shelter to guests\u00a0\u2013 was common among Jurchens. Unmarried daughters of Jurchen families of lower and middle classes in Jurchen villages were provided to Khitan messengers for sex, as recorded by Hong Hao. There is no evidence that guest prostitution of unmarried Jurchen girls to Khitan men was resented by the Jurchens. It was only when the Khitans forced aristocratic Jurchen families to give up their beautiful wives as guest prostitutes to Khitan messengers that the Jurchens became resentful.\nHistory.\nTaizu (1115\u20131123).\nAfter Wuyashu's death in 1113, his brother Aguda (posthumously Emperor Taizu of Jin) was elected leader of the Jurchens by the tribal elders. The Liao continued to bestow upon the Wanyan leaders the title of military governor, but the Jurchens soon came into military conflict with the Liao.\nIn late 1112, Emperor Tianzuo of Liao embarked on a fishing expedition to the Huntong River (modern Songhua River) where the Jurchen tribes were expected to pay homage to the emperor. As a symbolic gesture of obeisance, the Jurchen chieftains were supposed to get up in turn and dance in the emperor's camp, but one of them, Aguda, refused. Even after being bidden three times, Aguda still refused to dance. Tianzuo wanted him executed for his act of defiance but the influential chancellor, Xiao Fengxian, dissuaded him from that course and belittled the harm Aguda could do. This would prove to be a fatal mistake as Aguda was elected ruler of the Jurchens in the following year. Aguda immediately began harassing the Liao for the return of Ashu, a Jurchen chieftain who opposed Wanyan hegemony and had taken refuge in Liao territory, and when his demands were refused, began building fortifications on the Liao border. In the late autumn of 1114 Aguda attacked Ningjiang. Underestimating the Jurchen threat, Tianzuo only sent some Balhae detachments from the Eastern Capital, which were defeated. Another force composed of Khitan and Kumo Xi troops led by Xiao Sixian, the brother of Xiao Fengxian, was also defeated on the Songhua. Despite Sixian's incompetence, he escaped punishment, leading to demoralization of Khitan generals. By the end of the year, several border prefectures had been taken by the Jurchens and some neighboring tribes had also joined them.\nIn 1115 Tianzuo sent envoys to negotiate with the Jurchens, but Aguda had already declared himself emperor of the Jin \"Gold\" dynasty in the spring of 1115, and rejected the Liao letters because they did not address him by his new title. Aguda also took on a Chinese name (\"Min\" \"compassionate\") and a Chinese reign title (\"Shouguo\" \"receiving statehood\") in addition to all the regalia befitting of a Chinese emperor. The one responsible for this seems to be a man of Balhae origins, Yang Pu, who had received the \"jinshi\" degree under the Liao as a young man. He advised Aguda not to be content with mere independence for the Jurchens but to aspire to emperorship based on Chinese traditions. \nAguda continued to demand the return of Ashu and the withdraw of Liao troops from Huanglong, the major administrative center of the region. Huanglong fell to the Jin in late autumn. Tianzuo assembled a massive army west of the Songhua and crossed the river in the winter of 1115. His invasion was undermined by a plot to dethrone him and install his uncle, Prince Chun. The conspirators led by Yel\u00fc Zhangnu deserted the army and sent messengers informing Chun of their plan. Chun refused to take part in the coup and beheaded Zhangnu's messengers. The rebels then went about the countryside creating havoc until they were defeated by a small group of loyal Jurchens. Zhangnu was caught trying to escape to the Jin disguised as a messenger and was executed by being cut in half at the waist. More than 200 implicated nobles were executed and their families condemned to slavery. In early 1116 another rebellion occurred at the Eastern Capital when a Balhae officer named Gao Yongchang declared himself emperor of the Yuan dynasty and requested aid from the Jin. The Jin relief troops to Yuan easily repulsed the Liao troops but then turned on the Balhae rebels and killed Gao Yongchang. With the destruction of the Yuan dynasty, the entire region east of the Liao River fell to the Jin. To ensure Chun's continued loyalty, he was made commander in chief of the Liao armies and entrusted with defense operations against the Jin. Chun proved to be an awful commander. His new army, composed of Balhae refugees, inflicted more damage on the civilian population than the enemies. When the Jin attacked Chunzhou on the Songhua in early 1117, the Liao army melted away, not even offering a token resistance. At the end of the year, the Jin forces crossed the Liao River, defeated Chun's army, and conquered several prefectures.\nAfter the Jin's initial conquests, a lull in military activity followed. The Song started negotiating an alliance with the Jin in 1117. At first, an envoy was sent to the Jin court under the pretext of buying horses, but in reality it was the start of negotiations between the two empires. During the period from 1117-1123, the Song sent envoys to the Jin court seven times while the Jin sent six embassies. Despite these diplomatic efforts, by the time a formal treaty was finalized in 1123, Aguda had realized that there was no need for an alliance with the Song who were too militarily weak to render any significant aid to Jin campaigns. The treaty ironed out in 1123 portrayed the Jin and Song as equals. Aguda was addressed as the \"August Emperor of the great Jin\" on equal terms with the Song emperor. The treaty specified that the Song was to pay the Jin annual payments previously granted to the Liao and in addition they would also pay compensation in return for lost revenue from the prefectures of the Yan region that were to be returned to the Song. The treaty text, however, contains no specific instructions on how the prefectures were to be returned to the Song. Details on border delimitation were also left for future negotiations. The vagueness of the treaty points and the instability of the situation surrounding the Alliance Conducted at Sea would usher in an era of warfare between the Jin and Song rather than one of peaceful co-existence.\nIn 1118 Tianzuo initiated peace negotiations, but the Jin demands were so onerous, requesting half of the Liao empire in addition to payments of silk and silver, that they were impossible to meet. Aguda was unable to immediately continue military campaigns against the Liao due to stretched resources. In 1119 a rebellion against the Jin occurred at the Eastern Capital and had to be suppressed. This brief interlude was no less kind to the Liao, which was plagued by famine, local rebellions, and defections to the Jin. Hostilities renewed in the spring of 1020 when Aguda broke off negotiations.\nThe Jin captured the Supreme Capital in mid-1120 and stopped its advance to escape the summer heat. In the spring of 1121, Tianzuo's second wife, Lady Wen, conspired with her brother in law, General Yel\u00fc Yudu, to depose the emperor and enthrone her son. The plot was uncovered by Xiao Fengxian, whose sister, Lady Yuan, also hoped to have her son succeed. Lady Wen was forced to commit suicide but Yudu escaped and defected to the Jin. He was allowed to remain in command of his troops and in the winter of 1121\u201322, he led Jin forces to capture the Central Capital. Leaving Prince Chun in charge of the Southern Capital, Tianzuo embarked on a prolonged flight from the Jin, passing through Juyong Pass to the Western Capital. Shortly afterward, Tianzuo grew tired of Xiao Fengxian's manipulations, which had caused the death of his son, and had him commit suicide. Tianzuo then fled to the Yin Mountains where he tried to recruit fresh troops from local tribes. Following his trail, the Jin took the Western Capital in the spring of 1122. The Tanguts, fearing an invasion of their border, sent troops in support of Tianzuo and blocked the Jurchen advance. Soon after Aguda arrived, he defeated a Khitan-Tangut force near the Xia border, and turned back east to take the Southern Capital, where Prince Chun had been declared the new Liao emperor (Northern Liao).\nOnly three months after becoming emperor, Chun died, leaving his widowed empress in charge. In the late autumn of 1122, her commanders Guo Yaoshi and Gao Feng defected with their troops to the Song dynasty. They led Song troops in an attack on the Southern Capital, but even in the Liao's withered state, the Song army was still unable to overcome Khitan defenses and failed to take the city. In the winter, Aguda took the Southern Capital, and the remaining Khitans fled in two groups to the west. One group led by Xiao Gan fled to Western Xia where they set up a short lived Xi dynasty that lasted only five months before Gan died at the hands of his own troops. The other group, led by Yel\u00fc Dashi, joined Tianzuo at the Xia border. In the early summer of 1123, Dashi was captured by the Jin and forced to lead them to Tianzuo's camp, where the entire imperial family except for Tianzuo and one son were captured.\nAguda did not live to see the final defeat of the Liao. He died a few months after the treaty with the Song was concluded in 1123.\nTaizong (1123\u20131135).\nAfter Aguda died in 1123, he was succeeded by his younger brother Wuqimai (posthumously Emperor Taizong of Jin). Wuqimai oversaw the final defeat of the Liao dynasty and continued to expand the Jin dynasty's territory by waging war on the Song.\nEmperor Tianzuo of Liao sought refuge with Emperor Chongzong of Western Xia, who while initially receptive, changed his mind after warnings from the Jurchens and declared himself a vassal of Jin in 1124. Tianzuo fled further north into the steppes where he traded his clothes for food from the Khongirad. In spite of all these setbacks, Tianzuo still held onto the delusion of retaking the Western and Southern Capitals, and attacked nearby prefectures. Yel\u00fc Dashi, who had rejoined Tianzuo, grew tired of his behavior and left for the west. Tianzuo was captured in early 1125 and taken to the Jin court where he held the title of \"king of the seashore\" (). According to the \"History of Liao\", Tianzuo died at the age of 54 in 1128.\nAfter the defeat of the Liao dynasty and the submission of the Western Xia as a vassal, Wuqimai strengthened border defenses against Goryeo and quelled unrest among the Balhae districts. The Jin then focused its attention on the Song frontier. Prior to Aguda's death, the former Liao military governor of Pingzhou named Zhang Jue killed a Liao commander of Yan who had defected to the Jin. Zhang Jue declared his allegiance to the Song, who reappointed him to his former office. A Jin army attacked Pingzhou, forcing Zhang Jue to escape to Yan, where another former Liao commander, Guo Yaoshi, had defected to the Song. The Jin pressured the Song into returning Zhang Jue, whom they considered a criminal. The Song acquiesced to their demands, executed Zhang Jue, and sent his head to the Jin. Realizing that the Song were unwilling to stand up to the Jin, Guo Yaoshi declared his allegiance to the Jin, who reinstated him as the governor of Yan.\nThe Jin decided to invade the Song in the fall of 1125. Within a few months, they had occupied most of Shanxi and Hebei. In early 1126, the Jin army crossed the Yellow River and laid siege to the Song capital of Kaifeng. Due to considerations for material losses that the Jin army would have incurred from a prolonged siege, the Jin commander, Wanyan Zongwang (Wolibu, second son of Aguda), withdrew with heavy concessions from the Song. The Song ceded the three prefectures of Taiyuan, Hejian, and Zhongshan, representing the majority of Shanxi and Hebei's territory. The Song was also forced to pay a large indemnity in silver, silk, and coins worth 180 years of annual payments. The prince of Kang, a younger brother of Emperor Qinzong, was sent to Zongwang's camp along with the high ranking official Zhang Bangchang as hostages. After a week of negotiations, the siege of Kaifeng was lifted on 10 February 1126. A mistake that the Song had made during this invasion was the removal of the defensive forest that was planted along the Song-Liao border. Because of the removal of this landscape barrier, in 1126/27, the Jin army marched quickly across the North China Plain to Bianjing (present-day Kaifeng).\nConflict between the Jin and the Song recommenced almost immediately after the Jin army withdrew. It is uncertain what caused the second campaign but the Jin may have believed that the Song were weak enough to be completely defeated. The Jin accused the Song of inciting former Liao generals to attack the Jin, breaking the agreed upon truce. The Jin forces crossed the Yellow River in the winter of 1126-27 and laid siege to Kaifeng again. After heavy fighting, the Jin army succeeded in breaking Kaifeng's defenses and entered the city on 9 January 1127. The Song emperors Qinzong and Huizong were captured along with a host courtiers and family members in what is known as the Jingkang Incident. Huizong and Qinzong were demoted to commoners, forced to pay ritual obeisance to Aguda at his mausoleum, wear mourning dress, and were eventually enfeoffed as marquises with the titles of Muddle Virtue and Doubly Muddled. Huizong died in 1135 in Wuguocheng, a town near the Songhua River. Six Song princesses were married into the Wanyan clan. The Jin treated their Song royal hostages better over time in order to use them as a bargaining tool against the Southern Song. However this ended when Qinzong died in 1156, depriving the Jin of their primary hostage. The prince of Kang was enthroned as the new Song emperor (posthumously Emperor Gaozong of Song) and tried to organize resistance in regions that had not yet fallen to the Jin.\nDue to anti-Jin resistance groups in numerous parts of northern China and the deaths of several Jin military leaders, including Zongwang, in the aftermath of the second campaign, the Jin were unable to immediately continue their conquests into Song territory. The Jin created the puppet state of Great Chu in the new territory they had conquered and placed Zhang Bangchang on the throne in Jiankang as their puppet ruler. The Jurchens hoped that by placing an ethnically Han ruler on the throne they could attract Han defectors from the Song. However Zhang was killed or forced to commit suicide on the orders of the Song dynasty soon after. The failure of the Song to defend Kaifeng in 1127 did not result in a cessation of conflict or the surrender of the Song. The Song court fled to Jiankang where they had removed the Jin puppet kingdom ruled by Zhang Bangchang and then abandoned it for Shaoxing.\nThe Jin set up another nominally Han-ruled puppet state called Great Qi under the emperorship of Liu Yu, a \"jinshi\" degree holder who had defected to the Jin in 1128. At first Great Qi was based at Daming in Hebei, but by 1132, Liu Yu had moved to Kaifeng. Liu Yu worked hard to establish a functioning administration and to revive northern China's stagnant economy but its population was forced to pay heavy taxes as well as perform compulsory military service. The ensuing battles between the Jin-Qi forces and the Song saw the first use of the fire lance, the predecessor of the hand cannon, at the Siege of De'an by the Song defenders in 1132. Great Qi's troops fought alongside the Jurchens and even succeeded in beating Song forces a few times, notably capturing Xiangyang in 1135. But this victory was short lived and the Song offensive led by Yue Fei in 1134-5 ended up recapturing much of the lost Song territory. This military defeat by the Song damaged Liu Yu's standing in the eyes of the Jurchens and brought the value of his position into question. Liu Yu's patron, Wuqimai, died in 1135 and was succeeded by Hela, a grandson of Emperor Taizu of Jin.\nXizong (1135-1150).\nAfter Emperor Taizong of Jin died in 1135, he was succeeded by Hela (posthumously Emperor Xizong of Jin), a grandson of Emperor Taizu of Jin. Hela was much less favorable towards Liu Yu than his predecessor. He demoted Liu Yu from emperor of Great Qi to the rank of prince and abolished the state of Great Qi in 1137. Liu Yu lived out the rest of his life in supervised retirement at Linhuang.\nA peace treaty with the Song was finalized on 11 October 1142. There was a preliminary peace in 1139 when the Jin returned Shaanxi and Henan to the Song but this was short lived. In 1140, the Jin retook Shaanxi and Henan and sent troops south of the Yellow River. The Southern Song court, based in Hangzhou since 1138, sought to appease the Jin by eliminating the revanchist faction. Due to the machinations of Qin Hui, who has the ears of the emperor, the Song general who had experienced the most success in fighting back against the Jin, Yue Fei, was put to death in 1141. In October 1141, the Jin general Wanyan Zongbi (Jin Wuzhu), the fourth son of Aguda, offered to make the Huai River the border between the two states. The Song agreed to the terms of the Treaty of Shaoxing, which stipulated that the entire course of the Huai River would become the new border, Tangzhou and Dengzhou would be ceded to the Jin, 250,000 ounces of silver and silk would be paid annually to the Jin as tribute, no garrisons could be constructed on the side of the Song border, and the Song would not pursue criminals north of the border but would surrender criminals to the Jin. In return, the Jin withdrew their armies and promised to return the coffin of Huizong and the empresses. The treaty was couched in terms of vassalage with the Jin addressed as \"Your superior state\" investing Emperor Gaozong of Song as ruler of the Song. With the finalization of the treaty, the Jin had fully conquered northern China and the Central Plains. The political and economic center started shifting south as more Jurchens settling in northern China and larger numbers of Han Chinese were integrated into the state.\nAfter taking over northern China, the Jin became increasingly sinicised. Over the span of 20 years, the new Jurchen ruling class constituted around half of a larger pattern of migration southward into northern China. There, many Jurchens were granted land, which was then organised around a social structure based on hereditary military units: a ('company') was a unit consisting of 300 households, and groups of 7\u201310 were further organised into ('battalions').\nWhen Xizong was enthroned, he was only a boy of 16 years, and did not take part in much of the diplomatic and military activities that occurred immediately after his accession. Xizong left most of these affairs to the imperial clan members, who held the highest military and civilian offices. Despite his absence from the administration of the empire, the Jin remained relatively stable throughout his reign and did not face many urgent crises. Like the Song before them, the Jin sought to appease the northern nomads like the Mongols rather than to rule them directly. In 1146-7, the Jin invested Khabul Khan with the title of assisting state ruler of the Mongols. A Song record states that the Jin originally tried to use military force to defeat the Mongols but failed. Khabul was once invited to the Jin court. During the visit, Khabul tweaked the emperor's beard in a drunken outburst. While the emperor was initially willing to overlook this incident, he later changed his mind and ordered for Khabul to be captured. The Jin pursuers failed in the effort and were killed in an ambush. The Jin settled for sending elite troops to occupy a few strategic points before returning. After peaceful relations were established with the Mongols, the Jin sent them generous gifts as appeasement.\nThe Jin also tried to gain the submission of the Qara Khitai (Western Liao) offshoot of the Liao dynasty at the same time, however this effort came to nothing when the envoy was killed on his way west. The same envoy made contact with the Uyghurs of Qocho in 1144, but they remained aloof from the Jin and only sent local products as homage to the Jin court on an irregular basis.\nXizong adopted many Han Chinese cultural traditions and studied the classics and wrote Chinese poetry. Despite the increasing adoption of Han Chinese culture, the Jurchens continued to occupy the top echelons of Jin leadership positions. Later in his life, Xizong became an alcoholic, developed a persecution mania, and executed many officials for criticizing him. He also had Jurchen leaders who opposed him murdered, even those in the Wanyan clan. On 9 January 1150, he was murdered by a cabal of relatives and nobles, who made his cousin Wanyan Liang the next Jin emperor. Because of the brutality of both his domestic and foreign policy, Wanyan Liang was posthumously demoted from the position of emperor. Historians have consequently referred to him by his posthumous name \"Prince of Hailing\".\nWanyan Liang (1150-1161).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHaving usurped the throne, Wanyan Liang embarked on a program of legitimization to ensure his rule as an emperor of China. In the process he became known as a monster, according to both Song and Jin sources, who was far worse than his predecessor. He normalized the killing of his opponents, including those among the Wanyan royal clan, particularly the descendants of Taizong. In total, he executed 155 princes. After killing them, Liang transferred the widows and concubines of the murdered princes to his own harem. In later centuries, he became the subject of pornography where he was portrayed as an anti-hero and his exploits described with gusto.\nAs part of Liang's efforts to legitimize himself as emperor, he became thoroughly entrenched in Chinese traditions. In his youth, he was highly impressed by the Song Chinese he came into contact with and their influence caused him to adopt Chinese practices such as drinking tea and playing chess. His predilection for Chinese culture was so strong during his childhood that he was given the nickname of Boliehan, which in the Jurchen language means \"aping the Chinese\". Liang initiated reforms to make the Jin more Chinese in ritual, ceremony, fiscal policy, and administration. He was no longer satisfied with the northern base of political power in the Supreme Capital (\"Shangjing\") in Huining Prefecture (present day Acheng, Harbin), considering the region to be too underdeveloped for his liking. He started shifting the bureaucracy to Yanjing (modern Beijing) in the south. In 1152, Liang relocated his residence to Yanjing and renamed it the Central Capital. To emphasize the permanence of the move, in 1157 he ordered the destruction of the palaces and mansions of the Jurchen chiefs in the Supreme Capital and reduced it in rank to a prefecture. He also gave orders to reconstruct the former Song capital, Bianjing (present-day Kaifeng), and made it the Southern Capital.\nLiang's vision of himself as a Chinese emperor extended to his ambition to control all of China, including the territory of the Song dynasty. To fulfil his dream of becoming the ruler of all China, Wanyan attacked the Song in 1161. In 1158, he accused the Song of breaking the Shaoxing Treaty by making illicit purchases of horses at the border markets. Preparations for an all out invasion of the Song started in 1159. dispatched the minister of war to inspect the border with the Western Xia to make sure no border unrest could upset the campaign against the Song. Horses were requisitioned in great numbers and a total of 560,000 animals were reported to have been utilized for the war effort. A large store of weaponry was gathered in the Central Capital. A mandatory draft for the Han population was implemented, which was met with local resistance and rebellions in the south, particularly on the border with the Song dynasty. However, recruitment efforts continued until the summer of 1161. Anticipating combat with the Song navy and the need for river transport, Liang recruited 30,000 sailors and confiscated a great number of barges for his army.\nIn the summer of 1161, Wanyan Liang personally led his army from the Central Capital to the Southern Capital and killed all the surviving male descendants of the Yel\u00fc clan of the Liao dynasty and the House of Zhao of the Song dynasty. Over 130 persons were killed during the purge. Liang's purge of the Liao royal clan caused the Khitans to rebel, and 10,000 soldiers were forced to be diverted to quell the rebellion in the northeast. Liang also killed Empress Tudan for criticizing his campaign against the Song. Another rebellion broke out in the former Supreme Capital at Huining Prefecture led by Liang's cousin, the soon-to-be crowned Wanyan Yong.\nThere was no formal declaration of war against the Song. As late as 14 June 1161, Jin envoys were at the Song court congratulating Gaozong on his birthday. However one of the envoys behaved in a belligerent manner, alerting the Song to Jin plans to attack them. The Jin envoy was executed and the Song strengthened their border defenses in time for the invasion. Wanyan Liang concentrated his forces on the northern bank of the Huai River. He left the Southern Capital on 15 October and crossed the Huai on 28 October, advancing toward the Yangtze. The Song forces reinforced their line of defense on the Yangtze and pro-actively attacked the Jin in some locales, notably scoring a few successes to the west and conquering some Jin prefectures.\nOn 16 November, the Jin suffered a major defeat against the Song at sea. The Jin fleet was composed of over 600 large ships, 20,000 Jurchen and Balhae troops, 10,000 northern Han troops, and 40,000 sailors. They were sighted off of Chenjia island while waiting for reinforcements before sailing down to attack Hangzhou. On 15 November, the Jin fleet was spotted anchored off of Tang island (south of Qingdao). The Jin ships were anchored when the Song fleet moved to attack them. Despite adverse weather conditions causing delays in the Song attack, the Jin ships made no move to retaliate because all the sailors were Chinese conscripts. They lied to the Jin officers and told them that the approaching Song ships were actually reinforcements. When the Song ships started launching bombs and fire arrows at the rigging of the Jin ships, they were taken completely by surprise. The silk sails of the ships caught fire, causing panic and desertion among the crew and soldiers, who jumped ship or surrendered. The Jin ships moored further away raised anchor and fled to sea while the Song navy led by Li Bao gave chase. The inferior Jin ships, built for rivers and lakes, were slower than the Song vessels, and were captured one by one. Over 10,000 Jin forces drowned and another 3,000 Han conscripts in the Jin army surrendered to the Song troops upon reaching shore. Other Jurchen and Balhae troops died when their ships ran aground against the rocky shores. It was said that burning ships could be seen for 200 \"li\" (60 miles). According to Jin sources, half of the Jin navy was lost in the Battle of Tangdao, including high ranking commanders such as Wanyan Zhengjianu.\nWhile Liang was camped at Yangzhou, some of his generals tried to cross the Yangtze at Caishi (south of Ma'anshan). The attempted crossing on 26 and 27 November failed. The paddle-wheel ships of the Song navy launched gunpowder bombs known as thunderclap bombs at the Jin ships, causing a cloud of sulphur to blind the Jin forces. The Song ships then went forth and drowned the men and horses trying to cross. This engagement, known as the Battle of Caishi, was viewed as a major victory by Song sources, with references to large numbers of Jin forces numbering in the hundreds of thousands. However, the battle was likely a relatively small engagement and the Jin lost no more than 4,000 men.\nWanyan Liang's campaign came to an end when he was murdered along with five of his concubines in his camp on 15 December 1161. Liang's son and heir was also killed in the capital. The assassins were a group of officers who had grown disillusioned with Liang's defeats. There was widespread dissatisfaction with his rule not just among the minority groups, but also within the elite Jurchen class. Liang's cousin, Wulu (posthumously Emperor Shizong of Jin, had already been crowned emperor in Liaoyang by the conspirators on 27 October half a month prior to Liang's death.\nShizong (1161-1189).\nThe new emperor, Wulu, also known as Yong (posthumously Emperor Shizong of Jin), was not officially recognized as emperor until the murder of Wanyan Liang's heir. He was the grandson of Taizu and the son of Wanyan Zongfu and a Balhae consort. Prior to his accession as emperor, Shizong was stationed in the Eastern Capital (Liaoyang) as the city's vice-regent. When a Khitan rebellion in the region broke out in 1161, Shizong took part in the anti-rebel campaign and was able to bring them back under control. Khitans also rebelled in the northwest but they were also defeated by 1162. Some Khitans escaped to the Song while others in the Jin military were disbanded or spread out among Jurchen units. County towns in the northwest were fortified against further rebellions and to protect the region from the Mongols. During the 1150s or 1160s, the Jin captured the Mongol khan Ambaghai of the Taichiud, who was duped in a ruse by the Tatars. Ambaghai was nailed to a wooden donkey and left to die.\nSupported primarily by Balhae people and Jurchens dissatisfied with Wanyan Liang's rule, Shizong left for the Central Capital (modern Beijing) after he was proclaimed emperor. His first order in 1162 was to withdraw the army from the Yangtze region and in spring he sent envoys to the Song seeking peace. There were repeated clashes with the Song both in the Huai River region and in the southwest region bordering the Song province of Shu (Sichuan) until 1165, when a peace treaty was concluded on more favorable terms for the Song. The Song was no longer a vassal of the Jin and the word \"tribute\" was replaced with \"payment\", however the actual amount paid to the Jin remained unchanged. The border between the two states remained the same as before. The Treaty of Longxing ushered in 40 years of peace between the Song and Jin dynasties.\nAlthough educated in the Chinese classics, Shizong was not as infatuated with Chinese culture as his predecessor, Wanyan Liang. He had a great nostalgia for the traditional Jurchen lifestyle of those who still lived in their ancestral homelands. He saw the increasingly Chinese way of life that the Jurchens adopted as a concerning development, so he passed edicts prohibiting them from adopting Chinese names or dress. He promoted the Jurchen language and culture; during his reign, a number of Chinese classics were translated into Jurchen, the Imperial Jurchen Academy was founded, and the imperial examinations started to be offered in the Jurchen language. The old center of power in Huining Prefecture was rebuilt and returned to its former status as Supreme Capital. In 1184-5, Shizong spent a year in the Supreme Capital to reminisce about his forefathers.\nIn the early 1180s, Shizong instituted a restructuring of 200 \"meng'an\" units to remove tax abuses and help Jurchens. Communal farming was encouraged. The Jin Empire prospered and had a large surplus of grain in reserve. Poor Jurchen families in the southern Routes (Daming and Shandong) Battalion and Company households tried to live the lifestyle of wealthy Jurchen families and avoid doing farming work by selling their own Jurchen daughters into slavery and renting their land to Han tenants. The wealthy Jurchens feasted and drank and wore damask and silk. The \"History of Jin\" says that Shizong took note and attempted to halt this behavior in 1181. Shizong's reign was remembered as a time of comparative peace and prosperity, and the emperor himself was compared to the mythological rulers Yao and Shun.\nZhangzong (1189-1208).\nBy the time Shizong died in 1189, the crown prince and heir apparent Wanyan Yungong had already passed, so his grandson Madage (posthumously Emperor Zhangzong of Jin) succeeded him. The new emperor did not have as strong of a personality as his grandfather but was still able to maintain the unity of the Wanyan clan and the Jurchen noblemen. His reign saw the continued adoption of Chinese culture by the Jurchens and Khitans despite prohibitions against such behavior. Despite brewing trouble to the north with the rise of Genghis Khan, the main source of disaster during Zhangzong's reign was the 1194 Yellow River flood which inundated vast regions and formed two new courses. The flooding displaced farmers, disrupted communication, and fomented unrest among the population, causing the decline of the dynasty. In addition to the flooding, there were droughts and locusts plaguing the regions bordering the Song. Shandong in particular was heavily affected by natural disasters. At the same time, the Jin had to contend with the rising Mongols, forcing them to construct large scale fortifications along the northwestern border after 1192. The Jin also spent a significant portion of their resources on sending punitive expeditions into Mongol territory during the Yellow River flood. To raise more funds, the Jin government resorted to confiscating land from Han owners accused of tax evasion and redistributing the land to reliable Jurchens, causing friction between the two populations.\nIn 1195, the Jin attacked the Khongirad in conjunction with the Tatars but fallout over the distribution of loot caused the Jin to attack the Tatars in the following year. A Jin vanguard force led by Wanyan Anguo held off the Tatars on the Kherlen River for three days before reinforcements arrived and defeated them. Conflict with the Khongirad reignited on 4 February 1196 when they invaded Jin territory and defeated a Jin detachment. Meanwhile the Tatars fleeing Jin forces were defeated by Toghrul and Tem\u00fcjin. Toghrul and Tem\u00fcjin met with Jin officials who awarded them with titles. One of the officials, a Khitan named Yel\u00fc Ahai, later joined Tem\u00fcjin along with his brother Tuhua in 1203. The defeated Tatar Zuxu submitted to the Jin and rebelled again before submitting again in 1198. Zuxu soon died afterward.\nIn the south, the Song court was well aware of the Jin's difficulties. Song embassies traveled to the Central Capital twice a year and passed through the disaster struck regions. Song military leaders started instigating conflict on the Huai River border starting from 1204. The Song chancellor Han Tuozhou encouraged Song raids and military intrusions into Jin territory. By the summer of 1206, Han had decided it was time to formally declare war on the Jin. The deputy minister of war, Ye Shi, was tasked with drafting the declaration of war. However, he refused due to his opposition to the war. Ye Shi was demoted and replaced by Li Bi, who was a part of Han's revanchist party. The formal declaration of war was officially announced on 14 June 1206.\nThe Song deployed 160,000 men along the Huai River while the Jin mobilized 135,000 men to defend the border in December 1206. The Song offensive failed to make any significant headway against Jin defenses. Aside from capturing the relatively undefended border town of Sizhou on the northern bank of the Huai, the Song forces were completely ineffective at taking Jin defended positions. The campaign was badly organized and beset by heavy rains, which flooded their camp and destroyed the hay for their horses. Provisions also did not arrive on time so that soldiers suffered from hunger. Due to the harsh weather, the soldiers of the Song army starting deserting in the tens of thousands. By the autumn of 1206, the momentum had reversed and the Jin armies were able to take several Song prefectural towns, penetrating deep into Song territory. Rather than the large scale defection of Han people that the Song had hoped for, the Song governor-general of Shu (Sichuan), Wu Xi, defected to the Jin in December 1206. This would have been a major loss due to the number of soldiers that he commanded (70,000), but a group of loyal officers murdered Wu Xi on 29 March 1207 and returned Shu to Song control. Having narrowly averted disaster, the war continued with no major decisive engagements after April 1207.\nHan Tuozhou was dismissed from the Song court and murdered on 27 November 1207. Peace negotiations during the second half of 1207 and in 1208 were expedited by pressures on both sides. The Jin were worried about trouble to their north with the Mongols and the revanchist faction in the Song court had lost power. The Jin mainly blamed the conflict on Han, whom they regarded as a \"war criminal\". In July 1208, the Jin announced an end to the war and a peace treaty with the Song was finalized on 2 November 1208. Annual payments by the Song to the Jin were raised by 50,000 ounces of silver and 50,000 bolts of textiles. Han Tuozhou's head was delivered to the Jin in a box and preserved with lacquer. The head was placed on display in the Jin imperial family's ancestral temple.\nZhangzong died on 29 December 1208, having successfully overseen peaceful relations restored with the Song. During his reign, he sought to convert the Jin state into something more similar to the Tang and Song dynasties. In 1202, Zhangzong promulgated the \"Taihe Code\" to unify existing legislations. In the same year, he formally claimed the power of the Earth element on the wuxing cycle. This symbolic act formally placed the Jin as the successor of the Song and signaled to the world that the Jin considered itself the legitimate ruler of All Under Heaven.\nWanyan Yongji (1208\u20131213).\nWhen Emperor Zhangzong died in 1208, he was succeeded by Shizong's seventh son, Wanyan Yongji (originally Wanyan Yunji). Wanyan Yongji was born to a Balhae concubine and is not recorded in history as an emperor due to his successor, Emperor Xuanzong of Jin, reverting his status to that of a prince posthumously, therefore he is known as \"Prince Shao of Wei\" or \"Prince Weishao\". Yongji's succession was uncertain due to the seniority of Zhangzong's elder brother (Xuanzong), who should have succeeded Zhangzong according to tradition. However a court clique enthroned Yongji instead.\nBy the time Yongji came to power, the Jin had constructed a long line of fortifications from modern Qiqihar to Hulun Lake connecting with the previous Great Wall of China. However the units stationed along the fortifications were of Khitan and Kumo Xi extraction rather than Jurchen, making their worth of questionable value. It is uncertain why the Mongols under Genghis Khan invaded the Jin dynasty and numerous reasons are given, including the earlier killing of Ambaghai Khan (predecessor of Genghis) and Yongji personally insulting Genghis. Genghis broke off tributary relations with the Jin in 1210 and decided to invade them when he received news that the Jin were suffering from a severe famine.\nIn the spring of 1211, the Mongols attacked the Jin in two directions. The eastern army was led by Genghis. The Mongol forces led by Jochi, \u00d6gedei, and Chagatai easily overcame the border fortifications of the Jin and took Juyong Pass. Jin reinforcements were easily defeated by the Mongols, who ravaged the countryside while the western army blocked Jin auxiliary troops in Shanxi from coming to the aid of their frontline forces. The Mongols withdrew in the winter.\nThe Mongols invaded the Jin again in 1212. In February, the Mongols took Huanzhou and besieged Zhengzhou. Yongji sent out an army led by Heshilie Jiujin, the commander of the Jurchen and Khitan cavalry, and Duji Qianjianu and Hu Sha, who led the Han Chinese infantry, against the Mongol invasion. The Jin army was said to have been several hundred thousand strong. The Khitan commanders advocated for a surprise attack, but Heshilie Jiujin preferred to advance as a whole with the entire army. He also sent a letter to Genghis denouncing him, alerting the Mongols to the Jin advance. Although heavily outnumbered, Mongol cavalry led by Muqali charged the Jin forces, discomforting their ranks. The Mongol main army then followed up with an attack on the Jin forces, chasing them for 48\u00a0km before defeating their rearguard at Huihebao Fort. The Mongol victory at the Battle of Yehuling has been attributed to the overly cautious Jurchen commander, the disaffection of the Khitan commanders who resented Jurchen control, and the fighting qualities of the Mongol cavalry. \nIn the spring of 1212, the Mongols took Juyong Pass again and penetrated deep into Jin territory, devastating parts of Hebei, Shandong, and Shanxi. On 5 January 1213, Mongol forces led by Jebe took the Eastern Capital. Genghis defeated another Jin army led by Zhuhu Gaoqi in the summer of 1213. On 31 March 1214, Genghis laid siege to the Central Capital.\nDuring the Mongol invasion, Wanyan Yongji was killed in a coup by Heshilie Hushahu, who had been commander of the Western Capital, which had already fallen to the Mongols. One of the reasons Hushahu killed Yongji in the summer of 1213 was that he feared repercussions for his failure to defend the areas under his command from the Mongols. Hushahu enthroned Wudubu (posthumously Emperor Xuanzong of Jin), the elder brother of Zhangzong and nephew of Yongji.\nXuanzong (1213\u20131224).\nThe events of Wanyan Yongji's death and the accession of Wudubu (posthumously Emperor Xuanzong of Jin) happened while the Mongols were advancing toward the Central Capital. Repeated droughts had severely impacted the Jin dynasty's ability to wage war and muster troops. In a last ditch effort, the Jin court removed all limitations on its population's ability to take office, lifting former restrictions on the Khitans and Han. However this came to naught and the Jin started negotiations with the Mongols in the spring of 1214. The Mongols agreed to withdraw in return for the Jin submitting as a tributary and sending a daughter (Princess Qiguo) of the former emperor in marriage to the khan.\nDespite the momentary peace, Xuanzong judged the situation in the north to be too precarious to remain at the Central Capital and relocated the court to the Southern Capital, which was located in the center of the agriculturally developed Chinese plains and defended to the north by the Yellow River. Genghis saw the relocation as casus belli for the continuation of the war. By December 1214, Muqali's Mongol forces had taken the northeastern portion of the Jin dynasty while the Central Capital fell to the Mongols on 31 May 1215. The Khitan and Han subjects of the Jin dynasty defected to the Mongols, who placed the Khitan Shimo Ming'an and Jabar Khoja in charge of the Central Capital. At the same time the Jin and Western Xia came into conflict in the west while the Song refused to pay the sum stipulated in the 1208 treaty. The Mongols created a Han army out of defecting Jin troops, and another army out of defected Song troops called the \"Newly Submitted Army\" (). Two Han leaders, Shi Tianze and Liu Heima, and the Khitan Xiao Zhala defected and commanded the three tumens in the Mongol army.\nIn Shandong, a rebellion led by Yang Anguo, a man descended from a line of boot and leather workers, plundered the country towns in the east. In the summer of 1214, Yang proclaimed himself emperor. Despite the ongoing Mongol invasion, the Jin mobilized an army to put down the rebellion. The Jin forces led by Pusan Anchen had destroyed most of Yang's strongholds by late autumn. Yang was captured and killed in early 1215. Another two rebel leaders were defeated in the anti-rebel campaign, but general unrest in Shandong continued to incite rebellions. The rebels coalesced into a group known as the Red Coast in 1215. The Jin were unable to defeat them and in 1217, another Yellow River flood prevented them from taking action in Shandong. The Song tried to use the Red Coats to their advantage by offering their leaders official and material assistance. In 1218, the Song appointed the rebel leader Li Quan as commanding prefect of Shandong. In 1225, the Mongols invaded Shandong, resulting in the surrender of Li Quan in 1227. Li Quan joined the Mongols in attacking the Song in 1230 but the invasion ended in failure and Li Quan was killed on 18 February 1231. Li Quan's adopted son, Li Tan, inherited his father's position and defected to the Song in 1262, for which Kublai Khan had him executed.\nIn the northeast, the Khitan prince Yel\u00fc Liuge, who had been serving the Jin as a military commander, rebelled and seized a portion of Liaodong in 1211. Two years later he proclaimed himself the ruler of the Liao. Yel\u00fc Liuge was ousted by his younger brother, Yel\u00fc Sibu, and requested help from Genghis Khan against the usurper. Sibu was also usurped by one of his ministers, Yel\u00fc Qinu. The rebel Khitan state was destroyed by the Mongols in 1233. In 1214, the Jin assigned Puxian Wannu to suppress the rebellion. However Puxian Wannu was defeated and he himself rebelled in 1215. Based in the Eastern Capital (Liaoyang), Puxian Wannu declared the state of \"Dazhen\" (\"Great Jurchen\") and overran most of the former northeastern territory of the Jin dynasty, including the former Supreme Capital on the Songhua River. In the spring of 1216, Khitans fleeing from the Jin overran Puxian Wannu's territory and held the area from Dengzhou to Poju (Uiju).\nIn 1216, the Mongols accompanied by Yel\u00fc Liuge chased the Khitan rebels to the Goryeo borders and launched an attack on Dafuying, located on an island in the lower course of the Yalu River. The Khitans requested help from Goryeo but when the request was denied, the Khitans crossed the Yalu with an estimated 90,000 men and overran the Goryeo frontier. The Khitan rebels spent 1217 pillaging southwards down the Korean peninsula before several defeats at the hand of Korean General Kim Ch'wiry\u014f forced them to retreat. They turned their attention back toward the territory of Puxian Wannu. Puxian Wannu had already been defeated by the Mongols and submitted, but when the Mongol forces withdrew, he moved further east toward the Yalu and in early 1217, declared the state of \"Dongxia\" (\"Eastern Xia\"). Pressured by the Jin, he fled eastward again to the lower reaches of the Tumen River. It was also there that the Khitans fled from Goryeo. The Khitans were able to gather reinforcements and then invaded Goryeo again in the fall of 1217. The Khitan invasion was halted after they took the city of Kangdong, where Goryeo forces managed to contain them.\nIn the winter of 1218, 10,000 Mongol troops commanded by Hazhen and Zhala accompanied by 20,000 Eastern Jurchen troops commanded by Wanyan Ziyuan entered Goryeo from the northeast. They defeated Khitan forces in the cities of Hwaju, Maengju, Sunju, and T\u014fkchu. The Mongol-Jurchen advance was stopped by a heavy snowfall that made the roads impassable. Hazhen sent a letter carried by the translator Zhao Zhongxiang to Cho Ch'ung, the Goryeo commander in charge of the northwest, requesting provisions and demanding the two nations enter an Elder-Younger Brother relationship after the subjugation of the Khitans. Cho Ch'ung and Kim Ch'wiry\u014f were in favor of meeting the Mongol demands but the Goryeo court was more apprehensive. Ultimately they agreed to provide for the Mongol forces at the urging of Cho. One thousand bushels of rice and one thousand picked troops were sent to the Mongols. They arrived in time to witness the Mongols assault the Khitans in the walled-city of Taeju. The reinforcements were received well by the Mongols. In early 1219, preparations were underway to take the last Khitan stronghold in Kangdong. Troops from Goryeo joined the Mongol-Jurchen force. An estimated 50,000 Khitans surrendered and opened the gates.\nAfter the fall of Kangdong, Goryeo sent a delegation to Zhala's camp as well as gifts to the Mongol commanders. Mongol envoys met with Gojong of Goryeo (reigned 1213\u20131259) and handed him a document without the usual formalities. Cho accompanied the Mongol and Jurchen commanders to the Yalu where the Mongols seized a large number of Goryeo horses and left. The Mongols started collecting tribute from Goryeo and left behind 41 subordinates in Poju to learn the Korean language.\nConditions in northwestern Goryeo were poor following the Khitan raids. In the autumn of 1219, military commanders Han Sun and Ta Chi rebelled in Poju and defected to Puxian Wannu, who augmented their forces with 10,000 Eastern Jurchens. They tried to make an alliance with the Jin commander Yugexia. Yugexia invited them to a feast and killed them. Their heads were sent to Kaesong in early 1220 for which Yugexia was rewarded greatly by the Goryeo court. However Yugexia repeatedly sacked Goryeo's border cities for several years afterward. Troops sent to Poju to restore order slew so many that another rebellion occurred four months later that required 5,000 troops to put down. Khitans who had fled into the mountains continued to raid Goryeo garrisons. Yugexia later contributed 5,000 soldiers to the defense of Goryeo against the Mongols in 1231.\nIn 1224, Puxian Wannu declared independence from the Mongols and sent envoys to Goryeo to establish an alliance. Goryeo rejected the offer and over the next four years, Eastern Jurchens raided Goryeo. An attempt at peace negotiations was made in 1229 due to deteriorating relations between the Mongols and Goryeo. When the Mongols ordered Goryeo to attack Puxian Wannu, Goryeo did not comply. Puxian Wannu was defeated by the Mongols in 1233 shortly before the Jin dynasty was conquered in 1234.\nBy the end of Xuanzong's reign in 1224, The Mongol invasions and rebellions had reduced the Jin dynasty to a small state surrounding the Yellow River. The Jin tried to make up for their losses in the north by invading the Song in 1217 but failed to make much headway. The Western Xia also attacked the Jin in the west but also failed to make much headway against Jin defenses. A series of border battles over towns around the Huai River region ensued that resulted in some small gains for the Jin but no diplomatic concessions from the Song. Xuanzong died in 1223 and was succeeded by his third son, Ningjiasu.\nAizong (1224-1234).\nNingjiasu, posthumously Emperor Aizong of Jin, succeeded his father, Emperor Xuanzong of Jin, in 1224. His posthumous name, Aizong, means \"Pitiable Ancestor\", representing his role as the last emperor of the Jin dynasty. Upon Aizong's accession, the Jin had lost all territory north of the Yellow River.\nAizong made peace with the Song in 1224 and formally renounced their claim to annual payments from the Song. A peace treaty with the Western Xia was concluded in 1225 acknowledging that the Western Xia was no longer a vassal of the Jin.\nWhen Genghis Khan died in 1227, Aizong tried to appease the Mongols with an embassy offering their condolences, but the Mongols refused to receive their envoys. In 1230 and 1231, \u00d6gedei Khan launched another invasion of the Jin dynasty, attacking them from two directions under the personal command of \u00d6gedei and Genghis' youngest son Tolui. The combined army, led by Subutai, crossed the Yellow River on 28 January 1232 and reached Bianjing (Kaifeng) on 6 February. The Siege of Kaifeng (1232) began on 8 April 1232. There were peace talks into the summer of 1232 but negotiations ceased after the Jin murdered the Mongol envoy Tang Qing in his hostel as well as some 30 other people. Bianjing suffered from an epidemic in the summer of 1232 and ran out of emergency food supplies, causing starvation. Despite these setbacks and disorderly conditions within the city, the siege is well recorded due to the eyewitness account of a Han intellectual who recorded these events in his memoirs. As a result, the siege became historically significant for its descriptions of gunpowder weapons.\nThe Mongols deployed gunpowder weapons along with other more conventional siege techniques such as building stockades, watchtowers, trenches, guardhouses, and forcing Chinese captives to haul supplies and fill moats. The Jin scholar Liu Qi recounts in his memoir, \"the attack against the city walls grew increasingly intense, and bombs rained down as [the enemy] advanced.\" The Jin defenders also deployed gunpowder bombs as well as fire arrows launched using a type of early solid-propellant rocket. Of the bombs, Liu Qi writes, \"From within the walls the defenders responded with a gunpowder bomb called the heaven-shaking-thunder bomb (). Whenever the [Mongol] troops encountered one, several men at a time would be turned into ashes.\" The \"History of Jin\" provides a description of the bom: \"The heaven-shaking-thunder bomb is an iron vessel filled with gunpowder. When lighted with fire and shot off, it goes off like a crash of thunder that can be heard for a hundred li [thirty miles], burning an expanse of land more than half a mu [, a mu is a sixth of an acre], and the fire can even penetrate iron armor.\"\nHeaven-shaking-thunder bombs, also known as thunder crash bombs, had been used in 1231 by a Jin general to destroy a Mongol warship. A Jin general named Wanyan Eke had lost the defense of Hezhong to the Mongols and fled on ships with 3,000 of his men. The Mongols pursued them with their ships until the Jin broke through by using thunder crash bombs that caused flashes and flames. However during the siege the Mongols responded by protecting themselves with elaborate screens of thick cowhide. This was effective enough for workers to get right up to the walls to undermine their foundations and excavate protective niches. Jin defenders countered by tying iron cords and attaching them to heaven-shaking-thunder bombs, which were lowered down the walls until they reached the place where the miners worked. The protective leather screens were unable to withstand the explosion, and were penetrated, killing the excavators.\nAnother weapon the Jin employed was an improved re-usable version of the fire lance called the flying fire lance. The \"History of Jin\" provides a detailed description: \"To make the lance, use chi-huang paper, sixteen layers of it for the tube, and make it a bit longer than two feet. Stuff it with willow charcoal, iron fragments, magnet ends, sulfur, white arsenic [probably an error that should mean saltpeter], and other ingredients, and put a fuse to the end. Each troop has hanging on him a little iron pot to keep fire [probably hot coals], and when it's time to do battle, the flames shoot out the front of the lance more than ten feet, and when the gunpowder is depleted, the tube isn't destroyed.\" While Mongol soldiers typically held a view of disdain toward most Jin weapons, apparently they greatly feared the flying fire lance and heaven-shaking-thunder bomb.\nBianjing managed to hold out for a year before Aizong fled in the winter of 1232-33. The city was left under the command of Cui Li, who surrendered on 29 May. In some cases Jin troops still fought with success, scoring isolated victories such as when a Jin commander led 450 fire lancers against a Mongol encampment, which was \"completely routed, and three thousand five hundred were drowned.\" Aizong arrived at Guide (modern Shangqiu) on 26 February 1233 along with his entourage of loyal Jurchen and Han officials. He then moved to Caizhou on 3 August. Aizong's situation was so dire that he sent envoys to the Song asking for food. Caizhou came under siege by the Mongols in December 1233. Aizong tried to escape but failed, after which he abdicated to a distant relative, Wanyan Chenglin (posthumously Emperor Mo of Jin), and killed himself. Even after Aizong committed suicide in 1234, one loyalist gathered all the metal he could find in the city he was defending, even gold and silver, and made explosives to lob against the Mongols, but the momentum of the Mongol Empire could not be stopped. Caizhou fell to the Mongols on 9 February 1234 and the last Jin emperor died in the street fighting.\nGovernment.\nThe government of the Jin dynasty merged Jurchen customs with institutions adopted from the Liao and Song dynasties. The pre-dynastic Jurchen government was based on the quasi-egalitarian tribal council. Jurchen society at the time did not have a strong political hierarchy. The \"Shuo Fu\" () records that the Jurchen tribes were not ruled by central authority and locally elected their chieftains. Tribal customs were retained after Aguda united the Jurchen tribes and formed the Jin dynasty, coexisting alongside more centralised institutions. The Jin dynasty had five capitals, a practice they adopted from the Balhae and the Liao. The Jin had to overcome the difficulties of controlling a multicultural empire composed of territories once ruled by the Liao and Northern Song. The solution of the early Jin government was to establish separate government structures for different ethnic groups.\nThe Jin court maintained a clear separation between the sedentary population who had lived under Liao rule, and the sedentary population who formerly lived under Northern Song rule but had never been under Liao rule. The former they referred to as \"hanren\" or \"yanren\" while the latter they referred to as \"nanren\".\nCulture.\nArchitecture.\nThe Jin dynasty sought to revive of Tang-era urban design through architectural projects in Kaifeng and Zhongdu (modern Beijing), constructing landmarks such as a bell tower and drum tower to announce the night curfew which had been reinstated after being abolished by the Song government. The Jurchens, following the Khitan precedent, lived in tents amid Han Chinese-style architecture, which itself was modeled after Song dynasty Kaifeng.\nReligion.\nBecause the Jin had few contacts with its southern neighbour, the Song dynasty, different cultural developments took place in both states. Within Confucianism, the Neo-Confucian \"Learning of the Way\" that developed and became orthodox in Song did not take root in Jin. Jin scholars put more emphasis on the work of northern Song scholar and poet Su Shi (1037\u20131101) rather than on Zhu Xi's (1130\u20131200) scholarship that constituted the foundation of the Learning of the Way.\nTaoism.\nA significant branch of Taoism called the Quanzhen School was founded under the Jin Dynasty by Han Chinese Wang Zhe (1113\u20131170), founder of formal congregations in 1167 and 1168. He took the nickname of Wang Chongyang (Wang \"Double Yang\"), and his disciples were retrospectively known as the \"seven patriarchs of Quanzhen\". The \"ci\" poetry that characterized Jin literature was tightly linked to Quanzhen: two-thirds of the \"ci\" poetry written in Jin times was composed by Quanzhen Taoists.\nThe Jin state sponsored an edition of the Taoist Canon that is known as the \"Precious Canon of the Mysterious Metropolis of the Great Jin\" (). Based on a smaller version of the Canon printed by Emperor Huizong (r. 1100\u20131125) of the Song, it was completed in 1192 under the direction and support of Emperor Zhangzong (r. 1190\u20131208). In 1188, Zhangzong's grandfather and predecessor Shizong (r. 1161\u20131189) ordered for the Song Canon woodblocks to be transferred from the Jin southern capital Kaifeng (the former Northern Song capital) to the central capital's \"Abbey of Celestial Perpetuity\" (), on the site of what is now the White Cloud Temple in Beijing. Other Taoist writings were also moved there from another abbey in the central capital. Zhangzong instructed the abbey's superintendent Sun Mingdao () and two civil officials to prepare a complete Canon for printing. After sending people on a \"nationwide search for scriptures\" that yielded 1,074 fascicles of text that had not been included in the Huizong edition of the Canon and also securing donations to fund the new printing, Sun Mingdao proceeded to have the new woodblocks cut in 1192. The final print consisted of 6,455 fascicles. Despite records that the Jin emperors offered copies of the \"Canon\" as gifts, no surviving traces of the \"Canon\" had been found as of 2008.\nBuddhism.\nA Buddhist Canon or \"Tripitaka\" was also produced in Shanxi, the same place where an enhanced version of the Jin-sponsored Taoist Canon would be reprinted in 1244. The project was initiated in 1139 by a Buddhist nun named Cui Fazhen, who swore (and allegedly \"broke her arm to seal the oath\") that she would raise the necessary funds to make a new official edition of the Canon printed by the Northern Song. Completed in 1173, the Jin Tripitaka counted about 7,000 fascicles, \"a major achievement in the history of Buddhist private printing.\" It was further expanded during the Yuan dynasty.\nBuddhism thrived during the Jin period, both in its relation with the imperial court and in society in general. Many sutras were also carved on stone tablets. The donors who funded such inscriptions included members of the Jin imperial family, high officials, common people, and Buddhist priests. Some sutras have only survived from these carvings and thus they are important in the study of Chinese Buddhism. At the same time, the Jin court sold monk certificates for revenue. This practice was initiated in 1162 by Emperor Shizong to fund his wars, and stopped three years later when the wars were over. His successor Zhanzong used the same method to raise military funds in 1197 and again one year later to raise money to fight famine in the Western Capital. The same practice was used again in 1207 (to fight the Song and more famine) as well as under the reigns of emperors Weishao (r.1209\u20131213) and Xuanzong (r. 1213\u20131224) to fight the Mongols.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55025", "revid": "274535", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55025", "title": "Epi-Palaeolithic", "text": ""}
{"id": "55026", "revid": "776137", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55026", "title": "Palaeolithic", "text": ""}
{"id": "55027", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55027", "title": "Epipalaeolithic", "text": "Period in Levantine history\nIn archaeology, the Epipalaeolithic or Epipaleolithic (sometimes Epi-paleolithic etc.) is a period occurring between the Upper Paleolithic and Neolithic during the Stone Age. Mesolithic also falls between these two periods, and the two are sometimes confused or used as synonyms. More often, they are distinct, referring to approximately the same period of time in different geographic areas. Epipaleolithic always includes this period in the Levant and, often, the rest of the Near East. It sometimes includes parts of Southeast Europe, where Mesolithic is much more commonly used. Mesolithic very rarely includes the Levant or the Near East; in Europe, Epipalaeolithic is used, though not very often, to refer to the early Mesolithic.\nThe Epipalaeolithic has been defined as the \"final Upper Palaeolithic industries occurring at the end of the final glaciation which appear to merge technologically into the Mesolithic\". The period is generally dated from c.\u200920,000\u00a0BP to 10,000\u00a0BP in the Levant, but later in Europe. If used as a synonym or equivalent for Mesolithic in Europe, it might end at about c.\u20095,000\u00a0BP or even later.\nIn the Levant, the period may be subdivided into Early, Middle and Late Epipaleolithic, the last also being the Natufian. The preceding final Upper Paleolithic period is the Kebaran or \"Upper Paleolithic Stage VI\".\nEpipalaeolithic hunter-gatherers, generally nomadic, made relatively advanced tools from small flint or obsidian blades, known as microliths, that were hafted in wooden implements. There are settlements with \"flimsy structures\", probably not permanently occupied except at some rich sites, but used and returned to seasonally.\nTerm usage.\nIn describing the period before the start of the Neolithic, \"Epipaleolithic\" is typically used for cultures in regions that were far from the glaciers of the Ice Age, so that the retreat of the glaciers made a less dramatic change to conditions. This was the case in the Levant. Conversely, the term \"Mesolithic\" is most likely to be used for Western Europe where climatic change and the extinction of the megafauna had a great impact of the Paleolithic populations at the end of the Ice Age, creating post-glacial cultures such as the Azilian, Sauveterrian, Tardenoisian, and Maglemosian. In the past, French archaeologists had a general tendency to prefer the term \"Epipaleolithic\" to \"Mesolithic\", even for Western Europe. Where \"Epipaleolithic\" is still used for Europe, it is generally for areas close to the Mediterranean, as with the Azilian industry.\n\"Epipalaeolithic\" stresses the continuity with the Upper Paleolithic. Alfonso Moure says in this respect:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the language of Prehistorical Archaeology, the most extended trend is to use the term \"Epipaleolithic\" for the industrial complexes of the post-glacial hunter-gatherer groups. Inversely, those that are in transitional ways towards artificial production of food are inscribed in the \"Mesolithic\".\nIn Europe, the Epipalaeolithic may be regarded as a period preceding the Early Mesolithic, or as locally constituting at least a part of it. Other authors treat the Epipalaeolithic as part of the Late Palaeolithic; the culture in southern Portugal between about 10,500 to 8,500 years ago is \"variously labelled as 'Terminal Magdalenian' and 'Epipalaeolithic'\". The different usages often reflect the degree of innovation and \"economic intensification in the direction of domestication, sedentism or environmental modification\" seen in the culture. If the Palaeolithic way of life continues with only adaptation to reflect changes in the types of wild food available, the culture may be called Epipalaeolithic. One writer, talking of Azilian microliths in Vasco-Cantabria talks of \"some exceptions that seem to herald the coming of 'true' Mesolithic technologies a few centuries later\". The paleoanthropologist Trenton Holliday refers to a short Epipaleolithic phase in some areas of Europe after the end of the Younger Dryas 11,700 years ago, when in some areas of Europe most stone tools were small versions of Upper Paleolithic ones, before the introduction of Mesolithic technology around 10,000 years ago.\nHistory of the term.\nThe concept of the \"Epipalaeolithic\" arrived several decades after the main components of the three-age system, the Paleolithic, Mesolithic and Neolithic. It was first proposed in 1910 by the Swedish archaeologist, Knut Stjerna, his initial example being a culture or sub-culture in Scandinavian archaeology, that would not be often called Epipalaeolithic today. This left stone-lined pit graves containing implements of bone, such as harpoon and javelin heads. Stjerna observed that they \"persisted during the recent Paleolithic period and also during the Protoneolithic\". Here he had used a new term, \"Protoneolithic\", which was according to him to be applied to the Danish kitchen-middens. Stjerna also said that the eastern culture \"is attached to the Paleolithic civilization\" (\"se trouve rattach\u00e9e \u00e0 la civilisation pal\u00e9olithique\"). However, it was not intermediary and of its intermediates he said \"we cannot discuss them here\" (\"nous ne pouvons pas examiner ici\"). This \"attached\" and non-transitional culture he chose to call the Epipaleolithic, defining it as follows:\nWith Epipaleolithic I mean the period during the early days that followed the age of the reindeer, the one that retained Paleolithic customs. This period has two stages in Scandinavia, that of Maglemose and that of Kunda. (\"Par \u00e9poque \u00e9pipal\u00e9olithique j'entends la p\u00e9riode qui, pendant les premiers temps qui ont suivi l'\u00e2ge du Renne, conserve les coutumes pal\u00e9olithiques. Cette p\u00e9riode pr\u00e9sente deux \u00e9tapes en Scandinavie, celle de Maglemose et de Kunda.\")\nStjerna made no mention of the Mesolithic, and it is unclear if he intended his terms to replace that. His new terms were soon adopted by the German Hugo Obermaier, who in 1916 used them in \"El Hombre f\u00f3sil\" (translated into English in 1924) as part of an attack on the concept of the Mesolithic, which he insisted was a period of \"transition\" and an \"interim\" rather than \"transformation\":\nBut in my opinion this term is not justified, as it would be if these phases presented a natural evolutionary development \u2013 a progressive transformation from Paleolithic to Neolithic. In reality, the final phase of the Capsian, the Tardenoisian, the Azilian and the northern Maglemose industries are the posthumous descendants of the Palaeolithic\u00a0...\nThis early history of the term introduced the ambiguity and degree of confusion which has continued to surround its use, at least as relates to the archaeology of Europe.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55028", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55028", "title": "Frederick Douglas (disambiguation)", "text": ""}
{"id": "55029", "revid": "5308300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55029", "title": "Larry Bird", "text": "American basketball player (born 1956)\nLarry Joe Bird (born December 7, 1956) is an American former professional basketball player, coach, and executive in the National Basketball Association (NBA). Nicknamed \"the Hick from French Lick\" and \"Larry Legend\", Bird is widely regarded as one of the greatest basketball players of all time. He is the only person in NBA history to be named Rookie of the Year, Most Valuable Player, Finals MVP, All-Star MVP, Coach of the Year, and Executive of the Year.\nGrowing up in French Lick, Indiana, Bird was a local basketball star. Highly recruited, he initially signed to play college basketball for coach Bob Knight of the Indiana Hoosiers. However, Bird dropped out after one month and returned to French Lick and attended a local college. The next year, he attended Indiana State University, ultimately playing three years for the Sycamores. Selected by the Boston Celtics with the sixth overall pick in the 1978 NBA draft after his second year at Indiana State, Bird elected to stay in college and returned for the 1978\u201379 season. He then led his team to an undefeated regular season. The season finished with a national championship game match-up of Indiana State against Michigan State and featured a highly anticipated match-up of Bird against Michigan State great Magic Johnson, thus beginning a career-long rivalry that the two shared for over a decade. Michigan State won, ending the Sycamores' undefeated streak.\nBird entered the NBA for the 1979\u201380 season, where he made an immediate impact, starting at power forward and leading the Celtics to a 32-win improvement over the previous season before being eliminated from the playoffs in the conference finals. Bird played for the Celtics during his entire professional career (13 seasons), leading them to five NBA Finals appearances and three NBA championships. Bird played most of his career with forward Kevin McHale and center Robert Parish, considered by some to be the greatest front court in NBA history. Bird was a 12-time NBA All-Star, won two NBA Finals MVP awards and received the NBA Most Valuable Player Award three consecutive times (1984\u20131986), making him the only forward in league history to do so. Bird was also a member of the gold medal-winning 1992 U.S. Olympic basketball team, known as the \"Dream Team\". He was inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame twice as a player\u2014first in 1998 as an individual, and again in 2010 as a member of the \"Dream Team.\" Bird was voted onto the NBA's 50 Greatest Players in NBA History list in 1996, and subsequently the 75th Anniversary Team list in 2021. A versatile player at both forward positions, Bird could play both inside and outside, being one of the first players in the league to take advantage of the newly adopted three-point line. He was rated the greatest NBA small forward of all time by Fox Sports in 2016.\nAfter retiring as a player, Bird served as head coach of the Indiana Pacers from 1997 to 2000. He was named NBA Coach of the Year for the 1997\u201398 season and later led the Pacers to a berth in the 2000 NBA Finals. In 2003, Bird was named president of basketball operations for the Pacers, holding the position until retiring in 2012. He was named NBA Executive of the Year for the 2012 season. Bird returned to the Pacers as president of basketball operations in 2013, and remained in that role until 2017. Bird continued with the Pacers as an advisor until July 2022, then after nearly a year's break returned to the organization in the role of consultant.\nEarly life.\nBird was born December 7, 1956, in West Baden Springs, Indiana, to Georgia Marie (n\u00e9e Kerns; 1930\u20131996) and Claude Joseph \"Joe\" Bird (1926\u20131975), a veteran of World War II and the Korean War. His parents were of Irish, Scottish and Native American descent. Bird has four brothers and a sister.\nBird was raised in nearby French Lick, where his mother worked two jobs to support Larry and his five siblings. Bird has said that being poor as a child still motivates him \"to this day.\" Georgia and Joe divorced when Larry was in high school, and Joe committed suicide in February 1975.\nBird used basketball as an escape from his family troubles, starring for Springs Valley High School (Class of 1974) and averaging 31 points, 21 rebounds, and 4.0 assists as a senior on his way to becoming the school's all-time scoring leader. Bird wore the jersey number 33 in high school because his brother Mark had previously had it; he kept that number through his college and professional career. According to Bird, he grew up as a huge fan of the Indiana Pacers in the American Basketball Association (ABA) and the 6'9 center Mel Daniels, who represented his first exposure to professional basketball. Bird's youngest brother, Eddie, also played basketball at Indiana State University, where Daniels would coincidentally become an assistant coach to the young Larry once he played there.\nCollege career.\nBird received a scholarship to play college basketball for the Indiana Hoosiers under head coach Bob Knight in 1974. After less than a month on the Indiana University Bloomington campus, Bird dropped out of school, finding the adjustment between his small hometown and the large student population of Bloomington to be overwhelming. Bird returned to French Lick, enrolling at Northwood Institute (now Northwood University) in nearby West Baden, and working municipal jobs for a year before enrolling at Indiana State University in Terre Haute in 1975. He had a successful three-year career with the Sycamores, helping them reach the NCAA tournament for the first time in school history with a 33\u20130 record where they played the 1979 championship game against Michigan State. Indiana State lost the game 75\u201364, with Bird scoring 19 points but making only 7 of 21 shots.\nThe game achieved the highest-ever television rating for a college basketball game, in large part because of the matchup between Bird and Spartans' point guard Earvin \"Magic\" Johnson, a rivalry that lasted throughout their professional careers. Despite failing to win the championship, Bird earned numerous year-end awards and honors for his outstanding play, including the Naismith College Player of the Year Award. For his college career, Bird averaged 30.3 points, 13.3 rebounds, and 4.6 assists per game, leading the Sycamores to an 81\u201313 record during his tenure. Bird also appeared in one game for the baseball team, going 1\u2013for\u20132 with two runs batted in. He graduated in 1979 with a Bachelor of Science degree in physical education.\nProfessional career.\nBoston Celtics (1979\u20131992).\nJoining the Celtics (1978\u20131979).\nBird was selected by the Boston Celtics with the sixth overall pick in the 1978 NBA draft. He did not sign with the Celtics immediately; instead, Bird played out his final season at Indiana State and led the Sycamores to the NCAA title game. Celtics general manager Red Auerbach publicly stated that he would not pay Bird more than any Celtic on the current roster, but Bird's agent Bob Woolf told Auerbach that Bird would reject any sub-market offers and simply enter the 1979 draft instead, where Boston's rights would expire when the draft began on June 25, and Bird would have been the likely top pick. After protracted negotiations, he signed a five-year, $3.25 million contract with the team on June 8, making Bird the highest-paid rookie in sports history. Shortly afterwards, NBA draft eligibility rules were changed to prevent teams from drafting players before they were ready to sign, a rule known as the Bird Collegiate Rule.\nEarly success (1979\u20131983).\nIn his rookie season (1979\u201380), Bird immediately transformed the Celtics into a title contender. The team improved its win total by 32 games from the year before he was drafted and finished first in the Eastern Conference. In his career debut, Bird recorded 14 points, 10 rebounds, and five assists in a 114\u2013106 victory over the Houston Rockets. On November 14, 1979, he recorded his first career triple-double with 23 points, 19 rebounds and 10 assists in a 115\u2013111 victory over the Detroit Pistons. Nine days later, Bird recorded his first 30-point scoring game (along with 11 rebounds and 3 assists) in a 118\u2013103 victory over the Indiana Pacers. With averages of 21.3 points, 10.4 rebounds, 4.5 assists, and 1.7 steals per game for the season, he was selected to the All-Star Team and named Rookie of the Year. In the Eastern Conference Finals, Boston was eliminated by the Philadelphia 76ers.\nBefore the 1980\u201381 season, the Celtics selected forward Kevin McHale in the draft and acquired center Robert Parish from the Golden State Warriors, forming a Hall of Fame trio for years to come; the front-court of Bird, McHale, and Parish is regarded as one of the greatest front-courts in NBA history. Behind Bird's leadership and Boston's upgraded roster, the Celtics again advanced to the Conference Finals for a rematch with the 76ers. Boston fell behind 3\u20131 to start the series but won the next three games to advance to the Finals against the Houston Rockets, winning in six games and earning Bird his first championship. Bird averaged 21.9 points, 14 rebounds, 6.1 assists, and 2.3 steals per game for the postseason and 15.3 points, 15.3 rebounds, and 7 assists per game for the Finals.\nAt the 1982 All-Star Game, Bird scored 19 points en route to winning the All-Star Game MVP Award. At the end of the season, he earned his first All-Defensive Team selection. Bird eventually finished runner-up in Most Valuable Player Award voting to Moses Malone. In the Conference Finals, the Celtics faced the 76ers for the third consecutive year, losing in seven games. Boston's misfortunes continued into the next season, with Bird again finishing second in MVP voting to Malone and the team losing in the conference semifinals to the Milwaukee Bucks.\nMVP threepeat (1983\u20131986).\nBird was slated to become a free agent after the 1983\u201384 season. In 1983, as part of a collective bargaining agreement, the NBA initially implemented a \"hard\" salary cap (meaning total player salaries could not exceed a certain limit) which would not go into effect until the 1984\u201385 season. The NBA quickly modified this to a \"soft cap\", meaning the cap could be exceeded in order for a team re-sign its own free agents. This came to be erroneously known as the \"Larry Bird Rule\"; the Celtics didn't actually invoke the exception to specifically re-sign Bird, as the cap wasn't in effect. Bird signed his seven-year, $12.6 million extension in 1983, before the cap came into effect and the Celtics were actually over the cap in total player salaries (including Bird's extension) at the time the cap was implemented.\nBird was named MVP of the 1983\u201384 season with averages of 24.2 points, 10.1 rebounds, 6.6 assists, and 1.8 steals per game. In the playoffs, the Celtics avenged their loss from the year before to the Bucks, winning in five games in the Conference Finals to advance to the Finals against the Los Angeles Lakers. In Game 4, the Lakers\u2014led by Bird's college rival Magic Johnson\u2014were on the verge of taking a commanding 3\u20131 series lead before a flagrant foul was committed on Kurt Rambis that resulted in a brawl and caused the Lakers to lose their composure. Boston came back to win that game and eventually won the series in seven games. Bird was named Finals MVP behind 27.4 points, 14 rebounds, and 3.6 assists per game.\nOn December 9, 1984, Bird recorded 48 points to go along with 14 rebounds and 5 assists in a narrow 128\u2013127 victory over the Atlanta Hawks. On March 12 of the 1984\u201385 season, Bird scored a career-high and franchise record 60 points in a game against the Atlanta Hawks. The performance came just nine days after Kevin McHale set the previous Celtics record for points in a game with 56. At the end of the year, Bird was named MVP for the second consecutive season, behind averages of 28.7 points, 10.5 rebounds, and 6.6 assists per game. Boston advanced through the playoffs to earn a rematch with the Lakers, this time losing in six games.\nDuring the 1985 offseason, Bird injured his back shoveling crushed rock to create a driveway at his mother's house. At least partially as a result of this, Bird experienced back problems for the rest of his career.\nBefore the start of the 1985\u201386 season, the Celtics made a daring trade for Bill Walton, an All-Star center with a history of injury. The risk paid off; Walton's acquisition helped Boston win a league best 67 games. One of Bird's career highlights occurred at the 1986 NBA All-Star Weekend when he walked into the locker room at the inaugural Three-Point Shootout and asked who was going to finish second before winning the shootout.\nOn November 27, 1985, Bird recorded 47 points to go along with 12 rebounds, two assists, and two steals in a 132\u2013124 victory over the Detroit Pistons. On March 10, 1986, he scored 50 points to go along with 11 rebounds and five assists in a narrow 116\u2013115 loss to the Dallas Mavericks.\nWith averages of 25.8 points, 9.8 rebounds, and 6.8 assists, and 2.0 steals per game, Bird became just the third player in NBA history to win three consecutive MVP Awards. In the playoffs, the Celtics lost only one game through the first three rounds en route to a match-up against the Rockets in the Finals. In Game 6 of the Finals against the Rockets, Bird recorded a triple-double of 29 points, 11 rebounds, and 12 assists as the Celtics won the Finals in six games. He averaged 24 points, 9.7 rebounds, and 9.5 assists per game for the championship round.\nThe 1985\u201386 Celtics are commonly ranked as one of the greatest basketball teams of all time, with the \"Boston Globe\"'s Peter May and Grantland's Bill Simmons listing them at number one.\nFalling short (1986\u20131988).\nIn 1987, the Celtics made their last Finals appearance of Bird's career, fighting through difficult series against the Milwaukee Bucks and Detroit Pistons. In Game 5 of the Eastern Conference Finals against the Pistons, with five seconds remaining in the fourth quarter and Boston trailing the Pistons 107\u2013106, Bird stole an inbound pass. Falling out of bounds, Bird turned and passed the ball to teammate Dennis Johnson, who converted a game-winning layup with less than a second left. The dramatic play saved the series for the Celtics. When they reached the NBA Finals, the Celtics lost to a dominant Lakers team that had won 65 games during the season. The Celtics ended up losing to the Lakers in six games, with Bird averaging 24.2 points on .445 shooting, 10 rebounds, and 5.5 assists per game. \nThe 1987\u201388 season was the highest-scoring season of Bird's career. Aided by a new weight training regimen along with the shorter hairstyle after years of sporting a mullet, Bird would average nearly 30 points on 53% shooting, as the Celtics topped the Eastern Conference with 57 wins. In Game 7 of the 1988 Eastern Conference Semifinals against the Atlanta Hawks, Bird shot 9-of-10 from the floor in the fourth quarter, scoring 20 points in that quarter and lifting the Celtics to a series-clinching victory. Bird finished with 34 points. His effort helped to overcome a 47-point performance by Atlanta's Dominique Wilkins. Wilkins remarked, \"The basket was like a well. I couldn't miss. He couldn't miss. And it went down to the last shot of the game. Who was going to make the last shot? That's the greatest game I've ever played in or seen played.\" The Celtics failed to reach the NBA Finals for the first time in five years, losing to the Pistons in six games during the Eastern Conference Finals.\nBetween them, Bird and Johnson captured eight NBA championships during the 1980s, with Magic getting five and Bird three. During the 1980s, either Boston or Los Angeles appeared in every NBA Finals.\nLate career (1988\u20131992).\nBird's 1988\u201389 season ended after six games when he had bone spurs surgically removed from both of his heels. Bird returned to the Celtics in 1989, but debilitating back problems and an aging Celtic roster prevented him from regaining his prime form. Nonetheless, during the final years of his career, Bird maintained his status as one of the premier players in the game. In his final three seasons with the Celtics, Bird averaged over 20 points, nine rebounds, and seven assists per game, shot better than 45% from the field, and led the Celtics to playoff appearances.\nAfter leading the Celtics to a 29\u20135 start to the 1990\u201391 season, Bird missed 22 games due to a compressed nerve root in his back, a condition that eventually led to his retirement. Bird had off-season surgery to remove a disc from his back, but his back problems continued and Bird missed 37 games during the 1991\u201392 season. During the 1992 Eastern Conference Semifinals against the Cleveland Cavaliers, Bird missed four of the seven games due to recurring back problems.\nDuring Bird's final two seasons when he had serious back problems, the Celtics went 71\u201328 when he played. Without Bird, they had a 30\u201329 record, further demonstrating his importance and game-changing ability while on the court.\nOn August 18, 1992, Bird announced his retirement from the NBA. Following Bird's departure, the Celtics promptly retired his jersey number 33.\nRivalry with Magic Johnson.\nLarry Bird and Magic Johnson are known to be \"one of the greatest rivalries in sports.\" Their rivalry began in college, when Bird and Indiana State lost to Johnson and Michigan State in the NCAA Championship game. Their rivalry continued on in the revived Celtics\u2013Lakers rivalry in the NBA. Either the Celtics, led by Bird, or the Lakers, led by Magic, were present in every NBA Finals series in the '80s, with Bird and Magic meeting thrice. Magic got the upper hand against Bird, beating him in 1985 and 1987, while Bird beat Magic in 1984.\nThroughout the 1980s, contests between the Celtics and the Lakers\u2014both during the regular season and in the Finals\u2014attracted enormous television audiences. The first regular-season game between the Celtics and the Lakers in the 1987\u201388 season proved to be a classic with Magic Johnson banking in an off-balance shot from near the three-point line at the buzzer for a narrow 115\u2013114 Lakers victory at Boston Garden. The historical rift between the teams, which faced each other several times in championship series of the 1960s, fueled fan interest in the rivalry. Bird and Magic's presence on the court was only a small part of their contribution to basketball, as their rivalry changed the landscape of the NBA, transforming it from a \"struggling, barely profitable league into a highly visible, financial and marketing dream for teams and players alike.\" Many people realized that the emergence of these two stars was linked with the rise in popularity of the NBA, as the NBA started to market towards these two stars.\nThe apparent contrast between the two players and their respective teams seemed scripted for television, as they were polar opposites in nearly every way conceivable. Bird was White, Johnson was Black; Bird was an introvert from a small town playing in blue-collar Boston, while Johnson was the gregarious personification of the glitz and glamour of Los Angeles; Bird's Celtics played gritty, physical, defence-first basketball, whereas Johnson ran the Lakers' fast-paced Showtime offense. A 1980s Converse commercial for its \"Weapon\" line of basketball shoes (endorsed by both Bird and Johnson) reflected the perceived dichotomy between the two players. In the commercial, Bird is practicing alone on a rural basketball court (in reality the court was one Bird had made on the property in French Lick that he had purchased for his mother), when Johnson pulls up in a sleek limousine and challenges him to a one-on-one match.\nJournalists speculated that Bird and Magic represented different contrasts, such as clashes between Celtics and Lakers, between East and West, and between Blacks and Whites. But, as one journalist would say, \"They looked different, perhaps, but take a chainsaw to their souls and they were fraternal, if not identical, friends.\" Watching Bird play was like watching Magic play, as they both shared this talent that the league had never seen before. They each had charisma, deft shooting touch, extraordinary passing skills, and team-oriented mindset that ignited their team and the crowd. This style of play was starting to influence a new horde of fans as they would sit and \"marvel at what they [Bird and Magic] can do\" while giving younger kids \"a different perspective of the game.\"\nDespite the intensity of their rivalry, Bird and Johnson became friends off the court. Their friendship blossomed when the two players worked together to film the Converse commercial, which depicted them as archenemies. Johnson appeared at Bird's retirement ceremony on February 4, 1993, and emotionally described Bird as a \"friend forever.\"\nNational team career.\nDuring the summer of 1992, Bird joined Magic Johnson, Michael Jordan, and other NBA stars to play for the United States men's national basketball team in that year's Olympics in Barcelona, Spain. It was the first time in the United States' Olympic history that the country sent NBA players to compete. Although head coach Chuck Daly initially suggested that Jordan captain the team, he declined and so Bird and Magic Johnson held the co-captainship of the 1992 United States men's Olympic basketball team.\nThe \"Dream Team\" won the men's basketball gold medal. In eight games, Bird averaged 8.4 points. The Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame called the team \"the greatest collection of basketball talent on the planet.\"\nPlayer profile.\nBird has been described as one of the greatest basketball players and greatest shooters of all time. He was selected to 12 NBA All-Star teams. Bird won three NBA championships (in 1981, 1984, and 1986) with the Celtics and won two NBA Finals MVP Awards. He won three consecutive regular season MVP awards; as of 2020, the only other players to accomplish this feat are Bill Russell and Wilt Chamberlain. Bird was also a four-time regular season MVP runner-up in 1981, 1982, 1983, and 1988.\nBird scored 24.3 points per game in his career on a .496 field goal percentage, an .886 free throw percentage, and a .376 percentage on three-point shots. Bird had an average of 10.0 rebounds per game for his career and 6.3 assists. Bird was the first player in NBA history to shoot 50% or better on field goals, 40% on three-pointers, and 90% on free-throws in a single NBA season while achieving the league minimum for makes in each category. He accomplished this feat twice. Bird won NBA three-point-shooting contests in three consecutive years. He sometimes practiced shooting three-point shots with his eyes closed.\nBird is remembered as one of the foremost clutch performers in the history of the NBA; Bird was known for his excellent play in high-stakes, high-pressure situations. Pat Riley (who had coached the LA Lakers featuring Magic Johnson against Bird's Celtics in three NBA Finals), when asked about his opinion of the best clutch performer, said \"If I had to choose a player to take a shot to save a game, I'd choose Michael Jordan. If I had to choose a player to take a shot to save my life, I'd take Larry Bird.\"\nBird is also remembered as an excellent passer and defender. While he was relatively slow, Bird displayed a knack for anticipating the moves of his opponent, making Bird a strong team defender. He had 1,556 career steals. In recognition of his defensive abilities, Bird was named to three All-Defensive Second Teams.\nBird was known for his trash-talking on the court and is remembered as one of the most notable trash-talkers of his era. Bird was known for telling his opponents how and where in the court he would score against them; Xavier McDaniel recounted that Bird predicted a game-winning shot against him, then \"shot a shot right in my face and was like 'Damn, I didn't mean to leave two seconds on the clock.'\" When playing against Dennis Rodman, a player known for his defensive abilities, in the 1987 Eastern Conference finals, Bird continually belittled Rodman's ability, at one point asking Chuck Daly, Detroit's head coach, to send in someone up to the task of guarding him. Knowing that Bird used such chirping to raise his own game, Chicago Bulls superstar Michael Jordan discouraged his rookie teammate B.J. Armstrong not to respond to Bird, saying \"Not a single person. Not one word. No one talk to Larry Bird\". Jordan has since dubbed \"Larry Bird is the greatest trash-talker and mind-game player of all time. He taught me everything I know about getting in folks' heads\".\nBird was widely considered one of Red Auerbach's favorite players as he considered Bird to be the greatest basketball player of all time. Bird's humble roots were the source of his most frequently used moniker, \"The Hick from French Lick.\" Bird was also referred to as \"Larry Legend.\" Michael Jordan himself considers the description 'God disguised as Michael Jordan' as his favorite complement since it came from Bird (after Game 2 of the Celtics' first-round series against the Bulls during the 1986 playoffs when Jordan scored 63 points in a 135-131 Celtics win). Jordan has since said \"Larry Bird's comments gave me credibility. Up to that point I was still perceived as a hotshot rookie, not a real player. When Bird acknowledged my performance, I became a player. I still wasn't up to his level, but I was now a player who was marked as a star, a potential Hall of Famer depending upon how I took those comments. Off the court, Larry Bird intimidated me because of who he was, what he had accomplished. And the fact that he was Larry Legend\". In another example of how Bird was respected as one of the NBA's all-time greats, Jordan deferred to Bird and Magic Johnson for co-captainship of the 1992 United States men's Olympic basketball team.\nLegacy.\nBird was voted onto the NBA's 50th Anniversary All-Time Team list in 1996, and inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame in 1998. He was inducted into the Hall of Fame again in 2010, as a member of the \"Dream Team.\" In 1999, Bird ranked No. 30 on ESPN SportsCentury's list of . Bird also ranked No. 24 on the Associated Press's list of the 100 Greatest Athletes of the 20th century in 1999. He played both the small forward and power forward positions. Universally recognized as an all-time great player, Bird was placed at the power forward position on an NBA all-time starting five roster with fellow superstars Magic Johnson (point guard), Michael Jordan (shooting guard), LeBron James (small forward), and Kareem Abdul-Jabbar (center) in 2020.\nIn 2011, Bird was honored with a lifetime achievement award at The Sports Museum's 10th annual The Tradition event (celebrating New England athletes) held at TD Garden.\nThere is a street named in Bird's honor on the campus of Indiana State University. In 2013, the university unveiled a bronze statue of Bird (wearing his Sycamores jersey, in mid-jump-shot pose) in front of the Hulman Center. In addition, Bird's former teammate Bob Heaton, then serving in the Indiana House of Representatives, read a proclamation from Indiana Gov. Mike Pence proclaiming Nov. 9th as Larry Bird Day in the state of Indiana.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLarry, you only told me one lie. You said there will be another Larry Bird. Larry, there will never, ever be another Larry Bird.\n-Magic Johnson, as quoted at Bird's retirement party\nAt the 2019 NBA Awards, Bird received the NBA Lifetime Achievement Award (shared with Magic Johnson). Since 2022, the NBA will award the MVPs for the conference finals; the Eastern Conference Finals MVP trophy is named in Bird's honor, while the Western Conference trophy is named after Johnson.\nIn October 2021, as part of the NBA's 75th Anniversary, Bird was honored as one of the 75 greatest players of all time, by being named to the NBA's 75th Anniversary All-Time Team. To commemorate the NBA's 75th Anniversary, \"The Athletic\" ranked their top 75 players of all time, and named Bird as the seventh greatest player in NBA history.\nIn May 2024, the Larry Bird Museum was opened in Terre Haute, Indiana. The museum contains memorabilia from Bird's high school, college and NBA career along with interactive exhibits and interviews with coaches, teammates and rivals.\nCoaching and executive careers.\nThe Celtics employed Bird as a special assistant in the team's front office from 1992 until 1997.\nIn 1997, Bird accepted the position of head coach of the Indiana Pacers. Bird said that he would be on the job for no more than three years. Despite having no previous coaching experience, Bird led the Pacers to a 58\u201324 record\u2014the franchise's best as an NBA team at the time\u2014in the 1997\u201398 season, and pushed the eventual champions Chicago Bulls (led by superstar Michael Jordan and head coach Phil Jackson) to seven games in the Eastern Conference Finals. The 1997\u201398 team is considered one of the best in Pacers' franchise history, and Bird was named the NBA Coach of the Year for his efforts. Bird then led the Pacers to consecutive Central Division titles in 1999 and 2000, and a berth in the 2000 NBA Finals where they lost to the Los Angeles Lakers (coached by Phil Jackson) in six games. Bird resigned his head coaching position shortly after the end of the 1999\u20132000 season, following through on his initial promise to coach for only three years. He was succeeded in that capacity by Isiah Thomas.\nIn 2003, Bird was hired as the Indiana Pacers' president of basketball operations. One of Bird's first acts as Pacers president was to replace Isiah Thomas with Rick Carlisle as head coach, due to the team's underachievement under Thomas. From 2006 onwards, Bird overhauled the roster by trading away veterans while making savvy draft picks, since the Pacers were a small-market team that could not chase expensive free agents. After the 2011\u20132012 NBA season, when the Pacers secured the No. 3 seed in the East and had the fifth-best record (42\u201324) in the league, Bird was named NBA Executive of the Year, becoming the only man in NBA history to win the NBA MVP, Coach of the Year, and Executive of the Year. On the day before the 2012 NBA draft, Bird and the Pacers announced that they would be parting ways; he said that health issues were among the reasons for his departure. Bird returned to the Pacers as president of basketball operations in 2013. He stepped down again in 2017, but stayed with the team in an advisory capacity. Bird continued to serve as an advisor until July 2022, when he \"stepped back from maintaining an active role with the Indiana Pacers.\" Nearly a year later in June 2023, it was announced that the Pacers re-hired Bird to serve as a consultant. As of 2025, Larry Bird still holds his position as a consultant for the Indiana Pacers. Larry has recently been noted as \"disappearing\" from the sport. One reason according to him, is not being in a front-facing role such as a head coach, means that he doesn't have to face public scrutiny, something he has noted before. He stated in 2016, \"Sometimes my job really sucks.\"\nAwards and honors.\nNBA\nUSA Basketball\nNCAA\nMedia\nHalls of Fame\nPersonal life.\nIn 1975, Bird married Janet Condra. They remained married for less than a year. Following an attempted reconciliation, Bird and Condra had a daughter, Corrie, in 1977.\nBird married Dinah Mattingly in 1989. They have two adopted children: Conner and Mariah. That same year, Bird released his autobiography \"Drive: The Story of My Life,\" which he co-wrote alongside Bob Ryan. The book recounts his life up until that point, touching upon his childhood, his father's alcoholism and suicide, his first marriage along with his triumphs on the court, and stories about teammates.\nDuring his professional career with the Celtics, Bird lived in the Boston suburb of Brookline, Massachusetts.\nBird is an active philanthropist, especially through the Boys &amp; Girls Clubs of America along with health-related charitable efforts. However, Bird has kept most of his efforts out of the press, seeking no publicity for his efforts. Bird once stated \"All of my donations are sort of made under the table,\" \"I don't need the publicity. I'm not doing it for the publicity. But I do care. And that's what matters most.\"\nBird is known to live a low-key lifestyle, in his spare time his enjoys engaging in hands-on activities. He is an avid fisherman and enjoys playing golf.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55030", "revid": "14703151", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55030", "title": "Ogonek", "text": "Diacritic in the form of a small curl at the bottom (or rarely the top) of a letter\nThe tail or ( ; , \"little tail\", diminutive of ) is a diacritic hook placed under the lower right corner of a vowel in the Latin alphabet used in several European languages, and directly under a vowel in several Native American languages. It is also placed on the lower right corner of consonants in some Latin transcriptions of various indigenous languages of the Caucasus mountains.\nAn ogonek can also be attached to the bottom of a vowel in Old Norse or Old Icelandic to show length or vowel affection. For example, in Old Norse, \"\u01eb\" represents the Old Norwegian vowel , which in Old Icelandic merges with \"\u00f8\" \u2039\u00f6\u203a and in modern Scandinavian languages is represented by the letter \"\u00e5\".\nUse.\nExample in Polish:\n \n \u2014 The ox asks him: \"Mr. beetle, why do you buzz like that in the thicket?\"\n \u2014 Jan Brzechwa, \"Chrz\u0105szcz\"\nExample in Cayuga:\n \u2014 we will become poor\nExample in Chickasaw:\n \u2014 I am walking\nExample in Dogrib:\n \u2014 native people\nExample in Lithuanian:\n \n \u2014 Vincas Mykolaitis-Putinas, \"Margi sakalai\"\nExample in Elfdalian:\n\"Ja, e\u00f0 war \u012fe pl\u00e5g a\u00f0 g\u0119slkallum, dar e\u00f0 war slaik uondlostjyner i g\u0119slun.\"\n \u2014 Vikar Margit Andersdotter, \"I f\u00e4bodlivet i gamla tider\".\nValues.\nNasalization.\nThe use of the ogonek to indicate nasality is common in the transcription of the indigenous languages of the Americas. This usage originated in the orthographies created by Christian missionaries to transcribe these languages. Later, the practice was continued by Americanist anthropologists and linguists who still, to the present day, follow this convention in phonetic transcription (see Americanist phonetic notation).\nThe ogonek is also used to indicate a nasalized vowel in Polish, academic transliteration of Proto-Germanic, Old Church Slavonic, Navajo, Western Apache, Chiricahua, T\u0142\u012fch\u01eb Yati\u00ec, Slavey, D\u00ebne S\u0173\u0142in\u00e9 and Elfdalian. In Polish, \"\u0119\" is nasalized \"e\"; however, \"\u0105\" is nasalized \"o\", not \"a\", because of a vowel shift: \"\u0105\", originally a long nasal \"a\", turned into a short nasal \"o\" when the distinction in vowel quantity disappeared.\nLength.\nIn Lithuanian, the nosin\u0117 (literally, \"nasal\") mark originally indicated vowel nasalization but around late 17th and early 18th century, nasal vowels gradually evolved into the corresponding long non-nasal vowels in most dialects. Thus, the mark is now \"de facto\" an indicator of vowel length (the length of etymologically non-nasal vowels is marked differently or not marked at all). The mark also helps to distinguish different grammatical forms with otherwise the same written form (often with a different word stress, which is not indicated directly in the standard orthography).\nLowered articulation.\nBetween 1927 and 1989, the ogonek denoted lowering in vowels, and, since 1976, in consonants as well, in the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA). While the obsolete diacritic has also been identified as the left half ring diacritic \u27e8\u27e9, many publications of the IPA used the ogonek.\nIn Rheinische Dokumenta, it marks vowels that are more open than those denoted by their base letters \u00c4\u00e4, Oo, \u00d6\u00f6. In two cases, it can be combined with umlaut marks.\nSimilar diacritics.\nE caudata and o caudata.\nThe \"E caudata\" (\"\u0119\"), a symbol similar to an \"e\" with ogonek, evolved from a ligature of \"a\" and \"e\" in medieval scripts, in Latin and Irish palaeography. The \"O caudata\" of Old Norse (letter \"\u01eb\", with \"\u01eb\u0301\") is used to write the open-mid back rounded vowel, . Medieval Nordic manuscripts show this 'hook' in both directions, in combination with several vowels. Despite this distinction, the term 'ogonek' is sometimes used in discussions of typesetting and encoding Norse texts, as \"o caudata\" is typographically identical to o with ogonek. Similarly, the \"E caudata\" was sometimes used to designate the Norse vowel or .\nCedilla and comma.\nThe ogonek is functionally equivalent to the cedilla and comma diacritic marks. If two of these three are used within the same orthography their respective use is restricted to certain classes of letters, i.e. usually the ogonek is used with vowels whereas the cedilla is applied to consonants. In handwritten text, the marks may even look the same.\nSuperscript ogonek.\nIn Old Norse and Old Icelandic manuscripts, there is an over-hook or curl that may be considered a variant of the ogonek. It occurs on the letters a\u1dce e\u1dce i\u1dce o\u1dce \u00f8\u1dce u\u1dce.\nTypographical notes.\nThe ogonek should be almost the same size as a descender (relatively, its size in larger type may be significantly shorter), and should not be confused with the cedilla or comma diacritics used in other languages.\nEncoding.\nBecause attaching an ogonek does not affect the shape of the base letter, Unicode covers it with a combining diacritic, U+0328. There are a number of precomposed legacy characters, but new ones are not being added to Unicode (e.g. for \u27e8\u00e6\u0328\u27e9 or \u27e8\u00f8\u0328\u27e9).\nLaTeX2e.\nIn LaTeX2e, macro codice_1 will typeset a letter with ogonek, if it is supported by the font encoding, e.g. codice_2 will typeset \"\u0105\". (The default LaTeX OT1 encoding does not support it, but the newer T1 one does. It may be enabled by saying codice_3 in the preamble.)\nHowever, codice_4 rather places the diacritic \"right-aligned\" with the carrying \"e\" (\u0119), suitably for Polish, while codice_5 horizontally \"centers\" the diacritic with respect to the carrier, suitably for Native American Languages as well as for e caudata and o caudata. So codice_6 better fits the latter purposes. Actually, codice_7 (for \u01eb) is defined to result in codice_8, and codice_9 is defined to result in codice_10.\nThe package TIPA, activated by using the command \"codice_11\", offers a different way: \"codice_12\" will produce \"\u0105\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55032", "revid": "6046731", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55032", "title": "Outline of agriculture", "text": "Overview of and topical guide to agriculture\nThe following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to agriculture:\nAgriculture \u2013 cultivation of animals, plants, fungi and other life forms for food, fiber, and other products used to sustain life.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhat type of thing is agriculture?\nAgriculture can be described as all of the following:\nBranches of agriculture.\nBy industry.\nFarming.\nFarming equipment.\nFarm equipment \u2013 any kind of machinery used on a farm to help with farming.\nFishery.\nFishing \u2013 activity of trying to catch fish. Fish are normally caught in the wild. Techniques for catching fish include hand gathering, spearing, netting, angling and trapping.\nForestry.\nForestry \u2013 interdisciplinary profession embracing the science, art, and craft of creating, managing, using, and conserving forests and associated resources in a sustainable manner to meet desired goals, needs, and values for human benefit.\nRanching.\nRanching \u2013 practice of raising grazing livestock such as cattle or sheep for meat or wool.\nAgricultural Disciplines.\nAgricultural chemistry.\nAgricultural chemistry \u2013 study of both chemistry and biochemistry which are important in agricultural production, the processing of raw products into foods and beverages, and in environmental monitoring and remediation.\nAgricultural communication.\nAgricultural communication \u2013 field of study and work that focuses on communication about agricultural related information among agricultural stakeholders and between agricultural and non-agricultural stakeholders.\nAgricultural economics.\nAgricultural economics \u2013 originally applied the principles of economics to the production of crops and livestock \u2013 a discipline known as agronomics. Agronomics was a branch of economics that specifically dealt with land usage. It focused on maximizing the crop yield while maintaining a good soil ecosystem. Throughout the 20th century the discipline expanded and the current scope of the discipline is much broader. Agricultural economics today includes a variety of applied areas, having considerable overlap with conventional economics.\nAgricultural education.\nAgricultural education \u2013 instruction about crop production, livestock management, soil and water conservation, and various other aspects of agriculture. Farmers acquire adequate knowledge required on the correct amount use of agrochemicals and other agriculture related technologies.\nAgricultural universities and colleges \u2013 tertiary agricultural educational institutions around the world\nAgricultural engineering.\nAgricultural engineering \u2013 engineering discipline that applies engineering science and technology to agricultural production and processing.\nAgricultural philosophy.\nAgricultural philosophy \u2013 discipline devoted to the systematic critique of the philosophical frameworks (or ethical world views) that are the foundation for decisions regarding agriculture.\nAgricultural policy.\nAgricultural policy \u2013 set of laws relating to domestic agriculture and imports of foreign agricultural products. \nAgronomy.\nAgronomy \u2013 science and technology of producing and using plants for food, fuel, feed, fiber, and reclamation.\nHorticulture.\nHorticulture \u2013 art, science, technology and business of intensive plant cultivation for human use.\nAgricultural soil science.\nAgricultural soil science \u2013 branch of soil science that deals with the study of edaphic conditions as they relate to the production of food and fiber.\nAgroecology.\nAgroecology \u2013 application of ecological principles to the production of food, fuel, fiber, and pharmaceuticals and the management of agroecosystems.\nHistory of agriculture.\nHistory of agriculture \u2013 developed at least 10,000 years ago, although some forms of agriculture such as forest gardening and fire-stick farming date back even earlier to prehistoric times.\nAgriculturally based manufacturing industries.\nFood industry.\nFood industry \u2013 complex, global collective of diverse businesses that together supply much of the food energy consumed by the world population.\nPulp and paper industry.\nPulp and paper industry \u2013 comprises companies that use wood as a raw material to produce pulp, paper, board, and other cellulose-based products.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55033", "revid": "13004021", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55033", "title": "Great Dividing Range", "text": "Mountain range in Australia\nThe Great Dividing Range, also known as the East Australian Cordillera or the Eastern Highlands, is a cordillera system in eastern Australia consisting of an expansive collection of mountain ranges, plateaus and rolling hills. It runs roughly parallel to the east coast of Australia and forms the fifth-longest land-based mountain chain in the world, and the longest entirely within a single country. It is mainland Australia's most substantial topographic feature and serves as the definitive watershed for the river systems in eastern Australia, hence the name.\nThe Great Dividing Range stretches more than from Dauan Island in the Torres Strait off the northern tip of Cape York Peninsula, running the entire length of the eastern coastline through Queensland and New South Wales, then turning west across Victoria before finally fading into the Wimmera plains as rolling hills west of the Grampians region. The width of the Range varies from about to over . The Greater Blue Mountains Area, Gondwana Rainforests and Wet Tropics of Queensland World Heritage Areas are located in the Range. The highest place in Australia, the Mount Kosciuszko, resides in the Snowy Mountains portion of southern Great Dividing Range.\nGeography.\nThe Dividing Range does not consist of a single continuous mountain chain, but is rather a combined complex (cordillera) of mountain ranges, plateaus, hilly upland areas and escarpments with an ancient and complex geological history. The physiographic division name for the landmass is called the \"East Australian Cordillera\". In some places the terrain is relatively flat, consisting of very low hills. Typically the highlands range from in height. The mountains and plateaus, which consist of limestones, sandstone, quartzite, schists and dolomite, have been created by faulting and folding processes.\nThe crests of the Great Dividing Range is defined by the watershed boundary between the drainage basins of river systems east (the coastal or rainward side) and west (the inland or leeward side) of it. The higher and more rugged parts of the \"range\" do not necessarily form part of the crest of the range, but may be branches and offshoots from it. The term \"Great Dividing Range\" may refer specifically to the watershed crest of the range, or to the entire upland complex including all of the hills and mountains between the east coast of Australia and the central plains and lowlands. At some places it can be up to wide. Notable ranges and other features which form part of the range complex have their own distinctive names.\nAs a rule of thumb, rivers east/southeast of the Dividing Range drain directly eastward into the South Pacific and the Tasman Sea, or southward into the Bass Strait. Rivers west of the Dividing Range drain in various westerly directions according to latitudes: the Murray\u2013Darling basin in southeastern Australia (Darling Downs/eastern South West Queensland, West/Central New South Wales, Northern Victoria and the Murraylands/Riverland region of southeastern South Australia) drain southwestwards into the Great Australian Bight via the coastal Lake Alexandrina; the eastern half of the Lake Eyre basin in east central Australia (the Cooper Creek and Warburton River systems in Central/western South West Queensland and eastern Far North of South Australia) drain southwestwards into the endorheic Kati Thanda\u2013Lake Eyre; the numerous rivers of western Cape York Peninsula in northeastern Australia (North/Far North Queensland) drain westwards or northwestwards directly into the Gulf of Carpentaria.\nClimate.\nThe sharp rise between the coastal lowlands and the eastern uplands has affected Australia's climate, mainly due to orographic precipitation, and these areas of highest relief have revealed an impressive gorge country. Areas to the east of the mountain range in southern NSW usually experience a F\u00f6hn effect, which is a dry wind originating from the Great Dividing Range that abruptly raises the air temperature in the lee of that mountain range and reduces atmospheric moisture. This dry wind, which elevates fire danger in the warm months, occurs because of the partial orographic obstruction of relatively damp low-level air and the subsiding of drier upper-level air in leeward of the mountains. The drier air is then heated more because of the adiabatic compression as it comes down the lee slopes, forming a rain shadow.\nIn the cool season, the Great Dividing Range would shield much of the southeast (i.e. Sydney, Central Coast, Hunter Valley, Illawarra, the ACT, the Monaro and South Coast) from south-westerly cold fronts that originate from the Southern Ocean, which bring chilling rains, sleet and snow to the upwind side of the ranges, such as on the western Central Tablelands, South West Slopes and Snowy Mountains regions \u2013 all which have relatively wetter winters. Upwind locations include Crookwell, Batlow, Tumut, Corryong, Bright, Beechworth, Eildon, Tolmie and those in West Gippsland (namely the Latrobe Valley and Wilsons Promontory). Whereas on the downwind (eastern) slopes, Cooma, Omeo, Goulburn, Bowral, Bombala, Nimmitabel, and Canberra, are warmer and drier relative to altitude.\nMoreover, Oberon, Shooters Hill and Sunny Corner are on the crest of the ranges and thus exposed from all directions, hence their evenly spread rainfall. The main ski resorts in New South Wales, such as Thredbo Village, Perisher and Charlotte Pass, lie transitionally between the leeward and windward side (the former town being more leeward and the latter more windward). Although they receive substantial precipitation from over the crest of the ranges, they lack the persistent cloud cover which characterises truly windward locations on the western face, which are; Cabramurra, Kiandra, Mount Buller, Falls Creek, Mount Hotham, Mount Buffalo and Mount Baw Baw.\nHistory.\nThe Great Dividing Range was formed during the Carboniferous period\u2014over 300 million years ago\u2014when Australia collided with what are now parts of South America and New Zealand. The range has experienced significant erosion since. (See Geology of Australia.)\nFor tens of thousands of years prior to British colonisation the ranges were home to various Aboriginal Australian nations and clans. Evidence remains in some places of their traditional way of life including decorated caves, campsites and trails used to travel between the coastal and inland regions. Many descendants of these nations still exist today, and some remain the traditional owners and custodians of their lands.\nAfter British colonisation in 1788, the ranges were an obstacle to exploration and settlement by the British settlers. Although not high, parts of the highlands were very rugged. Crossing the Blue Mountains was particularly challenging due to the mistaken idea that the creeks should be followed rather than the ridges, and almost impenetrable, labyrinthine, sandstone mountains. The Blue Mountains actually lie to the east of the watershed that divides the Hawkesbury\u2013Nepean system and the Murray\u2013Darling system, the true Great Dividing Range. The watershed in this area lies to the west of Lithgow, passing near the locality of Mt Lambie and village of Capertee. There, as in some other places in New South Wales, the Great Divide is only a slight rise in the surrounding topography.\nKnowing that local Aboriginal people had already established routes crossing the range and by making use of Aboriginal walking trails, a usable ridge-top route was finally discovered by Europeans directly westward from Sydney across the Blue Mountains to Bathurst by an expedition jointly led by Gregory Blaxland, William Lawson and William Charles Wentworth. Towns in the Blue Mountains were later named after each of these men. This was the start of the development of the agricultural districts of inland New South Wales. A road was built to Bathurst by convicts within six months. Easier routes to inland New South Wales were discovered towards Goulburn to the southwest, and westwards from Newcastle.\nSubsequent explorations were made across and around the ranges by Allan Cunningham, John Oxley, Hamilton Hume, Paul Edmund Strzelecki, Ludwig Leichhardt and Thomas Mitchell. These explorers were mainly concerned with finding and appropriating good agricultural land.\nBy the late 1830s, the most fertile rangelands adjacent to the mountain ranges had been explored, appropriated from the traditional inhabitants and some settled. These included the Gippsland and Riverina regions in the south, up to the Liverpool Plains and the Darling Downs in the north.\nVarious road and railway routes were subsequently established through many parts of the ranges, although many areas remain remote to this day. For example, in eastern Victoria there is only one major road crossing the highlands from north to south, the Great Alpine Road.\nNatural components.\nParts of the highlands consisting of relatively flat and, by Australian standards, well-watered land were developed for agricultural and pastoral uses. Such areas include the Atherton Tableland and Darling Downs in Queensland, and the Northern Tablelands, Southern Highlands and Southern Tablelands in New South Wales. Other parts of the highlands are too rugged for agriculture and have been used for forestry. Many parts of the highlands which were not developed are now included in National Parks.\nAll of mainland Australia's alpine areas, including its highest mountain, Mount Kosciuszko ( AHD), are part of this range, called the Main Range. The highest areas in southern New South Wales and eastern Victoria are known as the Australian Alps.\nThe central core of the Great Dividing Range is dotted with hundreds of peaks and is surrounded by many smaller mountain ranges or spurs, canyons, valleys and plains of regional significance. Some of the major plains include the High Plains of South-Eastern Australia, the Southern Highlands, the Central Highlands and Bogong High Plains of Victoria. Other tablelands considered part of the Great Dividing Range are the Atherton Tableland, Canberra wine region and the Southern Tablelands.\nThe Dandenong Ranges, Barrington Tops, Bunya Mountains, Blue Mountains, Liverpool Range, McPherson Ranges and the Moonbi Range are some of the smaller spurs and ranges that make up the greater dividing range. Other notable ranges and tablelands which form part of the Great Dividing Range include the Liverpool Range, Mount Royal Range and the Monaro District. Whilst some of the peaks of the highlands reach heights of a little over , the age of the range and its erosion mean that most of the mountains are not very steep, and virtually all peaks can be reached without mountaineering equipment.\nIn some areas, such as the Snowy Mountains, Victorian Alps, the Scenic Rim and the eastern escarpments of the New England region, the highlands form a significant barrier. The eastern escarpment is the site of many spectacular waterfalls which were formed by rivers plunging off the tablelands. In other areas the slopes are gentle and in places the range is barely perceptible.\nWell known passes on the range include Coxs Gap, Cunninghams Gap, Dead Horse Gap, Nowlands Gap, and Spicers Gap.\nMajor cities located on the upland areas of the range include Canberra, Toowoomba and the outer suburbs of Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Gold Coast and Cairns in north Queensland. Many towns and cities are located on the range, and also in lowland areas and foothills adjacent to the highlands. There is a strong natural history and cultural attachment to the Dividing Range region in towns and on many, sometimes remote, landholdings.\nSome of the towns/cities located on or near the range include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWater catchments.\nThe lower reaches are used for forestry, an activity that causes friction with conservationists. The range is also the source of virtually all of eastern Australia's water supply, both through runoff caught in dams, and throughout much of Queensland, through the Great Artesian Basin.\nValleys along the chain of mountains have yielded a water source for important reservoirs and water supply projects such as the Upper Nepean Scheme, Snowy Mountains Scheme and Warragamba Dam.\nThe Bradfield Scheme has been mooted as a way to transport water from the Wet Tropics of Queensland in the coastal northeast of Far North Queensland via a series of Dams &amp; Tunnels, southwest to inland dryer regions, including a tunnel through the Great Dividing Range into the Flinders River then a tunnel into the Torrens Creek in the White Mountains National Park then flows south into Thompson River / Cooper Creek, part of the Eyre Basin. Many other variations have been proposed.\nThe Great Dividing Range creates the drainage basins of the Australian south-east coast drainage division and the Australian north-east coast drainage division, whose water flows to the east coast and into the Pacific Ocean, Tasman Sea, and Bass Strait with the westerly Murray\u2013Darling basin which flow inland, away from the coast into the interior plains.\nSome of the rivers which flow west of the ranges includes the Condamine River, Flinders River, Herbert River, Lachlan River, Macdonald River, Macintyre River and Namoi River. Rivers that flow north into the Murray\u2013Darling Basin from Victoria include the Goulburn, Mitta Mitta, Kiewa, Ovens, King, Loddon and Campaspe rivers. Rivers that flow east into the Pacific Ocean include the Annan River, Barron River, Brisbane River, Burdekin River, Burnett River, Clarence River, Daintree River, Fitzroy River, Hastings River, Hawkesbury River, Hunter River, Karuah River, Macleay River, Mary River, Pascoe River, Richmond River and the Shoalhaven River. Those that flow south, primarily through Victoria, include the Snowy, Cann, Tambo, Mitchell, Latrobe, Thomson, Yarra, Werribee, Hopkins and Glenelg rivers.\nFeatures.\nAt some high hill passes the range provides cool sites appropriate for vineyards.\nRailways.\nThe engineers of early rail passages across the Great Dividing Range needed to find low sections of the range to cross, as well as suitable, \"low\" gradient paths up the mountains on either side. Rail passages include:\nRoad transport.\nMany of Australia's highways such as the Alpine Way, Great Alpine Road, Snowy Mountains Highway, Hume Highway, Illawarra Highway, Northern Highway, Melba Highway, Maroondah Highway, Midland Highway, Pyrenees Highway, Sunraysia Highway, Monaro Highway, Olympic Highway, Newell Highway, Lachlan Valley Way, Barton Highway, Federal Highway, Kings Highway, Great Western Highway, Mitchell Highway, Mid-Western Highway, Castlereagh Highway, Mulligan Highway, Capricorn Highway, Cunningham Highway, Gore Highway, Flinders Highway, Gregory Highway, Peak Downs Highway, Dawson Highway, New England Highway, Golden Highway, Bruxner Highway, Gwydir Highway, Oxley Highway, Warrego Highway, Summerland Way, Waterfall Way, Thunderbolts Way, the Calder Highway, the Western Highway, and the Murray Valley Highway traverse parts of the range.\nProtected areas.\nMuch of the range lies within a succession of national parks and other reserves. Most of the national parks are listed below, and there are almost double that amount of state forests.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAwards.\nIn 2009 as part of the Q150 celebrations, the Great Dividing Range was announced as one of the Q150 Icons of Queensland for its role as a \"location\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55034", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55034", "title": "Spine", "text": "Spine or spinal may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "55035", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55035", "title": "Battle of red Cliffs", "text": ""}
{"id": "55036", "revid": "2153309", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55036", "title": "Fragaria", "text": "Genus of strawberry plants\nFragaria () is a genus of flowering plants in the rose family, Rosaceae, commonly known as strawberries for their edible fruits. There are more than 20 described species and many hybrids and cultivars. The most common strawberries grown commercially are cultivars of the garden strawberry, a hybrid known as \"Fragaria\" \u00d7 \"ananassa\". Strawberries have a taste that varies by cultivar, and ranges from quite sweet to rather tart. Strawberries are an important commercial fruit crop, widely grown in all temperate regions of the world.\nDescription.\nStrawberries are not berries in the botanical sense. The fleshy and edible part of the \"fruit\" is a receptacle, and the parts that are sometimes mistakenly called \"seeds\" are achenes and therefore the true botanical fruits.\nEtymology.\nThe genus name derives from (\"strawberry\") and , a suffix used to create feminine nouns and plant names. The Latin name is thought in turn to derive from a Proto-Indo-European language root meaning \"berry\", either \"*d\u02b0reh\u2082\u01f5-\" or \"*sr\u00f3h\u2082gs\".\nThe semantic motivation behind the English name \"strawberry\" (from Old English \"str\u0113awberie\") is unclear. Various suggestions have been put forward. One is that the name derives from the old practice of gathering strawberries by stringing them on a straw or stalk. Alternatively, \"straw\" may refer to the long, thin runners found on members of the genus. The term is absent from the other Germanic languages, which instead use words meaning \"earth berry\".\nClassification.\nThere are more than 20 different \"Fragaria\" species worldwide. A number of other species have been proposed, some of which are now recognized as subspecies. One key to the classification of strawberry species is that they vary in the number of chromosomes. They all have seven basic \"types\" of chromosomes, but exhibit different polyploidy. Some species are diploid, having two sets of the seven chromosomes (14 chromosomes total), but others are tetraploid (four sets, 28 chromosomes total), hexaploid (six sets, 42 chromosomes total), octoploid (eight sets, 56 chromosomes total), or decaploid (ten sets, 70 chromosomes total).\nAs a rough rule (with exceptions), strawberry species with more chromosomes tend to be more robust and produce larger plants with larger berries.\nThe oldest fossils confidently classifiable as \"Fragaria\" are from the Miocene of Poland. Fossilised \"Fragaria\" achenes are also known from the Pliocene of China.\nEcology.\nA number of species of butterflies and moths feed on strawberry plants.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55037", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55037", "title": "Shellfish", "text": "Culinary and fisheries term for exoskeleton-bearing aquatic invertebrates\nShellfish, in colloquial and fisheries usage, are exoskeleton-bearing aquatic invertebrates used as food, including various species of molluscs, crustaceans, and echinoderms. Although most kinds of shellfish are harvested from saltwater environments, some are found in freshwater. In addition, a few species of land crabs are eaten, for example \"Cardisoma guanhumi\" in the Caribbean. Shellfish are among the most common food allergens.\nDue to narrowing in the meaning of the English word \"fish\" over the centuries, shell\"fish\" no longer fall under what is usually considered fish. Most shellfish are low on the food chain and eat a diet composed primarily of phytoplankton and zooplankton. Many varieties of shellfish, and crustaceans in particular, are actually closely related to insects and arachnids; crustaceans make up one of the main subphyla of the phylum Arthropoda. Molluscs include cephalopods (squids, octopuses, cuttlefish) and bivalves (clams, oysters), as well as gastropods (aquatic species such as whelks and winkles; land species such as snails and slugs).\nMolluscs used as a food source by humans include many species of clams, mussels, oysters, winkles, and scallops. Some crustaceans that are commonly eaten are shrimp, lobsters, crayfish, crabs and barnacles. Echinoderms are not as frequently harvested for food as molluscs and crustaceans; however, sea urchin gonads are quite popular in many parts of the world, where the live delicacy is harder to transport.\nThough some shellfish harvesting has been unsustainable, and shrimp farming has been destructive in some parts of the world, shellfish farming can be important to environmental restoration, by developing reefs, filtering water and eating biomass.\nTerminology.\nThe term \"shellfish\" is used both broadly and specifically. In common parlance, as in \"having shellfish for dinner\", it can refer to anything from clams and oysters to lobster and shrimp. For regulatory purposes it is often narrowly defined as filter-feeding molluscs such as clams, mussels, and oyster to the exclusion of crustaceans and all else.\nAlthough the term is primarily applied to marine species, edible freshwater invertebrates such as crayfish and river mussels are also sometimes grouped under the umbrella term \"shellfish\".\nAlthough their shells may differ, all shellfish are invertebrates. As non-mammalian animals that spend their entire lives in water they are \"fish\" in an informal sense; however, the term \"finfish\" is sometimes used to distinguish fish, animals defined by having vertebrae, from shellfish in modern terminology.\nThe word \"shellfish\" is both singular and plural; the rarely used \"shellfishes\" is sometimes employed to distinguish among various types of shellfish.\nShellfish in various cuisines.\nArchaeological finds have shown that humans have been making use of shellfish as a food item for hundreds of thousands of years. In the present, shellfish dishes are a feature of almost all the cuisines of the world, providing an important source of protein in many cuisines around the world, especially in the countries with coastal areas.\nIn Japan.\nIn Japanese cuisine, chefs often use shellfish and their roe in different dishes. Sushi (vinegared rice, topped with other ingredients, including shellfish, fish, meat and vegetables) features both raw and cooked shellfish. Sashimi primarily consists of very fresh raw seafood, sliced into thin pieces. Both sushi and sashimi are served with soy sauce and wasabi paste (a Japanese horseradish root, a spice with extremely strong, hot flavor), thinly sliced pickled ginger root, and a simple garnish such as shiso (a kitchen herb, member of the mint family) or finely shredded daikon radish, or both.\nIn the United States.\nLobster in particular is a great delicacy in the United States, where families in the Northeast region make them into the centerpiece of a clam bake, usually for special occasions. Lobsters are eaten on much of the East Coast; the American lobster ranges from Newfoundland down to about the Carolinas, but is most often associated with Maine. A typical meal involves boiling the lobster with some slight seasoning and then serving it with drawn butter, baked potato, and corn on the cob.\nClamming is done both commercially and recreationally along the Northeast coastline of the US. Various type of clams are incorporated into the cuisine of New England. The soft-shelled clam is eaten either fried or steamed (and then called \"steamers\"). Many types of clams can be used for clam chowder, but the quahog, a hard shelled clam also known as a chowder clam, is often used because the long cooking time softens its tougher meat.\nThe Chesapeake Bay and Maryland region has generally been associated more with crabs, but in recent years the area has been trying to reduce its catch of blue crabs, as wild populations have been depleted. This has not, however, stemmed the demand: Maryland-style crabcakes are still a well known treat in crabhouses all over the bay, though the catch now comes from points farther south.\nIn the Southeast, and particularly the gulf states, shrimping is an important industry. Copious amounts of shrimp are harvested each year in the Gulf of Mexico and the Atlantic Ocean to satisfy a national demand for shrimp. Locally, prawns and shrimp are often deep fried; in the Cajun and Creole kitchens of Louisiana, shrimp and prawns are a common addition to traditional recipes like jambalaya and certain stews. Crawfish are a well known and much eaten delicacy there, often boiled in huge pots and heavily spiced.\nIn many major cities with active fishing ports, raw oyster bars are also a feature of shellfish consumption. When served freshly shucked (opened) and iced, one may find a liquid inside the shell, called the liquor. Some believe that oysters have the properties of an aphrodisiac.\nInter-tidal herbivorous shellfish such as mussels and clams can help people reach a healthy balance of omega-3 and omega-6 fats in their diets, instead of the current Western diets. For this reason, the eating of shellfish is often encouraged by dietitians.\nSome popular dishes using shellfish:\nReligious dietary restrictions.\nThe Torah forbids the consumption of shellfish (i.e. the only permitted seafood is fish with fins and scales), in the books of Leviticus and Deuteronomy. Jews (of all religious traditions) who fully observe the dietary laws thus do not eat shellfish, neither do Seventh-day Adventists, who also follow Jewish dietary law.\nShia Islamic schools of thought vary on whether (and which types of) shellfish may be acceptable. Sunni Muslims, except Hanafis, view them as halal.\nAllergy.\nApproximately 1% of the population is estimated to suffer from shellfish allergy, which is more common in teenage and adult life than very early childhood. \nThere is some evidence that shellfish intolerance exists in an unknown proportion of the population. The symptoms of this do not include the immune and respiratory symptoms of an allergic reaction, such as hives, hyperventilation, or anaphylaxis, but do involve gastrointestinal distress, such as nausea, abdominal cramps, and diarrhea. Similar symptoms can come from foodborne illness or as part of a toxic effect.\nToxic content.\nSome shellfish, such as whelk, contain arsenic. A sample of whelk was found to have a total content of arsenic at 15.42 mg/kg of which 1% is inorganic arsenic.\nShellfish caught in Alaska can cause paralytic shellfish poisoning (PSP). PSP is caused by toxins, namely saxitoxin, released by dinoflagellates, a type of protista (also considered algae), which are extremely poisonous (1000 times more potent than cyanide) and can lead to death by paralyzing the breathing muscles. Due to warming oceans, algae blooms have become more widespread, thereby increasing the likelihood of intoxications of various types.\nEcosystem services and reef-building.\nShellfish of various kinds contribute to the formation of reefs, such as when millions of oysters or mussels aggregate together. Reefs provide habitat for numerous other species, bury carbon, contributing to climate change mitigation, and defend the shore against erosion, floods and waves. Conversely, when they are destroyed or exploited, carbon can be released into the atmosphere, simultaneously increasing the likelihood of severe weather while removing the natural defence against its consequences. In addition, some shellfish are known for filtering water, removing suspended particles and contaminants, which contributes to both quality and clarity. These benefits cascade to other species that are helpful to humankind such as seagrasses.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55040", "revid": "13791031", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55040", "title": "Reconstruction era", "text": "Era after American Civil War (1865\u20131877)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Subinfobox bodystyle/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Reconstruction era was a period in US history that followed the American Civil War (1861\u20131865) and was dominated by the legal, social, and political challenges of the abolition of slavery and reintegration of the former Confederate States into the United States. Three amendments were added to the United States Constitution to grant citizenship and equal civil rights to the newly freed slaves. To circumvent these, former Confederate states imposed poll taxes and literacy tests and engaged in terrorism to intimidate and control African Americans and discourage or prevent them from voting.\nThroughout the war, the Union was confronted with the issue of how to administer captured areas and handle slaves escaping to Union lines. The United States Army played a vital role in establishing a free labor economy in the South, protecting freedmen's rights, and creating educational and religious institutions. Despite its reluctance to interfere with slavery, Congress passed the Confiscation Acts to seize Confederates' slaves, providing a precedent for President Abraham Lincoln to issue the Emancipation Proclamation. Congress established a Freedmen's Bureau to provide much-needed food and shelter to the newly freed slaves. As it became clear the Union would win, Congress debated the process for readmission of seceded states. Radical and moderate Republicans disagreed over the nature of secession, conditions for readmission, and desirability of social reforms. Lincoln favored the \"ten percent plan\" and vetoed the Wade\u2013Davis Bill, which proposed strict conditions for readmission. Lincoln was assassinated in 1865, just as fighting was drawing to a close. He was replaced by Andrew Johnson, who vetoed Radical Republican bills, pardoned Confederate leaders, and allowed Southern states to enact draconian Black Codes that restricted the rights of freedmen. His actions outraged many Northerners and stoked fears the Southern elite would regain power. Radical Republicans swept to power in the 1866 midterm elections, gaining majorities in both houses of Congress.\nIn 1867\u201368, the Radical Republicans enacted the Reconstruction Acts over Johnson's vetoes, setting the terms by which former Confederate states could be readmitted to the Union. Constitutional conventions held throughout the South gave Black men the right to vote. New state governments were established by a coalition of freedmen, supportive white Southerners, and Northern transplants. They were opposed by \"Redeemers\", who sought to restore white supremacy and reestablish Democratic Party control of Southern governments and society. Violent groups, including the Ku Klux Klan, White League, and Red Shirts, engaged in paramilitary insurgency and terrorism to disrupt Reconstruction governments and terrorize Republicans. Congressional anger at Johnson's vetoes of Radical Republican legislation led to his impeachment by the House of Representatives, but he was not convicted by the Senate and therefore was not removed from office.\nUnder Johnson's successor, President Ulysses S. Grant, Radical Republicans enacted additional legislation to enforce civil rights, such as the Ku Klux Klan Act and Civil Rights Act of 1875. However, resistance to Reconstruction by Southern whites and its high cost contributed to its losing support in the North. The 1876 presidential election was marked by Black voter suppression in the South, and the result was close and contested. An Electoral Commission resulted in the Compromise of 1877, which awarded the election to Republican Rutherford B. Hayes on the understanding that federal troops would cease to play an active role in regional politics. Efforts to enforce federal civil rights in the South ended in 1890 with the failure of the Lodge Bill.\nHistorians disagree about the legacy of Reconstruction. Criticism focuses on the failure to prevent violence, corruption, starvation and disease. Some consider the Union's policy toward freed slaves as inadequate and toward former slaveholders as too lenient. However, Reconstruction is credited with restoring the federal Union, limiting reprisals against the South, and establishing a legal framework for racial equality via constitutional rights to national birthright citizenship, due process, equal protection of the laws, and male suffrage regardless of race.\nDating.\nThe Reconstruction era had historically been dated from the end of the Civil War in 1865 until 1877, though other periodization schemes have been proposed more recently. In the 20th century, most scholars began their review in 1865, with the end of formal hostilities between the North and South. However, in his landmark 1988 monograph \"\", Eric Foner proposed 1863, starting with the Emancipation Proclamation, Port Royal Experiment, and earnest debate of Reconstruction policies during the war. By 2017, among scholars it was widely understood that Reconstruction started in either \"1863 with the Emancipation Proclamation or 1865 with the end of the war\".\nThe Reconstruction Era National Historical Park proposed 1861 as a starting date, interpreting Reconstruction as beginning \"as soon as the Union captured territory in the Confederacy\". According to Downs and Masur, \"Reconstruction began when the first US soldiers arrived in slaveholding territory, and enslaved people escaped...\" Soon afterwards, early discourse and experimentation began regarding Reconstruction policies. The policies provided opportunities to enslaved Gullah populations in the Sea Islands who became free overnight on November 7, 1861, after the Battle of Port Royal when slaveholders fled. After the battle, reconstruction policies were implemented under the Port Royal Experiment which were education, landownership, and labor reform. This transition to a free society was called \"Rehearsal for Reconstruction\".\nThe conventional end of Reconstruction is 1877, with the reduction of the role of federal troops in regional politics. Later dates have been suggested. Fritzhugh Brundage proposed that Reconstruction ended in 1890, when Republicans failed to pass the Lodge Bill to secure voting rights for Black Americans in the South. Heather Cox Richardson argued that for a periodization from 1865 until 1920, when the election of President Warren G. Harding marked the end of a national sentiment in favor of using government to promote equality. Manisha Sinha periodized Reconstruction from 1860\u2014when Lincoln won office as a president opposed to slavery\u2014until 1920, when America ratified the Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution affirming the right of women to vote, which Sinha called \"the last Reconstruction amendment\" because it drew upon a Reconstruction belief that government could protect civil and political rights.\nBackground.\nIn the American Civil War, eleven Southern states, all of which permitted slavery, seceded from the United States following the election of Lincoln to the presidency and formed the Confederate States of America. Though Lincoln initially declared secession \"legally void\" and declined to negotiate with Confederate delegates to Washington, following the Confederate assault on the Union garrison at Fort Sumter, Lincoln declared that \"an extraordinary occasion\" existed in the South and raised an army to quell \"combinations too powerful to be suppressed by the ordinary course of judicial proceedings.\" Over the next four years, 237 named battles were fought between the Union and Confederate armies, resulting in the dissolution of the Confederate States in 1865. During the war, Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation, which declared that \"all persons held as slaves\" within the Confederate territory \"are, and henceforward shall be free.\"\nAbolition of slavery and social reform.\nThe Civil War had immense social implications for the United States. Emancipation had altered the legal status of 3.5 million persons, threatened the end of the plantation economy of the South, and provoked questions regarding the legal and social inequality of the races in the United States. The end of the war was accompanied by a large migration of newly freed people to the cities, where they were relegated to the lowest paying jobs, such as unskilled and service labor. Men worked as rail workers, rolling and lumber mills workers, and hotel workers. Black women were largely confined to domestic work employed as cooks, maids, and child nurses, or in hotels and laundries. The large population of slave artisans during the prewar period did not translate into a large number of free artisans during Reconstruction. The dislocations had a severe negative impact on the Black population, with a large amount of sickness and death.\nDuring the war, Lincoln experimented with land reform by giving land to African-Americans in South Carolina. Having lost their enormous investment in slaves, plantation owners had minimal capital to pay freedmen workers to bring in crops. As a result, a system of sharecropping was developed, in which landowners broke up large plantations and rented small lots to the freedmen and their families. Thus, the main structure of the Southern economy changed from an elite minority of landed gentry slaveholders into a tenant farming agriculture system.\nHistorian David W. Blight identified three visions of the social implications of Reconstruction:\nEconomic devastation.\nThe Civil War had a devastating economic and material impact on the South, where most combat occurred.\nThe enormous cost of the Confederate war effort took a high toll on the region's economic infrastructure. The direct costs in human capital, government expenditures, and physical destruction totaled $3.3\u00a0billion. By early 1865, the Confederate dollar had nearly zero value, and the Southern banking system was in collapse by the war's end. Where scarce Union dollars could not be obtained, residents resorted to a barter system.\nThe Confederate States in 1861 had 297 towns and cities, with a total population of 835,000 people; of these, 162, with 681,000 people, were at some point occupied by Union forces. Eleven cities were destroyed or severely damaged by military action, including Atlanta, Charleston, Columbia, and Richmond, though the rate of damage in smaller towns was much lower. Farms were in disrepair, and the prewar stock of horses, mules, and cattle was much depleted. Forty percent of Southern livestock had been killed. The South's farms were not highly mechanized, but the value of farm implements and machinery according to the 1860 Census was $81 million and was reduced by 40% by 1870. The transportation infrastructure lay in ruins, with little railroad or riverboat service available to move crops and animals to market. Railroad mileage was located mostly in rural areas; over two-thirds of the South's rails, bridges, rail yards, repair shops, and rolling stock were in areas reached by Union armies, which systematically destroyed what they could. Even in untouched areas, the lack of maintenance and repair, the absence of new equipment, the heavy over-use, and the deliberate relocation of equipment by the Confederates from remote areas to the war zone ensured the system would be ruined at war's end. Restoring the infrastructure\u2014especially the railroad system\u2014became a high priority for Reconstruction state governments.\nOver a quarter of Southern White men of military age\u2014the backbone of the White workforce\u2014died during the war, leaving their families destitute, and per capita income for White Southerners declined from $125 in 1857 to a low of $80 in 1879. By the end of the 19th century and well into the 20th century, the South was locked into a system of poverty. How much of this failure was caused by the war and by previous reliance on slavery remains the subject of debate among economists and historians. In both the North and South, modernization and industrialization were the focus of the post-war recovery, built on the growth of cities, railroads, factories, and banks and led by Radical Republicans and former Whigs.\nLegal reconstruction.\nFrom its origins, questions existed as to the legal significance of the Civil War, whether secession had actually occurred, and what measures, if any, were necessary to restore the governments of the Confederate States. For example, throughout the conflict, the United States government recognized the legitimacy of a unionist government in Virginia led by Francis Harrison Pierpont out of Wheeling. (This recognition was rendered moot when the Pierpont government separated the northwestern counties of the state and sought admission as West Virginia.) As additional territory came under Union control, reconstructed governments were established in Tennessee, Arkansas, and Louisiana. Debates over \"legal reconstruction\" focused on whether secession was legally valid, the implications of secession for the nature of the seceded states, and the legitimate method of their readmission to the Union.\nThe first plan for legal reconstruction was introduced by Lincoln in his Proclamation of Amnesty and Reconstruction, the so-called \"ten percent plan\" under which a loyal unionist state government would be established when ten percent of its 1860 voters pledged an oath of allegiance to the Union, with a complete pardon for those who pledged such an oath. By 1864, Louisiana, Tennessee, and Arkansas had established fully functioning Unionist governments under this plan. However, Congress passed the Wade\u2013Davis Bill in opposition, which instead proposed that a \"majority\" of voters must pledge that they had \"never\" supported the Confederate government and disenfranchised all those who had. Lincoln vetoed the Wade\u2013Davis Bill, but it established a lasting conflict between the presidential and congressional visions of reconstruction.\nIn addition to the legal status of the seceded states, Congress debated the legal consequences for Confederate veterans and others who had engaged in \"insurrection and rebellion\" against the government and the legal rights of those freed from slavery. These debates resulted in the Reconstruction Amendments to the United States Constitution.\nRestoring the South to the Union.\nDuring the Civil War, the Radical Republican leaders argued that slavery and the Slave Power had to be permanently destroyed. Moderates said this could be easily accomplished as soon as the Confederate States Army surrendered and the Southern states repealed secession and accepted the Thirteenth Amendment\u2014most of which happened by December 1865.\nLincoln broke with the Radicals in 1864. The Wade\u2013Davis Bill of 1864 passed in Congress by the Radicals was designed to permanently disfranchise the Confederate element in the South. The bill asked the government to grant African American men the right to vote and that anyone who willingly gave weapons to the fight against the United States should be denied the right to vote. The bill required voters, fifty-one percent of White males, to take the Ironclad Oath swearing that they had never supported the Confederacy or been one of its soldiers. This oath also entailed having them to swear a loyalty to the Constitution and the Union before they could have state constitutional meetings. Lincoln blocked it. Pursuing a policy of \"malice toward none\" announced in his second inaugural address, Lincoln asked voters only to support the Union in the future, regardless of the past. Lincoln pocket vetoed the Wade\u2013Davis Bill, which was much more strict than the ten percent plan.\nFollowing Lincoln's veto, the Radicals lost support but regained strength after Lincoln's assassination in April 1865.\n1865.\nUpon President Lincoln's assassination in April 1865, Vice President Andrew Johnson became president. Radicals considered Johnson to be an ally, but upon becoming president, he rejected the Radical program of Reconstruction. He was on good terms with ex-Confederates in the South and ex-Copperheads in the North. He appointed his own governors and tried to close the Reconstruction process by the end of 1865. Thaddeus Stevens vehemently opposed Johnson's plans for an abrupt end to Reconstruction, insisting that Reconstruction must \"revolutionize Southern institutions, habits, and manners\u00a0... The foundations of their institutions\u00a0... must be broken up and relaid, or all our blood and treasure have been spent in vain.\" Johnson broke decisively with the Republicans in Congress when he vetoed the Civil Rights Act on March 27, 1866. While Democrats celebrated, the Republicans rallied, passed the bill again, and overrode Johnson's repeat veto. Full-scale political warfare now existed between Johnson (now allied with the Democrats) and the Radical Republicans.\nSince the war had ended, Congress rejected Johnson's argument that he had the war power to decide what to do. Congress decided it had the primary authority to decide how Reconstruction should proceed, because the Constitution stated the United States had to guarantee each state a republican form of government. The Radicals insisted that meant Congress decided how Reconstruction should be achieved. The issues were multiple: Who should decide, Congress or the president? How should republicanism operate in the South? What was the status of the former Confederate states? What was the citizenship status of the leaders of the Confederacy? What was the citizenship and suffrage status of freedmen?\nAfter the war ended, President Andrew Johnson gave back most of the land to the former White slave owners.\n1866.\nBy 1866, the faction of Radical Republicans led by Representative Thaddeus Stevens and Senator Charles Sumner were convinced that Johnson's Southern appointees were disloyal to the Union, hostile to loyal Unionists, and enemies of the Freedmen. Radicals used as evidence outbreaks of mob violence against Black people, such as the Memphis riots of 1866 and the New Orleans massacre of 1866. Radical Republicans demanded a prompt and strong federal response to protect freedmen and curb Southern racism.\nStevens and his followers viewed secession as having left the states in a status like new territories. Sumner argued that secession had destroyed statehood but the Constitution still extended its authority and its protection over individuals, as in existing U.S. territories. The Republicans sought to prevent Johnson's Southern politicians from \"restoring the historical subordination of Negroes\". Since slavery was abolished, the Three-fifths Compromise no longer applied to counting the population of Blacks. After the 1870 Census, the South would gain numerous additional representatives in Congress, based on the full population of freedmen. One Illinois Republican expressed a common fear that if the South were allowed to simply restore its previous established powers, that the \"reward of treason will be an increased representation\".\nThe election of 1866 decisively changed the balance of power, giving the Republicans two-thirds majorities in both houses of Congress, and enough votes to overcome Johnson's vetoes. They moved to impeach Johnson because of his constant attempts to thwart Radical Reconstruction measures, by using the \"Tenure of Office Act\". Johnson was acquitted by one vote, but he lost the influence to shape Reconstruction policy.\n1867.\nIn 1867, Congress passed the Reconstruction Acts of 1867 which outlined the terms in which the rebel states would be readmitted to the Union. Under these acts Republican Congress established military districts in the South and used Army personnel to administer the region until new governments loyal to the Union\u2014that accepted the Fourteenth Amendment and the right of freedmen to vote\u2014could be established. Congress temporarily suspended the ability to vote of approximately 10,000 to 15,000 former Confederate officials and senior officers, while constitutional amendments gave full citizenship to all African Americans, and suffrage to the adult men. With the power to vote, freedmen began participating in politics. While many enslaved people were illiterate, educated Blacks (including fugitive slaves) moved down from the North to aid them, and natural leaders also stepped forward. They elected White and Black men to represent them in constitutional conventions. A Republican coalition of freedmen, Southerners supportive of the Union (derisively called \"scalawags\" by White Democrats), and Northerners who had migrated to the South (derisively called \"carpetbaggers\")\u2014some of whom were returning natives, but were mostly Union veterans\u2014organized to create constitutional conventions. They created new state constitutions to set new directions for Southern states.\nSuffrage.\nCongress had to consider how to restore to full status and representation within the Union those Southern states that had declared their independence from the United States and had withdrawn their representation. Suffrage for former Confederates was one of two main concerns. A decision needed to be made whether to allow just some or all former Confederates to vote (and to hold office). The moderates in Congress wanted virtually all of them to vote, but the Radicals resisted. They repeatedly imposed the Ironclad Oath, which would effectively have allowed no former Confederates to vote. Historian Harold Hyman says that in 1866 congressmen \"described the oath as the last bulwark against the return of ex-rebels to power, the barrier behind which Southern Unionists and Negroes protected themselves\".\nRadical Republican leader Thaddeus Stevens proposed, unsuccessfully, that all former Confederates lose the right to vote for five years. The compromise that was reached disenfranchised many Confederate civil and military leaders. No one knows how many temporarily lost the vote, but one estimate placed the number as high as 10,000 to 15,000. However, Radical politicians took up the task at the state level. In Tennessee alone, over 80,000 former Confederates were disenfranchised.\nSecond, and closely related, was the issue of whether the 4\u00a0million freedmen were to be received as citizens: Would they be able to vote? If they were to be fully counted as citizens, some sort of representation for apportionment of seats in Congress had to be determined. Before the war, the population of slaves had been counted as three-fifths of a corresponding number of free Whites. By having 4\u00a0million freedmen counted as full citizens, the South would gain additional seats in Congress. If Blacks were denied the vote and the right to hold office, then only Whites would represent them. Many, including most White Southerners, Northern Democrats, and some Northern Republicans, opposed voting rights for African-Americans. The small fraction of Republican voters opposed to Black suffrage contributed to the defeats of several suffrage measures voted on in most Northern states. Some Northern states that had referendums on the subject limited the ability of their own small populations of Blacks to vote.\nLincoln had supported a middle position: to allow some Black men to vote, especially U.S. Army veterans. Johnson also believed that such service should be rewarded with citizenship. Lincoln proposed giving the vote to \"the very intelligent, and especially those who have fought gallantly in our ranks\". In 1864, Governor Johnson said: \"The better class of them will go to work and sustain themselves, and that class ought to be allowed to vote, on the ground that a loyal Negro is more worthy than a disloyal White man.\"\nAs president in 1865, Johnson wrote to the man he appointed as governor of Mississippi, recommending: \"If you could extend the elective franchise to all persons of color who can read the Constitution in English and write their names, and to all persons of color who own real estate valued at least two hundred and fifty dollars, and pay taxes thereon, you would completely disarm the adversary [Radicals in Congress], and set an example the other states will follow.\"\nCharles Sumner and Thaddeus Stevens, leaders of the Radical Republicans, were initially hesitant to enfranchise the largely illiterate freedmen. Sumner preferred at first impartial requirements that would have imposed literacy restrictions on Blacks and Whites. He believed that he would not succeed in passing legislation to disenfranchise illiterate Whites who already had the vote.\nIn the South, many poor Whites were illiterate as there was almost no public education before the war. In 1880, for example, the White illiteracy rate was about 25% in Tennessee, Kentucky, Alabama, South Carolina, and Georgia, and as high as 33% in North Carolina. This compares with the 9% national rate, and a Black rate of illiteracy that was over 70% in the South. By 1900, however, with emphasis within the Black community on education, the majority of Blacks had achieved literacy.\nSumner soon concluded that \"there was no substantial protection for the freedman except in the franchise\". This was necessary, he stated, \"(1) For his own protection; (2) For the protection of the white Unionist; and (3) For the peace of the country. We put the musket in his hands because it was necessary; for the same reason we must give him the franchise.\" The support for voting rights was a compromise between moderate and Radical Republicans.\nThe Republicans believed that the best way for men to get political experience was to be able to vote and to participate in the political system. They passed laws allowing all male freedmen to vote. In 1867, Black men voted for the first time. Over the course of Reconstruction, more than 1,500 African Americans held public office in the South; some of them were men who had escaped to the North and gained educations, and returned to the South. They did not hold office in numbers representative of their proportion in the population, but often elected Whites to represent them. The question of women's suffrage was also debated but was rejected leading to the creation of the National Woman Suffrage Association and the American Woman Suffrage Association . Women eventually gained the right to vote with the Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution in 1920.\nFrom 1890 to 1908, Southern states passed new state constitutions and laws that disenfranchised most Blacks and tens of thousands of poor Whites with new voter registration and electoral rules. When establishing new requirements such as subjectively administered literacy tests, in some states, they used \"grandfather clauses\" to enable illiterate Whites to vote.\nSouthern Treaty Commission.\nThe Five Civilized Tribes that had been relocated to Indian Territory (now part of Oklahoma) held Black slaves and signed treaties supporting the Confederacy. During the war, a war among pro-Union and anti-Union Native Americans had raged. Congress passed a statute that gave the president the authority to suspend the appropriations of any tribe if the tribe is \"in a state of actual hostility to the government of the United States\u00a0... and, by proclamation, to declare all treaties with such tribe to be abrogated by such tribe\".\nAs a component of Reconstruction, the Interior Department ordered a meeting of representatives from all Indian tribes who had affiliated with the Confederacy. The council, the Southern Treaty Commission, was first held in Fort Smith, Arkansas in September 1865, and was attended by hundreds of Native Americans representing dozens of tribes. Over the next several years the commission negotiated treaties with tribes that resulted in additional re-locations to Indian Territory and the \"de facto\" creation (initially by treaty) of an unorganized Oklahoma Territory.\nLincoln's presidential Reconstruction.\nPreliminary events.\nPresident Lincoln signed two Confiscation Acts into law, the first on August 6, 1861, and the second on July 17, 1862, safeguarding fugitive slaves who crossed from the Confederacy across Union lines and giving them indirect emancipation if their masters continued insurrection against the United States. The laws allowed the confiscation of lands for colonization from those who aided and supported the rebellion. However, these laws had limited effect as they were poorly funded by Congress and poorly enforced by Attorney General Edward Bates.\nIn August 1861, Major General John C. Fr\u00e9mont, Union commander of the Western Department, declared martial law in Missouri, confiscated Confederate property, and emancipated their slaves. Lincoln immediately ordered Fr\u00e9mont to rescind his emancipation declaration, stating: \"I think there is great danger that... the liberating slaves of traitorous owners, will alarm our Southern Union friends, and turn them against us\u2014perhaps ruin our fair prospect for Kentucky.\" After Fr\u00e9mont refused to rescind the emancipation order, Lincoln terminated him from active duty on November 2, 1861. Lincoln was concerned that the border states would secede from the Union if slaves were given their freedom. On May 26, 1862, Union Major General David Hunter emancipated slaves in South Carolina, Georgia, and Florida, declaring all \"persons\u00a0... heretofore held as slaves... forever free\". Lincoln, embarrassed by the order, rescinded Hunter's declaration and canceled the emancipation.\nOn April 16, 1862, Lincoln signed a bill into law outlawing slavery in Washington, D.C., and freeing the estimated 3,500 slaves in the city. On June 19, 1862, he signed legislation outlawing slavery in all U.S. territories. On July 17, 1862, under the authority of the Confiscation Acts and an amended Force Bill of 1795, he authorized the recruitment of freed slaves into the U.S. Army and seizure of any Confederate property for military purposes.\nGradual emancipation and compensation.\nIn an effort to keep border states in the Union, Lincoln, as early as 1861, designed gradual compensated emancipation programs paid for by government bonds. Lincoln desired Delaware, Maryland, Kentucky, and Missouri to \"adopt a system of gradual emancipation which should work the extinction of slavery in twenty years\". On March 26, 1862, Lincoln met with Senator Charles Sumner and recommended that a special joint session of Congress be convened to discuss giving financial aid to any border states who initiated a gradual emancipation plan. In April 1862, the joint session of Congress met; however, the border states were not interested and did not make any response to Lincoln or any congressional emancipation proposal. Lincoln advocated compensated emancipation during the Hampton Roads Conference.\nColonization.\nIn August 1862, Lincoln met with African American leaders and urged them to colonize some place in Central America. Lincoln planned to free the Southern slaves in the Emancipation Proclamation and he was concerned that freedmen would not be well treated in the United States by Whites in both the North and South. Although Lincoln gave assurances that the United States government would support and protect any colonies that were established for former slaves, the leaders declined the offer of colonization. Many free Blacks had been opposed to colonization plans in the past because they wanted to remain in the United States. Lincoln persisted in his colonization plan in the belief that emancipation and colonization were both part of the same program. By April 1863, Lincoln was successful in sending Black colonists to Haiti as well as 453 to Chiriqui in Central America; however, none of the colonies were able to remain self-sufficient. Frederick Douglass, a prominent 19th-century American civil rights activist, criticized Lincoln by stating that he was \"showing all his inconsistencies, his pride of race and blood, his contempt for Negroes and his canting hypocrisy\". African Americans, according to Douglass, wanted citizenship and civil rights rather than colonies. Historians are unsure if Lincoln gave up on the idea of African American colonization at the end of 1863 or if he actually planned to continue this policy up until 1865.\nInstallation of military governors.\nStarting in March 1862, in an effort to forestall Reconstruction by the Radicals in Congress, Lincoln installed military governors in certain rebellious states under Union military control. Although the states would not be recognized by the Radicals until an undetermined time, installation of military governors kept the administration of Reconstruction under presidential control, rather than that of the increasingly unsympathetic Radical Congress. On March 3, 1862, Lincoln installed a loyalist Democrat, Senator Andrew Johnson, as military governor with the rank of brigadier general in his home state of Tennessee. In May 1862, Lincoln appointed Edward Stanly military governor of the coastal region of North Carolina with the rank of brigadier general. Stanly resigned almost a year later when he angered Lincoln by closing two schools for Black children in New Bern. After Lincoln installed Brigadier General George Foster Shepley as military governor of Louisiana in May 1862, Shepley sent two anti-slavery representatives, Benjamin Flanders and Michael Hahn, elected in December 1862, to the House, which capitulated and voted to seat them. In July 1862, Lincoln installed Colonel John S. Phelps as military governor of Arkansas, though he resigned soon after due to poor health.\nEmancipation Proclamation.\nIn July 1862, Lincoln became convinced that \"a military necessity\" would give him authority under the Constitution to strike at slavery in order to win the Civil War for the Union. The Confiscation Acts were having only a minimal effect to end slavery. On July 22, he wrote a first draft of the Emancipation Proclamation that freed the slaves in states in rebellion. After he showed his Cabinet the document, slight alterations were made in the wording. Lincoln decided that the defeat of the Confederate invasion of the North at the Battle of Antietam was a sufficient battlefield victory to enable him to release the preliminary Emancipation Proclamation, which gave the rebels 100 days to return to the Union or the actual proclamation would be issued.\nOn January 1, 1863, Lincoln issued the final Emancipation Proclamation, naming ten states in which slaves would be \"forever free\". The proclamation did not name the states of Tennessee (because it was under Union control) or Kentucky, Missouri, Maryland, and Delaware (because, though slave states, they had not seceded) and specifically excluded numerous counties in some other states. Eventually, as the U.S. Army advanced into the Confederacy, millions of slaves were set free. Many of these freedmen joined the U.S. Army, as the Emancipation Proclamation authorized them to do, and fought in battles against the Confederate forces. Yet hundreds of thousands of freed slaves died during emancipation from illnesses that devastated army regiments. Freed slaves suffered from smallpox, yellow fever, and malnutrition.\nLincoln's 10% plan.\nLincoln was determined to effect a speedy restoration of the Confederate states to the Union after the Civil War. In 1863, he proposed a moderate plan for the Reconstruction of the captured Confederate state of Louisiana. The plan granted amnesty to rebels who took an oath of loyalty to the Union. Black freedmen workers were tied to labor on plantations for one year at a pay rate of $10 a month. Only 10% of the state's electorate had to take the loyalty oath in order for the state to be readmitted into the U.S. Congress. The state was required to abolish slavery in its new state constitution. Identical Reconstruction plans would be adopted in Arkansas and Tennessee. By December 1864, the Lincoln plan of Reconstruction had been enacted in Louisiana and the legislature sent two senators and five representatives to take their seats in Washington. However, Congress refused to count any of the votes from Louisiana, Arkansas, and Tennessee, in essence rejecting Lincoln's moderate Reconstruction plan. Congress, at this time controlled by the Radicals, proposed the Wade\u2013Davis Bill that required a majority of the state electorates to take the oath of loyalty to be admitted to Congress. Lincoln pocket vetoed the bill and the rift widened between the moderates, primarily concerned with preserving the Union and winning the war, and the Radicals, who wanted to effect a more complete change within Southern society. Frederick Douglass denounced Lincoln's 10% electorate plan as undemocratic since state admission and loyalty only depended on a minority vote.\nLegalization of slave marriages.\nBefore 1864, slave marriages had not been recognized legally; emancipation did not affect them. When freed, many sought official marriages. Before emancipation, slaves could not enter into contracts, including the marriage contract. Not all free people formalized their unions. Some continued to have common-law marriages or community-recognized relationships. The acknowledgement of marriage by the state increased the state's recognition of freed people as legal actors and eventually helped make the case for parental rights for freed people against the practice of apprenticeship of Black children. These children were legally taken away from their families under the guise of \"providing them with guardianship and 'good' homes until they reached the age of consent at twenty-one\" under acts such as the Georgia 1866 Apprentice Act. Such children were generally used as sources of unpaid labor.\nFreedmen's Bureau.\nOn March 3, 1865, the Freedmen's Bureau Bill became law, sponsored by the Republicans to aid freedmen and White refugees. A federal bureau was created to provide food, clothing, fuel, and advice on negotiating labor contracts. It attempted to oversee new relations between freedmen and their former masters in a free labor market. The act, without deference to a person's color, authorized the bureau to lease confiscated land for a period of three years and to sell it in portions of up to per buyer. The bureau was to expire one year after the termination of the war. Lincoln was assassinated before he could appoint a commissioner of the bureau.\nWith the help of the bureau, the recently freed slaves began voting, forming political parties, and assuming the control of labor in many areas. The bureau helped to start a change of power in the South that drew national attention from the Republicans in the North to the Democrats in the South. This is especially evident in the election between Grant and Seymour (Johnson did not get the Democratic nomination), where almost 700,000 Black voters voted and swayed the election 300,000 votes in Grant's favor.\nEven with the benefits that it gave to the freedmen, the Freedmen's Bureau was unable to operate effectively in certain areas. Terrorizing freedmen for trying to vote, hold a political office, or own land, the Ku Klux Klan was the nemesis of the Freedmen's Bureau.\nBans color discrimination.\nOther legislation was signed that broadened equality and rights for African Americans. Lincoln outlawed discrimination on account of color, in carrying U.S. mail, in riding on public street cars in Washington, D.C., and in pay for soldiers.\nFebruary 1865 peace conference.\nLincoln and Secretary of State William H. Seward met with three Southern representatives to discuss the peaceful Reconstruction of the Union and the Confederacy on February 3, 1865, in Hampton Roads, Virginia. The Southern delegation included Confederate Vice President Alexander H. Stephens, John Archibald Campbell, and Robert M. T. Hunter. The Southerners proposed the Union recognition of the Confederacy, a joint Union\u2013Confederate attack on Mexico to oust Emperor Maximilian I, and an alternative subordinate status of servitude for Blacks rather than slavery. Lincoln flatly rejected recognition of the Confederacy, and said that the slaves covered by his Emancipation Proclamation would not be re-enslaved. He said that the Union states were about to pass the Thirteenth Amendment, outlawing slavery. Lincoln urged the governor of Georgia to remove Confederate troops and \"ratify this constitutional amendment prospectively, so as to take effect\u2014say in five years... Slavery is doomed.\" Lincoln also urged compensated emancipation for the slaves as he thought the North should be willing to share the costs of freedom. Although the meeting was cordial, the parties did not settle on agreements.\nHistorical legacy debated.\nLincoln continued to advocate his Louisiana Plan as a model for all states up until his assassination on April 15, 1865. The plan successfully started the Reconstruction process of ratifying the Thirteenth Amendment in all states. Lincoln is typically portrayed as taking the moderate position and fighting the Radical positions. There is considerable debate on how well Lincoln, had he lived, would have handled Congress during the Reconstruction process that took place after the Civil War ended. One historical camp argues that Lincoln's flexibility, pragmatism, and superior political skills with Congress would have solved Reconstruction with far less difficulty. The other camp believes that the Radicals would have attempted to impeach Lincoln, just as they did to his successor, Andrew Johnson, in 1868.\nJohnson's presidential Reconstruction.\nNorthern anger over the assassination of Lincoln and the immense human cost of the war led to demands for punitive policies. Vice President Andrew Johnson had taken a hard line and spoke of hanging Confederates, but when he succeeded Lincoln as president, Johnson took a much softer position, pardoning many Confederate leaders and other former Confederates. Former Confederate President Jefferson Davis was held in prison for two years, but other Confederate leaders were not. Though a jury was temporarily empaneled, there were no trials on charges of treason. Only three people\u2014Captain Henry Wirz, the commandant of the prison camp in Andersonville, Georgia, and guerilla leaders Champ Ferguson and Henry C. Magruder\u2014were ever executed for war crimes. Andrew Johnson's racist view of Reconstruction did not include the involvement of blacks in government, and he refused to heed Northern concerns when Southern state legislatures implemented Black Codes that set the status of the freedmen much lower than that of white people.\nSmith argues that \"Johnson attempted to carry forward what he considered to be Lincoln's plans for Reconstruction.\" McKitrick says that in 1865 Johnson had strong support in the Republican Party, saying: \"It was naturally from the great moderate sector of Unionist opinion in the North that Johnson could draw his greatest comfort.\" Ray Allen Billington says: \"One faction, the moderate Republicans under the leadership of Presidents Abraham Lincoln and Andrew Johnson, favored a mild policy toward the South.\" David A. Lincove, citing Lincoln biographers James G. Randall and Richard N. Current, argued that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is likely that had he lived, Lincoln would have followed a policy similar to Johnson's, that he would have clashed with congressional Radicals, that he would have produced a better result for the freedmen than occurred, and that his political skills would have helped him avoid Johnson's mistakes.\nHistorians generally agree that President Johnson was an inept politician who lost all his advantages by unskilled maneuvering. He broke with Congress in early 1866 and then became defiant and tried to block enforcement of Reconstruction laws passed by the U.S. Congress. He was in constant conflict constitutionally with the Radicals in Congress over the status of freedmen and whites in the defeated South. Although resigned to the abolition of slavery, many former Confederates were unwilling to accept both social changes and political domination by former slaves. In the words of Benjamin Franklin Perry, President Johnson's choice as the provisional governor of South Carolina: \"First, the Negro is to be invested with all political power, and then the antagonism of interest between capital and labor is to work out the result.\"\nHowever, the fears of the planter elite and other leading white citizens were partly assuaged by the actions of President Johnson, who ensured that a wholesale land redistribution from the planters to the freedmen did not occur. President Johnson ordered that confiscated or abandoned lands administered by the Freedmen's Bureau would not be redistributed to the freedmen but would be returned to pardoned owners. Land was returned that would have been forfeited under the Confiscation Acts passed by Congress in 1861 and 1862. Johnson repudiated Sherman's Special Field Order Number 15, the source of the \"40 acres and a mule\" promise of reparations for former slaves.\nFreedmen and the enactment of Black Codes.\nSouthern state governments quickly enacted the restrictive \"Black Codes\". However, they were abolished in 1866 and seldom had effect, because the Freedmen's Bureau (not the local courts) handled the legal affairs of freedmen.\nThe Black Codes indicated the plans of the Southern whites for the former slaves. The freedmen would have more rights than did free Blacks before the war, but they would still have only second-class civil rights, no voting rights, and no citizenship. They could not own firearms, serve on a jury in a lawsuit involving whites, or move about without employment. The Black Codes outraged Northern opinion. They were overthrown by the Civil Rights Act of 1866 that gave the freedmen more legal equality (although still without the right to vote).\nThe freedmen, with the strong backing of the Freedmen's Bureau, rejected gang labor work patterns that had been used in slavery. Instead of gang labor, freed people preferred family-based labor groups. They forced planters to bargain for their labor. Such bargaining soon led to the establishment of the system of sharecropping, which gave the freedmen greater economic independence and social autonomy than gang labor. However, because they lacked capital and the planters continued to own the means of production (tools, draft animals, and land), the freedmen were forced into producing cash crops (mainly cotton) for the land-owners and merchants, and they entered into a crop-lien system. Widespread poverty, disruption to an agricultural economy too dependent on cotton, and the falling price of cotton, led within decades to the routine indebtedness of the majority of the freedmen, and the poverty of many planters.\nNorthern officials gave varying reports on conditions for the freedmen in the South. One harsh assessment came from Carl Schurz, who reported on the situation in the states along the Gulf Coast. His report documented dozens of extrajudicial killings and claimed that hundreds or thousands more African Americans were killed:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The number of murders and assaults perpetrated upon Negroes is very great; we can form only an approximative estimate of what is going on in those parts of the South which are not closely garrisoned, and from which no regular reports are received, by what occurs under the very eyes of our military authorities. As to my personal experience, I will only mention that during my two days sojourn at Atlanta, one Negro was stabbed with fatal effect on the street, and three were poisoned, one of whom died. While I was at Montgomery, one Negro was cut across the throat evidently with intent to kill, and another was shot, but both escaped with their lives. Several papers attached to this report give an account of the number of capital cases that occurred at certain places during a certain period of time. It is a sad fact that the perpetration of those acts is not confined to that class of people which might be called the rabble.\nThe report included sworn testimony from soldiers and officials of the Freedmen's Bureau. In Selma, Alabama, Major J. P. Houston noted that whites who killed 12 African Americans in his district never came to trial. Many more killings never became official cases. Captain Poillon described white patrols in southwestern Alabama:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;who board some of the boats; after the boats leave they hang, shoot, or drown the victims they may find on them, and all those found on the roads or coming down the rivers are almost invariably murdered. The bewildered and terrified freedmen know not what to do\u2014to leave is death; to remain is to suffer the increased burden imposed upon them by the cruel taskmaster, whose only interest is their labor, wrung from them by every device an inhuman ingenuity can devise; hence the lash and murder is resorted to intimidate those whom fear of an awful death alone cause to remain, while patrols, Negro dogs and spies, disguised as Yankees, keep constant guard over these unfortunate people.\nMuch of the violence that was perpetrated against African Americans was shaped by gender prejudices regarding African Americans. Black women were in a particularly vulnerable situation. To convict a white man of sexually assaulting Black women in this period was exceedingly difficult. The South's judicial system had been wholly refigured to make one of its primary purposes the coercion of African Americans to comply with the social customs and labor demands of whites. Trials were discouraged and attorneys for Black misdemeanor defendants were difficult to find. The goal of county courts was a fast, uncomplicated trial with a resulting conviction. Most Blacks were unable to pay their fines or bail, and \"the most common penalty was nine months to a year in a slave mine or lumber camp\". The South's judicial system was rigged to generate fees and claim bounties, not to ensure public protection. Black women were socially perceived as sexually avaricious and since they were portrayed as having little virtue, society held that they could not be raped. One report indicates two freed women, Frances Thompson and Lucy Smith, described their violent sexual assault during the Memphis Riots of 1866. However, Black women were vulnerable even in times of relative normalcy. Sexual assaults on African-American women were so pervasive, particularly on the part of their white employers, that Black men sought to reduce the contact between white males and Black females by having the women in their family avoid doing work that was closely overseen by whites. Black men were construed as being extremely sexually aggressive and their supposed or rumored threats to white women were often used as a pretext for lynching and castrations.\nModerate responses.\nDuring fall 1865, out of response to the Black Codes and worrisome signs of Southern recalcitrance, the Radical Republicans blocked the readmission of the former rebellious states to the Congress. Johnson, however, was content with allowing former Confederate states into the Union as long as their state governments adopted the Thirteenth Amendment abolishing slavery. By December 6, 1865, the amendment was ratified and Johnson considered Reconstruction over. According to James Schouler writing in 1913, Johnson was following the moderate Lincoln presidential Reconstruction policy to get the states readmitted as soon as possible.\nCongress, however, controlled by the Radicals, had other plans. The Radicals were led by Charles Sumner in the Senate and Thaddeus Stevens in the House of Representatives. Congress, on December 4, 1865, rejected Johnson's moderate presidential Reconstruction, and organized the Joint Committee on Reconstruction, a 15-member panel to devise Reconstruction requirements for the Southern states to be restored to the Union.\nIn January 1866, Congress renewed the Freedmen's Bureau; however, Johnson vetoed the Freedmen's Bureau Bill in February 1866. Although Johnson had sympathy for the plight of the freedmen, he was against federal assistance. An attempt to override the veto failed on February 20, 1866. This veto shocked the congressional Radicals. In response, both the Senate and House passed a joint resolution not to allow any senator or representative seat admittance until Congress decided when Reconstruction was finished.\nSenator Lyman Trumbull of Illinois, leader of the moderate Republicans, took affront to the Black Codes. He proposed the first Civil Rights Act, because the abolition of slavery was empty if:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;laws are to be enacted and enforced depriving persons of African descent of privileges which are essential to freemen... A law that does not allow a colored person to go from one county to another, and one that does not allow him to hold property, to teach, to preach, are certainly laws in violation of the rights of a freeman... The purpose of this bill is to destroy all these discriminations.\nThe key to the bill was the opening section:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;All persons born in the United States\u00a0... are hereby declared to be citizens of the United States; and such citizens of every race and color, without regard to any previous condition of slavery\u00a0... shall have the same right in every State\u00a0... to make and enforce contracts, to sue, be parties, and give evidence, to inherit, purchase, lease, sell, hold, and convey real and personal property, and to full and equal benefit of all laws and proceedings for the security of person and property, as is enjoyed by white citizens, and shall be subject to like punishment, pains, and penalties and to none other, any law, statute, ordinance, regulation, or custom to the Contrary notwithstanding.\nThe bill did not give freedmen the right to vote. Congress quickly passed the Civil Rights Bill; the Senate on February 2 voted 33\u201312; the House on March 13 voted 111\u201338.\nJohnson's vetoes.\nAlthough strongly urged by moderates in Congress to sign the Civil Rights bill, Johnson broke decisively with them by vetoing it on March 27, 1866. His veto message objected to the measure because it conferred citizenship on the freedmen at a time when 11 out of 36 states were unrepresented and attempted to fix by federal law \"a perfect equality of the white and black races in every state of the Union\". Johnson said it was an invasion by federal authority of the rights of the states; it had no warrant in the Constitution and was contrary to all precedents. It was a \"stride toward centralization and the concentration of all legislative power in the national government\".\nThe Democratic Party, proclaiming itself the party of white men, North and South, supported Johnson. However, the Republicans in Congress overrode his veto (the Senate by the close vote of 33\u201315, and the House by 122\u201341) and the civil rights bill became law. Congress also passed a watered-down Freedmen's Bureau bill; Johnson quickly vetoed as he had done to the previous bill. Once again, however, Congress had enough support and overrode Johnson's veto.\nThe last moderate proposal was the Fourteenth Amendment, whose principal drafter was Representative John Bingham. It was designed to put the key provisions of the Civil Rights Act into the Constitution, but it went much further. It extended citizenship to everyone born in the United States (except Indians on reservations), penalized states that did not give the vote to freedmen, and most important, created new federal civil rights that could be protected by federal courts. It guaranteed the federal war debt would be paid (and promised the Confederate debt would never be paid). Johnson used his influence to block the amendment in the states since three-fourths of the states were required for ratification (the amendment was later ratified). The moderate effort to compromise with Johnson had failed, and a political fight broke out between the Republicans (both Radical and moderate) on one side, and on the other side, Johnson and his allies in the Democratic Party in the North, and the groupings (which used different names) in each Southern state.\nCongressional Reconstruction.\nConcerned by multiple reports of abuse of black freedmen by Southern white officials and plantation owners, Republicans in Congress took control of Reconstruction policies after the election of 1866. Johnson ignored the policy mandate, and he openly encouraged Southern states to deny ratification of the Fourteenth Amendment (except for Tennessee, all former Confederate states did refuse to ratify, as did the border states of Delaware, Maryland, and Kentucky). Radical Republicans in Congress, led by Stevens and Sumner, opened the way to suffrage for male freedmen. They were generally in control, although they had to compromise with the moderate Republicans (the Democrats in Congress had almost no power). Historians refer to this period as \"Radical Reconstruction\" or \"congressional Reconstruction\". The business spokesmen in the North generally opposed Radical proposals. Analysis of 34 major business newspapers showed that 12 discussed politics, and only one, \"Iron Age\", supported radicalism. The other 11 opposed a \"harsh\" Reconstruction policy, favored the speedy return of the Southern states to congressional representation, opposed legislation designed to protect the freedmen, and deplored the impeachment of President Andrew Johnson.\nThe South's White leaders, who held power in the immediate post-bellum era before the vote was granted to the freedmen, renounced secession and slavery, but not White supremacy. People who had previously held power were angered in 1867 when new elections were held. New Republican lawmakers were elected by a coalition of White Unionists, freedmen and Northerners who had settled in the South. Some leaders in the South tried to accommodate new conditions.\nConstitutional amendments.\nThree constitutional amendments, known as the Reconstruction amendments, were adopted. The Thirteenth Amendment abolishing slavery was ratified in 1865. The Fourteenth Amendment was proposed in 1866 and ratified in 1868, guaranteeing United States citizenship to all persons born or naturalized in the United States and granting them federal civil rights. The Fifteenth Amendment, proposed in late February 1869, and passed in early February 1870, decreed that the right to vote could not be denied because of \"race, color, or previous condition of servitude\". Left unaffected was that states would still determine voter registration and electoral laws. The amendments were directed at ending slavery and providing full citizenship to freedmen. Many northern congressmen believed that providing Black men with the right to vote would be the most rapid means of political education and training. Some viewed it as a panacea to resolve freedman's strife while relieving northerners of their responsibility of defending them.\nMany Blacks took an active part in voting and political life, and rapidly continued to build churches and community organizations. Following Reconstruction, White Democrats and insurgent groups used force to regain power in the state legislatures, and pass laws that effectively disenfranchised most Blacks and many poor Whites in the South. From 1890 to 1910, Southern states passed new state constitutions that completed the disenfranchisement of Blacks. U.S. Supreme Court rulings on these provisions upheld many of these new Southern state constitutions and laws, and most Blacks were prevented from voting in the South until the 1960s. Full federal enforcement of the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments did not reoccur until after passage of legislation in the mid-1960s as a result of the civil rights movement.\nStatutes.\nThe Reconstruction Acts, as originally passed, were initially called \"An act to provide for the more efficient Government of the Rebel States\". The legislation was enacted by the 39th Congress, on March 2, 1867. It was vetoed by President Johnson, and the veto then overridden by a two-thirds majority, in both the House and the Senate, the same day. Congress also clarified the scope of the federal writ of habeas corpus, to allow federal courts to vacate unlawful state court convictions or sentences, in 1867.\nMilitary Reconstruction.\nWith the Radicals in control, Congress passed the Reconstruction Acts on July 19, 1867. The first Reconstruction Act, authored by Oregon Sen. George Henry Williams, a Radical Republican, placed 10 of the former Confederate states\u2014all but Tennessee\u2014under military control, grouping them into five military districts:\n20,000 U.S. troops were deployed to enforce the act.\nThe five border states that had not joined the Confederacy were not subject to military Reconstruction. West Virginia, which had seceded from Virginia in 1863, and Tennessee, which had already been re-admitted in 1866, were not included in the military districts. Federal troops, however, were kept in West Virginia through 1868 in order to control civil unrest in several areas throughout the state. Federal troops were removed from Kentucky and Missouri in 1866.\nThe 10 Southern state governments were re-constituted under the direct control of the United States Army. One major purpose was to recognize and protect the right of African Americans to vote. There was little to no combat, but rather a state of martial law in which the military closely supervised local government, supervised elections, and tried to protect office holders and freedmen from violence. Blacks were enrolled as voters; former Confederate leaders were excluded for a limited period. No one state was entirely representative. Randolph Campbell describes what happened in Texas:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The first critical step\u00a0... was the registration of voters according to guidelines established by Congress and interpreted by Generals Sheridan and Charles Griffin. The Reconstruction Acts called for registering all adult males, white and black, except those who had ever sworn an oath to uphold the Constitution of the United States and then engaged in rebellion... Sheridan interpreted these restrictions stringently, barring from registration not only all pre-1861 officials of state and local governments who had supported the Confederacy but also all city officeholders and even minor functionaries such as sextons of cemeteries. In May Griffin\u00a0... appointed a three-man board of registrars for each county, making his choices on the advice of known scalawags and local Freedmen's Bureau agents. In every county where practicable a freedman served as one of the three registrars... Final registration amounted to approximately 59,633 whites and 49,479 blacks. It is impossible to say how many whites were rejected or refused to register (estimates vary from 7,500 to 12,000), but blacks, who constituted only about 30 percent of the state's population, were significantly over-represented at 45 percent of all voters.\nState constitutional conventions: 1867\u20131869.\nThe 11 Southern states held constitutional conventions giving Black men the right to vote, where the factions divided into the Radical, \"conservative\", and in-between delegates. The Radicals were a coalition: 40% were Southern White Republicans; 25% were White and 34% were Black. In addition to expanding the franchise, they pressed for provisions designed to promote economic growth, especially financial aid to rebuild the ruined railroad system. The conventions set up systems of free public schools funded by tax dollars, but did not require them to be racially integrated.\nUntil 1872, most former Confederate or prewar Southern office holders were disqualified from voting or holding office; all but 500 top Confederate leaders were pardoned by the Amnesty Act of 1872. \"Proscription\" was the policy of disqualifying as many ex-Confederates as possible. For example, in 1865 Tennessee had disenfranchised 80,000 ex-Confederates. However, proscription was soundly rejected by the Black element, which insisted on universal suffrage. The issue would come up repeatedly in several states, especially in Texas and Virginia. In Virginia, an effort was made to disqualify for public office every man who had served in the Confederate Army even as a private, and any civilian farmer who sold food to the Confederate States Army. Disenfranchising Southern Whites was also opposed by moderate Republicans in the North, who felt that ending proscription would bring the South closer to a republican form of government based on the consent of the governed, as called for by the Constitution and the Declaration of Independence. Strong measures that were called for in order to forestall a return to the defunct Confederacy increasingly seemed out of place, and the role of the United States Army and controlling politics in the state was troublesome. Historian Mark Summers states that increasingly \"the disenfranchisers had to fall back on the contention that denial of the vote was meant as punishment, and a lifelong punishment at that\u00a0... Month by month, the un-republican character of the regime looked more glaring.\"\nElection of 1868.\nDuring the Civil War, many in the North believed that fighting for the Union was a noble cause\u2014for the preservation of the Union and the end of slavery. After the war ended, with the North victorious, the fear among Radicals was that President Johnson too quickly assumed that slavery and Confederate nationalism were dead and that the Southern states could return. The Radicals sought out a candidate for president who represented their viewpoint.\nIn May 1868, the Republicans unanimously chose Ulysses S. Grant as their presidential candidate, and Schuyler Colfax as their vice-presidential candidate. Grant won favor with the Radicals after he allowed Edwin Stanton, a Radical, to be reinstated as secretary of war. As early as 1862, during the Civil War, Grant had appointed the Ohio military chaplain John Eaton to protect and gradually incorporate refugee slaves in west Tennessee and northern Mississippi into the Union war effort and pay them for their labor. It was the beginning of his vision for the Freedmen's Bureau. Grant opposed President Johnson by supporting the Reconstruction Acts passed by the Radicals.\nIn northern cities Grant contended with a strong immigrant, and particularly in New York City an Irish, anti-Reconstructionist Democratic bloc. Republicans sought to make inroads campaigning for the Irish taken prisoner in the Fenian raids into Canada, and calling on the Johnson administration to recognize a lawful state of war between Ireland and England. In 1867 Grant personally intervened with David Bell and Michael Scanlon to move their paper, the \"Irish Republic\", articulate in its support for black equality, to New York from Chicago.\nThe Democrats, having abandoned Johnson, nominated former governor Horatio Seymour of New York for president and Francis P. Blair of Missouri for vice president. The Democrats advocated the immediate restoration of former Confederate states to the Union and amnesty from \"all past political offenses\".\nGrant won the popular vote by 300,000 votes out of 5,716,082 votes cast, receiving an Electoral College landslide of 214 votes to Seymour's 80. Seymour received a majority of white votes, but Grant was aided by 500,000 votes cast by blacks, winning him 52.7 percent of the popular vote. He lost Louisiana and Georgia primarily due to Ku Klux Klan violence against African-American voters. At the age of 46, Grant was the youngest president yet elected, and the first president elected after the nation had outlawed slavery.\nGrant's presidential Reconstruction.\nEffective civil rights executive.\nPresident Ulysses S. Grant was considered an effective civil rights executive, concerned about the plight of African Americans. Grant met with prominent black leaders for consultation and signed a bill into law, on March 18, 1869, that guaranteed equal rights to both blacks and whites, to serve on juries, and hold office, in Washington D.C. In 1870 Grant signed into law a Naturalization Act that opened a path to citizenship for foreign-born Black residents in the US. Additionally, Grant's Postmaster General, John Creswell used his patronage powers to integrate the postal system and appointed a record number of African-American men and women as postal workers across the nation, while also expanding many of the mail routes. Grant appointed Republican abolitionist and champion of black education Hugh Lennox Bond as U.S. Circuit Court judge.\nFinal three Reconstruction states admitted.\nImmediately upon inauguration in 1869, Grant bolstered Reconstruction by prodding Congress to readmit Virginia, Mississippi, and Texas into the Union, while ensuring their state constitutions protected every citizen's voting rights.\nGrant advocated the ratification of the Fifteenth Amendment that said states could not disenfranchise African Americans. Within a year, the three remaining states\u2014Mississippi, Virginia, and Texas\u2014adopted the new amendment\u2014and were admitted to Congress. Grant put military pressure on Georgia to reinstate its black legislators and adopt the new amendment. Georgia complied, and on February 24, 1871, its senators were seated in Congress, with all the former Confederate states represented. Southern Reconstructed states were controlled by Republicans and former slaves. Eight years later, in 1877, the Democratic Party had full control of the region and Reconstruction was dead.\nDepartment of Justice created.\nIn 1870, to enforce Reconstruction, Congress and Grant created the Justice Department that allowed the Attorney General Amos Akerman and the first Solicitor General Benjamin Bristow to prosecute the Klan. In Grant's two terms he strengthened Washington's legal capabilities to directly intervene to protect citizenship rights even if the states ignored the problem.\nEnforcement Acts (1870\u20131871).\nCongress and Grant passed a series (three) of powerful civil rights Enforcement Acts between 1870 and 1871, designed to protect blacks and Reconstruction governments. These were criminal codes that protected the freedmen's right to vote, to hold office, to serve on juries, and receive equal protection of laws. Most important, they authorized the federal government to intervene when states did not act. Urged by Grant and his Attorney General Amos T. Akerman, the strongest of these laws was the Ku Klux Klan Act, passed on April 20, 1871, that authorized the president to impose martial law and suspend the writ of \"habeas corpus\".\nGrant was so adamant about the passage of the Ku Klux Klan Act, he earlier had sent a message to Congress, on March 23, 1871, in which he said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGrant also recommended the enforcement of laws in all parts of the United States to protect life, liberty, and property.\nProsecution of the Ku Klux Klan.\nGrant's Justice Department destroyed the Ku Klux Klan, but during both of his terms, Blacks lost their political strength in the Southern United States. By October, Grant suspended \"habeas corpus\" in part of South Carolina and he also sent federal troops to help marshals, who initiated prosecutions of Klan members. Grant's Attorney General, Amos T. Akerman, who replaced Hoar, was zealous in his attempt to destroy the Klan. Akerman and South Carolina's U.S. marshal arrested over 470 Klan members, but hundreds of Klansmen, including the Klan's wealthy leaders, fled the state. Akerman returned over 3,000 indictments of the Klan throughout the South and obtained 600 convictions for the worst offenders. By 1872, Grant had crushed the Klan, and African Americans peacefully voted in record numbers in elections in the South. Attorney General George H. Williams, Akerman's replacement, suspended his prosecutions of the Klan in North Carolina and South Carolina in the Spring of 1873, but prior to the election of 1874, he changed course and prosecuted the Klan. Civil rights prosecutions continued but with fewer yearly cases and convictions.\nAmnesty Act of 1872.\nIn addition to fighting for African American civil rights, Grant wanted to reconcile with white southerners, out of a spirit of Appomattox. To placate the South, in May 1872, Grant signed the Amnesty Act, which restored political rights to former Confederates, except for a few hundred former Confederate officers. Grant wanted people to vote and practice free speech despite their \"views, color or nativity\".\nCivil Rights Act of 1875.\nThe Civil Rights Act of 1875 was one of the last major acts of Congress and Grant to preserve Reconstruction and equality for African Americans. The initial bill was created by Senator Charles Sumner. Grant endorsed the measure, despite his previous feud with Sumner, signing it into law on March 1, 1875. The law, ahead of its times, outlawed discrimination for blacks in public accommodations, schools, transportation, and selecting juries. Although weakly enforceable, the law spread fear among whites opposed to interracial justice and was overturned by the Supreme Court in 1883. The later enforceable Civil Rights Act of 1964 borrowed many of the earlier 1875's law's provisions.\nCountered election fraud.\nTo counter vote fraud in the Democratic stronghold of New York City, Grant sent in tens of thousands of armed, uniformed federal marshals and other election officials to regulate the 1870 and subsequent elections. Democrats across the North then mobilized to defend their base and attacked Grant's entire set of policies. On October 21, 1876, President Grant deployed troops to protect Black and White Republican voters in Petersburg, Virginia.\nNational support of Reconstruction declines.\nGrant's support from Congress and the nation declined due to scandals within his administration and the political resurgence of the Democrats in the North and South. Anti-Reconstruction whites claimed that wealthy white landowners had lost power, and they blamed governmental scandals in the South on it. Meanwhile, white northern Republicans were becoming more conservative. Republicans and Black Americans lost power in the South. By 1870, most Republicans felt the war goals had been achieved, and they turned their attention to other issues such as economic policies. White Americans were in almost full control again by the start of the 1900s and did not enforce Black voting rights. The United States government eventually pulled all its troops from the Southern states.\nAfrican American officeholders.\nRepublicans took control of all Southern state governorships and state legislatures, except for Virginia. The Republican coalition elected numerous African Americans to local, state, and national offices; though they did not dominate any electoral offices, Black men as representatives voting in state and federal legislatures marked a drastic social change. At the beginning of 1867, no African American in the South held political office, but within three or four years \"about 15 percent of the officeholders in the South were Black\u2014a larger proportion than in 1990\". Most of those offices were at the local level. In 1860, Blacks constituted the majority of the population in Mississippi and South Carolina, 47% in Louisiana, 45% in Alabama, and 44% in Georgia and Florida, so their political influence was still far less than their percentage of the population.\nAbout 137 Black officeholders had lived outside the South before the Civil War. Some who had escaped from slavery to the North and had become educated returned to help the South advance in the postwar era. Others were free people of color before the war, who had achieved education and positions of leadership elsewhere. Other African American men elected to office were already leaders in their communities, including a number of preachers. As happened in White communities, not all leadership depended upon wealth and literacy.\nThere were few African Americans elected or appointed to national office. African Americans voted for both White and Black candidates. The Fifteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution guaranteed only that voting could not be restricted on the basis of race, color, or previous condition of servitude. From 1868 on, campaigns and elections were surrounded by violence as White insurgents and paramilitaries tried to suppress the Black vote, and fraud was rampant. Many white southerners who had been pro-slavery were angry with governments that had African Americans in office. Furious white Southerners told the rumor that Reconstruction was secretly promoting Black Americans having full control over whites. Many congressional elections in the South were contested. Even states with majority-African-American populations often elected only one or two African American representatives to Congress. Exceptions included South Carolina; at the end of Reconstruction, four of its five congressmen were African Americans.\nSocial and economic factors.\nReligion.\nFreedmen were very active in forming their own churches, mostly Baptist or Methodist, and giving their ministers both moral and political leadership roles. In a process of self-segregation, practically all Blacks left White churches so that few racially integrated congregations remained (apart from some Catholic churches in Louisiana). They started many new Black Baptist churches and soon, new Black state associations.\nFour main groups competed with each other across the South to form new Methodist churches composed of freedmen. They were the African Methodist Episcopal Church; the African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church, both independent Black denominations founded in Philadelphia and New York, respectively; the Colored Methodist Episcopal Church (which was sponsored by the White Methodist Episcopal Church, South) and the well-funded Methodist Episcopal Church (predominantly White Methodists of the North). The Methodist Church had split before the war due to disagreements about slavery. By 1871, the Northern Methodists had 88,000 Black members in the South, and had opened numerous schools for them.\nBlacks in the South made up a core element of the Republican Party. Their ministers had powerful political roles that were distinctive since they did not depend on White support, in contrast to teachers, politicians, businessmen, and tenant farmers. Acting on the principle as stated by Charles H. Pearce, an AME minister in Florida: \"A man in this state cannot do his whole duty as a minister except he looks out for the political interests of his people.\" More than 100 Black ministers were elected to state legislatures during Reconstruction, as well as several to Congress and one, Hiram Rhodes Revels, to the U.S. Senate.\nIn a highly controversial action during the war, the Northern Methodists used the Army to seize control of Methodist churches in large cities, over the vehement protests of the Southern Methodists. Historian Ralph Morrow reports:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A War Department order of November 1863, applicable to the Southwestern states of the Confederacy, authorized the Northern Methodists to occupy \"all houses of worship belonging to the Methodist Episcopal Church South in which a loyal minister, appointed by a loyal bishop of said church, does not officiate.\"\nAcross the North, several denominations\u2014especially the Methodists, Congregationalists, and Presbyterians, as well as the Quakers\u2014strongly supported Radical policies. The focus on social problems paved the way for the Social Gospel movement. Matthew Simpson, a Methodist bishop, played a leading role in mobilizing the Northern Methodists for the cause. Biographer Robert D. Clark called him the \"High Priest of the Radical Republicans\". The Methodist Ministers Association of Boston, meeting two weeks after Lincoln's assassination, called for a hard line against the Confederate leadership:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Resolved, that no terms should be made with traitors, no compromise with rebels... That we hold the national authority bound by the most solemn obligation to God and man to bring all the civil and military leaders of the rebellion to trial by due course of law, and when they are clearly convicted, to execute them.\nThe denominations all sent missionaries, teachers and activists to the South to help the freedmen. Only the Methodists made many converts, however. Activists sponsored by the Northern Methodist Church played a major role in the Freedmen's Bureau, notably in such key educational roles as the bureau's state superintendent or assistant superintendent of education for Virginia, Florida, Alabama, and South Carolina.\nMany Americans interpreted great events in religious terms. Historian Wilson Fallin Jr. contrasts the interpretation of the Civil War and Reconstruction in White versus Black Baptist sermons in Alabama. White Baptists expressed the view that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;God had chastised them and given them a special mission\u2014to maintain orthodoxy, strict biblicism, personal piety, and traditional race relations. Slavery, they insisted, had not been sinful. Rather, emancipation was a historical tragedy and the end of Reconstruction was a clear sign of God's favor.\nIn sharp contrast, Black Baptists interpreted the Civil War, emancipation, and Reconstruction as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;God's gift of freedom. They appreciated opportunities to exercise their independence, to worship in their own way, to affirm their worth and dignity, and to proclaim the fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man. Most of all, they could form their own churches, associations, and conventions. These institutions offered self-help and racial uplift, and provided places where the gospel of liberation could be proclaimed. As a result, black preachers continued to insist that God would protect and help them; God would be their rock in a stormy land.\nPublic schools.\nHistorian James D. Anderson argues that the freed slaves were the first Southerners \"to campaign for universal, state-supported public education\". Blacks in the Republican coalition played a critical role in establishing the principle in state constitutions for the first time during congressional Reconstruction. Some slaves had learned to read from White playmates or colleagues before formal education was allowed by law; African Americans started \"native schools\" before the end of the war; Sabbath schools were another widespread means that freedmen developed to teach literacy. When they gained suffrage, Black politicians took this commitment to public education to state constitutional conventions.\nThe Republicans created a system of public schools, which were segregated by race everywhere except New Orleans. Generally, elementary and a few secondary schools were built in most cities, and occasionally in the countryside, but the South had few cities.\nThe rural areas faced many difficulties opening and maintaining public schools. In the country, the public school was often a one-room affair that attracted about half the younger children. The teachers were poorly paid, and their pay was often in arrears. Conservatives contended the rural schools were too expensive and unnecessary for a region where the vast majority of people were cotton or tobacco farmers. They had no expectation of better education for their residents. One historian found that the schools were less effective than they might have been because \"poverty, the inability of the states to collect taxes, and inefficiency and corruption in many places prevented successful operation of the schools\". After Reconstruction ended and White elected officials disenfranchised Blacks and imposed Jim Crow laws, they consistently underfunded Black institutions, including the schools.\nAfter the war, Northern missionaries founded numerous private academies and colleges for freedmen across the South. In addition, every state founded state colleges for freedmen, such as Alcorn State University in Mississippi. The normal schools and state colleges produced generations of teachers who were integral to the education of African American children under the segregated system. By the end of the century, the majority of African Americans were literate.\nIn the late 19th century, the federal government established land grant legislation to provide funding for higher education across the United States. Learning that Blacks were excluded from land grant colleges in the South, in 1890 the federal government insisted that Southern states establish Black state institutions as land grant colleges to provide for Black higher education, in order to continue to receive funds for their already established White schools. Some states classified their Black state colleges as land grant institutions. Former Congressman John Roy Lynch wrote: \"there are very many liberal, fair-minded and influential Democrats in the state [Mississippi] who are strongly in favor of having the state provide for the liberal education of both races\".\nAccording to a 2020 study by economist Trevon Logan, increases in Black politicians led to greater tax revenue, which was put towards public education spending (and land tenancy reforms). Logan finds that this led to greater literacy among Black men. A 2025 study found that access to educational opportunities for recently freed people during Reconstruction led to improved occupational standing for the affected individuals.\nRailroad subsidies and payoffs.\nEvery Southern state subsidized railroads, which modernizers believed could haul the South out of isolation and poverty. Millions of dollars in bonds and subsidies were fraudulently pocketed. One ring in North Carolina spent $200,000 in bribing the legislature and obtained millions of state dollars for its railroads. Instead of building new track, however, it used the funds to speculate in bonds, reward friends with extravagant fees, and enjoy lavish trips to Europe. Taxes were quadrupled across the South to pay off the railroad bonds and the school costs.\nThere were complaints among taxpayers because taxes had historically been low, as the planter elite was not committed to public infrastructure or public education. Taxes historically had been much lower in the South than in the North, reflecting the lack of government investment by the communities. Nevertheless, thousands of miles of lines were built as the Southern system expanded from in 1870 to in 1890. The lines were owned and directed overwhelmingly by Northerners. Railroads helped create a mechanically skilled group of craftsmen and broke the isolation of much of the region. Passengers were few, however, and apart from hauling the cotton crop when it was harvested, there was little freight traffic. As Franklin explains: \"numerous railroads fed at the public trough by bribing legislators\u00a0... and through the use and misuse of state funds\". According to one businessman, the effect \"was to drive capital from the state, paralyze industry, and demoralize labor\".\nThe Southern country store.\nOutside the South, there were plenty of small towns where merchants and storekeepers could prosper. In the antebellum South there was no counterpart. The Civil War had devastated the operation of plantations as cotton prices fell and emancipation disrupted slavers' access to highly exploitable labor. Before the Civil War plantation owners handled the cotton or tobacco matters and met consumer needs of their family and slaves. They dealt directly with wholesalers (called \"factors\") in far-off cities such as Baltimore, Louisville, and St Louis. In poor white areas there were occasional merchants before 1865. When slavery was abolished the rural South urgently needed merchants. Ambitious men suddenly appeared after 1865 and played a leading role in refashioning the economic and social fabric of the South. These merchants served as crucial intermediaries between rural communities and larger markets. Many if not most were Jewish peddlers and merchants; some had been in the South for decades and others were newly arrived from the North. They had a good rapport with their Black customers.\nMerchants used the newly built railroads to link the rural cotton or tobacco economy to the national economy. They worked with wholesalers in the handful of Southern cities to bring in northern consumer products. Legally they depended on new state laws creating the \"crop lien system\". The merchant legally owned the entire commercial crop (usually cotton) from planting to harvest. He sold supplies on credit. When the crop was harvested the farmer brought it all to the merchant who then sold it, paid what the farmer owed the owner of the land, cleared the farmer's debt to the store, and returned the surplus if any. By providing credit to the poor white and black farmers, they exerted more influence every week than the white land owners.\nThe role of the country store extended beyond simple trade. It was a general store that provided a wide range of goods\u2014pills, petticoats and plows and a hundred other items. The local federal post office was inside and there were benches outside for the bystanders. The farmers produced most of their own food, but they did buy necessities. In one Florida store with a largely Black clientele, the items most often purchased were corn, salt pork, sugar, lard, coffee, syrup, rice, flour, cloth, shoes, shotguns, shells, and patent medicines. Everything had a price except the one item in greatest demand: gossip was free.\nMerchants took food and meat in trade and resold it. These merchants were not just shopkeepers but also acted as bankers and brokers, extending credit to poor farmers and hand pressed landowners. The customers needed supplies every week, but had an income only at the end of the harvest season. The merchants gave them credit in terms of the expected size of their cotton or tobacco crops. Sharecroppers had to give half or more of the crop to the landowner. The rest at harvest time went to the merchant who would sell advantageously, and close the credit accounts. Merchants were thus the liaison between rural areas and the few cities in the postwar South. They handled the flow of goods, information, and credit. Merchants depended on credit from urban wholesalers, and like the sharecroppers they paid off their own debts with proceeds from the cotton or tobacco harvests.\nIn the paternalistic mill villages that opened in the South in the late 19th century, the textile mills provided jobs for all family members, rented them cheap housing and paid then \u2212in script they used to buy food and supplies in company stores. Independent merchants were few.\nTaxation during Reconstruction.\nReconstruction changed the means of taxation in the South. In the U.S. from the earliest days until today, a major source of state revenue was the property tax. In the South, wealthy landowners were allowed to self-assess the value of their own land. These fraudulent assessments were almost valueless, and pre-war property tax collections were lacking due to property value misrepresentation. State revenues came from fees and from sales taxes on slave auctions. Some states assessed property owners by a combination of land value and a capitation tax, a tax on each worker employed. This tax was often assessed in a way to discourage a free labor market, where a slave was assessed at 75 cents, while a free White was assessed at a dollar or more, and a free African American at $3 or more. Some revenue also came from poll taxes. These taxes were more than poor people could pay, with the designed and inevitable consequence that they did not vote.\nDuring Reconstruction, the state legislature mobilized to provide for public needs more than had previous governments: establishing public schools and investing in infrastructure, as well as charitable institutions such as hospitals and asylums. They set out to increase taxes, which were unusually low. The planters had provided privately for their own needs. There was some fraudulent spending in the postwar years; a collapse in state credit because of huge deficits, forced the states to increase property tax rates. In places, the rate went up to 10 times higher\u2014despite the poverty of the region. The planters had not invested in infrastructure and much had been destroyed during the war. In part, the new tax system was designed to force owners of large plantations with huge tracts of uncultivated land either to sell or to have it confiscated for failure to pay taxes. The taxes would serve as a market-based system for redistributing the land to the landless freedmen and White poor. Mississippi, for instance, was mostly frontier, with 90% of the bottom lands in the interior undeveloped.\nThe following table shows property tax rates for South Carolina and Mississippi. Many local town and county assessments effectively doubled the tax rates reported in the table. These taxes were still levied upon the landowners' own sworn testimony as to the value of their land, which remained the dubious and exploitable system used by wealthy landholders in the South well into the 20th century.\nCalled upon to pay taxes on their property, essentially for the first time, angry plantation owners revolted. The conservatives shifted their focus away from race to taxes. Former Congressman John R. Lynch, a Black Republican leader from Mississippi, later wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The argument made by the taxpayers, however, was plausible and it may be conceded that, upon the whole, they were about right; for no doubt it would have been much easier upon the taxpayers to have increased at that time the interest-bearing debt of the state than to have increased the tax rate. The latter course, however, had been adopted and could not then be changed unless of course they wanted to change them.\nNational financial issues.\nThe Civil War had been financed primarily by issuing short-term and long-term bonds and loans, plus inflation caused by printing paper money, plus new taxes. Wholesale prices had more than doubled, and reduction of inflation was a priority for Secretary McCulloch. A high priority, and by far the most controversial, was the currency question. The old paper currency issued by state banks had been withdrawn, and Confederate currency was worthless. The national banks had issued $207\u00a0million in currency, which was backed by gold and silver. The federal treasury had issued $428\u00a0million in greenbacks, which was legal tender but not backed by gold or silver. In addition about $275\u00a0million of coin was in circulation. The new administration policy announced in October 1865 would be to make all the paper convertible into specie, if Congress so voted. The House of Representatives passed the Alley Resolution on December 18, 1865, by a vote of 144 to 6. In the Senate it was a different matter, for the key player was Senator John Sherman, who said that inflation contraction was not nearly as important as refunding the short-term and long-term national debt. The war had been largely financed by national debt, in addition to taxation and inflation. The national debt stood at $2.8\u00a0billion. By October 1865, most of it in short-term and temporary loans. Wall Street bankers typified by Jay Cooke believed that the economy was about to grow rapidly, thanks to the development of agriculture through the Homestead Act, the expansion of railroads, especially rebuilding the devastated Southern railroads and opening the transcontinental railroad line to the West Coast, and especially the flourishing of manufacturing during the war. The gold premium over greenbacks was $145 in greenbacks to $100 in gold, and the optimists thought that the heavy demand for currency in an era of prosperity would return the ratio to 100. A compromise was reached in April 1866, that limited the treasury to a currency contraction of only $10\u00a0million over six months. Meanwhile, the Senate refunded the entire national debt, but the House failed to act. By early 1867, postwar prosperity was a reality, and the optimists wanted an end to contraction, which Congress ordered in January 1868. Meanwhile, the Treasury issued new bonds at a lower interest rate to refinance the redemption of short-term debt. While the old state bank notes were disappearing from circulation, new national bank notes, backed by species, were expanding. By 1868 inflation was minimal.\nCulture.\nBaseball rose to prominence during the Civil War, as it gave soldiers from around the country a common pastime. In the aftermath of the war, Northerners who were anxious to reconcile the nation sought to use the unifying powers of the sport mainly among white Americans, resulting in the development of racial segregation in the sport.\nEnding Reconstruction.\nCongressional investigation into Reconstruction states 1872.\nOn April 20, 1871, prior to the passage of the Ku Klux Klan Act (\"Last of three Enforcement Acts\"), on the same day, the U.S. Congress launched a 21-member investigation committee on the status of the Southern Reconstruction states North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, Mississippi, Alabama, and Florida. Congressional members on the committee included Rep. Benjamin Butler, Sen. Zachariah Chandler, and Sen. Francis P. Blair. Subcommittee members traveled into the South to interview the people living in their respective states. Those interviewed included top-ranking officials, such as Wade Hampton III, former South Carolina Gov. James L. Orr, and Nathan Bedford Forrest, a former Confederate general and prominent Ku Klux Klan leader (Forrest denied in his congressional testimony being a member). Other Southerners interviewed included farmers, doctors, merchants, teachers, and clergymen. The committee heard numerous reports of White violence against Blacks, while many Whites denied Klan membership or knowledge of violent activities. The majority report by Republicans concluded that the government would not tolerate any Southern \"conspiracy\" to resist violently the congressional Reconstruction. The committee completed its 13-volume report in February 1872. While President Ulysses S. Grant had been able to suppress the KKK through the Enforcement Acts, other paramilitary insurgents organized, including the White League in 1874, active in Louisiana; and the Red Shirts, with chapters active in Mississippi and the Carolinas. They used intimidation and outright attacks to run Republicans out of office and repress voting by Blacks, leading to White Democrats regaining power by the elections of the mid-to-late 1870s.\nSouthern Democrats.\nWhile Republican whites supported measures for black civil rights, other whites typically opposed these measures. Some supported armed attacks to suppress blacks. They self-consciously defended their own actions within the framework of a white American discourse of resistance against tyrannical government, and they broadly succeeded in convincing many fellow White citizens, says Steedman.\nThe opponents of Reconstruction formed state political parties, affiliated with the national Democratic Party and often named the \"Conservative Party\". They supported or tolerated violent paramilitary groups, such as the White League in Louisiana and the Red Shirts in Mississippi and the Carolinas, that assassinated and intimidated both Black and White Republican leaders at election time. Historian George C. Rable called such groups the \"military arm of the Democratic Party\". By the mid-1870s, the \"conservatives\" and Democrats had aligned with the national Democratic Party, which enthusiastically supported their cause even as the national Republican Party was losing interest in Southern affairs.\nHistorian Walter L. Fleming, associated with the early 20th-century Dunning School, describes the mounting anger of Southern Whites:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Negro troops, even at their best, were everywhere considered offensive by the native whites... The Negro soldier, impudent by reason of his new freedom, his new uniform, and his new gun, was more than Southern temper could tranquilly bear, and race conflicts were frequent.\nOften, these White Southerners identified as the \"Conservative Party\" or the \"Democratic and Conservative Party\" in order to distinguish themselves from the national Democratic Party and to obtain support from former Whigs. These parties sent delegates to the 1868 Democratic National Convention and abandoned their separate names by 1873 or 1874.\nMost White members of both the planter and business class and common farmer class of the South opposed Reconstruction, Black civil rights and military rule and sought white supremacy. Democrats nominated some Blacks for political office and tried to entice other Blacks from the Republican side. When these attempts to combine with the Blacks failed, the planters joined the common farmers in simply trying to displace the Republican governments. The planters and their business allies dominated the self-styled \"conservative\" coalition that finally took control in the South. They were paternalistic toward the Blacks but feared they would use power to raise taxes and slow business development.\nFleming described the first results of the insurgent movement as \"good\", and the later ones as \"both good and bad\". According to Fleming (1907), the KKK \"quieted the Negroes, made life and property safer, gave protection to women, stopped burnings, forced the Radical leaders to be more moderate, made the Negroes work better, drove the worst of the Radical leaders from the country and started the whites on the way to gain political supremacy\". The evil result, Fleming said, was that lawless elements \"made use of the organization as a cloak to cover their misdeeds\u00a0... The lynching habits of today [1907] are largely due to conditions, social and legal, growing out of Reconstruction.\" Historians have noted that the peak of lynchings took place near the turn of the century, decades after Reconstruction ended, as Whites were imposing Jim Crow laws and passing new state constitutions that disenfranchised the Blacks. The lynchings were used for intimidation and social control, with a frequency associated more with economic stresses and the settlement of sharecropper accounts at the end of the season, than for any other reason.\nIn 1917, Ellis Paxson Oberholtzer explained:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Outrages upon the former slaves in the South there were in plenty. Their sufferings were many. But white men, too, were victims of lawless violence, and in all portions of the North and the late \"rebel\" states. Not a political campaign passed without the exchange of bullets, the breaking of skulls with sticks and stones, the firing of rival club-houses. Republican clubs marched the streets of Philadelphia, amid revolver shots and brickbats, to save the Negroes from the \"rebel\" savages in Alabama... The project to make voters out of black men was not so much for their social elevation as for the further punishment of the Southern white people\u2014for the capture of offices for Radical scamps and the entrenchment of the Radical party in power for a long time to come in the South and in the country at large.\nAt election times, whites people engaged in increased violence in attempts to run Republicans out of office and suppress Black voting. The victims of this violence were overwhelmingly African American, as in the Colfax Massacre of 1873. After federal suppression of the Klan in the early 1870s, white insurgent groups tried to avoid open conflict with federal forces. In 1874, in the Battle of Liberty Place, the White League entered New Orleans with 5,000 members and defeated the police and militia, to occupy federal offices for three days in an attempt to overturn the disputed government of William Pitt Kellogg, but they retreated before federal troops reached the city. None was prosecuted. Their election-time tactics included violent intimidation of African American and Republican voters prior to elections, while avoiding conflict with the U.S. Army or the state militias and then withdrawing completely on election day. White supremacist violence continued in both the North and South; the White Liners movement to elect candidates dedicated to white supremacy reached as far as Ohio in 1875.\nHistorian Daniel Byman argues that white supremacist violence played a key role in the failure of Reconstruction. White supremacist groups such as the Ku Klux Klan (KKK) and the Red Shirts engaged in terroristic acts against Black voters and white Republicans. They used assassinations, violence, and economic means to undermine and devastate Reconstruction efforts. He estimates that perhaps tens of thousands of Black Americans were murdered during this period. Byman argues that the federal government's failure to enforce Reconstruction policies enabled these white supremacy groups. The federal government did not commit enough military resources, and this enabled white supremacist groups to consolidate power. Reconstruction culminated in the Compromise of 1877 and the rollback of Black political rights.\nRedemption 1873\u20131877.\nThe Redeemers were the Southern wing of the Bourbon Democrats, the classically liberal, pro-business faction of the Democratic Party. They were a coalition which sought to regain political power, reestablish white supremacy, and oust the Radical Republicans from influence. Led by rich former planters, businessmen, and professionals, they dominated Southern politics in most areas from the 1870s to 1910.\nRepublicans split nationally: election of 1872.\nAs early as 1868, Supreme Court Chief Justice Salmon P. Chase, a leading Radical during the war, concluded that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Congress was right in not limiting, by its Reconstruction acts, the right of suffrage to Whites; but wrong in the exclusion from suffrage of certain classes of citizens and all unable to take its prescribed retrospective oath, and wrong also in the establishment of despotic military governments for the states and in authorizing military commissions for the trial of civilians in time of peace. There should have been as little military government as possible; no military commissions; no classes excluded from suffrage; and no oath except one of faithful obedience and support to the Constitution and laws, and of sincere attachment to the constitutional government of the United States.\nBy 1872, President Ulysses S. Grant had alienated large numbers of leading Republicans, including many Radicals, by the corruption of his administration and his use of federal soldiers to prop up Radical state regimes in the South. The opponents, called \"Liberal Republicans\", included founders of the party who expressed dismay that the party had succumbed to corruption. They were further wearied by the continued insurgent violence of Whites against Blacks in the South, especially around every election cycle, which demonstrated that the war was not over and changes were fragile. Leaders included editors of some of the nation's most powerful newspapers. Charles Sumner, embittered by the corruption of the Grant administration, joined the new party, which nominated editor Horace Greeley. The loosely organized Democratic Party reluctantly endorsed Greeley and the Liberal Republican platform at their convention.\nGrant made up for the defections by new gains among Union veterans and by strong support from the \"Stalwart\" faction of his party (which depended on his patronage), and the Southern Republican Party. Grant won with 55.6% of the vote to Greeley's 43.8%. The Liberal Republican Party vanished and many former supporters\u2014even former abolitionists\u2014abandoned the cause of Reconstruction.\nThe Republican coalition splinters in the South.\nIn the South, political and racial tensions built up inside the Republican Party as they were attacked by the Democrats. In 1868, Georgia Democrats, with support from some Republicans, expelled all 28 Black Republican members from the state house, arguing Blacks were eligible to vote but not to hold office. In most states, the more Whiggish Republicans fought for control with the more Radical Republicans and their Black allies. Most of the 430 Republican newspapers in the South were edited by native Southerners\u2014only 20 percent were edited by northerners. White businessmen generally boycotted Republican papers, which survived through government patronage. Nevertheless, in the increasingly bitter battles inside the Republican Party, those who supported Reconstruction usually lost; many of the disgruntled losers switched over to the Whig-leaning or Democratic side. In Mississippi, the Whiggish faction led by James Lusk Alcorn was decisively defeated by the Radical faction led by Adelbert Ames. The party lost support steadily as many supporters of Reconstruction left it; few recruits were acquired. The most bitter contest took place inside the Republican Party in Arkansas, where the two sides armed their forces and confronted each other in the streets; no actual combat took place in the Brooks\u2013Baxter War. The faction led by Elisha Baxter finally prevailed when the White House intervened, but both sides were badly weakened, and the Democrats soon came to power.\nMeanwhile, in state after state the freedmen were demanding a bigger share of the offices and patronage, squeezing out white allies but never commanding the numbers equivalent to their population proportion. By the mid-1870s: \"The hard realities of Southern political life had taught the lesson that black constituents needed to be represented by black officials.\" The financial depression increased the pressure on Reconstruction governments, dissolving progress.\nFinally, some of the more prosperous freedmen were joining the Democrats, as they were angered at the failure of the Republicans to help them acquire land. The South was \"sparsely settled\"; only 10 percent of Louisiana was cultivated, and 90 percent of Mississippi bottom land was undeveloped in areas away from the river fronts, but freedmen often did not have the stake to get started. They hoped that the government would help them acquire land which they could work. Only South Carolina created any land redistribution, establishing a land commission and resettling about 14,000 freedmen families and some poor Whites on land purchased by the state.\nAlthough historians such as W. E. B. Du Bois celebrated a cross-racial coalition of poor Whites and Blacks, such coalitions rarely formed in these years. Writing in 1913, former Congressman Lynch, recalling his experience as a Black leader in Mississippi, explained that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;While the colored men did not look with favor upon a political alliance with the poor whites, it must be admitted that, with very few exceptions, that class of whites did not seek, and did not seem to desire such an alliance.\nLynch reported that poor Whites resented the job competition from freedmen. Furthermore, the poor Whites:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;with a few exceptions, were less efficient, less capable, and knew less about matters of state and governmental administration than many of the former slaves... As a rule, therefore, the Whites that came into the leadership of the Republican Party between 1872 and 1875 were representatives of the most substantial families of the land.\nDemocrats try a \"New Departure\".\nBy 1870, the Democratic leadership across the South decided it had to end its opposition to Reconstruction and Black suffrage to survive and move on to new issues. The Grant administration had proven by its crackdown on the Ku Klux Klan that it would use as much federal power as necessary to suppress open anti-Black violence. Democrats in the North concurred with these Southern Democrats. They wanted to fight the Republican Party on economic grounds rather than race. The New Departure offered the chance for a clean slate without having to re-fight the Civil War every election. Furthermore, many wealthy Southern landowners thought they could control part of the newly enfranchised Black electorate to their own advantage.\nNot all Democrats agreed; an insurgent element continued to resist Reconstruction no matter what. Eventually, a group called \"Redeemers\" took control of the party in the Southern states. They formed coalitions with conservative Republicans, including supporters of Reconstruction, emphasizing the need for economic modernization. Railroad building was seen as a panacea since Northern capital was needed. The new tactics were a success in Virginia where William Mahone built a winning coalition. In Tennessee, the Redeemers formed a coalition with Republican Governor Dewitt Clinton Senter. Across the South, some Democrats switched from the race issue to taxes and corruption, charging that Republican governments were corrupt and inefficient. With a continuing decrease in cotton prices, taxes squeezed cash-poor farmers who rarely saw $20 in currency a year, but had to pay taxes in currency or lose their farms. But major planters, who had never paid taxes before, often recovered their property even after confiscation.\nIn North Carolina, Republican Governor William Woods Holden used state troops against the Klan, but the prisoners were released by federal judges. Holden became the first governor in American history to be impeached and removed from office. Republican political disputes in Georgia split the party and enabled the Redeemers to take over.\nIn the North, a live-and-let-live attitude made elections more like a sporting contest. But in the Deep South, many White citizens had not reconciled with the defeat of the war or the granting of citizenship to freedmen. As an Alabamian supporter of Reconstruction explained: \"Our contest here is for life, for the right to earn our bread,\u00a0... for a decent and respectful consideration as human beings and members of society.\"\nPanic of 1873.\nThe Panic of 1873 (a depression) hit the Southern economy hard and disillusioned many Republicans who had gambled that railroads would pull the South out of its poverty. The price of cotton fell by half; many small landowners, local merchants, and cotton factors (wholesalers) went bankrupt. Sharecropping for Black and White farmers became more common as a way to spread the risk of owning land. The old abolitionist element in the North was aging away, or had lost interest, and was not replenished. Many northern whites returned to the North or joined the Redeemers. Blacks had an increased voice in the Republican Party, but across the South it was divided by internal bickering and was rapidly losing its cohesion. Many local Black leaders started emphasizing individual economic progress in cooperation with White elites, rather than racial political progress in opposition to them, a conservative attitude that foreshadowed Booker T. Washington.\nNationally, President Grant was blamed for the depression; the Republican Party lost 96 seats in all parts of the country in the 1874 elections. The Bourbon Democrats took control of the House and were confident of electing Samuel J. Tilden president in 1876. President Grant was not running for re-election and seemed to be losing interest in the South. States fell to the Redeemers, with only four in Republican hands in 1873: Arkansas, Louisiana, Mississippi, and South Carolina. Arkansas then fell after the violent Brooks\u2013Baxter War in 1874 ripped apart the Republican Party there.\nViolence.\nIn the lower South, violence increased as new insurgent groups arose, including the Red Shirts in Mississippi and the Carolinas, and the White League in Louisiana. The disputed election in Louisiana in 1872 found both Republican and Democratic candidates holding inaugural balls while returns were reviewed. Both certified their own slates for local parish offices in many places, causing local tensions to rise. Finally, federal support helped certify the Republican as governor.\nSlates for local offices were certified by each candidate. In rural Grant Parish in the Red River Valley, freedmen fearing a Democratic attempt to take over the parish government reinforced defenses at the small Colfax courthouse in late March. White militias gathered from the area a few miles outside the settlement. Rumors and fears abounded on both sides. William Ward, an African American Union veteran and militia captain, mustered his company in Colfax and went to the courthouse. On Easter Sunday, April 13, 1873, the Whites attacked the defenders at the courthouse. There was confusion about who shot one of the White leaders after an offer by the defenders to surrender. It was a catalyst to mayhem. In the end, three Whites died and 120\u2013150 Blacks were killed, some 50 that evening while being held as prisoners. The disproportionate numbers of Black to White fatalities and documentation of brutalized bodies are why contemporary historians call it the Colfax Massacre rather than the Colfax Riot, as it was known locally.\nThis marked the beginning of heightened insurgency and attacks on Republican officeholders and freedmen in Louisiana and other Deep South states. In Louisiana, Judge T. S. Crawford and District Attorney P. H. Harris of the 12th Judicial District were shot off their horses and killed by ambush October 8, 1873, while going to court. One widow wrote to the Department of Justice that her husband was killed because he was a Union man, telling \"the efforts made to screen those who committed a crime\".\nPolitical violence was endemic in Louisiana. In 1874, the White militias coalesced into paramilitary organizations such as the White League, first in parishes of the Red River Valley. The new organization operated openly and had political goals: the violent overthrow of Republican rule and suppression of Black voting. White League chapters soon rose in many rural parishes, receiving financing for advanced weaponry from wealthy men. In the Coushatta Massacre in 1874, the White League assassinated six White Republican officeholders and five to 20 Black witnesses outside Coushatta, Red River Parish. Four of the White men were related to the Republican representative of the parish, who was married to a local woman; three were native to the region.\nLater in 1874 the White League mounted a serious attempt to unseat the Republican governor of Louisiana, in a dispute that had simmered since the 1872 election. It brought 5,000 troops to New Orleans to engage and overwhelm forces of the metropolitan police and state militia to turn Republican Governor William P. Kellogg out of office and seat John McEnery. The White League took over and held the state house and city hall, but they retreated before the arrival of reinforcing federal troops. Kellogg had asked for reinforcements before, and Grant finally responded, sending additional troops to try to quell violence throughout plantation areas of the Red River Valley, although 2,000 troops were already in the state.\nSimilarly, the Red Shirts, another paramilitary group, arose in 1875 in Mississippi and the Carolinas. Like the White League and White Liner rifle clubs, to which 20,000 men belonged in North Carolina alone, these groups operated as a \"military arm of the Democratic Party\", to restore White supremacy.\nDemocrats and many Northern Republicans agreed that Confederate nationalism and slavery were dead\u2014the war goals were achieved\u2014and further federal military interference was an undemocratic violation of historical Republican values. The victory of Rutherford B. Hayes in the hotly contested 1875 Ohio gubernatorial election indicated his \"let alone\" policy toward the South would become Republican policy, as happened when he won the 1876 Republican nomination for president.\nThis shift in federal attitude marked the beginning of a retreat from actively enforcing the Reconstruction policies in the south. As federal commitment declined, white supremacist organizations like the Ku Klux Klan and the Red Shirts escalated their violent campaigns to suppress Black political participation. These acts of violence also aimed to dismantle Republican led governments and cause instability. Actions from these groups proved that a federal response was needed in order to sustain Reconstruction. \nHistorians such as Daniel Byman argue that the failure of Reconstruction was driven not merely by political compromise alone, but by the federal government's inability to suppress a campaign of racial terrorism. White supremacist groups used assassinations, beatings, arson, and coordinated intimidation to eliminate Black leadership and frighten freedmen away from voting. These were not isolated acts of violence, but part of a deliberate strategy to destroy Reconstruction. \"The goal of this violence was not random terror,\" Byman writes, \"but targeted political control,\" emphasizing that the collapse of Reconstruction was a calculated success for white supremacists, not an accidental failure.\nFederal enforcement measures such as the Enforcement Acts and the Ku Klux Klan Act of 1871 were inconsistently applied and increasingly unpopular in the North. As Byman notes, \"The lack of an enduring presence enables insurgents to simply wait out government forces,\" likening the situation to failed modern counterinsurgency efforts. By the time of the Compromise of 1877, federal troops had been withdrawn from most of the South. This effectively signaled the end of Reconstruction enforcement. This resulting power vacuum allowed extremist groups to seize control of local governments and reimpose white supremacy.\nHistorian Sarah Sullivan further argues that the violence of the Ku Klux Klan during Reconstruction has been historically underestimated. Drawing from congressional hearings and testimonies, she documents how Klan members operated with impunity. They often targeted Black communities under the pretext of punishing \"criminal behavior\". In reality, such crimes were often as simple as voting Republican or pursuing interracial relationships. \"Blacks who contended for their rights and were not much afraid were deemed 'very bad negroes', a label that often resulted in death,\" Sullivan writes, illustrating how assertions of basic rights could lead to lynching. \nThe Klan's brutality extended to public torture, whipping, and murder, including the spectacle-style killings later associated with the Jim Crow era. Sullivan writes, \"Lynchings done by the Ku Klux Klan acted under the pretext of all three\u2026justice, race, and tradition\u2026establishing a pattern of violence that persisted for decades.\" These actions had a chilling effect on Black communities, where families were often too afraid to testify or report crimes. White Democratic lawmakers, some aligned with the Klan, frequently obstructed investigations, contributing to a culture of impunity. Together, Byman and Sullivan demonstrated that the failure of Reconstruction was not a passive collapse, but a result of federal negligence. This negligence allowed for the increase of insurgent violence. As Byman explains, \"White supremacists opposed to Reconstruction effectively mobilized their community, using terrorism as an intimidation tactic to undermine Black political power and force uncommitted white Southerners to their side.\" Without federal protection, even Black citizens who attempted to participate in public life faced extreme danger. Sullivan's research shows how that fear became an effective substitute for law, eroding democratic institutions at a local level. In the end, the collapse of Reconstruction was a warning. The story of its failure is ultimately the story of how democracy can unravel when governments tolerate political violence. The withdrawal of troops and the abandonment of Reconstruction allowed terror to dictate power in the South. This not only dismantled the gains made after emancipation but laid the foundation for systemic racial injustice that persisted well into the 20th century.\nAn explosion of violence accompanied the campaign for Mississippi's 1875 election, in which Red Shirts and Democratic rifle clubs, operating in the open, threatened or shot enough Republicans to decide the election for the Democrats. Hundreds of Black men were killed. Republican Governor Adelbert Ames asked Grant for federal troops to fight back; Grant initially refused, saying public opinion was \"tired out\" of the perpetual troubles in the South. Ames fled the state as the Democrats took over Mississippi.\nThe campaigns and elections of 1876 were marked by additional murders and attacks on Republicans in Louisiana, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Florida. In South Carolina the campaign season of 1876 was marked by murderous outbreaks and fraud against freedmen. Red Shirts paraded with arms behind Democratic candidates; they killed Blacks in the Hamburg and Ellenton, South Carolina massacres. One historian estimated 150 Blacks were killed in the weeks before the 1876 election across South Carolina. Red Shirts prevented almost all Black voting in two majority-Black counties. The Red Shirts were also active in North Carolina.\nA 2019 study found that counties that were occupied by the U.S. Army to enforce enfranchisement of emancipated slaves were more likely to elect Black politicians. The study also found that \"political murders by White-supremacist groups occurred less frequently\" in these counties than in Southern counties that were not occupied.\nElection of 1876.\nReconstruction continued in South Carolina, Louisiana, and Florida until 1877. The elections of 1876 were accompanied by heightened violence across the Deep South. A combination of ballot stuffing and intimidating Blacks suppressed their vote even in majority Black counties. The White League was active in Louisiana. After Republican Rutherford B. Hayes won the disputed 1876 presidential election, the national Compromise of 1877 (a corrupt bargain) was reached.\nThe White Democrats in the South agreed to accept Hayes' victory if he withdrew the last federal troops. By this point, the North was weary of insurgency. White Democrats controlled most of the Southern legislatures and armed militias controlled small towns and rural areas. Blacks considered Reconstruction a failure because the federal government withdrew from enforcing their ability to exercise their rights as citizens.\nHayes ends Reconstruction.\nOn January 29, 1877, President Grant signed the Electoral Commission Act, which set up a 15-member commission of eight Republicans and seven Democrats to settle the disputed 1876 election. Since the Constitution did not explicitly indicate how Electoral College disputes were to be resolved, Congress was forced to consider other methods to settle the crisis. Many Democrats argued that Congress as a whole should determine which certificates to count. However, the chances that this method would result in a harmonious settlement were slim, as the Democrats controlled the House, while the Republicans controlled the Senate. Several Hayes supporters, on the other hand, argued that the President pro tempore of the Senate had the authority to determine which certificates to count, because he was responsible for chairing the congressional session at which the electoral votes were to be tallied. Since the office of president pro tempore was occupied by a Republican, Senator Thomas W. Ferry of Michigan, this method would have favored Hayes. Still others proposed that the matter should be settled by the Supreme Court. In a stormy session that began on March 1, 1877, the House debated the objection for about twelve hours before overruling it. Immediately, another spurious objection was raised, this time to the electoral votes from Wisconsin. Again, the Senate voted to overrule the objection, while a filibuster was conducted in the House. However, the Speaker of the House, Democrat Samuel J. Randall, refused to entertain dilatory motions. Eventually, the filibusterers gave up, allowing the House to reject the objection in the early hours of March 2. The House and Senate then reassembled to complete the count of the electoral votes. At 4:10 am on March 2, Senator Ferry announced that Hayes and Wheeler had been elected to the presidency and vice presidency, by an electoral margin of 185\u2013184.\nThe Democrats agreed not to block Hayes' inauguration based on a \"back room\" deal. Key to this deal was the understanding that federal troops would no longer interfere in Southern politics despite substantial election-associated violence against Blacks. The Southern states indicated that they would protect the lives of African Americans; however, such promises were largely not kept. Hayes' friends also let it be known that he would promote federal aid for internal improvements, including help with a railroad in Texas (which never happened) and name a Southerner to his cabinet (this did happen). With the end to the political role of Northern troops, the president had no method to enforce Reconstruction; thus, this \"back room\" deal signaled the end of American Reconstruction.\nAfter assuming office on March 4, 1877, President Hayes removed troops from the capitals of the remaining Reconstruction states, Louisiana and South Carolina, allowing the Redeemers to have full control of these states. President Grant had already removed troops from Florida, before Hayes was inaugurated, and troops from the other Reconstruction states had long since been withdrawn. Hayes appointed David M. Key from Tennessee, a Southern Democrat, to the position of postmaster general. By 1879, thousands of African American \"Exodusters\" packed up and headed to new opportunities in Kansas.\nThe Democrats gained control of the Senate, and had complete control of Congress, having taken over the House in 1875. Hayes vetoed bills from the Democrats that outlawed the Republican Enforcement Acts; however, with the military underfunded, Hayes could not adequately enforce these laws. African-Americans remained involved in Southern politics, particularly in Virginia, which was run by the biracial Readjuster Party.\nNumerous African-Americans were elected to local office through the 1880s, and in the 1890s in some states, biracial coalitions of populists and Republicans briefly held control of state legislatures. In the last decade of the 19th century, Southern states elected five Black U.S. congressmen before disenfranchising state constitutions were passed throughout the former Confederacy.\nLegacy and historiography.\nBesides the election of Southern black people to state governments and the United States Congress, other achievements of the Reconstruction era include \"the South's first state-funded public school systems, more equitable taxation legislation, laws against racial discrimination in public transport and accommodations and ambitious economic development programs (including aid to railroads and other enterprises).\" Despite these achievements the interpretation of Reconstruction has been a topic of controversy because nearly all historians hold that Reconstruction ended in failure, but for very different reasons.\nThe first generation of Northern historians believed that the former Confederates were traitors and Johnson was their ally who threatened to undo the Union's constitutional achievements. By the 1880s, however, Northern historians argued that Johnson and his allies were not traitors but had blundered badly in rejecting the Fourteenth Amendment and setting the stage for Radical Reconstruction.\nThe Black leader Booker T. Washington, who grew up in West Virginia during Reconstruction, concluded later that: \"the Reconstruction experiment in racial democracy failed because it began at the wrong end, emphasizing political means and civil rights acts rather than economic means and self-determination\". His solution was to concentrate on building the economic infrastructure of the Black community, in part by his leadership and the Southern Tuskegee Institute.\nDunning School, 1900s\u20131920s.\nThe Dunning School of scholars, who were trained at the history department of Columbia University under Professor William A. Dunning, analyzed Reconstruction as a failure after 1866 for different reasons. They claimed that Congress took freedoms and rights from qualified Whites and gave them to unqualified Blacks who were being duped by what they called \"corrupt carpetbaggers and scalawags\". As T. Harry Williams (who was a sharp critic of the Dunning School) noted, the Dunning scholars portrayed the era in stark terms:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Reconstruction was a battle between two extremes: the Democrats, as the group which included the vast majority of the whites, standing for decent government and racial supremacy, versus the Republicans, the Negroes, alien carpetbaggers, and renegade scalawags, standing for dishonest government and alien ideals. These historians wrote literally in terms of white and black.\nRevisionists and Beardians, 1930s\u20131940s.\nIn the 1930s, historical revisionism became popular among scholars. As disciples of Charles A. Beard, revisionists focused on economics, downplaying politics and constitutional issues. The central figure was a young scholar at the University of Wisconsin, Howard K. Beale, who in his PhD dissertation, finished in 1924, developed a complex new interpretation of Reconstruction. The Dunning School portrayed freedmen as mere pawns in the hands of northern whites. Beale argued that the whites themselves were pawns in the hands of Northern industrialists, who had taken control of the nation during the Civil War and who Beale felt would be threatened by return to power of the Southern Whites. Beale further argued that the rhetoric of civil rights for Blacks, and the dream of equality, was rhetoric designed to fool idealistic voters, calling it \"claptrap\", arguing: \"Constitutional discussions of the rights of the Negro, the status of Southern states, the legal position of ex-rebels, and the powers of Congress and the president determined nothing. They were pure sham.\" The Beard\u2013Beale interpretation of Reconstruction became known as \"revisionism\", and replaced the Dunning School for most historians until the 1950s, after which it was largely discredited.\nThe Beardian interpretation of the causes of the Civil War downplayed slavery, abolitionism, and issues of morality. It ignored constitutional issues of states' rights and even ignored American nationalism as the force that finally led to victory in the war. Indeed, the ferocious combat itself was passed over as merely an ephemeral event. Much more important was the calculus of class conflict. As the Beards explained in \"The Rise of American Civilization\" (1927), the Civil War was really a:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;social cataclysm in which the capitalists, laborers, and farmers of the North and West drove from power in the national government the planting aristocracy of the South.\nThe Beards were especially interested in the Reconstruction era, as the industrialists of the Northeast and the farmers of the West cashed in on their great victory over the Southern aristocracy. Historian Richard Hofstadter paraphrases the Beards as arguing that in victory:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;the Northern capitalists were able to impose their economic program, quickly passing a series of measures on tariffs, banking, homesteads, and immigration that guaranteed the success of their plans for economic development. Solicitude for the freedmen had little to do with Northern policies. The Fourteenth Amendment, which gave the Negro his citizenship, Beard found significant primarily as a result of a conspiracy of a few legislative draftsmen friendly to corporations to use the supposed elevation of the blacks as a cover for a fundamental law giving strong protection to business corporations against regulation by state government.\nWilliam B. Hesseltine, a socialist politician and historian, adhered to the point that there were Northeastern businessmen wanting to control the Southern economy before and after the war, implying that they did by owning railroads. In his book, \"A History of The South 1607-1936\", he wrote \"when the war closed, Northern business men looked to the South as a colony into which business might expand\". Further in the same book, he wrote: \"Moderates, Liberals, and Democrats continued to deplore Southern conditions until the Northern business man was persuaded that only a restoration of native white government would bring the peace necessary for economic penetration into the South.\"\nThe Beard\u2013Beale interpretation of the monolithic Northern industrialists fell apart in the 1950s when it was closely examined by numerous historians, including Robert P. Sharkey, Irwin Unger, and Stanley Coben. The younger scholars conclusively demonstrated that there was no unified economic policy on the part of the dominant Republican Party. Some wanted high tariffs and some low. Some wanted greenbacks and others wanted gold. There was no conspiracy to use Reconstruction to impose any such unified economic policy on the nation. Northern businessmen were widely divergent on monetary or tariff policy, and seldom paid attention to Reconstruction issues. Furthermore, the rhetoric on behalf of the rights of the freedmen was not claptrap but deeply-held and very serious political philosophy.\nBlack historians.\nThe Black scholar W. E. B. Du Bois, in his \"Black Reconstruction in America, 1860\u20131880\", published in 1935, compared results across the states to show achievements by the Reconstruction legislatures and to refute claims about wholesale African American control of governments. He showed Black contributions, as in the establishment of universal public education, charitable and social institutions and universal suffrage as important results, and he noted their collaboration with Whites. He also pointed out that Whites benefited most by the financial deals made, and he put excesses in the perspective of the war's aftermath. He noted that despite complaints, several states kept their Reconstruction-era state constitutions into the early 20th century. Despite receiving favorable reviews, his work was largely ignored by White historians of his time.\nNeo-abolitionists.\nIn the 1960s, neo-abolitionist historians emerged, led by John Hope Franklin, Kenneth Stampp, Leon Litwack, and Eric Foner. Influenced by the civil rights movement, they rejected the Dunning School and found a great deal to praise in Radical Reconstruction. Foner, the primary advocate of this view, argued that it was never truly completed, and that a \"Second Reconstruction\" was needed in the late 20th century to complete the goal of full equality for African Americans. The neo-abolitionists followed the revisionists in minimizing the corruption and waste created by Republican state governments, saying it was no worse than Boss Tweed's ring in New York City.\nInstead, they emphasized that suppression of the rights of African Americans was a worse scandal, and a grave corruption of America's republicanist ideals. They argued that the tragedy of Reconstruction was not that it failed because Blacks were incapable of governing, especially as they did not dominate any state government, but that it failed because Whites raised an insurgent movement to restore White supremacy. White-elite-dominated state legislatures passed disenfranchising state constitutions from 1890 to 1908 that effectively barred most Blacks and many poor Whites from voting. This disenfranchisement affected millions of people for decades into the 20th century, and closed African Americans and poor Whites out of the political process in the South.\nRe-establishment of White supremacy meant that within a decade African Americans were excluded from virtually all local, state, and federal governance in all states of the South. Lack of representation meant that they were treated as second-class citizens, with schools and services consistently underfunded in segregated societies, no representation on juries or in law enforcement, and bias in other legislation. It was not until the civil rights movement and the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965 that segregation was outlawed and suffrage restored, under what has in retrospect been referred to as the \"Second Reconstruction\".\nIn 1990, Eric Foner concluded that from the Black point of view \"Reconstruction must be judged a failure.\" Foner stated Reconstruction was \"a noble if flawed experiment, the first attempt to introduce a genuine inter-racial democracy in the United States\". According to him, the many factors contributing to the failure included: lack of a permanent federal agency \"specifically\" designed for the enforcement of civil rights; the Morrison R. Waite Supreme Court decisions that dismantled previous congressional civil rights legislation; and the economic reestablishment of Whiggish white planters in the South by 1877. Historian William McFeely explained that although the constitutional amendments and civil rights legislation on their own merit were remarkable achievements, no permanent government agency whose specific purpose was civil rights enforcement had been created.\nMore recent work by Nina Silber, David W. Blight, Cecelia O'Leary, Laura Edwards, LeeAnn Whites, and Edward J. Blum has encouraged greater attention to race, religion, and issues of gender while at the same time pushing the effective end of Reconstruction to the end of the 19th century, while monographs by Charles Reagan Wilson, Gaines Foster, W. Scott Poole, and Bruce Baker have offered new views of the Southern \"Lost Cause\".\nDating the end of the Reconstruction era.\nAt the national level, textbooks typically date the era from 1865 to 1877. Eric Foner's textbook of national history \"Give Me Liberty\" is an example. His monograph \"Reconstruction: America's Unfinished Revolution, 1863\u20131877\" (1988) focusing on the situation in the South, covers 1863 to 1865. While 1877 is the usual date given for the end of Reconstruction, some historians such as Orville Vernon Burton extend the era to the 1890s to include the imposition of segregation.\nThe year 1877 is also commonly used as a dividing point for two-semester survey courses and two-volume textbooks that aim to cover all of U.S. history.\nEconomic role of race.\nEconomists and economic historians have different interpretations of the economic impact of race on the postwar Southern economy. In 1995, Robert Whaples took a random survey of 178 members of the Economic History Association, who studied American history in all time periods. He asked whether they wholly or partly accepted, or rejected, 40 propositions in the scholarly literature about American economic history. The greatest difference between economics PhDs and history PhDs came in questions on competition and race. For example, the proposition originally put forward by Robert Higgs, \"in the post-bellum South economic competition among Whites played an important part in protecting blacks from racial coercion\", was accepted in whole or part by 66% of the economists, but by only 22% of the historians. Whaples says this highlights: \"A recurring difference dividing historians and economists. The economists have more faith in the power of the competitive market. For example, they see the competitive market as protecting disenfranchised blacks and are less likely to accept the idea that there was exploitation by merchant monopolists.\"\nThe \"failure\" issue.\nReconstruction is widely considered a failure, though the reason for this is a matter of controversy.\nHistorian Donald R. Shaffer maintained that the gains during Reconstruction for African Americans were not entirely extinguished. The legalization of African American marriages and families and the independence of Black churches from White denominations were a source of strength during the Jim Crow era. Reconstruction was never forgotten within the Black community and it remained a source of inspiration. The system of sharecropping granted Blacks a considerable amount of freedom as compared to slavery.\nHistorian Eric Foner argues:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;What remains certain is that Reconstruction failed, and that for Blacks its failure was a disaster whose magnitude cannot be obscured by the genuine accomplishments that did endure.\nHistorian Annette Gordon-Reed described in an October 2015 article for \"The Atlantic\" magazine the effects if Reconstruction had not failed. However, in 2014, historian Mark Summers argued that the \"failure\" question should be looked at from the viewpoint of the war goals; in that case, he argues:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If we see Reconstruction's purpose as making sure that the main goals of the war would be fulfilled, of a Union held together forever, of a North and South able to work together, of slavery extirpated, and sectional rivalries confined, of the permanent banishment of the fear of vaunting appeals to state sovereignty, backed by armed force, then Reconstruction looks like what in that respect it was, a lasting and unappreciated success.\nHistoriographical Interpretations.\nHistorians have long debated the legacy of the Reconstruction era, with interpretations evolving significantly over time. One of the most influential and contested narratives was advanced by the Dunning school, which characterized Reconstruction as a misguided experiment that led to widespread corruption and social disorder. This view marginalized the experiences and achievements of African Americans during Reconstruction and perpetuated myths of white Southern victimhood. Contemporary scholars, including Hannah Rosen, have challenged these interpretations by emphasizing the era's transformative potential and highlighting the efforts of freedmen and their allies to establish civil rights and social equality. Rosen argues that understanding Reconstruction requires acknowledging both its profound advancements in racial justice and the systemic backlash that sought to undermine them. This historiographical shift has underscored the importance of accurate and inclusive narratives, illustrating how public memory has been shaped by political and cultural forces, and how these narratives continue to influence contemporary discussions on race and justice.\nIn popular culture.\nThe journalist Joel Chandler Harris, who wrote under the name \"Joe Harris\" for the \"Atlanta Constitution\" (mostly after Reconstruction), tried to advance racial and sectional reconciliation in the late 19th century. He supported Henry W. Grady's vision of a New South during Grady's time as editor from 1880 to 1889. Harris wrote many editorials in which he encouraged Southerners to accept the changed conditions along with some Northern influences, but he asserted his belief that change should proceed under White supremacy.\nIn popular literature, two early 20th-century novels by Thomas Dixon Jr.\u00a0\u2013 \"The Leopard's Spots: A Romance of the White Man's Burden \u2013 1865\u20131900\" (1902), and \"\" (1905)\u00a0\u2013 idealized White resistance to Northern and Black coercion, hailing vigilante action by the Ku Klux Klan. D. W. Griffith adapted Dixon's \"The Clansman\" for the screen in his anti-Republican movie \"The Birth of a Nation\" (1915); it stimulated the formation of the 20th-century version of the KKK. Many other authors romanticized the supposed benevolence of slavery and the elite world of the antebellum plantations, in memoirs and histories which were published in the late 19th and early 20th centuries; the United Daughters of the Confederacy promoted influential works which were written in these genres by women.\nOf much more lasting impact was the story \"Gone with the Wind\", first in the form of the best-selling 1936 novel, which enabled its author Margaret Mitchell to win the Pulitzer Prize, and an award-winning Hollywood blockbuster with the same title in 1939. In each case, the second half of the story focuses on Reconstruction in Atlanta. The book sold millions of copies nationwide; the film is regularly re-broadcast on television. In 2018, it remained at the top of the list of highest-grossing films, adjusted in order to keep up with inflation. The \"New Georgia Encyclopedia\" argues:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Politically, the film offers a conservative view of Georgia and the South. In her novel, despite her Southern prejudices, Mitchell showed clear awareness of the shortcomings of her characters and their region. The film is less analytical. It portrays the story from a clearly Old South point of view: the South is presented as a great civilization, the practice of slavery is never questioned, and the plight of the freedmen after the Civil War is implicitly blamed on their emancipation. A series of scenes whose racism rivals that of D. W. Griffith's film \"The Birth of a Nation\" (1915) mainly portrays Reconstruction as a time when Southern whites were victimized by freed slaves, who themselves were exploited by Northern carpetbaggers.\nIn education.\nThe \"Dunning School\" dominated white scholarship about Reconstruction during most of the 20th century. Black scholarship on the Reconstruction era was mostly ignored until the civil rights movement of the 1950s and 1960s, though the racist interpretations of the Dunning School continue to this day.\nHistorian Eric Foner said, \"for no other period of American history does so wide a gap exist between current scholarship and popular historical understanding, which, judging from references to Reconstruction in recent newspaper articles, films, popular books, and in public monuments across the country, still bears the mark of the old Dunning School.\"\nAs reported in a January 2022 \"Time\" magazine article:In social studies standards for 45 out of 50 states and the District of Columbia, discussion of Reconstruction is \"partial\" or \"non-existent\", according to historians who reviewed how the period is discussed in K-12 social studies standards for public schools nationwide. In a report produced by the education nonprofit Zinn Education Project, the study's authors say they are concerned that American children will grow up to be uninformed about a critical period of history that helps explain why full racial equality remains unfulfilled today.The Zinn Education Project's report, \"Erasing the Black Freedom Struggle: How State Standards Fail to Teach the Truth About Reconstruction\", highlights the historical connections to Reconstruction that surround us today and examines Reconstruction's place in state social studies standards across the United States and the barriers to teaching effective Reconstruction history.\nAccording to a \"Facing South\" article entitled \"The South's schools are failing to teach accurate Reconstruction history\":\"It is our hope that states and districts will adopt these guidelines for their own educational standards, curricula, and professional development,\" the report states. \"In so doing, they will be better equipped to teach students the true history of Reconstruction, help students understand its significance and make connections to the present day. And they will empower teachers to educate their students and themselves about ongoing Reconstruction scholarship.\"\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nScholarly secondary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHistoriography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nYearbooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
