{"id": "56506", "revid": "49934754", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56506", "title": "Saratoga County, New York", "text": "County in New York, United States\nSaratoga County is a county in the U.S. state of New York, and is the fastest-growing county in Upstate New York. As of the 2020 United States census, the county's population was enumerated at 235,509, its highest decennial count ever and a 7.2% increase from the 219,607 recorded at the 2010 census, representing one of the fastest growth rates in New York. The county seat is Ballston Spa. The county is part of the Capital District region of the state.\nSaratoga County's name was derived from the Iroquois word \"sah-rah-ka\" or \"sarach-togue\", meaning \"the hill beside the river\", referring to the Hudson River bordering the county on its eastern flank and the Mohawk River delineating its southern border. Saratoga County, bisected by the toll-free, six-lane Adirondack Northway, serves as an outdoor recreational haven and as the gateway to the Adirondack Mountains and State Park for the populations of the Albany and New York City metropolitan areas. The county is also home to the internationally renowned Saratoga Race Course, one of the oldest venues in horse racing.\nSaratoga County lies in the heart of eastern New York State's recognized Tech Valley, a growing center for the computer hardware side of the high-technology industry and its concomitant venture capital investment, with great strides in the nanotechnology sector, digital electronics design, and water- and electricity-dependent integrated microchip circuit manufacturing, and more recently, artificial intelligence, involving companies including IBM, GlobalFoundries, Samsung, and Taiwan Semiconductor, among others. In April 2021, GlobalFoundries, a company specializing in the semiconductor industry, moved its headquarters from Silicon Valley, California to its most advanced semiconductor-chip manufacturing facility in Saratoga County near a section of the Adirondack Northway, in Malta, New York.\nThe county is also frequently recognized for its high standard of living and quality of life. Saratoga County touts its strongly academic schools, clean environment and relatively cool climate, abundance of clean water and electricity, natural beauty and recreational opportunities, low county tax rates, and availability of new housing in its approach to robust growth in the county's high-tech workforce.\nHistory.\nWhen counties were established in the Province of New York in 1683, the present Saratoga County was part of Albany County. This was an enormous county, including the northern part of New York, as well as all of the present state of Vermont and, in theory, extending westward to the Pacific Ocean. This large county was progressively reduced in size by the separation of several counties until 1791, when Saratoga County and Rensselaer County were split off from Albany County. The Battles of Saratoga (September 19 and October 7, 1777) marked the climax of the Saratoga campaign, giving a decisive victory to the Americans over the British in the American Revolutionary War, which convinced France that the Thirteen Colonies could win the war. The government of Louis XVI began lending military and financial aid to the American Patriot cause.\nDuring the 19th century, Saratoga County was an important industrial center. Its location 30 miles north of Albany on the Delaware and Hudson Railway, as well as its proximity to water power from the Hudson River and the Kayaderosseras Creek, led to rapid industrial development beginning in the early 19th century. Some of the most important industrial employers were paper mills, tanneries, foundries, and textile mills.\nSince the construction of the Adirondack Northway in the 1960s, Saratoga County has consistently been the fastest-growing county in the Capital District and indeed, in Upstate New York, and one of the fastest-growing in the Northeastern United States. The county has historically maintained a low county tax rate; according to its official website, Saratoga County levies one of the lowest county tax rates in New York.\nGeography.\nSaratoga County is situated in the eastern portion of New York State, north of the state capital city of Albany, northwest of Troy, and east of Utica. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which are land and (4.0%) are covered by water. The Hudson River forms the eastern border of the county, while the Mohawk River demarcates its southern border. The highest elevation in Saratoga County is at the peak of Tenant Mountain in the Adirondack Mountains, at , while the lowest elevation is , at the waterfront of the Village of Waterford, at the confluence of the Mohawk and Hudson Rivers.\nAdjacent counties.\nSaratoga County is bordered by eight counties. Listed clockwise, they are:\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nIn 1960, Saratoga County had a population of only 89,000, less than half of its population noted at the 2020 United States census, enumerated at 235,509. Saratoga County has continued its robust growth in the 2020s, in spite of the COVID-19 pandemic.\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 U.S. census, there were 219,607 people, 88,296 households, and 58,814 families residing in Saratoga County. The population density was . There were 98,656 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 94.3% White, 1.8% Asian, 1.5% Black or African American, 0.2% Native American, 0.0% Pacific Islander, 0.5% from other races, and 1.7% from two or more races. 2.4% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 88,296 households, out of which 29.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 53.3% were married couples living together, 9.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.4% were non-families. 26.1% of all households were made up of individuals, 31.5% of households had individuals under 18 years, and 9.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.44 and the average family size was 2.96.\nOf Saratoga County's population in 2010, 6.3% were between ages of 5 and 9 years, 6.7% between 10 and 14 years, 6.5% between 15 and 19 years, 5.5% between 20 and 24 years, 5.5% between 25 and 29 years, 5.8% between 30 and 34 years, 6.6% between 35 and 39 years, 7.9% between 40 and 44 years, 8.5% between 45 and 49 years, 8.0% between 50 and 54 years, 7.0% between 55 and 59 years, 6.4% between 60 and 64 years, and 13.7% of age 65 years and over. 22.7% of the county's population was under age 18. The median age was 40.9 years.\nAccording to the 2009-2013 American Community Survey, the median income for a household in Saratoga County was $69,826, and the median income for a family was $87,058. Males had a median income of $59,636 versus $44,743 for females. The per capita income for the county was $35,176. About 4.0% of families and 6.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 7.4% of those under age 18 and 6.1% of those age 65 or over.\nTransportation.\nAdirondack Northway.\nThe toll-free, six-lane Adirondack Northway bisects Saratoga County, running in a south\u2013north direction. The highway, designated Interstate 87, is the primary conduit connecting the capital of New York, Albany, northward across the Thaddeus Kosciusko Bridge into and through Saratoga County, then past Lake George in the Adirondack Park, through the Adirondack Mountains, and eventually to the Canada\u2013United States border, where it continues seamlessly as Quebec Autoroute 15 to Montreal. The freeway has been a major catalyst for the growth of population and commerce in Saratoga County.\nRail.\nThe Saratoga and North Creek Railway was a heritage railway that operated from 2011 to 2018 between the Saratoga Springs Amtrak station at its southern terminus and North Creek in the Adirondack Park at its northern terminus. Its commercial operations were originally built by the Adirondack Railway (succeeded by the Delaware and Hudson). Amtrak's \"Ethan Allen Express\" and \"Adirondack\" services remain at Saratoga Springs.\nAirports.\nThese public-use airports are located in Saratoga County:\nEconomy.\nTech Valley.\nSince the 2000s, the economy of Saratoga County and the surrounding Capital District has been redirected toward high technology. Tech Valley is a marketing name for the eastern part of New York, encompassing Saratoga County, the Capital District, and the Hudson Valley. Originated in 1998 to promote the greater Albany area as a high-tech competitor to regions such as Silicon Valley and Boston, it has since grown to represent the counties in the Capital District and extending to IBM's Westchester County plants in the south and the Canada\u2013US border to the north. The area's high-technology ecosystem is supported by technologically focused academic institutions including Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and the State University of New York Polytechnic Institute. Tech Valley encompasses 19 counties straddling both sides of the Adirondack Northway and the New York Thruway, and with heavy state taxpayer subsidy, has experienced significant growth in the computer hardware side of the high-technology industry, with great strides in the nanotechnology sector, digital electronics design, and water- and electricity-dependent integrated microchip circuit manufacturing, and more recently, artificial intelligence, involving companies including GlobalFoundries in Malta and others. Saratoga County touts its high standard of living and quality of life, strongly academic schools, clean environment and relatively cool climate, abundance of clean water and electricity, natural beauty and recreational opportunities, low county rax rates, and availability of new housing in its approach to robust growth in the county's high-tech workforce.\nAdirondack Trust Company is the largest independent community bank in Saratoga County. Adirondack Trust's 167 full-time employees own the company, which offers banking, loans and investment services, along with insurance through its Amsure subsidiary. As of December 2020, the bank reported almost $1.5 billion in assets, and over $1.3 billion in deposits, across 13 branches.\nRecreation.\nSaratoga County is extremely popular between late July and early September each year due to the Saratoga Race Course being open. This world-famous track dates back to 1863, when it was founded by John Morrissey. Thoroughbred horse racing in the United States has its own Hall of Fame in Saratoga Springs, which honors remarkable horses, jockeys, owners, and trainers. Horse-racing fans come from all over to watch the races.\nThe Saratoga National Historical Park is located along the Hudson River in Stillwater, and features a drive-around trail where one can drive up to each station. The park is also famous for its outstanding views of the area's natural scenery and Vermont's Green Mountains in the distance.\nThe Saratoga Spa State Park capitalizes on the culture and the mineral springs that once drove Saratoga County. This is a large state park and includes a hotel, two pool complexes, mineral baths, Saratoga Performing Arts Center, picnic areas, hiking trails, and numerous mineral springs.\nSaratoga County serves as the southern gateway to the Adirondack Park, the largest park in the contiguous United States, covering about , a land area roughly the size of Vermont and greater than the areas of the National Parks of Yellowstone, Grand Canyon, Glacier, and Great Smoky Mountains combined. A portion of northwestern Saratoga County lies within the boundaries of the Adirondack Park and includes Hadley Mountain.\nEducation.\nUnified school districts.\nSchool districts include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCommunities.\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nVillages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHamlets.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGovernment.\nSaratoga County is governed by a Board Of Supervisors, with each town Supervisor acting as the representative from that community. The City of Saratoga Springs elects two Supervisors and the City of Mechanicville elects one supervisor to sit on the Board of Supervisors, but have no power in their respective city governments. The Town of Clifton Park also elects two Supervisors, one being the elected Town Supervisor, and one having only County duties. Voting is by weighted vote of each of the communities based on population, which is the reason why Saratoga Springs and Clifton Park, the two largest communities in Saratoga County, elect two Supervisors. The political makeup of the 2016-17 Board consists of 21 Republicans, and two Democrats. By long-standing tradition, whoever serves as chairman of the Board of Supervisor's powerful Law and Finance Committee one year serves as chairman of the full Board the following year\u2014a tradition that has been broken only three times in Saratoga County's history. Under this custom, current Law and Finance Committee Chairman Arthur \"Mo\" Wright, the Supervisor of the Town of Hadley, is slated to become chairman of the full Board in 2016. Republicans hold the county-wide offices of sheriff, district attorney, county clerk, treasurer, and judges of the county, family, and the surrogate courts.\nOn the presidential level, like most of the Hudson Valley, Saratoga County was historically powerfully Republican. It only supported a Democrat for president twice in the 20th century, in 1964 and 1996. The Republican edge narrowed somewhat in the 1990s and since then Saratoga County has been a Republican-leaning swing county. George W. Bush won the county narrowly in 2004 with 53% of the vote, while Barack Obama slightly edged out John McCain and Mitt Romney in both 2008 and 2012, becoming the first Democrat to win a majority in the county since 1964. In 2016, Saratoga County flipped back to the Republicans, with Donald Trump capturing a narrow plurality of the vote over Hillary Clinton. The flip proved to be temporary, with Democratic candidate Joe Biden winning the county in 2020.\nThe county is represented in the U.S. Congress by Republican Elise Stefanik and Democrat Paul Tonko. In the State Senate, the county is divided between Republicans Daphne Jordan and Jim Tedisco, while in the State Assembly Democrats John T. McDonald III and Carrie Woerner, along with Republicans Mary Beth Walsh and Dan Stec, each represent portions of the county.\nJames A. Murphy III, a Republican, is the County Court Judge and a former District Attorney. James A. Bowen had been the dean of NYS Sheriffs, having served as Sheriff since 1972, when he was appointed by Governor Nelson A. Rockefeller. Bowen won election in his own right in 1973 and had been elected every four years up until his retirement at the end of his tenth term in office in 2013. Michael H. Zurlo is the current Sheriff, winning the election to succeed Bowen in 2013. Democratic strength is best shown in the City of Saratoga Springs, which has voted Democratic in every presidential election since 1988. Republican strength is concentrated in the western part of the county, which is mostly rural or exurban. In 2005, the Democrats gained a majority on the Saratoga Springs City Council after decades of Republican dominance. The Republicans, however, reclaimed the council majority in the 2007 General Elections due to a split Democratic Party in the mayor's race. In 2009, the Republicans reclaimed their supermajority (4-1) on the City Council, by winning every contested election (Mayor, Finance, Public Safety, and Public Works). In 2011, Democrats reclaimed the Majority on the City Council, while Republican Scott Johnson was reelected as Mayor. The Current City Council (2016-2017) is 4-1 Democratic led by Mayor Meg Kelly. At the Saratoga County Board of Supervisors, the city is split, with one Republican and one Democrat holding the two Supervisor seats.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56507", "revid": "48991186", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56507", "title": "Marlinespike hitch", "text": "Type of temporary knot\nThe marlinespike hitch is a temporary knot used to attach a rod to a rope in order to form a handle. This allows more tension than could be produced comfortably by gripping the rope with the hands alone. It is useful when tightening knots and for other purposes in ropework.\nAs the name suggests, the type of rod traditionally used with this hitch is a marlinespike. The advantages of this hitch over others which might serve the purpose are its quickness of tying and ease of releasing. Topologically it is a form of the noose, but in practice this hitch is not allowed to collapse into that shape. When it does capsize into a traditional noose, it can jam against the rod, making it much more difficult to release.\nThe hitch is frequently used by hammock campers to attach adjustable rope slings (\"whoopie slings\") to the webbing straps that are used to attach hammocks to trees.\nBy passing the working end through the marlinespike hitch, this knot can be used as an alternative method of tying the Bowline knot. Passing through in the opposite direction will give you the Cowboy bowline (also known as the left-hand bowline, Dutch marine bowline or winter bowline).\nTying.\nBelow is a basic method of tying. The knot can also be made by using the rod itself to form the loop, but the tying method does not affect the performance of the resulting hitch.\nBegin with an overhand loop, that is, a loop in which the working part passes over the standing part:&lt;br&gt;\nFold the loop over the working part, towards the standing part such that the standing part is visible through the center of the loop:&lt;br&gt;\n&lt;br&gt;\nIn stiffer material the first two steps can be accomplished in a single motion by twisting the working part with the fingers until a loop forms and flops over the standing part.\nUse the rod to snag a bight of the standing part through the loop, that is, pass the rod over the near side of the loop, under the standing part and then over the far side of the loop:&lt;br&gt;\nBefore tensioning, excess slack can be removed by pulling \"simultaneously\" on both the working and standing parts:&lt;br&gt;\n&lt;br&gt;\nIn actual use the hitch should be loaded only from the standing side.\nUndesirable capsized form.\nIf the working end is loaded rather than the standing part, the knot will capsize into an overhand noose:&lt;br&gt;\n&lt;br&gt;\nWhile this form may still hold when the standing part is subsequently loaded, it can jam badly against the rod. This is especially troublesome if the rod is not tapered.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56508", "revid": "2842084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56508", "title": "Judi Bari", "text": "American environmentalist, feminist, and labor leader (1949\u20131997)\nJudith Beatrice Bari (November 7, 1949 \u2013 March 2, 1997) was an American environmentalist, feminist, and labor leader, primarily active in Northern California after moving to the state in the mid-1970s. In the 1980s and 1990s, she was the principal organizer of Earth First! campaigns against logging in the ancient redwood forests of Mendocino County and related areas. She also organized Industrial Workers of the World Local 1 in an effort to bring together timber workers and environmentalists of Earth First! in common cause.\nBari suffered severe injuries on 24 May 1990 in Oakland, California, when a pipe bomb went off under her seat in her car. She was driving with colleague Darryl Cherney, who had minor injuries. They were arrested by Oakland Police, aided by the FBI, who accused them of transporting a bomb for terrorist purposes. While those charges were dropped, in 1991 the pair filed suit against the Oakland Police Department and FBI for violations of their civil rights during the investigation of the bombing. A jury found in their favor when the case went to trial in 2002, and damages were awarded to Bari's estate and Cherney. Bari had died of cancer in 1997. The bombing has not been solved.\nIn 1999 a bill was passed to establish the Headwaters Forest Reserve (H.R. 2107, Title V. Sec.501.) under administration by the Bureau of Land Management. This protected of mixed old-growth and previously harvested forest. It was a project that Bari had long supported.\nEarly life and education.\nBari was born on November 7, 1949, and was raised in Silver Spring, Maryland, the daughter of mathematician Ruth Aaronson Bari, who became a recognized mathematician, and diamond setter Arthur Bari. Her parents were Jewish and Italian in ancestry, respectively. The elder Baris were both active in left-wing politics; they advocated for civil rights and opposed the Vietnam War. Judi Bari was the second of three daughters; her older sister is Gina Kolata, a science journalist for the \"New York Times\"; and younger is Martha Bari, an art historian.\nAlthough Judi Bari attended the University of Maryland for five years, she dropped out without graduating. She said that her college career was most notable for \"anti-Vietnam War rioting\".\nBari began working as a clerk for a chain grocery store and became a union organizer in its work force. At her next job as a mail handler, she organized a wildcat strike in the United States Postal Service bulk mail facility in Maryland.\nMove to California, marriage and family.\nBari moved to the Bay Area in Northern California, which was a center of political activism. In 1978 she met her future husband Michael Sweeney at a labor organizers' conference. They shared an interest in radical politics. Sweeney had graduated from Stanford University, and for a time in the early 1970s had been a member of the Maoist group Venceremos, which had mostly Chicano members. He had been married before.\nIn 1979, Bari and Sweeney married and settled in Santa Rosa, California. They had two daughters together, Lisa (1981) and Jessica (1985). The couple divorced in 1988 and shared custody of their children.\nPolitical and conservation activities.\nDuring the early to mid-1980s, Bari devoted herself to Pledge of Resistance, a group that opposed US policies in Central America. She was a self-proclaimed virtuoso on the bullhorn. She edited, wrote, and drew cartoons for political leaflets and publications.\nAround 1985, Bari moved north with her husband and two children to the vicinity of Redwood Valley in Mendocino County, California. It was an area of old timber towns, such as Eureka and Fortuna, and a new wave of hippies and young counter-culture adults who migrated here from urban areas.\nIn 1986, Houston millionaire Charles Hurwitz acquired Pacific Lumber Company, with assets in Northern California, including in redwood forests. He doubled the company's rate of timber harvesting as a means of paying off the acquisition cost. This enraged environmentalists. The federal government also investigated the transaction because of Hurwitz's use of junk bonds. Activist protests against old-growth timber harvesting by Pacific Lumber became the focus of Earth First! in the following years.\nOn May 8, 1987, a sawmill accident occurred at the Louisiana Pacific mill in Cloverdale, California. Mill worker George Alexander nearly died of injuries suffered when a saw blade struck a spike in a log being milled, generating shrapnel. Adverse publicity resulted.\nEarth First!, which at that point still promoted \"monkeywrenching\" as part of its tactics, was blamed by the company and some workers for the spike because of incidents of equipment sabotage that had taken place in the vicinity where the log was harvested. But responsibility for the spike was not determined. However, it was later confirmed that the prime suspect in the case was not an Earth First! activist but a local \"disgruntled\" landowner.\nThe bad publicity from the incident resulted in Earth First! disavowing tree spiking (but not other forms of sabotage).\nIn 1989, Bari was instrumental in starting Local 1 of the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW), which allied with Earth First! in protests against cutting old growth redwoods. Bari used her labor organizing background to run a workshop on the Industrial Workers of the World at an Earth First! rendezvous in California. Through the formation of IWW\u2013EF! Local 1, she sought to bring together environmentalists and timber workers who were concerned about the harvest rate by the timber industry. She believed they had interests in common.\nThat year, Bari organized the first forest blockade, to promote expanding the South Fork Eel River Wilderness, managed by the US Bureau of Land Management. Related to her other interests, that year Bari also organized a counter-demonstration to protect a Planned Parenthood clinic in Ukiah.\nMany timber workers believed that the environmentalists were threatening their livelihoods. At this time, environmentalists were backing their legal suits against timber overcutting by staging blockades of job sites in the woods and tree sitting. Loggers saw such actions as harassment. Confrontations between loggers and demonstrators were often heated and sometimes violent. Reactions to Bari's involvement in the protests were severe: her car was rammed by a logging truck in 1989, and she received death threats.\nIn August 1989, environmentalist Mem Hill suffered a broken nose in a protest confrontation with loggers in the woods. She filed a legal suit accusing a logger of assault, and claiming law enforcement did not protect her from attack.\nBari emphasized non-violent action and began to incorporate music into her demonstrations. She played the fiddle and sang original compositions by Darryl Cherney, who played guitar. Sometimes she sang her own songs. Their song titles and lyrics aroused controversy, as many listeners considered them offensive. Cherney's song about tree spiking, \"Spike a Tree for Jesus\" is one example; \"Will This Fetus Be Aborted?\", sung as a counter-protest to an anti-abortion rally, was another.\nThe media portrayed her as an obstructionist saboteur. Some activists and area residents found Bari to be egocentric, humorless, and strident. Her tactics often rankled not only members of the timber industry and political establishment, but fellow activists.\nDifferences emerged between Bari and her husband over their political paths and diverging lives. He headed a recycling company in the county. They struggled to reconcile political action with the obligations of parenting. In 1988, with a divorce between herself and her husband underway, she met Darryl Cherney. They began a romantic relationship based partly on shared political beliefs, and appeared together at various protests (as noted above).\nIn 1990, the Sierra Club withdrew its support from legislation amending California Forest Practice Rules and moved forward with a process to establish a Headwaters Forest preserve on Pacific Lumber Company land. They submitted a voter initiative, Proposition 130, dubbed \"Forests Forever.\" The timber industry was strongly opposed to it. In response, environmentalists began organizing Redwood Summer, a campaign of nonviolent protests focused on slowing harvest of redwood forests in Northern California until such forests gained extra protections under Proposition 130. They named their campaign in honor of the 1964 Freedom Summer of the Civil Rights Movement. Bari was instrumental in recruiting demonstrators from college campuses across the United States. But on November 6, 1990, Proposition 130 was defeated by California voters, with 52.1% against. Opponents emphasized the disruptive activities of Redwood Summer, which interfered with timber workers, and the support of Earth First! for Proposition 130. It had been accused of sabotage and violence against workers in the past.\nDuring organizing for Redwood Summer, Bari directed efforts in Mendocino County, and Cherney went on the road to recruit activists. Bari had local connections and a rapport with some lumber industry workers that was developed during her organizing efforts of an IWW local. While recruiting, Cherney was kept at a distance, so that his reputation for advocating sabotage and propensity for hostile outbursts toward timber workers could not damage the campaign.\nOn April 22, 1990, a group called Earth Night Action Group sabotaged power poles in southern Santa Cruz County, causing power outages. Upon hearing of that incident, Bari reportedly said, \"Desperate times call for desperate measures,\" and \"So what if some ice cream melted?\" Observers interpreted her statements as approval of sabotage, and thought Earth First! might still be involved in such activities. A provocative flyer was publicized that had been written by Cherney: he called for \"Earth Night\" actions, and it featured images of a monkey wrench, an earth mover, and figures representing saboteurs in the night. Cherney said the flyer was facetious. The identities of members of the Earth Night Action Group has never been established; their relationship to Earth First! was a matter of speculation.\nOn May 9, 1990, a failed incendiary pipe bomb was discovered in the Louisiana Pacific sawmill in Cloverdale. A hand-lettered sign, saying \"L-P screws millworkers\", had been placed outside the mill. Responsibility for the bomb was never established.\nOn May 22, 1990, Bari met with local loggers to agree on ground rules for nonviolence during the Redwood Summer demonstrations. In the early afternoon of May 23, 1990, Bari started a road trip to Santa Cruz to organize for Redwood Summer and related musical events. She stopped for a press conference in Ukiah and for a meeting at the Seeds of Peace collective house in Berkeley.\nThat night she stayed overnight in Oakland, at a house near MacArthur and Park boulevards. On May 24 she and Darryl Cherney (as passenger) drove away from the house, and a short time later a bomb exploded beneath her seat. She suffered severe injuries and Cherney suffered lesser ones.\nCar bombing attempt on Bari's life.\nSummary.\nOn May 24, 1990, in Oakland, California, Bari and Darryl Cherney were traveling in her car when it was blown up by a pipe bomb under her seat. Bari was driving and severely injured by the blast. Cherney suffered minor injuries. Bari was arrested for transporting explosives while she was still in critical condition with a fractured pelvis and other major injuries.\nFBI bomb investigators reached the scene nearly simultaneously with first responders from the Oakland Police Department. Bari raised suspicion that the FBI knew about the bomb beforehand and might have been responsible for it. In Bari's words, it was as if the investigators were \"waiting around the corner with their fingers in their ears.\" It was later revealed that there had been a tip to law enforcement, suspected to be from the person responsible for the bomb, that \"some heavies\" were carrying a bomb south for sabotage in the Santa Cruz area.\nThe Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) took jurisdiction of the case away from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, alleging it was an eco-terrorism case. The Oakland Police Department of Alameda County was the local agency on the case. Bari's wounds disabled her to the extent she had to curtail her activities. As Bari convalesced, other activists carried out Redwood Summer, conducting a series of demonstrations by thousands of environmental activists.\nIn late July 1990, the Alameda County District Attorney declined to press charges against Bari and Cherney, claiming insufficient evidence. But Bari and Cherney filed a civil rights suit in 1991 for violations by the FBI and Oakland Police because of the arrests and search warrants carried out on their properties. The trial was not concluded until 2002. Bari died of breast cancer in 1997. The jury found that their civil rights had been violated. The court made an award of $4.4 million to Cherney and Bari's estate.\nEvents of investigation.\nWhen the Oakland police and the FBI initially accused Bari and Cherney of knowingly carrying a bomb for use in an act of terrorism, the story made headlines nationwide. By 3:00\u00a0p.m. of the day of the bombing, Bari was arrested for transportation of illegal explosives. She was still being treated in Highland Hospital.\nBecause of Earth First! had earlier developed a reputation for sabotage, the media reported the police version of events. For example, a KQED news report, entitled \"Focus: Logjam\", used the term \"radical\" to describe Earth First!, blamed them for having sabotaged loggers' equipment and conducting tree spiking, and tied Bari's bombing in with such actions.\nBased on his personal observations of bomb damage to the car, FBI Special Agent Frank Doyle filed a public affidavit that the bomb had been carried on the back seat floorboard of Bari's vehicle. The FBI was granted a search warrant on May 25 at 2:21\u00a0a.m., and agents used a helicopter to quickly reach Bari's home and search it. Agents also searched the premises of the \"Seeds of Peace\" house in Berkeley, where Bari and Cherney had visited the day before the explosion. Members of Seeds of Peace were repeatedly interviewed; they said that they repeatedly told police that Bari and Cherney were committed to nonviolence.\nWithin a week, supporters of Bari and Cherney were petitioning for an investigation of the FBI's investigative methods. Daniel Hamburg, a former Mendocino County Supervisor, and others complained that the investigation seemed focused on charging the two environmentalists.\nOn July 6, a new search warrant for Bari's home was granted, as investigators sought exemplars of typewriting to compare to the typewritten The \"Lord's Avenger\", a letter claiming responsibility for the bomb.\nFBI analysis of the explosive device determined it was a pipe bomb with nails wrapped to its surface to create shrapnel. It was equipped with a timer-armed motion trigger, so that it would explode only when the car was driven. The bomb was confirmed to have been placed on the floorboard directly under the driver's seat, not on the floorboard behind the seat, as Agent Doyle had claimed. That evidence suggested that the bomb was an anti-personnel device intended to kill the driver of Bari's car. The FBI investigation remained focused on the theory that the explosion was an accidental detonation of a device knowingly transported by Bari. They attempted to match roofing nails transported in Bari's car to finishing nails used with the bomb. After seven weeks of news stories reporting the police claims that all evidence pointed to Bari and Cherney, the Alameda County District Attorney announced that he would not file any formal charges against the pair due to insufficient evidence against them. Law enforcement agencies never fully investigated evidence that the bombing was an attempt on Bari's life. The crime has remained unsolved.\nDuring her convalescence, Bari issued a directive prohibiting those in her circle from cooperating with investigators. Even after she was no longer considered a suspect, she demanded that her circle remain silent. Bari offered cooperation with investigators in return for legal immunity; but her offer was refused.\nTheories.\nThe \"Lord's Avenger\".\nFive days after the bombing, on May 29, while Bari was still in hospital, Mike Geniella of the Santa Rosa \"Press Democrat\" received a letter claiming responsibility for both the bomb in Bari's car and a partially detonated one set a week before at the Cloverdale lumber mill. Written in an ornate, biblical style with misogynistic language, the letter was signed \"The Lord's Avenger.\" It said the writer had been outraged by Bari's statements and behavior in December 1988, when she opposed an anti-abortion protest at a Planned Parenthood clinic in Ukiah, California. The letter described the construction of the two bombs in great detail.\nBased on content of the letter, law enforcement investigated Bill Staley, a self-styled preacher, Louisiana Pacific mill worker, and former professional football player who had been prominent at the 1988 anti-abortion demonstration. Staley was eventually cleared of suspicion in the bombing. While the letter's author gave accurate details about the bombs' construction, investigators found the explanation of how the bomb was placed in Bari's car to be implausible. Both supporters and detractors of Bari's theory of the bombing being an FBI/industry plot, which had been publicized, concluded that the bomb builder sent the letter in an effort to divert attention to Staley.\nDarryl Cherney.\nInvestigators looked closely at both Cherney and Bari's ex-husband Sweeney as potential suspects, knowing that women often faced danger and were killed by men close to them, especially after relationships ended. Some of Bari's friends had noted changes in her relationship with Cherney, and thought he may have set the bomb because Bari had replaced him as the leading organizer of Earth First! in northern California. In a related rumor, there was talk that killing Bari would provide a martyr to boost the profile of Redwood Summer. Suspicions about his writing the Lord's Avenger letter, as well as more general grounds, fell apart under logical impossibilities.\nFBI.\nThe FBI's assertion that the bombing was an accidental detonation was shown to be completely implausible in the face of physical evidence. Bari and her supporters began to suspect the assailant was associated with the FBI. Within the next year, Bari developed the theory that the bomber was an acquaintance whom she had suspected of being an FBI informant. From depositions taken in 1994 for Bari and Cherney's federal civil rights lawsuit, they learned that the May 24 bombing of Bari's car bore a close resemblance to \"crime scenes\" staged by the FBI in a \"bomb school\" held in redwood country with the assistance of the Pacific Lumber company earlier that year. Bari and followers believed this supported their idea that the bombing could be attributed to the FBI.\nThe FBI school was intended to train local and state police officers on how to investigate bomb scenes. The school taught that bomb explosions inside a vehicle often indicated the knowing, criminal transportation of homemade bombs, which went off accidentally. They noted that it was difficult to break into a locked car in order to plant a bomb. By 1991, evidence conclusively showed that the bomb was placed directly beneath Bari's seat, as she had said from the day of the accident.\nAccording to Bari, FBI Special Agent Frank Doyle, one of the agents on her case, had been the instructor at the bomb school. At least four of the law enforcement responders to the bombing had been students of his at the school.\nIn the weeks before the bombing, Bari had received numerous death threats related to her anti-logging activism, which she reported to local police. After the bombing, her attorney turned over such written threats to the FBI for investigation. As revealed in the 2002 trial evidence, neither the Oakland police nor the FBI ever investigated these.\nBari's ex-husband.\nIn 1991, Stephen Talbot, KQED reporter and documentary producer, and investigative reporter David Helvarg made a documentary titled \"Who Bombed Judi Bari?\". It was the first mainstream media investigation to critique the FBI and Oakland Police Department case against Bari During the production, Talbot discovered circumstantial evidence and heard suspicions expressed by acquaintances of Bari that her ex-husband Mike Sweeney should be considered a suspect. Bari told Talbot in confidence that she also had doubts about her former husband, and that he abused her during their marriage. She later publicly denied these statements. Talbot named Sweeney and others as possible suspects in the bombing, but in 1991 did not attribute any statements to Bari. After her death, he felt released from his journalist's protection of her as a source. He wrote about Sweeney as a suspect more directly in a 2002 article published on Salon.com.\nEven though Talbot and Helvarg's film had made the case for Bari's innocence, based on their point-by-point critique of the FBI and Oakland police accusations against her, Bari strongly criticized Talbot's 1991 film in her article, \"Who bought Steve Talbot?,\" published in the \"San Francisco Weekly\" and the \"Anderson Valley Advertiser\" because Talbot raised questions about her ex-husband Michael Sweeney.\nTalbot also had reported a 1989 letter signed by \"Argus\" that was sent to the Chief of the Ukiah Police Department, offering to be an informant against Bari regarding marijuana dealing. Bari claimed in her article that the \"Argus\" letter had to have been written by Irv Sutley, a Peace and Freedom Party activist whom she had met in 1988. Attention had also been focused on two other threatening letters: a \"no second warning\" death threat letter sent to Bari about a month before the bombing, and what became known as the \"Lord's Avenger\" letter sent to the \"Santa Rosa Press Democrat\" immediately after the bombing.\nThrough the early 1990s, many activists believed that the bombing was the work of either the FBI or other opponents of Bari's Earth First! activities. Irv Sutley was suspected as the hitman. But Bari's attempts to shape accounts of the bombing were alienating supporters and raised suspicions that she was hiding something. Bruce Anderson of the \"Advertiser\" was among those put off by her assertions. He knew that the 1988 divorce had been bitter. While he thought that some of her post-bombing behavior was odd, he continued to support her public position.\nAs he later recalled:\nI still feel guilty about not defending you [Talbot]. I wimped out completely. I knew she'd told you about Sweeney. Lots of people knew she'd told you. I was a complete dupe, a coward and a fool. I convinced myself that her work mobilizing people against the corporate timber companies outweighed unpleasant aspects of her character and the even more unpleasant aspects of her personal behavior.\nIn a reaction to efforts to tie Sutley to the bombing, some former Bari supporters publicly shifted their suspicion toward Sweeney. In 1995 Ed Gehrman, a teacher and publisher of \"Flatland\", a small magazine (now defunct) in Fort Bragg, California, had also participated in Redwood Summer protests. He became concerned about the controversy over Sutley. Initially suspecting Sutley, Gehrman questioned him directly about it. Sutley denied being involved. In addition, he said that in 1989, Pam Davis, a friend of Bari, had on three separate occasions offered him $5,000 to kill her ex-husband Sweeney. In response, Bari said in a radio broadcast that the apparent solicitation was a joke misunderstood by her friend, who had conveyed the offer to Sutley.\nGehrman believed that someone was lying. He discussed the issues with journalist Alexander Cockburn of \"CounterPunch\", a political magazine. Cockburn offered to pay for polygraph tests of the key players in the controversy. Sutley was the only one who accepted the offer; he took a polygraph test and passed. (Law enforcement does not rely on such polygraph tests.) After that, Gehrman considered Sutley credible. As he considered motives for that attack, he began to suspect Sweeney more strongly.\nGehrman presented his case for exculpating Sutley in \"Flatland\". Anderson reconsidered his support of Bari's position, arousing anger among her supporters. Anderson was incensed by the possibility that Bari had tried to smear an innocent man in order to promote her narrative that the timber industry and/or the FBI were involved in the bombing. Anderson suggested that Bari and Sweeney each had sufficient guilty knowledge to destroy the other \u2013 a legal mutual assured destruction scenario.\nMeanwhile, Gehrman tried to use the \"Argus,\" \"no second warning,\" and \"Lord's Avenger\" letters to determine the identity of Bari's assailant. He submitted facsimiles of the three letters and their envelopes, along with exemplars of text written by various suspects, to Don Foster. An English professor at Vassar College, Foster had established expertise in attributional analysis of documents. (He has since been discounted as an expert.) Foster concluded that the three letters were from the same writer and most closely matched exemplars by Sweeney.\nAnderson wrote regular columns in the \"Advertiser\" accusing the supporters of the late Bari of lying by their continued support of the industry/FBI theory. Gehrman said he was approached in 2005 by Jan Maxwell, a longtime friend of Pam Davis. Maxwell said that Davis had told her that Bari had suggested a murder-for-hire solicitation against Sweeney. This seemed to place the solicitations to Sutley within a larger pattern. Gehrman presented a summary of his knowledge about the case, which he reprinted in the \"Advertiser\" in 2008.\nYears before, in 2002, at the conclusion of the Bari/Cherney civil rights trial, Stephen Talbot had already publicly reported on \"Salon.com\" that Bari had confided in him about her suspicions of Sweeney and the car bombing, as well as her knowledge that he had firebombed the Santa Rosa airport in 1980. She also said that Sweeney had abused her during their marriage.\nAftermath.\nWhile the bombing investigation was underway, Earth First! organizers proceeded with training and demonstrations in several timber towns: Fort Bragg (July), Eureka, and Fortuna. Before they got underway, the Mendocino County Board of Supervisors was considering legislation to regulate the size of protest signs and standards, in order to curb violence by demonstrators. Meanwhile, Redwood Summer organizers debated whether to cancel demonstrations in the woods as being too dangerous.\nOn May 29, representatives of Redwood Summer were pleased to reach an agreement with some of industry: they signed with small local logging companies to support nonviolent and non-destructive protests of timber harvesting. Activists eventually continued events of Redwood Summer, demonstrating in some of the timber towns. The demonstrations by environmentalists were generally countered by demonstrations of numerous loggers and their families. The latter believed that their jobs and lives were jeopardized by proposed restrictions on logging.\nRedwood Summer ended with Earth First! claiming success because they had trained so many volunteers in nonviolent resistance. But the numbers of participants in protests were smaller than organizers had hoped for. In addition, by September, the \"New York Times\" was reporting that antagonism between environmentalists and timber workers seemed to have increased. State voters defeated Proposition 130, which would have restricted logging, on November 6, 1990. The campaign against it had emphasized its support by Earth First!.\nSeveral years later, the Northern California \"Timber Wars\" heated up again in 1998. Earth First! members were dissatisfied with the final agreement that established the Headwaters Forest Reserve. By a bill passed in 1997, the government was authorized to acquire and protect , rather than the much larger portion proposed for more than a decade. The division between the timber community and Earth First! became sharper than ever. \"Anarchists\" and other advocates of violence, such as Rodney Coronado, a convicted arsonist and Earth Liberation Front member, gained prominence within Earth First!. Such members threatened both the industrial equipment and facilities of timber companies, as well as individuals at their private residences. After Bari died in 1997, she had the status of a major leader in Earth First! lore, but timber protests moved away from the community-based collaboration that she had tried to develop and present.\nLater events related to bombing investigation.\nThe bombing of Bari and Cherney has never been solved. Following the 2002 trial and award of damages, Cherney and supporters sought access to the remains of the partially intact Cloverdale mill bomb held by the FBI. Investigators believed that similarities between it and the remains of the pipe bomb in the car showed they were constructed by the same maker. They hoped to find DNA evidence that could be analyzed by current technology and reveal a suspect. In 2012, a federal judge ordered the FBI not to destroy the remains of that pipe bomb, as they had planned. Ben Rosenfeld, attorney for Cherney, requested DNA analysis by an outside lab. The FBI said they had never performed such testing. The judge ordered such testing.\nThe case remains under the jurisdiction of the City of Oakland, where it occurred, and the Alameda County District Attorney. The Mendocino County Sheriff's Office has deferred on jurisdictional issues, claiming that there is insufficient evidence that the bomb was planted in Mendocino County.\nIn 2001 DNA evidence from documents, including the \"Lord's Avenger\" letter, which is believed strongly tied to Bari's assailant and yielded a fingerprint, was presented by joint agreement of the Bari advocates and the FBI. It does not match DNA samples obtained from Sutley. Mike Sweeney reportedly had not submitted a DNA sample. It is not known if law enforcement requested him to submit one.\nWriting and public service career.\nBari became a political writer as part of her interests in feminism, class struggle, and ecology. In May 1992, in an article published in \"Ms.\" magazine, she claimed to have feminized Earth First!. The radical environmentalist group was founded by men. In its early days, they pursued sabotage that damaged equipment and threatened the lives of timber workers, a series of actions known as \"monkeywrenching\". Bari emphasized non-violent actions and public education in an effort to build collaboration in the region.\nStepping back from Earth First! leadership because of dealing with inoperable cancer, by the end of 1996, Bari was working as a para-legal and hosting a weekly public radio show. Before her death, she organized the Redwood Summer Justice Project, a non-profit organization to coordinate political and financial support for the suit she and Cherney were conducting.\nIn 1994 Bari was part of a congressional advisory committee, chartered by Congressman Dan Hamburg (D-CA), trying to develop a proposal for a Headwaters Forest Reserve of 44,000 acres. Efforts had been underway to protect this area for more than a decade. Their proposal included a compensation clause for those lumber workers who would have been laid off following establishment of this extensive reserve. The bill based on the \"large reserve\" proposal died in Congress after Hamburg lost his 1994 re-election bid; during a midterm upheaval, he was defeated by the Republican former incumbent of his seat. Instead, a 7472-acre forest reserve was authorized by a bill passed on November 14, 1997, shortly after Bari's death.\nDeath and posthumous civil rights trial.\nOn March 2, 1997, Bari died of breast cancer at her home near Willits. A memorial service in her honor was attended by an estimated 1,000 people.\nBari and Cherney had filed a federal civil rights suit in 1991 claiming that the FBI and police officers falsely arrested the pair in relation to the bombing of her car in May 1990. They were accused of carrying the bomb to use for other purposes. Bari and Cherney said that law enforcement was trying to frame them as terrorists so as to discredit their political organizing to protect the redwood forests.\nIn 1997, Bari and Cherney sued the law enforcement officers named in the civil rights suit for conspiracy to violate the activists' First and Fourth Amendment rights. On October 15 that year, the agents lost their bid for immunity from prosecution.\nAlso on October 15, federal judge Claudia Wilken dismissed former FBI supervisor SAIC Richard Wallace Held from the case. The court said that as SAIC he had no duty to oversee the daily duties of his subordinate agents. The plaintiffs' contention that the FBI was responsible for the bomb was also dismissed from the case. Its scope was restricted to malicious investigative malpractice on the part of the FBI, and the allowed damage claim was reduced from $20 million to $4.4 million.\nThe suit finally went to trial in 2002. After deliberation for two weeks, a jury found in favor of Bari's and Cherney's federal civil lawsuit. They concluded the pair's civil rights had been violated by several named individuals from the FBI and Oakland Police Department.\nAs part of the jury's verdict, the judge ordered Frank Doyle and two other FBI agents, and three Oakland police officers, to pay a total of $4.4 million to Cherney and to Bari's estate. The award was compensation for the defendants' violation of the plaintiffs' First Amendment rights to freedom of speech and freedom of assembly, and for the defendants' various unlawful acts, including unlawful search and seizure in violation of the plaintiffs' Fourth Amendment rights. At trial the FBI and the Oakland Police had pointed fingers at each other:\nOakland investigators testified that they relied almost exclusively on the F.B.I.'s counter-terrorism unit in San Francisco for advice on how to handle the case. But the F.B.I. agents denied misleading the investigators into believing that Ms. Bari and Mr. Cherney were violence-prone radicals who were probably guilty of transporting the bomb.\nWhile neither agency would admit wrongdoing, the jury held both liable, finding that \"[B]oth agencies admitted they had amassed intelligence on the couple before the bombing.\" This evidence supported the jury's finding that both the FBI and the Oakland police persecuted Bari and Cherney as potential terrorists rather than conducting a full investigation to try to find the perpetrators. They were trying to discredit and sabotage Earth First! and the planned Redwood Summer of 1990, thereby violating the plaintiffs' First Amendment rights and justifying the large award.\nAfter the trial's gag order was lifted, a juror revealed to the press that she believed the law enforcement agents had lied:\n\"Investigators were lying so much it was insulting\u00a0. ... I'm surprised that they seriously expected anyone would believe them\u00a0... They were evasive. They were arrogant. They were defensive,\" said juror Mary Nunn.\nLegacy.\nOn May 20, 2003, the Oakland City Council unanimously voted a resolution establishing Judi Bari Day, stating:\nWhereas, Judi Bari was a dedicated activist, who worked for many social and environmental causes, the most prominent being the protection and stewardship of California's ancient redwood forests.\u00a0... Now, therefore, be it resolved that the City of Oakland shall designate May 24 as Judi Bari Day\u00a0...\nRenewed controversy.\nA critical biography of Bari titled \"The Secret Wars of Judi Bari\" (2005), by investigative journalist Kate Coleman, drew fierce criticism by many supporters. But a\nreview by Polly Welts Kaufman in \"Environmental History\" said that the author \"succeeds in offering a balanced view of her life.\"\nCherney, managers of Bari's estate (for her portion of the FBI settlement award), Bari's ex-husband Michael Sweeney, a suspect in the bombing; and their followers, claimed the book had hundreds of factual errors and expressed a bias against Bari and Earth First! These critics noted that the publisher, Encounter Books, was founded by arch-conservative Peter Collier. They said it was funded primarily by arch-conservative foundations not sympathetic to Bari's causes. Author Coleman said that such allegations and the aspersions cast on the publisher, were being used as a smokescreen. She said the book's detractors were dedicated to preserving an incomplete and distorted memory of Ms. Bari.\nCherney and some other critics said that Coleman had failed to include more information from their points of view. The author said that they had not responded to her attempts to contact them.\nIn her book, Coleman outlined a case that Sweeney, Bari's ex-husband, had planted the bomb in order to kill her. This thesis had been suggested by others, namely Stephen Talbot, in his 1991 documentary, and more specifically in his 2002 article on \"Salon.com\", in which he revealed statements that Bari had made to him in 1991. He felt her death lifted his responsibility to protect her confidences.\nMark Hertsgaard wrote a critical review in the \"Los Angeles Times\" entitled, \"'Too many rumors, too few facts to examine eco-activism case\". He said, \"the reporting is thin and sloppy, and the humdrum prose is marred by dubious speculation.\" Ed Guthmann, in a review in the \"San Francisco Chronicle\", criticized Hertsgaard's review for containing its own errors.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56509", "revid": "39762818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56509", "title": "Potash", "text": "Salt mixture\nPotash ( ) are mined and manufactured salts that contain potassium in water-soluble form. The term \"potash\" derives from \"pot ash\", either plant ashes or wood ashes that were soaked in water in a pot, which was the primary means of manufacturing potash before the Industrial Era; the word \"potassium\" derives from the term \"potash\".\nIn 2021, the worldwide production of potash exceeded 71.9\u00a0million tonnes (~45.4 million tonnes K2O equivalent), and Canada is the greatest producer of potash as fertilizer. Potassium was first derived in 1807 by electrolysis of caustic potash (potassium hydroxide).\nTerminology.\nThe term \"potash\" refers to compounds of potassium and to potassium-bearing materials, usually potassium carbonate. The usage of the term \"potash\" dates from 1477, and derives from the Middle Dutch word , denoting pot ashes.\nThe old method of making potassium carbonate (K2CO3) was either by collecting or by producing wood ash (the occupation of the ash burner), chemically leaching the ashes and then evaporating the resulting solution in large iron pots, which yielded a white residue denominated \"pot ash\"; approximately 10% by weight of common wood ash can be recovered as potash.\nThe term \"potash\" later identified minerals that contained potassium salts and the artificial commercial product derived from the salts. The table identifies eight (8) potassium compounds with the term \"potash\" in their traditional names:\nHistory.\nOrigin of potash ore.\nMost of the world reserves of potassium (K) were deposited as sea water in ancient inland oceans. After the water evaporated, the potassium salts crystallized into beds of potash ore. These are the locations where potash is being mined today. The deposits are a naturally occurring mixture of potassium chloride (KCl; mineral name sylvite) and sodium chloride (NaCl; mineral name halite), more commonly known as table salt. Over time, as the surface of the earth changed, these deposits were covered by thousands of feet of earth.\nBronze Age.\nPotash (especially potassium carbonate) has been used in bleaching textiles, making glass, ceramic, and making soap, since the Bronze Age. Potash was principally obtained by leaching the ashes of wood burned for heating and cooking.\n14th\u201317th century.\nPotash mining.\nBeginning in the 14th century potash was mined in Ethiopia. One of the world's largest deposits, 140 to 150\u00a0million tons, is located in the Dallol area of the Afar Region.\nWood-derived potash.\nPotash was one of the most important industrial chemicals. It was refined from the ashes of broadleaved trees and produced primarily in the forested areas of Europe, Russia, and North America. Although methods for producing artificial alkalis were invented in the late 18th century, these did not become economical until the late 19th century and so the dependence on organic sources of potash remained.\nPotash became an important international trade commodity in Europe from at least the early 14th century. It is estimated that European imports of potash required 6 or more million cubic metres each year from the early 17th century. Between 1420 and 1620, the primary exporting cities for wood-derived potash were Gda\u0144sk, K\u00f6nigsberg and Riga. In the late 15th century, London was the lead importer due to its position as the centre of soft soap making while the Dutch dominated as suppliers and consumers in the 16th century. From the 1640s, geopolitical disruptions (i.e. Russo-Polish War (1654\u20131667)) meant that the centres of export moved from the Baltic to Arkhangelsk, Russia. In 1700, Russian ash was dominant though Gda\u0144sk remained notable for the quality of its potash.\n18th century.\nKelp ash.\nOn the Orkney islands, kelp ash provided potash and soda ash, production starting \"possibly as early as 1719\" and lasting for a century. The products were \"eagerly sought after by the glass and soap industries of the time.\"\nNorth America.\nBy the 18th century, higher quality American potash was increasingly exported to Britain. In the late 18th and early 19th centuries, potash production provided settlers in North America badly needed cash and credit as they cleared wooded land for crops. To make full use of their land, settlers needed to dispose of excess wood. The easiest way to accomplish this was to burn any wood not needed for fuel or construction. Ashes from hardwood trees could then be used to make lye, which could either be used to make soap or boiled down to produce valuable potash. Hardwood could generate ashes at the rate of 60 to 100 bushels per acre (500 to 900 m3/km2). In 1790, the sale of ashes could generate $3.25 to $6.25 per acre ($800 to $1,500/km2) in rural New York State \u2013 nearly the same rate as hiring a laborer to clear the same area. Potash making became a major industry in British North America. Great Britain was always the most important market. The American potash industry followed the woodsman's ax across the country.\nThe first US patent.\nThe first US patent of any kind was issued in 1790 to Samuel Hopkins for an improvement \"in the making of Pot ash and Pearl ash by a new Apparatus and Process\". \"Pearl ash\" was a purer quality made by calcination of potash in a reverberatory furnace or kiln. Potash pits were once used in England to produce potash that was used in making soap for the preparation of wool for yarn production.\n19th century.\nAfter about 1820, New York replaced New England as the most important source; by 1840 the center was in Ohio. Potash production was always a by-product industry, following from the need to clear land for agriculture.\nCanada.\nFrom 1767, potash from wood ashes was exported from Canada. By 1811, 70% of the total 19.6 million lbs of potash imports to Britain came from Canada. Exports of potash and pearl ash reached 43,958 barrels in 1865. There were 519 asheries in operation in 1871.\n20th century industrialization.\nThe wood-ash industry declined in the late 19th century when large-scale production of salts was established in Germany. In the early 20th century, the potash industry was dominated by a cartel in which Germany had the dominant role.147 WWI saw a brief resurgence of American asheries, with their product typically consisting of 66% hydroxide, 17% carbonate, 16% sulfate and other impurities. Later in the century, the cartel ended as new potash producers emerged in the USSR and Canada.147\nIn 1943, potash was discovered in Saskatchewan, Canada, during oil drilling. Active exploration began in 1951. In 1958, the Potash Company of America became the first potash producer in Canada with the commissioning of an underground potash mine at Patience Lake. As numerous potash producers in Canada developed, the Saskatchewan government became increasingly involved in the industry, leading to the creation of Canpotex in the 1970s.147 \nIn 1964 the Canadian company Kalium Chemicals established the first potash mine using the solution process. The discovery was made during oil reserve exploration. The mine was developed near Regina, Saskatchewan. The mine reached depths greater than 1500 meters. It is now the Mosaic Corporation's Belle Plaine unit.\nThe USSR's potash production had largely been for domestic use and use in the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance countries.147 After the dissolution of the USSR, Russian and Belarusian potash producers entered into direct competition with producers elsewhere in the world for the first time.147\nIn the beginning of the 20th century, potash deposits were found in the Dallol Depression in the Musely and Crescent localities near the Ethiopean-Eritrean border. The estimated reserves in Musely and Crescent are 173 and 12\u00a0million tonnes respectively. The latter is particularly suitable for surface mining. It was explored in the 1960s but the works stopped due to flooding in 1967. Attempts to continue mining in the 1990s were halted by the Eritrean\u2013Ethiopian War and have not resumed as of 2009.\nMining.\nShaft mining and strip mining.\nAll commercial potash deposits come originally from evaporite deposits and are often buried deep below the earth's surface. Potash ores are typically rich in potassium chloride (KCl), sodium chloride (NaCl) and other salts and clays, and are typically obtained by conventional shaft mining with the extracted ore ground into a powder. Most potash mines today are deep shaft mines as much as 4,400 feet (1,400 m) underground. Others are mined as strip mines, having been laid down in horizontal layers as sedimentary rock. In above-ground processing plants, the KCl is separated from the mixture to produce a high-analysis potassium fertilizer. Other potassium salts can be separated by various procedures, resulting in potassium sulfate and potassium-magnesium sulfate. Saskatchewan is the world\u2019s largest producer of potash.\nDissolution mining and evaporation methods.\nOther methods include dissolution mining and evaporation methods from brines. In the evaporation method, hot water is injected into the potash, which is dissolved and then pumped to the surface where it is concentrated by solar induced evaporation. Amine reagents are then added to either the mined or evaporated solutions. The amine coats the KCl but not NaCl. Air bubbles cling to the amine + KCl and float it to the surface while the NaCl and clay sink to the bottom. The surface is skimmed for the amine + KCl, which is then dried and packaged for use as a K rich fertilizer\u2014KCl dissolves readily in water and is available quickly for plant nutrition.\nRecovery of potassium fertilizer salts from sea water has been studied in India. During extraction of salt from seawater by evaporation, potassium salts get concentrated in bittern, an effluent from the salt industry.\nProduction.\nPotash deposits are distributed unevenly throughout the world.147 As of 2015[ [update]], deposits are being mined in Canada, Russia, China, Belarus, Israel, Germany, Chile, the United States, Jordan, Spain, the United Kingdom, Uzbekistan and Brazil, with the most significant deposits present under the great depths of the Prairie Evaporite Formation in Saskatchewan, Canada. Canada and Russia are the countries where the bulk of potash is produced; Belarus is also a major producer.12\nThe Permian Basin deposit includes the major mines outside of Carlsbad, New Mexico, to the world's purest potash deposit in Lea County, New Mexico (near the Carlsbad deposits), which is believed to be roughly 80% pure. (Osceola County, Michigan, has deposits 90+% pure; the only mine there was converted to salt production, however.) Canada is the largest producer, followed by Russia and Belarus. The most significant reserve of Canada's potash is located in the province of Saskatchewan and is mined by The Mosaic Company, Nutrien and K+S.\nIn China, most potash deposits are concentrated in the deserts and salt flats of the endorheic basins of its western provinces, particularly Qinghai. Geological expeditions discovered the reserves in the 1950s but commercial exploitation lagged until Deng Xiaoping's Reform and Opening Up Policy in the 1980s. The 1989 opening of the Qinghai Potash Fertilizer Factory in the remote Qarhan Playa increased China's production of potassium chloride sixfold, from less than a year at Haixi and Tanggu to just under a year.\nIn 2013, almost 70% of potash production was controlled by Canpotex, an exporting and marketing firm, and the Belarusian Potash Company. The latter was a joint venture between Belaruskali and Uralkali, but on July 30, 2013, Uralkali announced that it had ended the venture.\nPotash is water soluble and transporting it requires special transportation infrastructure.152 \nOccupational hazards.\nExcessive respiratory disease due to environmental hazards, such as radon and asbestos, has been a concern for potash miners throughout history. Potash miners are liable to develop silicosis. Based on a study conducted between 1977 and 1987 of cardiovascular disease among potash workers, the overall mortality rates were low, but a noticeable difference in above-ground workers was documented.\nUse.\nFertilizers.\nPotassium is the third major plant and crop nutrient after nitrogen and phosphorus. It has been used since antiquity as a soil fertilizer (about 90% of current use). Fertilizer use is the main driver behind potash consumption, especially for its use in fertilizing crops that contribute to high-protein diets.23 As of at least 2010, more than 95% of potash is mined for use in agricultural purposes.24\nElemental potassium does not occur in nature because it reacts violently with water. As part of various compounds, potassium makes up about 2.6% of the Earth's crust by mass and is the seventh most abundant element, similar in abundance to sodium at approximately 1.8% of the crust. Potash is important for agriculture because it improves water retention, yield, nutrient value, taste, color, texture24 and disease resistance of food crops. It has wide application to fruit and vegetables, rice, wheat and other grains, sugar, corn, soybeans, palm oil and cotton, all of which benefit from the nutrient's quality-enhancing properties.\nDemand for food and animal feed has been on the rise since 2000. The United States Department of Agriculture's Economic Research Service (ERS) attributes the trend to average annual population increases of 75\u00a0million people around the world. Geographically, economic growth in Asia and Latin America greatly contributed to the increased use of potash-based fertilizer. Rising incomes in developing countries also were a factor in the growing potash and fertilizer use. With more money in the household budget, consumers added more meat and dairy products to their diets. This shift in eating patterns required more acres to be planted, more fertilizer to be applied and more animals to be fed\u2014all requiring more potash.\nAfter years of trending upward, fertilizer use slowed in 2008. The worldwide economic downturn is the primary reason for the declining fertilizer use, dropping prices, and mounting inventories.\nThe world's largest consumers of potash are China, the United States, Brazil, and India. Brazil imports 90% of the potash it needs. Potash consumption for fertilizers is expected to increase to about 37.8 million tonnes by 2022.\nPotash imports and exports are often reported in K2O \"equivalent\", although fertilizer never contains potassium oxide, per se, because potassium oxide is caustic and hygroscopic.\nPricing.\nAt the beginning of 2008, potash prices started a meteoric climb from less than US$200 a tonne to a high of US$875 in February 2009. These subsequently dropped dramatically to an April 2010 low of US$310 level, before recovering in 2011\u201312, and relapsing again in 2013. For reference, prices in November 2011 were about US$470 per tonne, but as of May 2013 were stable at US$393. After the surprise breakup of the world's largest potash cartel at the end of July 2013, potash prices were poised to drop some 20 percent. At the end of December 2015, potash traded for US$295 a tonne. In April 2016 its price was US$269. In May 2017, prices had stabilised at around US$216 a tonne down 18% from the previous year. By January 2018, prices have been recovering to around US$225 a tonne. World potash demand tends to be price inelastic in the short-run and even in the long run.\nOther uses.\nIn addition to its use as a fertilizer, potassium chloride is important in many industrialized economies, where it is used in aluminium recycling, by the chloralkali industry to produce potassium hydroxide, in metal electroplating, oil-well drilling fluid, snow and ice melting, steel heat-treating, in medicine as a treatment for hypokalemia, and water softening. Potassium hydroxide is used for industrial water treatment and is the precursor of potassium carbonate, several forms of potassium phosphate, many other potassic chemicals, and soap manufacturing. Potassium carbonate is used to produce animal feed supplements, cement, fire extinguishers, food products, photographic chemicals, and textiles. It is also used in brewing beer, pharmaceutical preparations, and as a catalyst for synthetic rubber manufacturing. Also combined with silica sand to produce potassium silicate, sometimes known as waterglass, for use in paints and arc welding electrodes. These non-fertilizer uses have accounted for about 15% of annual potash consumption in the United States.\nSubstitutes.\nNo substitutes exist for potassium as an essential plant nutrient and as an essential nutritional requirement for animals and humans.143 Manure and glauconite (greensand) are low-potassium-content sources that can be profitably transported only short distances to crop fields.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56510", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56510", "title": "Angiopathy", "text": "Disease of the blood vessels\nAngiopathy is the generic term for a disease of the blood vessels (arteries, veins, and capillaries). This also refers to the condition of damage or rupture of small blood vessels. The best known and most prevalent angiopathy is diabetic angiopathy, a common complication of chronic diabetes.\nClassification.\nBy caliber.\nThere are two types of angiopathy: macroangiopathy and microangiopathy.\nIn macroangiopathy, atherosclerosis and a resultant blood clot forms on the large blood vessels, sticks to the vessel walls, and blocks the flow of blood. Macroangiopathy in the heart is coronary artery disease; in the brain, it is cerebrovascular disease. Macroangiopathy may cause other complications, such as ischemic heart disease, stroke and peripheral vascular disease which contributes to the diabetic foot ulcers and the risk of amputation.\nIn microangiopathy, the walls of the smaller blood vessels become so thick and weak that they bleed, leak protein, and slow the flow of blood through the body. The decrease of blood flow through stenosis or clot formation impairs the flow of oxygen to cells and biological tissues (called ischemia) and leads to cellular death (necrosis and gangrene, which in turn may require amputation). Thus, tissues which are very sensitive to oxygen levels, such as the retina, develop microangiopathy and may cause blindness (so-called proliferative diabetic retinopathy). Damage to nerve cells may cause peripheral neuropathy, and to kidney cells, diabetic kidney disease (Kimmelstiel-Wilson syndrome).\nBy condition.\nIt is also possible to classify angiopathy by the associated condition:\nChronic diabetes can lead to several problems, one of which is Diabetic Angiopathy. Individuals with diabetic angiopathy notice a constriction in their arteries. This cause many organs to receive insufficient blood and oxygen, which might eventually cause harm. High blood sugar is the primary cause of diabetic angiopathy. Excessive blood sugar levels have the potential to harm tissues and cells.\nA form of cerebrovascular illness known as Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy (CAA) is typified by the buildup of amyloid beta-peptide in the leptomeninges and small to medium sized cerebral blood vessels. Amyloid buildup causes brittle blood vessels, which can lead to lobar intracerebral hemorrhages (ICH). In addition, hemosiderosis, inflammatory leukoencephalopathy, Alzheimer's disease, accidental microbleeds, cognitive deficits, and transitory neurological symptoms may manifest.\nCauses.\nThe cause of Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy are unknown. Sometimes it can be hereditary, however, there have been cases where it is developed in the elderly, especially in people over 55 years of age.\nHigh blood sugar is the primary cause of diabetic angiopathy. The endothelium, a smooth layer of the cell wall, is weakened and the artery-lining cells are injured. Rough patches develop along the endothelium and may promote the accumulation of deposits known as plaque. These deposits gradually harden and become more noticeable over time, restricting (stenosing) the artery and impairing normal blood flow. Different organs receive insufficient oxygen-rich blood due to the bottleneck that was formed. \nSymptoms.\nIndividuals with cerebral amyloid angiopathy typically have no symptoms. However, spontaneous lobar bleeding is the most frequent clinical sign when symptomatic. The clinical impairments are primarily determined by the site and extent of the bleeding. Larger hemorrhages may result in greater focused deficits, headaches, seizures, speaking difficulties, and muscular weakness. Smaller hemorrhages may produce hemiplegia and diminished consciousness. \nTreatment.\nCurrently, while there is no cure for angiopathy, there are ways through which the symptoms can be managed. For example, therapies. Treatment options for situations of muscle weakness may include speech, occupational, or physical therapy. Medication can be used for potential seizures and memory loss.\nlobar intracerebral hemorrhages(ICH) linked to CAA is often recurring. Due to this high prevalence, when there isn't a clear justification for anticoagulation, doctors usually avoid antiplatelet medicines and anticoagulants. Notably, research has shown that people with atrial fibrillation benefit from restarting anticoagulation.\nDespite the fact that CAA does not appear to be primarily caused by hypertension, blood pressure reduction has also been linked to advantages in terms of mortality.[8] Blood pressure control reduced the risk of CAA-related ICH by 77%. \nFinally, a small body of research has demonstrated the advantages of using immunosuppression to treat the inflammatory forms of CAA.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56511", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56511", "title": "Kidney dialysis", "text": "Removal of nitrogenous waste and toxins from the body in place of or to augment the kidney\nKidney dialysis is the process of removing excess water, solutes, and toxins from the blood in people whose kidneys can no longer perform these functions naturally. Along with kidney transplantation, it is a type of renal replacement therapy.\nDialysis may need to be initiated when there is a sudden rapid loss of kidney function, known as acute kidney injury (previously called acute renal failure), or when a gradual decline in kidney function, chronic kidney failure, reaches stage 5. Stage 5 chronic renal failure is reached when the glomerular filtration rate is less than 15% of the normal, creatinine clearance is less than 10\u00a0mL per minute, and uremia is present.\nDialysis is used as a temporary measure in either acute kidney injury or in those awaiting kidney transplant and as a permanent measure in those for whom a transplant is not indicated or not possible.\nIn West European countries, Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom, and the United States, dialysis is paid for by the government for those who are eligible. The first successful dialysis was performed in 1943.\nBackground.\nThe kidneys have an important role in maintaining health. When the person is healthy, the kidneys maintain the body's internal equilibrium of water and minerals (sodium, potassium, chloride, calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, sulphate). The acidic metabolism end-products that the body cannot get rid of via respiration are also excreted through the kidneys. The kidneys also function as a part of the endocrine system, producing erythropoietin, calcitriol and renin. Erythropoietin is involved in the production of red blood cells and calcitriol plays a role in bone formation. Dialysis is an imperfect treatment to replace kidney function because it does not correct the compromised endocrine functions of the kidney. Dialysis treatments replace some of these functions through diffusion (waste removal) and ultrafiltration (fluid removal). Dialysis uses highly purified (also known as \"ultrapure\") water.\nPrinciple.\nDialysis works on the principles of the diffusion of solutes and ultrafiltration of fluid across a semipermeable membrane. Diffusion is a property of substances in water; substances in water tend to move from an area of high concentration to an area of low concentration. Blood flows by one side of a semipermeable membrane, and a dialysate, or special dialysis fluid, flows by the opposite side. A semipermeable membrane is a thin layer of material that contains holes of various sizes, or pores. Smaller solutes and fluid pass through the membrane, but the membrane blocks the passage of larger substances (for example, red blood cells and large proteins). This replicates the filtering process that takes place in the kidneys when the blood enters the kidneys and the larger substances are separated from the smaller ones in the glomerulus.\nThe two main types of dialysis, hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis, remove wastes and excess water from the blood in different ways. Hemodialysis removes wastes and water by circulating blood outside the body through an external filter, called a dialyzer, that contains a semipermeable membrane. The blood flows in one direction and the dialysate flows in the opposite. The counter-current flow of the blood and dialysate maximizes the concentration gradient of solutes between the blood and dialysate, which helps to remove more urea and creatinine from the blood. The concentrations of solutes normally found in the urine (for example potassium, phosphorus and urea) are undesirably high in the blood, but low or absent in the dialysis solution, and constant replacement of the dialysate ensures that the concentration of undesired solutes is kept low on this side of the membrane. The dialysis solution has levels of minerals like potassium and calcium that are similar to their natural concentration in healthy blood. For another solute, bicarbonate, dialysis solution level is set at a slightly higher level than in normal blood, to encourage the diffusion of bicarbonate into the blood, to act as a pH buffer to neutralize the metabolic acidosis that is often present in these patients. The levels of the components of dialysate are typically prescribed by a nephrologist according to the needs of the individual patient.\nIn peritoneal dialysis, wastes and water are removed from the blood inside the body using the peritoneum as a natural semipermeable membrane. Waste and excess water move from the blood, across the visceral peritoneum due to its large surface area and into a special dialysis solution, called dialysate, in the peritoneal cavity within the abdomen.\nTypes.\nThere are three primary and two secondary types of dialysis: hemodialysis (primary), peritoneal dialysis (primary), hemofiltration (primary), hemodiafiltration (secondary) and intestinal dialysis (secondary).\nHemodialysis.\nIn hemodialysis, the patient's blood is pumped through the blood compartment of a dialyzer, exposing it to a partially permeable membrane. The dialyzer is composed of thousands of tiny hollow synthetic fibers. The fiber wall acts as the semipermeable membrane. Blood flows through the fibers, dialysis solution flows around the outside of the fibers, and water and wastes move between these two solutions. The cleansed blood is then returned via the circuit back to the body. Ultrafiltration occurs by increasing the hydrostatic pressure across the dialyzer membrane. This usually is done by applying a negative pressure to the dialysate compartment of the dialyzer. This pressure gradient causes water and dissolved solutes to move from blood to dialysate and allows the removal of several litres of excess fluid during a typical 4-hour treatment.\nIn the United States, hemodialysis treatments are typically given in a dialysis center three times per week (due in the United States to Medicare reimbursement rules); however, as of 2005 over 2,500 people in the United States are dialyzing at home more frequently for various treatment lengths. Studies have demonstrated the clinical benefits of dialyzing 5 to 7 times a week, for 6 to 8 hours. This type of hemodialysis is usually called \"nocturnal daily hemodialysis\" and a study has shown it provides a significant improvement in both small and large molecular weight clearance and decreases the need for phosphate binders. These frequent long treatments are often done at home while sleeping, but home dialysis is a flexible modality and schedules can be changed day to day, week to week. In general, studies show that both increased treatment length and frequency are clinically beneficial.\nHemo-dialysis was one of the most common procedures performed in U.S. hospitals in 2011, occurring in 909,000 stays (a rate of 29 stays per 10,000 population).\nPeritoneal dialysis.\nIn peritoneal dialysis, a sterile solution containing glucose (called dialysate) is run through a tube into the peritoneal cavity, the abdominal body cavity around the intestine, where the peritoneal membrane acts as a partially permeable membrane.\nThis exchange is repeated 4\u20135 times per day; automatic systems can run more frequent exchange cycles overnight. Peritoneal dialysis is less efficient than hemodialysis, but because it is carried out for a longer period of time the net effect in terms of removal of waste products and of salt and water are similar to hemodialysis. Peritoneal dialysis is carried out at home by the patient, often without help. This frees patients from the routine of having to go to a dialysis clinic on a fixed schedule multiple times per week. Peritoneal dialysis can be performed with little to no specialized equipment (other than bags of fresh dialysate).\nHemofiltration.\nHemofiltration is a similar treatment to hemodialysis, but it makes use of a different principle. The blood is pumped through a dialyzer or \"hemofilter\" as in dialysis, but no dialysate is used. A pressure gradient is applied; as a result, water moves across the very permeable membrane rapidly, \"dragging\" along with it many dissolved substances, including ones with large molecular weights, which are not cleared as well by hemodialysis. Salts and water lost from the blood during this process are replaced with a \"substitution fluid\" that is infused into the extracorporeal circuit during the treatment.\nHemodiafiltration.\nHemodiafiltration is a combination between hemodialysis and hemofiltration, thus used to purify the blood from toxins when the kidney is not working normally and also used to treat acute kidney injury (AKI).\nIntestinal dialysis.\nIn healthy humans, the intestines both remove uremic toxins (urea, creatine, uric acid) from blood and add uremic toxins (indoxyl sulfate, ammonia, etc.) to blood. More uremic toxins are excreted through the gut (as feces) than through the kidneys (as urine). This exchange of substances is enabled by the massive surface area of the intestinal capillary network and intestinal mucus, together serving as a large semipermeable membrane. In patients with kidney failure, the intestines receive a larger influx of uremic toxins due to a higher concentration in blood, but this does not automatically translate to a benefit in reducing blood toxin levels as gut bacteria use these toxins as food, producing more toxins in the process. The goal of \"intestinal dialysis\" is to maximize the removal of uremic toxins into the intestines while minimizing the production of new toxin molecules in the intestines. It serves as a more conservative renal replacement therapy for those unable to tolerate conventional dialysis. There are a few forms of intestinal dialysis:\nA related development is supplementation with soluble fibres such as acacia fibre into the diet. These fibers are digested by bacteria in the colon. This bacterial growth increases the amount of nitrogen that is eliminated in fecal waste.\nIndications.\nThe decision to initiate dialysis or hemofiltration in patients with kidney failure depends on several factors. These can be divided into acute or chronic indications.\nDepression and kidney failure symptoms can be similar to each other. It is important that there is open communication between a dialysis team and the patient. Open communication will allow giving a better quality of life. Knowing the patients' needs will allow the dialysis team to provide more options like: changes in dialysis type like home dialysis for patients to be able to be more active or changes in eating habits to avoid unnecessary waste products.\nAcute indications.\nIndications for dialysis in a patient with acute kidney injury are summarized with the vowel mnemonic of \"AEIOU\":\nChronic indications.\nChronic dialysis may be indicated when a patient has symptomatic kidney failure and low glomerular filtration rate (GFR &lt; 15 mL/min). Between 1996 and 2008, there was a trend to initiate dialysis at progressively higher estimated GFR, eGFR.\nA review of the evidence shows no benefit or potential harm with early dialysis initiation, which has been defined by start of dialysis at an estimated GFR of greater than 10\u00a0ml/min/1.732. Observational data from large registries of dialysis patients suggests that early start of dialysis may be harmful.\nThe most recent published guidelines from Canada, for when to initiate dialysis, recommend an intent to defer dialysis until a patient has definite kidney failure symptoms, which may occur at an estimated GFR of 5\u20139\u00a0ml/min/1.732.\nImpact.\nEffectiveness.\nEven though it is not a cure for kidney failure, dialysis is a very effective treatment. Survival rates of kidney failure are generally longer with dialysis than without (having only conservative kidney management). However, from the age of 80 and in elderly patients with comorbidities there is no difference in survival between the two groups.\nQuality of life.\nDialysis is an intensive treatment that has a serious impact on those treated with it. Being on dialysis usually leads to a poor quality of life. However, there are strategies that can make it more tolerable. Receiving dialysis at home might improve people's quality of life and autonomy.\nScheduling and adherence.\nDialysis is typically on a regular schedule of three times a week.\nGiven that dialysis patients have little or no capacity to filtrate solutes and regulate their fluid volume due to kidney dysfunction, missing dialysis is potentially lethal. These patients can be hyperkalaemic leading to cardiac dysrhythmias and potential cardiac arrest, as well as fluid in the alveoli of their lungs which can impair breathing.\nSome medications can be used in the short term to decrease serum potassium and stabilise the cardiac muscle so as to facilitate stabilisation of acute patients in the setting of missed dialysis. Salbutamol and insulin can decrease serum potassium by up to 1.0mmol/L each by shifting potassium from the extracellular space into the intracellular spaces within skeletal muscle cells, and calcium gluconate is used to stabilise the myocardium in hyperkalaemic patients, in an attempt to reduce the likelihood of lethal arrhythmias arising from a high serum potassium.\nSurvival without dialysis.\nPeople who decide against dialysis treatment when reaching end-stage chronic kidney disease could survive several years and experience improvements in their mental well-being in addition to sustained physical well-being and overall quality of life until late in their illness course. However, use of acute care services in these cases is common and intensity of end-of-life care is highly variable among people opting out of dialysis.\nLife Expectancy After Starting Kidney Dialysis.\nLife expectancy after starting kidney dialysis for end-stage kidney disease (ESKD) varies significantly based on factors such as age, comorbidities, dialysis modality, and access to healthcare. Dialysis extends life compared to untreated ESKD but does not restore normal kidney function. Median survival is approximately 3\u20135 years, with 5-year survival rates around 35\u201342% for hemodialysis (HD) patients. Mortality is highest in the first year (15\u201320%), primarily from cardiovascular events or infections.\nOverall survival.\nFor incident dialysis patients (mean age ~65 years), median survival is about 3 years, with adjusted mortality rates of 187.7 per 1,000 patient-years.\n1-year survival: 80\u201385% overall; 60\u201370% for patients \u226565 years.\n3-year survival: ~57% for HD, ~68% for peritoneal dialysis (PD).\n5-year survival: 35\u201342% for HD; PD outcomes converge long-term.\nSurvival by age.\nSurvival rate of dialysis patients drops significantly with their age. Peritoneal dialysis has a little better outcome than hemodialysis, particularly for older patients.\nFor a 55-year-old, expected survival is ~5 years on dialysis vs. 26 years in the general population. \nPatients \u226580 years have ~50\u201360% 1-year survival with planned HD starts.\nDialysis modality.\nHemodialysis (HD): Used by ~88% of patients; 5-year survival ~40%. Higher early mortality from urgent starts.\nPeritoneal dialysis (PD): Better early survival due to home-based flexibility; outcomes equalize after 2\u20133 years. May improve quality of life short-term.\nExceptional cases survive 20\u201330+ years with optimal care.\nFactors affecting survival.\nPositive factors.\nYounger age, fewer comorbidities, good nutrition (higher BMI/albumin), planned dialysis start, home therapies.\nNegative factors.\nDiabetes, cardiovascular disease, urgent initiation, inadequate dialysis (Kt/V &lt;1.2), infections. COVID-19 increased mortality in 2020 but rates declined by 2022.\nIn low-resource settings, median survival may be ~1.5 years due to access barriers.\nComparison to alternatives.\nKidney transplantation offers superior survival (~80% at 5 years) and is recommended when eligible. For frail elderly patients, conservative management without dialysis may yield similar survival but better quality of life.\nPediatric dialysis.\nOver the past 20 years, children have benefited from major improvements in both technology and clinical management of dialysis. Morbidity during dialysis sessions has decreased with seizures being exceptional and hypotensive episodes rare. Pain and discomfort have been reduced with the use of chronic internal jugular venous catheters and anesthetic creams for fistula puncture. Non-invasive technologies to assess patient target dry weight and access flow can significantly reduce patient morbidity and health care costs. Mortality in paediatric and young adult patients on chronic hemodialysis is associated with multifactorial markers of nutrition, inflammation, anaemia and dialysis dose, which highlights the importance of multimodal intervention strategies besides adequate hemodialysis treatment as determined by Kt/V alone.\nBiocompatible synthetic membranes, specific small size material dialyzers and new low extra-corporeal volume tubing have been developed for young infants. Arterial and venous tubing length is made of minimum length and diameter, a &lt;80\u00a0ml to &lt;110\u00a0ml volume tubing is designed for pediatric patients and a &gt;130 to &lt;224\u00a0ml tubing are for adult patients, regardless of blood pump segment size, which can be of 6.4\u00a0mm for normal dialysis or 8.0mm for high flux dialysis in all patients. All dialysis machine manufacturers design their machine to do the pediatric dialysis. In pediatric patients, the pump speed should be kept at low side, according to patient blood output capacity, and the clotting with heparin dose should be carefully monitored. The high flux dialysis (see below) is not recommended for pediatric patients.\nIn children, hemodialysis must be individualized and viewed as an \"integrated therapy\" that considers their long-term exposure to chronic renal failure treatment. Dialysis is seen only as a temporary measure for children compared with renal transplantation because this enables the best chance of rehabilitation in terms of educational and psychosocial functioning. Long-term chronic dialysis, however, the highest standards should be applied to these children to preserve their future \"cardiovascular life\"\u2014which might include more dialysis time and on-line hemodiafiltration online hdf with synthetic high flux membranes with the surface area of 0.2\u00a0m2 to 0.8\u00a0m2 and blood tubing lines with the low volume yet large blood pump segment of 6.4/8.0\u00a0mm, if we are able to improve on the rather restricted concept of small-solute urea dialysis clearance.\nDialyzable substances.\nCharacteristics.\nDialyzable substances\u2014substances removable with dialysis\u2014have these properties:\nDialysis in different countries.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe National Health Service provides dialysis in the United Kingdom. In 2022, there were more than 30,000 people on dialysis in the UK.\nFor people who need to travel to dialysis centres, patient transport services are generally provided without charge. Cornwall Clinical Commissioning Group proposed to restrict this provision to people who did not have specific medical or financial reasons in 2018 but changed their minds after a campaign led by Kidney Care UK and decided to fund transport for people requiring dialysis three times a week for a minimum or six times a month for a minimum of three months.\nHome dialysis.\nUK clinical guidelines recommend offering people a choice regarding where they get their dialysis. Research in the UK found that receiving dialysis at home can lead to better quality of life and is less costly than receiving dialysis in hospital. However, many people in the UK prefer to receive dialysis in hospital: In 2022, only 1 in 6 chose receiving it at home.\nThere are various reasons why people do not choose home dialysis. Among these are preferring hospitals as a way of getting regular social contact, being concerned about necessary changes to their homes and their family members becoming carers. Other reasons include a lack of motivation, doubting abilities for self-managed treatment, and not having suitable housing or support at home. Hospital dialysis is also often presented as the norm by healthcare professionals.\nEncouraging people to have dialysis at home could reduce the impact of dialysis on people's social and professional lives. Some ways to help are offering peer support from other people on home dialysis, better education materials, and professionals being more familiar with home dialysis and its impact. Choosing home dialysis is more likely at kidney centers which have better organisational culture, leadership and attitude.\nUnited States.\nSince 1972, insurance companies in the United States have covered the cost of dialysis and transplants for all citizens. By 2014, more than 460,000 Americans were undergoing treatment, the costs of which amount to six percent of the entire Medicare budget. Kidney disease is the ninth leading cause of death, and the U.S. has one of the highest mortality rates for dialysis care in the industrialized world. The rate of patients getting kidney transplants has been lower than expected. These outcomes have been blamed on a new for-profit dialysis industry responding to government payment policies. A 1999 study concluded that \"patients treated in for-profit dialysis facilities have higher mortality rates and are less likely to be placed on the waiting list for a renal transplant than are patients who are treated in not-for-profit facilities\", possibly because transplantation removes a constant stream of revenue from the facility. The insurance industry has complained about kickbacks and problematic relationships between charities and providers.\nChina.\nThe Government of China provides the funding for dialysis treatment. There is a challenge to reach everyone who needs dialysis treatment because of the unequal distribution of health care resources and dialysis centers. There are 395,121 individuals who receive hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis in China per year. The percentage of the Chinese population with Chronic Kidney Disease is 10.8%. The Chinese Government is trying to increase the amount of peritoneal dialysis taking place to meet the needs of the nation's individuals with Chronic Kidney Disease.\nAustralia.\nDialysis is provided without cost to all patients through Medicare, with 75% of all dialysis being administered as haemodialysis to patients three times per week in a dialysis facility. The Northern Territory has the highest incidence rate per population of haemodialysis, with Indigenous Australians having higher rates of Chronic Kidney Disease and lower rates of functional kidney transplants than the broader population. The remote Central Australian town of Alice Springs, despite having a population of approximately 25000, has the largest dialysis unit in the Southern Hemisphere. Many people must move to Alice Springs from remote Indigenous communities to access health services such as haemodialysis, which results in housing shortages, overcrowding, and poor living conditions.\nHistory.\nIn 1913, Leonard Rowntree and John Jacob Abel of Johns Hopkins Hospital developed the first dialysis system which they successfully tested in animals. A Dutch doctor, Willem Johan Kolff, constructed the first working dialyzer in 1943 during the Nazi occupation of the Netherlands. Due to the scarcity of available resources, Kolff had to improvise and build the initial machine using sausage casings, beverage cans, a washing machine and various other items that were available at the time. Over the following two years (1944\u20131945), Kolff used his machine to treat 16 patients with acute kidney failure, but the results were unsuccessful. Then, in 1945, a 67-year-old comatose woman regained consciousness following 11 hours of hemodialysis with the dialyzer and lived for another seven years before dying from an unrelated condition. She was the first-ever patient successfully treated with dialysis. Gordon Murray of the University of Toronto independently developed a dialysis machine in 1945. Unlike Kolff's rotating drum, Murray's machine used fixed flat plates, more like modern designs. Like Kolff, Murray's initial success was in patients with acute renal failure. Nils Alwall of Lund University in Sweden modified a similar construction to the Kolff dialysis machine by enclosing it inside a stainless steel canister. This allowed the removal of fluids, by applying a negative pressure to the outside canister, thus making it the first truly practical device for hemodialysis. Alwall treated his first patient in acute kidney failure on 3 September 1946.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56512", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56512", "title": "Capillary", "text": "Smallest type of blood vessel\nA capillary is a small blood vessel, from 5 to 10 micrometres in diameter, and is part of the microcirculation system. Capillaries are microvessels and the smallest blood vessels in the body. They are composed of only the tunica intima (the innermost layer of an artery or vein), consisting of a thin wall of simple squamous endothelial cells. They are the site of the exchange of many substances from the surrounding interstitial fluid, and they convey blood from the smallest branches of the arteries (arterioles) to those of the veins (venules). Other substances which cross capillaries include water, oxygen, carbon dioxide, urea, glucose, uric acid, lactic acid and creatinine. Lymph capillaries connect with larger lymph vessels to drain lymphatic fluid collected in microcirculation.\nEtymology.\n\"Capillary\" comes from the Latin word , meaning \"of or resembling hair\", with use in English beginning in the mid-17th century. The meaning stems from the tiny, hairlike diameter of a capillary. While \"capillary\" is usually used as a noun, the word also is used as an adjective, as in \"capillary action\", in which a liquid flows without influence of external forces, such as gravity.\nStructure.\nBlood flows from the heart through arteries, which branch and narrow into arterioles, and then branch further into capillaries where nutrients and wastes are exchanged. The capillaries then join and widen to become venules, which in turn widen and converge to become veins, which then return blood back to the heart through the venae cavae. In the mesentery, metarterioles form an additional stage between arterioles and capillaries.\nIndividual capillaries are part of the capillary bed, an interweaving network of capillaries supplying tissues and organs. The more metabolically active a tissue is, the more capillaries are required to supply nutrients and carry away products of metabolism. There are two types of capillaries: true capillaries, which branch from arterioles and provide exchange between tissue and the capillary blood, and sinusoids, a type of open-pore capillary found in the liver, bone marrow, anterior pituitary gland, and brain circumventricular organs. Capillaries and sinusoids are short vessels that directly connect the arterioles and venules at opposite ends of the beds. Metarterioles are found primarily in the mesenteric microcirculation.\nLymphatic capillaries are slightly larger in diameter than blood capillaries, and have closed ends (unlike the blood capillaries open at one end to the arterioles and open at the other end to the venules). This structure permits interstitial fluid to flow into them but not out. Lymph capillaries have a greater internal oncotic pressure than blood capillaries, due to the greater concentration of plasma proteins in the lymph.\nTypes.\nBlood capillaries are categorized into three types: continuous, fenestrated, and sinusoidal (also known as discontinuous).\nContinuous.\nContinuous capillaries are continuous in the sense that the endothelial cells provide an uninterrupted lining, and they only allow smaller molecules, such as water and ions, to pass through their intercellular clefts. Lipid-soluble molecules can passively diffuse through the endothelial cell membranes along concentration gradients. Continuous capillaries can be further divided into two subtypes:\n# Those with numerous transport vesicles, which are found primarily in skeletal muscles, fingers, gonads, and skin.\n# Those with few vesicles, which are primarily found in the central nervous system. These capillaries are a constituent of the blood\u2013brain barrier.\nFenestrated.\nFenestrated capillaries have pores known as \"fenestrae\" (Latin for \"windows\") in the endothelial cells that are 60\u201380\u00a0nanometres (nm) in diameter. They are spanned by a diaphragm of radially oriented fibrils that allows small molecules and limited amounts of protein to diffuse. In the renal glomerulus the capillaries are wrapped in podocyte foot processes or pedicels, which have slit pores with a function analogous to the diaphragm of the capillaries. Both of these types of blood vessels have continuous basal laminae and are primarily located in the endocrine glands, intestines, pancreas, and the glomeruli of the kidney.\nSinusoidal.\nSinusoidal capillaries or discontinuous capillaries are a special type of open-pore capillary, also known as a \"sinusoid\", that have wider fenestrations that are 30\u201340\u00a0micrometres (\u03bcm) in diameter, with wider openings in the endothelium. Fenestrated capillaries have diaphragms that cover the pores whereas sinusoids lack a diaphragm and just have an open pore. These types of blood vessels allow red and white blood cells (7.5\u00a0\u03bcm \u2013 25\u00a0\u03bcm diameter) and various serum proteins to pass, aided by a discontinuous basal lamina. These capillaries lack pinocytotic vesicles, and therefore use gaps present in cell junctions to permit transfer between endothelial cells, and hence across the membrane. Sinusoids are irregular spaces filled with blood and are mainly found in the liver, bone marrow, spleen, and brain circumventricular organs.\nDevelopment.\nDuring early embryonic development, new capillaries are formed through vasculogenesis, the process of blood vessel formation that occurs through a novel production of endothelial cells that then form vascular tubes. The term \"angiogenesis\" denotes the formation of new capillaries from pre-existing blood vessels and already-present endothelium which divides. The small capillaries lengthen and interconnect to establish a network of vessels, a primitive vascular network that vascularises the entire yolk sac, connecting stalk, and chorionic villi.\nFunction.\nThe capillary wall performs an important function by allowing nutrients and waste substances to pass across it. Molecules larger than 3\u00a0nm such as albumin and other large proteins pass through transcellular transport carried inside vesicles, a process which requires them to go through the cells that form the wall. Molecules smaller than 3\u00a0nm such as water and gases cross the capillary wall through the space between cells in a process known as paracellular transport. These transport mechanisms allow bidirectional exchange of substances depending on osmotic gradients. Capillaries that form part of the blood\u2013brain barrier only allow for transcellular transport as tight junctions between endothelial cells seal the paracellular space.\nCapillary beds may control their blood flow via autoregulation. This allows an organ to maintain constant flow despite a change in central blood pressure. This is achieved by myogenic response, and in the kidney by tubuloglomerular feedback. When blood pressure increases, arterioles are stretched and subsequently constrict (a phenomenon known as the Bayliss effect) to counteract the increased tendency for high pressure to increase blood flow.\nIn the lungs, special mechanisms have been adapted to meet the needs of increased necessity of blood flow during exercise. When the heart rate increases and more blood must flow through the lungs, capillaries are recruited and are also distended to make room for increased blood flow. This allows blood flow to increase while resistance decreases. Extreme exercise can make capillaries vulnerable, with a breaking point similar to that of collagen.\nCapillary permeability can be increased by the release of certain cytokines, anaphylatoxins, or other mediators (such as leukotrienes, prostaglandins, histamine, bradykinin, etc.) highly influenced by the immune system.\nStarling equation.\nThe transport mechanisms can be further quantified by the Starling equation. The Starling equation defines the forces across a semipermeable membrane and allows calculation of the net flux:\nformula_1\nwhere:\n formula_2 is the net driving force,\n formula_3 is the proportionality constant, and\n formula_4 is the net fluid movement between compartments.\nBy convention, outward force is defined as positive, and inward force is defined as negative. The solution to the equation is known as the net filtration or net fluid movement (\"J\"\"v\"). If positive, fluid will tend to \"leave\" the capillary (filtration). If negative, fluid will tend to \"enter\" the capillary (absorption). This equation has a number of important physiologic implications, especially when pathologic processes grossly alter one or more of the variables.\nAccording to Starling's equation, the movement of fluid depends on six variables:\nClinical significance.\nDisorders of capillary formation as a developmental defect or acquired disorder are a feature in many common and serious disorders. Within a wide range of cellular factors and cytokines, issues with normal genetic expression and bioactivity of the vascular growth and permeability factor vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) appear to play a major role in many of the disorders. Cellular factors include reduced number and function of bone-marrow derived endothelial progenitor cells. and reduced ability of those cells to form blood vessels.\nTherapeutics.\nMajor diseases where altering capillary formation could be helpful include conditions where there is excessive or abnormal capillary formation such as cancer and disorders harming eyesight; and medical conditions in which there is reduced capillary formation either for familial or genetic reasons, or as an acquired problem.\nBlood sampling.\nCapillary blood sampling can be used to test for blood glucose (such as in blood glucose monitoring), hemoglobin, pH and lactate. It is generally performed by creating a small cut using a blood lancet, followed by sampling by capillary action on the cut with a test strip or small pipette. It is also used to test for sexually transmitted infections that are present in the blood stream, such as HIV, syphilis, and hepatitis B and C, where a finger is lanced and a small amount of blood is sampled into a test tube.\nHistory.\nA 13th century manuscript by Ibn Nafis contains the earliest known description of capillaries. The manuscript records Ibn Nafis' prediction of the existence of the capillaries which he described as perceptible passages (\"manafidh\") between pulmonary artery and pulmonary vein. These passages would later be identified by Marcello Malpighi as capillaries. He further states that the heart's two main chambers (right and left ventricles) are separate and that blood cannot pass through the (interventricular) septum.\nWilliam Harvey did not explicitly predict the existence of capillaries, but he saw the need for some sort of connection between the arterial and venous systems. In 1653, he wrote, \"...the blood doth enter into every member through the arteries, and does return by the veins, and that the veins are the vessels and ways by which the blood is returned to the heart itself; and that the blood in the members and extremities does pass from the arteries into the veins (either mediately by an anastomosis, or immediately through the porosities of the flesh, or both ways) as before it did in the heart and thorax out of the veins, into the arteries...\"\nMarcello Malpighi was the first to observe directly and correctly describe capillaries, discovering them in a frog's lung 8 years later, in 1661.\nAugust Krogh discovered how capillaries provide nutrients to animal tissue. For his work he was awarded the 1920 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. His 1922 estimate that total length of capillaries in a human body is as long as 100,000\u00a0km, had been widely adopted by textbooks and other secondary sources. This estimate was based on figures he gathered from \"an extraordinarily large person\". More recent estimates give a number between 9,000 and 19,000\u00a0km.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56513", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56513", "title": "Complications of Diabetes", "text": ""}
{"id": "56514", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56514", "title": "Neuropathy", "text": ""}
{"id": "56515", "revid": "38556235", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56515", "title": "War on Drugs", "text": ""}
{"id": "56516", "revid": "224287", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56516", "title": "Biological phenomenon", "text": ""}
{"id": "56517", "revid": "1320115750", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56517", "title": "Raymond Smullyan", "text": "American mathematician and logician (1919\u20132017)\nRaymond Merrill Smullyan (; May 25, 1919 \u2013 February 6, 2017) was an American mathematician, magician, concert pianist, logician, Taoist, and philosopher.\nBorn in Far Rockaway, New York, Smullyan's first career choice was in stage magic. He earned a BSc from the University of Chicago in 1955 and his PhD from Princeton University in 1959. Smullyan is one of many logicians to have studied with Alonzo Church.\nLife.\nSmullyan was born on May 25, 1919, in Far Rockaway, Queens, New York, to an Ashkenazi Jewish family. His father was Isidore Smullyan, a Russian-born businessman who emigrated to Belgium when young and graduated from the Saint-Ignatius College of Commerce, his native language being French. His mother was Rosina Smullyan (n\u00e9e Freeman), a painter and actress born and raised in London. Both parents were musical, his father playing the violin and his mother playing the piano. Smullyan was the youngest of three children. His eldest brother, Emile Benoit Smullyan, later became an economist under the name of Emile Benoit. His sister was Gladys Smullyan, later Gladys Gwynn. His cousin was the philosopher Arthur Francis Smullyan (1912\u20131998). In Far Rockaway he was a grade school classmate of Richard Feynman.\nSmullyan showed musical talent from a young age, playing both violin and piano. He studied with pianist Grace Hofheimer in New York. He had perfect pitch. He started his interest in logic at the age of 5. In 1931 he won a gold medal in the piano competition of the New York Music Week Association when he was aged 12 (the previous year he had won the silver medal). After graduating from grade school, the Depression forced his family to move to Manhattan, and he attended Theodore Roosevelt High School in The Bronx. He played violin in the school orchestra but devoted more time to playing the piano. At high school he fell in love with mathematics when he took a class in geometry. Apart from his classes in geometry, physics, and chemistry, however, he was dissatisfied with his high school, and dropped out. Smullyan studied mathematics on his own, including analytic geometry, calculus, and modern higher algebra \u2013 particularly group theory and Galois theory. He sat in on a course taught by Ernest Nagel at Columbia University that was being taken by his cousin, Arthur Smullyan, and independently discovered Boolean rings. He also spent a year at the Cambridge Rindge and Latin School. Smullyan did not graduate with a high school diploma, but he took the College Board exams to get into college. He studied mathematics and music at Pacific University in Oregon for one semester, and at Reed College for less than a semester, before following the pianist Bernhard Abramowitsch to San Francisco. Smullyan audited classes at the University of California, Berkeley, before returning to New York, where he continued his independent study of modern abstract algebra. At this time he composed a number of chess problems which were published many years later; he also learned magic.\nAt the age of 24, Smullyan enrolled at the University of Wisconsin-Madison for three semesters, because he wanted to study modern algebra with a professor whose book he had read. He later transferred to the University of Chicago and majored in mathematics. After a break in which he worked as a magician in New York and met his first wife, he returned to the University of Chicago, where he also worked as a magician at night and taught piano on the faculty at Roosevelt University. While at Chicago he took three courses with the philosopher Rudolf Carnap, for which he wrote three term papers. Carnap recommended that he send the first term paper to Willard Van Orman Quine, which he did. Quine replied that he should tinker with his idea about what makes quantification theory tick. Of the other two term papers, one, entitled \"Languages in Which Self Reference is Possible\" (which Carnap showed to Kurt G\u00f6del), was later published in 1957. The other was later published in his 1961 book \"Theory of Formal Systems\". While still a student at the University of Chicago, on the basis of a recommendation from Carnap, he was hired by John G. Kemeny, the chair of the mathematics department at Dartmouth College. Smullyan taught at Dartmouth for two years. During that time he separated from his first wife, from whom he later divorced. He also used to visit his friends Gloria and Marvin Minsky (Gloria Minsky was his cousin) in Cambridge, Massachusetts. The University of Chicago, after a battle between the faculty and administration, agreed to award Smullyan a bachelor of science degree in mathematics in 1955 based partly on courses he had taught at Dartmouth (although he had not taken them at Chicago). Both Carnap and Kemeny helped him to get accepted to the graduate program in mathematics at Princeton University. He received a PhD in mathematics from Princeton University in 1959. He completed his doctoral dissertation, titled \"Theory of formal systems\", under the supervision of Alonzo Church, which was published in 1961. While a graduate student at Princeton he met his second wife, Blanche, a pianist and teacher, born in Belgium, to whom he was married for 48 years until she died in 2006.\nWhile a PhD student, Smullyan's term paper for Carnap, \"Languages in which Self-Reference is Possible\", was published in 1957 in the \"Journal of Symbolic Logic\". showing that G\u00f6delian incompleteness held for formal systems considerably more elementary than that of Kurt G\u00f6del's 1931 landmark paper. The contemporary understanding of G\u00f6del's theorem dates from this paper. Smullyan later made a compelling case that much of the fascination with G\u00f6del's theorem should be directed at Tarski's theorem, which is much easier to prove and equally disturbing philosophically.\nAfter getting his PhD from Princeton, he taught at Princeton for two years. He subsequently taught at New York University, at the State University of New York at New Paltz, at Smith College, and at the Belfer Graduate School of Science at Yeshiva University, before becoming professor of mathematics and computer science at Lehman College in the Bronx, where he taught undergraduate students from 1968 to 1984. He was also a professor of philosophy at the CUNY Graduate Center from 1976 to 1984, where he taught graduate students. He was subsequently a professor of philosophy at Indiana University, where he taught both undergraduate and graduate students. He was also an amateur astronomer, using a six-inch reflecting telescope for which he ground the mirror. Fellow mathematician Martin Gardner was a close friend.\nSmullyan wrote many books about recreational mathematics and recreational logic. Most notably, one is titled \"What Is the Name of This Book?\". His \"A Beginner's Further Guide to Mathematical Logic\", published in 2017, was his final book.\nLogic problems.\nMany of Smullyan's logic problems are extensions of classic puzzles. Knights and Knaves involves knights (who always tell the truth) and knaves (who always lie). This is based on a story of two doors and two guards, one who lies and one who tells the truth. One door leads to heaven and one to hell, and the puzzle is to find out which door leads to heaven by asking one of the guards a question. One way to do this is to ask, \"Which door would the other guard say leads to hell?\". Unfortunately, this fails, as the liar can answer, \"He would say the door to paradise leads to hell\", and the truth-teller would answer, \"He would say the door to paradise leads to hell.\" You must point at one of the doors as well as simply stating a question. For example, as philosopher Richard Turnbull has explained, you could point at either door and ask, \"Will the other guard say this is the door to paradise?\" The truth-teller will say \"No, \" if it is in fact the door to paradise, as will the liar. So you pick that door. The truth-teller will answer \"Yes,\" if it is the door to Hell, as will the liar, so you pick the other door. Note also that we are not told anything about the goals of either guard: for all we know, the liar may want to help us and the truth-teller not help us, or both are indifferent, so there's no reason to think either one will phrase answers such as to provide us with the most optimally available kind of comprehension. This is behind the crucial role of actually pointing at a door directly while asking the question. This idea was famously used in the 1986 film \"Labyrinth\".\nIn more complex puzzles, he introduces characters who may lie or tell the truth (referred to as \"normals\"), and furthermore instead of answering \"yes\" or \"no\", use words which mean \"yes\" or \"no\", but the reader does not know which word means which. The puzzle known as \"the hardest logic puzzle ever\" is based on these characters and themes. In his Transylvania puzzles, half of the inhabitants are insane, and believe only false things, whereas the other half are sane and believe only true things. In addition, humans always tell the truth, and vampires always lie. For example, an insane vampire will believe a false thing (2 + 2 is not 4) but will then lie about it, and say that it is false. A sane vampire knows 2 + 2 is 4, but will lie and say it is not. And \"mutatis mutandis\" for humans. Thus everything said by a sane human or an insane vampire is true, while everything said by an insane human or a sane vampire is false.\nHis book \"Forever Undecided\" popularizes G\u00f6del's incompleteness theorems by phrasing them in terms of reasoners and their beliefs, rather than formal systems and what can be proved in them. For example, if a native of a knight/knave island says to a sufficiently self-aware reasoner, \"You will never believe that I am a knight\", the reasoner cannot believe either that the native is a knight or that he is a knave without becoming inconsistent (i.e., holding two contradictory beliefs). The equivalent theorem is that for any formal system S, there exists a mathematical statement that can be interpreted as \"This statement is not provable in formal system S\". If the system S is consistent, neither the statement nor its opposite will be provable in it. See also Doxastic logic.\nInspector Craig is a frequent character in Smullyan's \"puzzle-novellas\". He is generally called into a scene of a crime that has a solution that is mathematical in nature. Then, through a series of increasingly harder challenges, he (and the reader) begin to understand the principles in question. Finally the novella culminates in Inspector Craig (and the reader) solving the crime, utilizing the mathematical and logical principles learned. Inspector Craig generally does not learn the formal theory in question, and Smullyan usually reserves a few chapters after the Inspector Craig adventure to illuminate the analogy for the reader. Inspector Craig gets his name from William Craig.\nHis book \"To Mock a Mockingbird\" (1985) is a recreational introduction to the subject of combinatory logic.\nApart from writing about and teaching logic, Smullyan released a recording of his favorite baroque keyboard and classical piano pieces by composers such as Bach, Scarlatti, and Schubert. Some recordings are available on the Piano Society website, along with the video \"Rambles, Reflections, Music and Readings\". He has also written two autobiographical works, one entitled \"Some Interesting Memories: A Paradoxical Life\" and a later book entitled \"Reflections: The Magic, Music and Mathematics of Raymond Smullyan\".\nIn 2001, documentary filmmaker Tao Ruspoli made a film about Smullyan called \"This Film Needs No Title: A Portrait of Raymond Smullyan\".\nPhilosophy.\nSmullyan wrote several books about Taoist philosophy, a philosophy he believed neatly solved most or all traditional philosophical problems as well as integrating mathematics, logic, and philosophy into a cohesive whole. One of Smullyan's discussions of Taoist philosophy centers on the question of free will in an imagined conversation between a mortal human and God.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56518", "revid": "1233313", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56518", "title": "Wilderness area", "text": ""}
{"id": "56519", "revid": "11112747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56519", "title": "Riding (division)", "text": "Administrative jurisdiction\nA riding is an administrative jurisdiction or electoral district, particularly in several current or former Commonwealth countries.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"riding\" is descended from late Old English or (recorded only in Latin contexts or forms, e.g., , , , with Latin initial \"t\" here representing the Old English letter thorn). It came into Old English as a loanword from Old Norse , meaning a third part (especially of a county) \u2013 the original \"ridings\", in the English counties of Yorkshire and Lincolnshire, were in each case a set of three, though once the term was adopted elsewhere it was used for other numbers (compare to farthings). The modern form \"riding\" was the result of the initial \"th\" being absorbed in the final \"th\" or \"t\" of the words \"north\", \"south\", \"east\" and \"west\", by which it was normally preceded.\nA common misconception holds that the term arose from some association between the size of the district and the distance that can be covered or encircled on horseback in a certain amount of time (compare the Walking Purchase).\nAustralia.\nThe term was used in Australia as a division of some shire councils, similar to a ward in city, borough, town and many shire councils.\nCanada.\nThe term was used in 19th-century Canada to refer to subdivisions of counties.\nIn Canadian politics, \"riding\" is a colloquial term for a constituency or electoral district. Officially, \"electoral district\" is generally used, although government documents sometimes use the colloquial term. In colloquial Canadian French, a riding is known as , i.e., 'county', as the electoral districts in Quebec were historically identical to its counties; the official French term is .\nThe Canadian use of \"riding\" is derived from the English local government term, which was widely used in Canada in the 19th century. Most Canadian counties never had sufficient population to justify administrative subdivisions. Nonetheless, it was common, especially in Ontario, to divide counties with sufficient population into multiple electoral districts, which thus became known as ridings in official documents. The term was used in the legal descriptions of the electoral districts of Canada West in the Province of Canada. It was later used in the description of the new electoral districts which were created by the \"Constitution Act, 1867\", for the first elections to the new federal House of Commons and the new provincial Legislative Assembly of Ontario, immediately following Confederation. Soon after Confederation, the urban population grew (and more importantly, most city dwellers gained the franchise after property ownership was no longer required to gain the vote). Rural constituencies therefore became geographically larger through the 20th century and generally encompassed one or more counties each, and the word \"riding\" was then used to refer to any electoral division.\nThe local association for a political party, which legally is known as an electoral district association, is often referred to as a riding association.\nEngland.\nYorkshire.\nThe ancient county of Yorkshire had three ridings, North, West and East, originally each subdivided into wapentakes which were created by the Vikings. Note that the bounds of the City of York lay outside all the ridings to emphasise its political impartiality.\nThe Yorkshire ridings were in many ways treated as separate administrative counties, having had separate quarter sessions and also separate lieutenancies since the Restoration. This practice was followed by the \"Local Government Act 1888\", which made each of the three ridings an administrative county with an elected county council. These county councils, along with the ancient lieutenancies, were abolished in 1974 under the \"Local Government Act 1972\".\nA local government area, East Riding of Yorkshire, was created in 1996, but this does not cover the entire area of the former East Riding and includes areas from the historical West Riding.\nAccording to the 12th century compilation known as the , the riding was the third part of a county (); to it causes were brought which could not be determined in the wapentake, and a matter which could not be determined in the riding was brought into the court of the shire.\nRiding courts were held after the Norman Conquest. A charter which Henry I granted to the Church of St Peters at York mentions \",\" and (-mot designates popular assemblies), and exemptions from suit to the or riding are described in the charters of the Norman kings. As yet, however, the jurisdiction and functions of these courts have not been ascertained. It seems probable from the silence of the records that they had already fallen into disuse early in the 13th century.\nAlthough no longer having any administrative role, the ridings of Yorkshire still play a part as cultural entities \u2013 they are used for the names of a number of groups and organisations and some people in Yorkshire associate themselves with one riding or another (see current usage of West Riding of Yorkshire). Winifred Holtby's 1936 novel \"South Riding\" and its adaptations were set in a fictional fourth riding. The title of the novel trilogy \"Red Riding\" by David Peace, set in Yorkshire, is a play on the word.\nThe Yorkshire Ridings Society calls for wider recognition of the historic borders of Yorkshire.\nLindsey, Lincolnshire.\nThe Parts of Lindsey, one of the Parts of Lincolnshire, also possessed ridings, in this case the North, West, and South ridings.\nIreland.\nThe \"Grand Jury (Ireland) Act 1836\" empowered the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland to divide Irish counties into ridings with separate assizes held in different towns. This was to allow County Tipperary to be divided in 1838 into a North Riding and South Riding, because the county town of Clonmel was inconveniently far south for jurors from the north. Nenagh became the North Riding's assize town. The ridings became separate administrative counties, with minor boundary adjustments, under the \"Local Government (Ireland) Act 1898\", and were redenominated as counties \"North Tipperary\" and \"South Tipperary\" under the \"Local Government Act 2001\". They were merged back into a single County Tipperary by the \"Local Government Reform Act 2014\".\nCounty Cork had been divided in 1823 into East and West Ridings for quarter sessions and petty sessions, but not for assizes, and so had a single county council after the 1898 changes. County Galway from 1837 had East and West Ridings for Royal Irish Constabulary and county surveyor purposes. The Cork and Galway ridings became largely obsolete after independence in 1922, although the names \"Cork East[/West] Riding\" were used for the relevant (police) divisions into the 1990s.\nNew Zealand.\nRidings existed in rural New Zealand in the late 19th and early to mid 20th century as part of larger county councils in the area. For example, The Taranaki County Council was divided into three separate ridings: Moa (south), Omata (west) and Waitara (east).\nAs use of the automobile became more popular with the improvement of roads, combined with the concurrent trend of urban drift (c.\u20091950s), the ridings were either merged back into their parent councils or separated off into county councils in their own right. The Taranaki County Council's three ridings eventually split, with the Omata Riding remaining part of the Taranaki County Council, the Moa riding merging with the Inglewood Borough Council and the Waitara Riding becoming part of the Clifton County Council.\nIn 1989 these were again merged, reorganised into district and/or city councils. For example, the above three all merged with the New Plymouth Council and Waitara Borough Councils to form the New Plymouth District Council.\nExamples:\nScandinavia.\nRidings are originally Scandinavian institutions.\nIn Iceland the third part of a \"thing\" which corresponded roughly to an English county was called . The island of Gotland and the Swedish provinces N\u00e4rke and H\u00e4lsingland were also divided into instead of hundreds.\nIn Norway, the seems to have been an ecclesiastical division.\nFarthings.\nThe term is analogous to fourths of a county, in a fashion similar to the old British farthing. They have also been found in Iceland and Gloucestershire. In J. R. R. Tolkien's fictional world Middle-earth, The Shire, the homeland of the hobbits, is divided into farthings.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56520", "revid": "3488865", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56520", "title": "Conservation easement", "text": "Type of legal arrangement applying to land\nIn the United States, a conservation easement (also called conservation covenant, conservation restriction or conservation servitude) is a power invested in a nonprofit organization called a land trust, or a governmental entity to restrict, as to a specified land area, the exercise of rights otherwise held by a landowner so as to achieve certain conservation purposes. It is an interest in real property established by agreement between a landowner and land trust or unit of government. The conservation easement \"runs with the land\", meaning it is applicable to both present and future owners of the land. The grant of conservation easement, as with any real property interest, is part of the chain of title for the property and is normally recorded in local land records.\nThe conservation easement's purposes will vary depending on the character of the particular property, the goals of the land trust or government unit, and the needs of the landowners. For example, an easement's purposes (often called \"conservation objectives\") might include any one or more of the following:\nThe conservation easement's administrative terms for advancing the conservation objectives also vary but typically forbid or substantially constrain subdivision and other real estate development.\nThe most distinguishing feature of the conservation easement as a conservation tool is it enables users to achieve specific conservation objectives on the land, while keeping the land in the ownership of landowners for uses consistent with the conservation objectives.\nUnlike land use regulation, a conservation easement is placed on property \"voluntarily\" by the owner whose rights are being restricted. The restrictions of the easement, once set in place, are usually perpetual, and reduce the market value of the property. Appraisals of the value of the easement, and financial arrangements between the parties (land owner and land trust), generally are kept private.\nThe landowner who grants a conservation easement continues to manage and otherwise privately own the land and may receive significant state and federal tax advantages for having donated and/or sold the conservation easement. In granting the conservation easement, the easement holder has a responsibility to monitor future uses of the land to ensure compliance with the terms of the easement, and to enforce the terms if a violation occurs.\nAlthough a conservation easement prohibits certain uses by the landowner, such an easement does not make the land public. On the contrary, many conservation easements confer no use of the land either to the easement holder or to the public. Furthermore, many conservation easements reserve to the landowner specific uses, which if not reserved would be prohibited. Some conservation easements confer specific uses to the easement holder or to the public. These details are spelled out in the legal document that creates the conservation easement.\nIncome tax deductions.\nLandowners in the United States who donate a \"qualifying\" conservation easement to a \"qualified\" land protection organization under \u00a7 170(h) of the Internal Revenue Code may be eligible for a federal income tax deduction equal to the value of their donation. The value of the easement donation, as determined by a qualified appraiser, equals the difference between the fair market value of the property before and after the easement takes effect.\nTo qualify for this income tax deduction, the easement must be: a) perpetual; b) held by a qualified governmental or non-profit organization; and, c) serve a valid \"conservation purpose\", meaning the property must have an appreciable natural, scenic, historic, scientific, recreational, or open space value. As a result of legislation in 2006 and 2007, conservation easement donors were able to deduct the value of their gift at the rate of 50% of their adjusted gross income (AGI) per year. Landowners with 50% or more of their income from agriculture were able to deduct the donation at a rate of 100% of their AGI. Any amount of the donation remaining after the first year could be carried forward for fifteen additional years (allowing a maximum of sixteen years within which the deduction may be utilized), or until the amount of the deduction has been used up, whichever comes first. With the passage of the Farm Bill in the summer of 2008 these expanded federal income tax incentives were extended such that they also apply to all conservation easements donated in 2008 and 2009. The provision was renewed annually each year between 2010 and 2014 and was finally incorporated to the tax code without an expiration date in 2015.\nIncome tax credits (states).\nLand conservation advocates have tried to enact additional tax incentives for easements, above the federal charitable deduction. Sone states have granted credits that can be used to pay state income tax to donors of qualified conservation easements. In 1983, North Carolina became the first state to establish such a program.\nThe Nature Conservancy promoted the state tax credit idea widely in the 1990s. In 1999, four state legislatures enacted state tax credit programs (Virginia, Delaware, Colorado, and Connecticut, in that order). South Carolina and California followed in 2000. Several other states have followed since.\nFor landowners with little income subject to state taxation, a tax credit is of little value and may be insufficient incentive to grant a conservation easement. For this reason, some states, including Colorado and Virginia, the state tax credit is transferable; the landowner can sell their credit to someone else. The buyer can use the purchased tax credit, normally purchased at a discount, against their own Colorado income tax.\nIn the states where credit for conservation land donations is transferable, brokerages have arisen. The federal and state tax treatment of profits from sale and use of transferable tax credit have been the subject of extensive discussion and the issuance of several guidance documents by the Internal Revenue Service.\nThe New Mexico state income tax credit started effective in 2004. New transferability legislation, effective January 1, 2008, applies retroactively to conservation easements effected from January 1, 2004.\nThe Virginia transferable credit program is the largest among the States in dollar value of property conserved. By the end of 2010, $2,512,000,000 of property value had been donated as easements in Virginia for which tax credit was claimed. The qualifying easements cover over of Virginia landscape. The Virginia program now (2011) grants about $110 million of new tax credit each year. The credit allowance is 40% of the appraised value of the easement donation, so this equates to $275 million of property value donated per year for protection of wildlife habitat, farmland and woodland, and scenic open space.\nEstate tax reductions and exclusions.\nFor landowners who will leave sizable estates upon their death, the most important financial impact of a conservation easement may be a significant reduction in estate taxes. Estate taxes often make it difficult for heirs to keep land intact and in the family because of high estate tax rates and high development value of land. It may be necessary to subdivide or sell land for development in order to pay these taxes which may not be the desire of the landowner or their heirs. A conservation easement can often provide significant help with this problem in three important ways:\nIn Pennsylvania, conservation restrictions on land included in the estate can reduce the inheritance tax owed.\nProperty tax incentives.\nMany states offer property tax incentives to conservation easement donors.\nIssues to consider.\nAs is the case with any property interest, a conservation easement may be taken by eminent domain, when the public value of the proposed project exceeds that of the conservation interest being protected by the easement. For example, a conservation easement may be for a long term (such as 30 years), or in perpetuity (forever).\nConservation easements may result in a significant reduction in the sale price of the land, because a builder can no longer develop it. This difference in value is a major reason for the granting of the original tax incentives. An estimate of 35%\u201365% value reduction has been made on conservation easement land to the land owner.\nThe cost-effectiveness of either a conservation easement or eminent domain depends on various economic and ecological conditions, which need to be closely considered.\nRecently, the U.S. Tax Court has penalized taxpayers for overstating the value of the easement.\nPurchase of conservation easements.\nMany conservation easements are purchased with funds from federal, state, and local governments, nonprofit organizations, or private donors. In these cases, landowners are paid directly for the purchase of the conservation easement.\nThe Farm Bill, updated every five or more years, provides an important source of funds for conservation easement purchase. The 2014 Farm Bill created the Agricultural Conservation Easement Program (ACEP) by consolidating the Farm and Ranch Lands Protection Program, the Grassland Reserve Program, and the Wetlands Reserve Program. Under ACEP, the Natural Resources Conservation Service helps tribes, state and local governments, and land trusts protect agriculture from development and other non-agricultural uses. ACEP includes Agricultural Land Easements and Wetland Reserve Easements. Agricultural land easements preserve land for food production and aids in soil and water conservation. Wetland reserve easements aim to restore wetland areas that have been converted into agricultural land. To maximize the benefits, the program targets land that has both a high chance of restoration success and a history of low crop yields or crop failure. The Farm Bill also funds the purchase of conservation easements for forestland. The Forest Legacy Program is a voluntary Federal program in partnership with States which protects privately owned forest lands. Landowners are required to prepare a multiple resource management plan as part of the conservation easement acquisition.\nThe majority of states have direct funding sources for conservation. Commonly used funding sources include real estate transfer tax, legislative bonds, and lottery proceeds. For instance, in 2014, New Jersey added conservation funding from corporate business taxes through constitutional amendment, approved by 65% of voters. Many states and counties have programs for the purchase of agricultural conservation easements (PACE) to protect productive farmland from non-agricultural development. In 1974, Suffolk County in New York enacted the first PACE (also known as purchase of development rights or PDR) program. King County in Washington and the states of Maryland, Massachusetts, and Connecticut quickly followed suit. As of 2016, the PACE program operates in 32 states through both state and local programs.\nNational Conservation Easement Database.\nThe National Conservation Easement Database maps conservation easements and provides a resource for understanding what resources conservation easements protect in the U.S. As of 2018, the National Conservation Easement Database included over 130,000 conservation easements on 24.7 million acres.\nCriticism.\nIn 2017, \"Fortune\" published an investigative report by \"ProPublica\" criticizing the continuing use of conservation easements as a tax avoidance scheme, which causes the government to lose billions of dollars in tax revenues, thus raising taxes for middle-class and working individuals.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56521", "revid": "15950732", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56521", "title": "Right wing", "text": ""}
{"id": "56522", "revid": "45179772", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56522", "title": "Right-wing politics", "text": "Political ideologies favouring social hierarchy\nRight-wing politics is the range of political ideologies that view certain social orders and hierarchies as inevitable, natural, normal, or desirable, typically supporting this position in favour of conservatism, natural law, economics, authority, property, religion, or tradition. Hierarchy and inequality may be seen as natural results of traditional social differences or competition in market economies.\nRight-wing politics are considered the counterpart to left-wing politics, and the left\u2013right political spectrum is the most common political spectrum. The right includes social conservatives and fiscal conservatives, as well as right-libertarians. \"Right\" and \"right-wing\" have been variously used as compliments and pejoratives describing neoliberal, conservative, and fascist economic and social ideas.\nPositions.\nThe following positions are typically associated with right-wing politics.\nAnti-communism.\nEarly communists used the term \"right-wing\" in reference to conservatives, placing the conservatives on the right, the liberals in the centre and the communists on the left. Both the conservatives and the liberals were strongly anti-communist, although the conservatives' anti-communism was much stronger than liberals'. The history of the use of the term \"right-wing\" about anti-communism is a complicated one.\nEarly Marxist movements were at odds with the traditional monarchies that ruled over much of the European continent at the time. Many European monarchies outlawed the public expression of communist views and the \"Communist Manifesto\", which began \"[a] spectre [that] is haunting Europe\", and stated that monarchs feared for their thrones. Advocacy of communism was illegal in the Russian Empire, the German Empire, and Austria-Hungary, the three most powerful monarchies in continental Europe before World War I. Many monarchists (except constitutional monarchists) viewed inequality in wealth and political power as resulting from a divine natural order. The struggle between monarchists and communists was often described as a struggle between the Right and the Left.\nBy World War I, in most European monarchies the divine right of kings had become discredited and was replaced by liberal and nationalist movements. Most European monarchs became figureheads, or they yielded some power to elected governments. The most conservative European monarchy, the Russian Empire, was replaced by the communist Soviet Union. The Russian Revolution inspired a series of other communist revolutions across Europe in the years 1917\u20131923. Many of these, such as the German Revolution, were defeated by nationalist and monarchist military units. During this period, nationalism began to be considered right-wing, especially when it opposed the internationalism of the communists.\nThe 1920s and 1930s saw the decline of traditional right-wing politics. The mantle of conservative anti-communism was taken up by the rising fascist movements on the one hand and by American-inspired liberal conservatives on the other. When communist groups and political parties began appearing around the world, their opponents were usually colonial authorities and the term \"right-wing\" came to be applied to colonialism.\nAfter World War II, communism became a global phenomenon and anti-communism became an integral part of the domestic and foreign policies of the United States and its NATO allies. Conservatism in the post-war era abandoned its monarchist and aristocratic roots, focusing instead on patriotism, religious values, and nationalism. Throughout the Cold War, postcolonial governments in Asia, Africa, and Latin America turned to the United States for political and economic support. Communists were also enemies of capitalism, portraying Wall Street as the oppressor of the masses. The United States made anti-communism the top priority of its foreign policy, and many American conservatives sought to combat what they saw as communist influence at home. This led to the adoption of several domestic policies that are collectively known under the term \"McCarthyism\". While both liberals and conservatives were anti-communist, the followers of Senator McCarthy were called \"right-wing\" and those on the right called liberals who favoured free speech, even for communists, \"leftist\".\nEconomics.\nEarly forms of corporatism would be developed in Classical Greece and used in Ancient Rome. Plato would develop the ideas of totalitarian and communitarian corporatist systems of natural based classes and social hierarchies that would be organised based on function, such that groups would cooperate to achieve social harmony by emphasising collectives interests over individual interests. Corporatism as a political ideology advocates the organisation of society by corporate groups\u2014such as agricultural, labour, military, scientific, or guild associations\u2014based on their common interests.\nAfter the decline of the Western Roman Empire corporatism became limited to religious orders and to the idea of Christian brotherhood, especially in the context of economic transactions. From the High Middle Ages onwards corporatist organisations became increasingly common in Europe, including such groups as religious orders, monasteries, fraternities, military orders such as the Knights Templar and the Teutonic Order, educational organisations such as the emerging universities and learned societies, the chartered towns and cities, and most notably the guild system which dominated the economics of population centres in Europe.\nIn post-revolutionary France, the Right fought against the rising power of those who had grown rich through commerce, and sought to preserve the rights of the hereditary nobility. They were uncomfortable with capitalism, the Enlightenment, individualism, and industrialism, and fought to retain traditional social hierarchies and institutions. In Europe's history, there have been strong collectivist right-wing movements, such as in the social Catholic right, that have exhibited hostility to all forms of liberalism (including economic liberalism) and have historically advocated for paternalist class harmony involving an organic-hierarchical society where workers are protected while class hierarchy remains.\nIn the 19th century, the Right had shifted to support the newly rich in some European countries (particularly Britain) and instead of favouring the nobility over industrialists, favoured capitalists over the working class. Other right-wing movements\u2014such as Carlism in Spain and nationalist movements in France, Germany, and Russia\u2014remained hostile to capitalism and industrialism. Nevertheless, a few right-wing movements\u2014notably the French Nouvelle Droite, CasaPound, and American paleoconservatism\u2014are often in opposition to capitalist ethics and the effects they have on society. These forces see capitalism and industrialism as infringing upon or causing the decay of social traditions or hierarchies that are essential for social order.\n\"Laissez-faire\" schools.\nIn modern times, \"right-wing\" is sometimes used to describe \"laissez-faire\" capitalism. In Europe, capitalists formed alliances with the Right during their conflicts with workers after 1848. In 1871, the Austrian school came to be with the work of Carl Menger, Eugen von B\u00f6hm-Bawerk, Friedrich von Wieser, and others, originating from methodologically opposition to the Historical school, in a dispute known as \"Methodenstreit\". The Austrian school opposition to be heterodox, advocating strict adherence to methodological individualism, the concept that social phenomena result primarily from the motivations and actions of individuals along with their self interest. Austrian-school theorists hold that economic theory should be exclusively derived from basic principles of human action.\nIn France, the Right's support of capitalism can be traced to the late 19th century. The so-called neoliberal Right, popularised by US President Ronald Reagan and UK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, combines support for free markets, privatisation, and deregulation with traditional right-wing support for social conformity.\nNationalism.\nIn France, nationalism was originally a left-wing and republican ideology. After the period of \"boulangisme\" and the Dreyfus affair, nationalism became a trait of the right-wing. Right-wing nationalists sought to define and defend a \"true\" national identity from elements which they believed were corrupting that identity. Some were supremacists, who in accordance with scientific racism and social Darwinism applied the concept of \"survival of the fittest\" to nations and races.\nRight-wing nationalism was influenced by Romantic nationalism in which the state derives its political legitimacy from the organic unity of those who it governs. This generally includes the language, race, culture, religion, and customs of the nation, all of which were \"born\" within its culture. Linked with right-wing nationalism is cultural conservatism, which supports the preservation of the heritage of a nation or culture and often sees deviations from cultural norms as an existential threat.\nIn the 21st century, neo-nationalism came to prominence after the Cold War in the Western world. It is typically associated with cultural conservatism, populism, anti-globalisation, and nativism and is opposed to immigration. The ideology takes historical association in determining membership in a nation, rather than racial concepts.\nNatural law and traditionalism.\nRight-wing politics typically justifies a hierarchical society based on natural law or tradition.\nTraditionalism was advocated by a group of United States university professors (labelled the \"New Conservatives\" by the popular press) who rejected the concepts of individualism, liberalism, modernity, and social progress, seeking instead to promote what they identified as cultural and educational renewal and a revived interest in concepts perceived by traditionalists as truths that endure from age to age alongside basic institutions of western society such as the church, the family, the state, and business.\nPopulism.\nRight-wing populism is a combination of civic-nationalism, cultural-nationalism and sometimes ethno-nationalism, localism, along with anti-elitism, using populist rhetoric to provide a critique of existing political institutions. According to Margaret Canovan, a right-wing populist is \"a charismatic leader, using the tactics of politicians' populism to go past the politicians and intellectual elite and appeal to the reactionary sentiments of the populace, often buttressing his claim to speak for the people by the use of referendums\".\nIn Europe, right-wing populism often takes the form of distrust of the European Union, and of politicians in general, combined with anti-immigrant rhetoric and a call for a return to traditional, national values. Daniel Stockemer states, the radical right is, \"Targeting immigrants as a threat to employment, security and cultural cohesion\".\nIn the United States, the Tea Party movement stated that the core beliefs for membership were the primacy of individual liberties as defined by the Constitution of the United States, preference for a small federal government, and respect for the rule of law. Some policy positions included opposition to illegal immigration and support for a strong national military force, the right to individual gun ownership, cutting taxes, reducing government spending, and balancing the budget.\nIn Indonesia, Islamic populism has a significant impact on right-wing politics. This is largely due to the historical context which Islamic organisations had during the 1960s in destroying the Indonesian Communist Party. Whilst the party is adopting democratic processes with neo-liberal market economies, socially pluralist positions are not necessarily adopted. The Islamic populism in Indonesia has boosted its influence in 1998 after the demise of the Suharto authoritarian regime. Islamic populism in Indonesia has similar properties with Islamic populist regimes like in the Middle East, Turkey and North Africa (MENA). The emphasis on social justice, pluralism, equality and progressive agendas could be potentially mobilised by Islamic cultural resources. \nIn India, supporters of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) have more authoritarian, nativist, and populist ideas than other Indian citizens. Under Narendra Modi, populism is a core part of the party's ideology. The party's rhetoric reflects the idea is that the ordinary, \"good\" individuals are continuously under attack from \"bad\" political forces, the media, etc. Since Narendra Modi became the leader of the BJP, it has increasingly been considered a populist radical right party (PRR) and has also been considered a Hindu nationalist party.\nReligion.\nPhilosopher and diplomat Joseph de Maistre argued for the indirect authority of the Pope over temporal matters. According to Maistre, only governments which were founded upon Christian constitutions\u2014which were implicit in the customs and institutions of all European societies, especially the Catholic European monarchies\u2014could avoid the disorder and bloodshed that followed the implementation of rationalist political programmes, such as the chaos which occurred during the French Revolution. Some prelates of the Church of England\u2013established by Henry VIII and headed by the current sovereign\u2014are given seats in the House of Lords (as Lords Spiritual), but they are considered politically neutral rather than specifically right- or left-wing.\nIn \"The Possessed\" (1872) and \"The Brothers Karamazov\" (1880), Fyodor Dostoevsky portrayed socialism as an attempt to build a kingdom of Man as opposed to kingdom of God. According to Dostoevsky himself, the intention of the latter book was to portray \"the seed of the idea of destruction in our time in Russia among the young people uprooted from reality\". This seed is depicted as: \"the rejection not of God but of the meaning of His creation. Socialism has sprung from the denial of the meaning of historical reality and ended in a programme of destruction and anarchism\".\nIn his 1931 encyclical \"Quadragesimo Anno\", Pope Pius XI wrote that \"true socialism\" was irreconcilable with the teachings of the Catholic Church \"because its concept of society itself is utterly foreign to Christian truth\", stating:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"For, according to Christian teaching, man, endowed with a social nature, is placed on this earth so that by leading a life in society and under an authority ordained of God he may fully cultivate and develop all his faculties unto the praise and glory of his Creator; and that by faithfully fulfilling the duties of his craft or other calling he may obtain for himself temporal and at the same time eternal happiness. Socialism, on the other hand, wholly ignoring and indifferent to this sublime end of both man and society, affirms that human association has been instituted for the sake of material advantage alone\"\u2014\u200aAmerican right-wing media outlets oppose sex outside marriage and same-sex marriage, and they sometimes reject scientific positions on evolution and other matters where science tends to disagree with the Bible.\nThe term \"family values\" has been used by right-wing parties\u2014such as the Republican Party in the United States, the Family First Party in Australia, the Conservative Party in the United Kingdom, and the Bharatiya Janata Party in India\u2014to signify support for traditional families and opposition to the changes the modern world has made in how families live. Supporters of \"family values\" may oppose abortion, euthanasia, and birth control.\nOutside the West, the Hindu nationalist movement has attracted privileged groups which fear encroachment on their dominant positions, as well as \"plebeian\" and impoverished groups which seek recognition around a majoritarian rhetoric of cultural pride, order, and national strength.\nIn Israel, Meir Kahane advocated that Israel should be a theocratic state, where non-Jews have no voting rights, and the far-right Lehava strictly opposes Jewish assimilation and the Christian presence in Israel. The Jewish Defence League (JDL) in the United States was classified as \"a right wing terrorist group\" by the FBI in 2001. Many Islamist groups have been called right-wing, including the Great Union Party, the Combatant Clergy Association/Association of Militant Clergy, and the Islamic Society of Engineers of Iran.\nSocial stratification.\nRight-wing politics involves, in varying degrees, the rejection of some egalitarian objectives of left-wing politics, claiming either that social or economic inequality is natural and inevitable or that it is beneficial to society. Right-wing ideologies and movements support social order. The original French right-wing was called \"the party of order\" and held that France needed a strong political leader to keep order.\nConservative British scholar R. J. White, who rejects egalitarianism, wrote: \"Men are equal before God and the laws, but unequal in all else; hierarchy is the order of nature, and privilege is the reward of honourable service\". American conservative Russell Kirk also rejected egalitarianism as imposing sameness, stating: \"Men are created different; and a government that ignores this law becomes an unjust government for it sacrifices nobility to mediocrity\". Italian scholar Norberto Bobbio argued that the right-wing is inegalitarian compared to the left-wing, as he argued that equality is a relative, not absolute, concept.\nRight libertarians reject collective or state-imposed equality as undermining reward for personal merit, initiative, and enterprise. In their view, such imposed equality is unjust, limits personal freedom, and leads to social uniformity and mediocrity.\nIn the view of philosopher Jason Stanley in \"How Fascism Works\", the \"politics of hierarchy\" is one of the hallmarks of fascism, which refers to a \"glorious past\" in which members of the rightfully dominant group sat atop the hierarchy, and attempt to recreate this state of being.\nHistory.\nAccording to \"The Cambridge History of Twentieth-Century Political Thought\", (2003) the Right has gone through five distinct historical stages:\nThe political terms \"Left\" and \"Right\" were first used in the 18th century, during the French Revolution, referencing the seating arrangement of the French parliament. Those who sat to the right of the chair of the presiding officer (\"le pr\u00e9sident\") were generally supportive of the institutions of the monarchist Old Regime. The original \"Right\" in France was formed in reaction to the \"Left\" and comprised those supporting hierarchy, tradition, and clericalism. The expression (\"the right\") increased in use after the restoration of the monarchy in 1815, when it was applied to the ultra-royalists.\nFrom the 1830s to the 1880s, the Western world's social class structure and economy shifted from nobility and aristocracy towards capitalism. This shift affected centre-right movements such as the British Conservative Party, which responded supporting capitalism.\nThe people of English-speaking countries did not apply the terms \"right\" and \"left\" to their politics until the 20th century. The term \"right-wing\" was originally applied to traditional conservatives, monarchists, and reactionaries; a revision of this which occurred sometime between the 1920s and 1950s considers the \"far-right to\" denote fascism, Nazism, and racial supremacy.\nRightist regimes were common in Europe in the Interwar period, 1919\u20131938.\nChina.\nRepublic of China (1912\u20131949).\nAmong Kuomintang (KMT)'s conservatives during the Republic of China, Dai Jitao Thought supporters formed the Western Hills Group in the 1920s.\nChiang Kai-shek initially claimed himself as a 'centrist' in the KMT left-right conflict, but became an anti-communist right-wing after Shanghai massacre. Chiangism (or 'Chiang Kai-shek Thought') was related to Confucianism, party-state capitalism, paternalistic conservatism, and Chinese nationalism.\nPeople's Republic of China.\nNeoauthoritarianism is a current of political thought that rose in China in the late 1980's and came into ascendancy after the death of Deng Xiaoping; it advocates a powerful state to facilitate market reforms. It has been described as right-wing, classically conservative even though it incorporated some aspects of Marxist\u2013Leninist and Maoist theories.\nFrance.\nThe political term \"right-wing\" was first used during the French Revolution, when liberal deputies of the Third Estate generally sat to the left of the presiding officer's chair, a custom that began in the Estates General of 1789. The nobility, members of the Second Estate, generally sat to the right. In the successive legislative assemblies, monarchists who supported the Old Regime were commonly referred to as rightists because they sat on the right side. A major figure on the right was Joseph de Maistre, who argued for an authoritarian form of conservatism.\nThroughout France in the 19th century, the main line dividing the left and right was between supporters of the republic and those of the monarchy, who were often secularist and Catholic respectively. On the right, the Legitimists and Ultra-royalists held counter-revolutionary views, while the Orl\u00e9anists hoped to create a constitutional monarchy under their preferred branch of the royal family, which briefly became a reality after the 1830 July Revolution.\nThe centre-right Gaullists in post-World War II France advocated considerable social spending on education and infrastructure development as well as extensive economic regulation, but limited the wealth redistribution measures characteristic of social democracy.\nHungary.\nThe dominance of the political right of inter-war Hungary, after the collapse of a short-lived Communist regime, was described by historian Istv\u00e1n De\u00e1k:\nBetween 1919 and 1944 Hungary was a rightist country. Forged out of a counter-revolutionary heritage, its governments advocated a \"nationalist Christian\" policy; they extolled heroism, faith, and unity; they despised the French Revolution, and they spurned the liberal and socialist ideologies of the 19th century. The governments saw Hungary as a bulwark against bolshevism and bolshevism's instruments: socialism, cosmopolitanism, and Freemasonry. They perpetrated the rule of a small clique of aristocrats, civil servants, and army officers, and surrounded with adulation the head of the state, the counterrevolutionary Admiral Horthy.\nIndia.\nAlthough freedom fighters are favoured, the right-wing tendency to elect or appoint politicians and government officials based on aristocratic and religious ties is common to almost all the states of India. Multiple political parties however identify with terms and beliefs which are, by political consensus, right or left wing. Certain political parties such as the Bharatiya Janata Party, identify with conservative and nationalist elements. Some, such as the Indian National Congress, take a liberal stance. The Communist Party of India, Communist Party of India (Marxist), and others, identify with left-wing socialist and communist concepts. Other political parties take differing stands, and hence cannot be clearly grouped as the left- and the right-wing.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn British politics, the terms \"right\" and \"left\" came into common use for the first time in the late 1930s during debates over the Spanish Civil War.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, following the Second World War, social conservatives joined with right-wing elements of the Republican Party to gain support in traditionally Democratic voting populations like white southerners and Catholics. Ronald Reagan's election to the presidency in 1980 cemented the alliance between the religious right in the United States and social conservatives.\nIn 2019, the United States populace leaned centre-right, with 37% of Americans self-identifying as conservative, compared to 35% moderate and 24% liberal. This was continuing a decades long trend of the country leaning centre-right.\nThe United States Department of Homeland Security defines right-wing extremism in the United States as \"broadly divided into those groups, movements, and adherents that are primarily hate-oriented (based on hatred of particular religious, racial or ethnic groups), and those that are mainly anti-government, rejecting federal authority in favour of state or local authority, or rejecting government authority entirely. It may include groups and individuals that are dedicated to a single issue, such as opposition to abortion or immigration\".\nTypes.\nThe meaning of right-wing \"varies across societies, historical epochs, and political systems and ideologies\". According to \"The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Politics\", in liberal democracies, the political right opposes socialism and social democracy. Right-wing parties include conservatives, Christian democrats, classical liberals, and nationalists, as well as fascists on the far-right.\nBritish academics No\u00ebl O'Sullivan and Roger Eatwell divide the right into five types: reactionary, moderate, radical, extreme, and new. Chip Berlet wrote that each of these \"styles of thought\" are \"responses to the left\", including liberalism and socialism, which have arisen since the 1789 French Revolution.\nOther authors make a distinction between the centre-right and the far-right.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56523", "revid": "5183450", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56523", "title": "Leftism", "text": ""}
{"id": "56524", "revid": "36761066", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56524", "title": "Fats", "text": "Fats or FATS may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "56525", "revid": "69412", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56525", "title": "Triglyceride", "text": "Any ester of glycerol having all three hydroxyl groups esterified with fatty acids\nA triglyceride (from \"tri-\" and \"glyceride\"; also TG, triacylglycerol, TAG, or triacylglyceride) is an ester derived from glycerol and three fatty acids.\nTriglycerides are the main constituents of body fat in humans and other vertebrates as well as vegetable fat.\nThey are also present in the blood to enable the bidirectional transference of adipose fat and blood glucose from the liver and are a major component of human skin oils.\nMany types of triglycerides exist. One specific classification focuses on saturated and unsaturated types. Saturated fats have \"no\" C=C groups; unsaturated fats feature one or more C=C groups. Unsaturated fats tend to have a lower melting point than saturated analogues; as a result, they are often liquid at room temperature.\nChemical structure.\nThe three fatty acids substituents can be the same, but they are usually different. The positions of the three fatty acids are specified using stereospecific numbering as sn-1, sn-2, and sn-3. The compositions of many fats and oils have been determined. Many triglycerides are known because many fatty acids are known. The chain lengths of the fatty acid groups vary in naturally occurring triglycerides, Those containing 16, 18, or 20 carbon atoms are defined as long-chain triglycerides, while medium-chain triglycerides contain shorter fatty acids. Animals synthesize even-numbered fatty acids, but bacteria possess the ability to synthesise odd- and branched-chain fatty acids. As a result, ruminant animal fat contains odd-numbered fatty acids, such as 15, due to the action of bacteria in the rumen. Many fatty acids are unsaturated; some are polyunsaturated (e.g., those derived from linoleic acid).\nMost natural fats contain a complex mixture of individual triglycerides. Because of their heterogeneity, they melt over a broad range of temperatures. Cocoa butter is unusual in that it is composed of only a few triglycerides, derived from palmitic, oleic, and stearic acids in the 1-, 2-, and 3-positions of glycerol, respectively.\nThe simplest triglycerides are those where the three fatty acids are identical. Their names indicate the fatty acid: stearin derived from stearic acid, triolein derived from oleic acid, palmitin derived from palmitic acid, etc. These compounds can be obtained in three crystalline forms (polymorphs): \u03b1, \u03b2, and \u03b2\u2032, the three forms differing in their melting points.\nA triglyceride containing different fatty acids is known as a \"mixed triglyceride\". These are more common in nature.\nIf all three fatty acids on the glycerol differ, then the mixed triglyceride is chiral.\nPhysical properties.\nTriglycerides are colorless, although degraded samples can appear yellowish. Stearin, a simple, saturated, symmetrical triglyceride, is a solid near room temperature, but most examples are oils. Their densities range from around 0.89 with very long-chain fatty acids, through about 0.93 to 0.98 with medium-chain, and above 1.0 for very-short-chain acids.\nBiosynthesis.\nTriglycerides are tri-esters derived from the condensation reaction of glycerol with three fatty acids. Their formation can be summarised by the following overall equation:\nIn nature, the formation of triglycerides is not random; rather, specific fatty acids are selectively condensed with the hydroxyl functional groups of glycerol. Animal fats typically have unsaturated fatty acid residues on carbon atoms 1 and 3. Extreme examples of non-random fats are cocoa butter (mentioned above) and lard, which contains about 20% triglyceride with palmitic acid on carbon 2 and oleic acid on carbons 1 and 3. An early step in the biosynthesis is the formation of the glycerol-1-phosphate:\nThe three oxygen atoms in this phosphate ester are differentiated, setting the stage for regiospecific formation of triglycerides, as the diol reacts selectively with coenzyme-A derivatives of the fatty acids, RC(O)S\u2013CoA:\nThe phosphate ester linkage is then hydrolysed to make way for the introduction of a third fatty acid ester:\nNomenclature.\nCommon fat names.\nFats are often named after their source, e.g., olive oil, cod liver oil, shea butter, tail fat. Some have traditional names of their own, e.g., butter, lard, ghee, and margarine. The composition of these natural fats are somewhat variable. The oleic acid component in olive oil can vary from 64% to 86%.\nChemical fatty acid names.\nTriglycerides are then commonly named as esters of those acids, as in glyceryl 1,2-dioleate 3-palmitate, the name for a brood pheromone of the honey bee. Where the fatty acid residues in a triglyceride are all the same, names like olein (for glyceryl trioleate) and palmitin (for glyceryl tripalmitate) are common.\nIUPAC.\nIn the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry's (IUPAC's) general chemical nomenclature for organic compounds, any organic structure can be named by starting from its corresponding hydrocarbon and then specifying differences so as to describe its structure completely. For fatty acids, for example, the position and orientation of carbon-carbon double bonds is specified counting from the carboxyl functional group. Thus, oleic acid is formally named (9\"Z\")-octadec-9-enoic acid, which describes that the compound has:\nIUPAC nomenclature can also handle branched chains and derivatives where hydrogen atoms are replaced by other chemical groups. Triglycerides take formal IUPAC names according to the rule governing naming of esters. For example, the formal name propane-1,2,3-tryl 1,2-bis((9\"Z\")-octadec-9-enoate) 3-(hexadecanoate) applies to the pheromone informally named as glyceryl 1,2-dioleate-3-palmitate, and also known by other common names including 1,2-dioleoyl-3-palmitoylglycerol, glycerol dioleate palmitate, and 3-palmito-1,2-diolein.\nFatty acid code.\nA notation specific for fatty acids with unbranched chain, that is as precise as the IUPAC one but easier to parse, is a code of the form \"{N}:{D} \"cis\"-{CCC} \"trans\"-{TTT}\", where {N} is the number of carbons (including the carboxyl one), {D} is the number of double bonds, {CCC} is a list of the positions of the \"cis\" double bonds, and {TTT} is a list of the positions of the \"trans\" bonds. Either or both \"cis\" and \"trans\" lists and their labels are omitted if there are no multiple bonds with that geometry. For example, the codes for stearic, oleic, elaidic, and vaccenic acids are \"18:0\", \"18:1 \"cis\"-9\", \"18:1 \"trans\"-9\", and \"18:1 \"trans\"-11\", respectively. Catalpic acid, (9\"E\",11\"E\",13\"Z\")-octadeca-9,11,13-trienoic acid according to IUPAC nomenclature, has the code \"18:3 \"cis\"-13 \"trans\"-9,11\".\nSaturated and unsaturated fats.\nFor human nutrition, an important classification of fats is based on the number and position of double bonds in the constituent fatty acids. Saturated fat has a predominance of saturated fatty acids, without any double bonds, while unsaturated fat has predominantly unsaturated acids with double bonds. (The names refer to the fact that each double bond means two fewer hydrogen atoms in the chemical formula. Thus, a saturated fatty acid, having no double bonds, has the maximum number of hydrogen atoms for a given number of carbon atoms\u00a0\u2013 that is, it is \"saturated\" with hydrogen atoms.)\nUnsaturated fatty acids are further classified into monounsaturated (MUFAs), with a single double bond, and polyunsaturated (PUFAs), with two or more. Natural fats usually contain several different saturated and unsaturated acids, even on the same molecule. For example, in most vegetable oils, the saturated palmitic (C16:0) and stearic (C18:0) acid residues are usually attached to positions 1 and 3 (sn1 and sn3) of the glycerol hub, whereas the middle position (sn2) is usually occupied by an unsaturated one, such as oleic (C18:1, \u03c9\u20139) or linoleic (C18:2, \u03c9\u20136).)\nSaturated fats generally have a higher melting point than unsaturated ones with the same molecular weight, and thus are more likely to be solid at room temperature. For example, the animal fats tallow and lard are high in saturated fatty acid content and are solids. Olive and linseed oils on the other hand are unsaturated and liquid. Unsaturated fats are prone to oxidation by air, which causes them to become rancid and inedible.\nThe double bonds in unsaturated fats can be converted into single bonds by reaction with hydrogen effected by a catalyst. This process, called hydrogenation, is used to turn vegetable oils into solid or semisolid vegetable fats like margarine, which can substitute for tallow and butter and (unlike unsaturated fats) resist rancidification. Under some conditions, hydrogenation can creates some unwanted \"trans\" acids from \"cis\" acids.\nIn cellular metabolism, unsaturated fat molecules yield slightly less energy (i.e., fewer calories) than an equivalent amount of saturated fat. The heats of combustion of saturated, mono-, di-, and tri-unsaturated 18-carbon fatty acid esters have been measured as 2859, 2828, 2794, and 2750 kcal/mol, respectively; or, on a weight basis, 10.75, 10.71, 10.66, and 10.58 kcal/g\u00a0\u2013 a decrease of about 0.6% for each additional double bond.\nThe greater the degree of unsaturation in a fatty acid (i.e., the more double bonds in the fatty acid) the more vulnerable it is to lipid peroxidation (rancidity). Antioxidants can protect unsaturated fat from lipid peroxidation.\nCommercial applications.\nWhile it is the \"nutritional\" aspects of polyunsaturated fatty acids that are generally of greatest interest, these materials also have non-food applications. \nLinseed oil and related oils are important components of useful products used in oil paints and related coatings. Linseed oil is rich in di- and tri-unsaturated fatty acid components, which tend to harden in the presence of oxygen. This heat-producing hardening process is peculiar to these so-called \"drying oils\". It is caused by a polymerization process that begins with oxygen molecules attacking the carbon backbone. Aside from llinseed oil, other oils exhibit drying properties and are used in more specialized applications. These include tung, poppyseed, perilla, and walnut oil. All \"polymerize\" on exposure to oxygen to form solid films, useful in paints and varnishes.\nTriglycerides can also be split into methyl esters of the constituent fatty acids via transesterification: \nThe resulting fatty acid methyl esters can be used as fuel in diesel engines, hence their name biodiesel.\nStaining.\nStaining for fatty acids, triglycerides, lipoproteins, and other lipids is done through the use of lysochromes (fat-soluble dyes). These dyes can allow the qualification of a certain fat of interest by staining the material a specific color. Some examples: Sudan IV, Oil Red O, and Sudan Black B.\nInteractive pathway map.\n\"Click on genes, proteins and metabolites below to link to respective articles.\" \nStatin pathway http://\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56526", "revid": "46807820", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56526", "title": "Diabetic ketoacidosis", "text": "Medical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nDiabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) is a potentially life-threatening acute complication of diabetes mellitus. Signs and symptoms may include vomiting, abdominal pain, deep gasping breathing, increased urination, weakness, confusion and occasionally loss of consciousness. A person's breath may develop a specific \"fruity\" or acetone smell. The onset of symptoms is usually rapid. People without a previous diagnosis of diabetes may develop DKA as the first obvious symptom.\nDKA happens most often in those with type 1 diabetes but can also occur in those with other types of diabetes under certain circumstances. Triggers may include infection, not taking insulin correctly, stroke and certain medications such as steroids. DKA results from a shortage of insulin; in response, the body switches to burning fatty acids, which produces acidic ketone bodies. DKA is typically diagnosed when testing finds high blood sugar, low blood pH and keto acids in either the blood or urine.\nThe primary treatment of DKA is with intravenous fluids and insulin. Depending on the severity, insulin may be given intravenously or by injection under the skin. Usually, potassium is also needed to prevent the development of low blood potassium. Throughout treatment, blood glucose and potassium levels should be regularly checked. Underlying causes for the DKA should be identified. In those with severely low blood pH who are critically ill, sodium bicarbonate may be given; however, its use is of unclear benefit and typically not recommended.\nRates of DKA vary around the world. Each year, about 4% of type 1 diabetics in the United Kingdom develop DKA, versus 25% of type 1 diabetics in Malaysia. DKA was first described in 1886 and continued to be a universally fatal condition until introduction of insulin therapy in the 1920s. With adequate and timely treatment, the risk of death is between &lt;1% and 5%.\nHistory.\nThe first full description of diabetic ketoacidosis is attributed to Julius Dreschfeld, a German-British pathologist working in Manchester, United Kingdom. In his description, which he gave in an 1886 lecture at the Royal College of Physicians in London, he drew on reports by Adolf Kussmaul as well as describing the main ketones, acetoacetate and \u03b2-hydroxybutyrate, and their chemical determination. The condition remained almost universally fatal until the discovery of insulin in the 1920s; by the 1930s, mortality had fallen to 29 percent, and by the 1950s it had become less than 10 percent. The entity of cerebral edema due to DKA was described in 1936 by a team of doctors from Philadelphia.\nNumerous research studies since the 1950s have focused on the ideal treatment for diabetic ketoacidosis. A significant proportion of these studies have been conducted at the University of Tennessee Health Science Center and Emory University School of Medicine. Treatment options studied have included high- or low-dose intravenous, subcutaneous or intramuscular (e.g. the \"Alberti regime\") insulin, potassium supplementation, need for a loading dose of insulin, and the appropriateness of using bicarbonate therapy in moderate DKA. Various questions remain unanswered, such as whether bicarbonate administration in severe DKA makes any real difference to the clinical course, and whether an insulin loading dose is needed in adults.\nSigns and symptoms.\nThe symptoms of an episode of diabetic ketoacidosis usually evolve over a period of about 24 hours. Predominant symptoms are nausea and vomiting, pronounced thirst, excessive urine production and abdominal pain that may be severe. In severe DKA, breathing becomes rapid and of a deep, gasping character, called \"Kussmaul breathing\". The abdomen may be tender to the point that a serious abdominal condition may be suspected, such as acute pancreatitis, appendicitis or gastrointestinal perforation. Vomiting altered blood that resembles coffee grounds occurs in a minority of people and tends to originate from erosion of the esophagus. In severe DKA, there may be confusion or a marked decrease in alertness, including coma.\nOn physical examination there is usually clinical evidence of dehydration, such as a dry mouth and decreased skin turgor. If the dehydration is profound enough to cause a decrease in the circulating blood volume, a rapid heart rate and low blood pressure may be observed. Often, a \"ketotic\" odor is present, which is often described as \"fruity\" or \"like pear drops\". The smell is due to the presence of acetone. If Kussmaul respiration is present, this is reflected in an increased respiratory rate.\nSmall children with DKA are relatively prone to brain swelling, also called cerebral edema, which may cause headache, coma, loss of the pupillary light reflex, and can progress to death. It occurs in about 1 out of 100 children with DKA and more rarely occurs in adults.\nCause.\nDKA most frequently occurs in those who know that they have diabetes, but it may also be the first presentation in someone who has not previously been known to be diabetic. There is often a particular underlying problem that has led to the DKA episode; this may be intercurrent illness (pneumonia, influenza, gastroenteritis, a urinary tract infection), pregnancy, inadequate insulin administration (e.g. defective insulin pen device), myocardial infarction (heart attack), stroke or the use of cocaine. Young people with recurrent episodes of DKA may have an underlying eating disorder, or may be using insufficient insulin for fear that it will cause weight gain.\nDiabetic ketoacidosis may occur in those previously known to have diabetes mellitus type 2 or in those who on further investigations turn out to have features of type 2 diabetes (e.g. obesity, strong family history); this is more common in African, African-American and Hispanic people. Their condition is then labeled \"ketosis-prone type 2 diabetes\".\nDrugs in the gliflozin class (SGLT2 inhibitors), which are generally used for type 2 diabetes, have been associated with cases of diabetic ketoacidosis where the blood sugars may not be significantly elevated (\"euglycemic DKA\"). While this is a relatively uncommon adverse event, it is thought to be more common if someone receiving an SGLT2 inhibitor who is also receiving insulin has reduced or missed insulin doses. Furthermore, it can be triggered by severe acute illness, dehydration, extensive exercise, surgery, low-carbohydrate diets, or excessive alcohol intake. Proposed mechanisms for SGLT2-I induced \"euglycemic DKA\" include increased ketosis due to volume depletion combined with relative insulin deficiency and glucagon excess. SGLT2 inhibitors should be stopped before surgery and only recommenced when it is safe to do so. SGLT2 inhibitors may be used in people with type 1 diabetes, but the possibility of ketoacidosis requires specific risk management. Specifically, they should not be used if someone is also using a low carbohydrate or ketogenic diet.\nMechanism.\nDiabetic ketoacidosis arises because of a lack of insulin in the body. The lack of insulin and corresponding elevation of glucagon leads to increased release of glucose by the liver (a process that is normally suppressed by insulin) from glycogen via glycogenolysis and also through gluconeogenesis. High glucose levels spill over into the urine, taking water and solutes (such as sodium and potassium) along with it in a process known as osmotic diuresis. This leads to polyuria, dehydration, and polydipsia. The absence of insulin also leads to the release of free fatty acids from adipose tissue (lipolysis), which the liver converts into acetyl-CoA through a process called beta oxidation. \nAcetyl-CoA is metabolised into ketone bodies under severe states of energy deficiency, like starvation, through a process called ketogenesis, whose final products are aceto-acetate and \u03b2-Hydroxybutyrate. These ketone bodies can serve as an energy source in the absence of insulin-mediated glucose delivery, and is a protective mechanism in case of starvation. The ketone bodies, however, have a low pKa and therefore turn the blood acidic (metabolic acidosis). The body initially buffers the change with the bicarbonate buffering system, but this system is quickly overwhelmed and other mechanisms must work to compensate for the acidosis. One such mechanism is hyperventilation to lower blood carbon dioxide levels (a form of compensatory respiratory alkalosis). This hyperventilation, in its extreme form, may be observed as Kussmaul respiration.\nIn various situations such as infection, insulin demands rise but are not matched by the failing pancreas. Blood sugars rise, dehydration ensues, and resistance to the normal effects of insulin increases further by way of a vicious circle.\nAs a result of the above mechanisms, the average adult with DKA has a total body water shortage of about 6\u00a0liters (or 100\u00a0mL/kg), in addition to substantial shortages in sodium, potassium, chloride, phosphate, magnesium and calcium. Glucose levels usually exceed 13.8\u00a0mmol/L or 250\u00a0mg/dL.\nDKA is common in type 1 diabetes as this form of diabetes is associated with an absolute lack of insulin production by the islets of Langerhans. In type 2 diabetes, insulin production is present but is insufficient to meet the body's requirements as a result of end-organ insulin resistance. Usually, these amounts of insulin are sufficient to suppress ketogenesis. If DKA occurs in someone with type 2 diabetes, their condition is called \"ketosis-prone type 2 diabetes\". The exact mechanism for this phenomenon is unclear, but there is evidence both of impaired insulin secretion and insulin action. Once the condition has been treated, insulin production resumes and often the person may be able to resume diet or tablet treatment as normally recommended in type 2 diabetes.\nThe clinical state of DKA is associated, in addition to the above, with the release of various counterregulatory hormones such as glucagon and adrenaline as well as cytokines, the latter of which leads to increased markers of inflammation, even in the absence of infection.\nCerebral edema, which is the most dangerous DKA complication, is probably the result of a number of factors. Some authorities suggest that it is the result of overvigorous fluid replacement, but the complication may develop before treatment has been commenced. It is more likely in those with more severe DKA, and in the first episode of DKA. Likely factors in the development of cerebral edema are dehydration, acidosis and low carbon dioxide levels; in addition, the increased level of inflammation and coagulation may, together with these factors, lead to decreased blood flow to parts of the brain, which then swells up once fluid replacement has been commenced. The swelling of brain tissue leads to raised intracranial pressure ultimately leading to death.\nKetosis prone diabetes.\nThe entity of ketosis-prone type 2 diabetes was first fully described in 1987 after several preceding case reports. It was initially thought to be a form of maturity onset diabetes of the young, and went through several other descriptive names (such as \"idiopathic type 1 diabetes\", \"Flatbush diabetes\", \"atypical diabetes\" and \"type 1.5 diabetes\") before the current terminology of \"ketosis-prone type 2 diabetes\" was adopted.\nIt has been reported predominantly in non-white ethnicity in African\u2013Americans, Hispanics, Black Africans and Black Caribbeans. There is a link with G6PD deficiency.\nDiagnosis.\nInvestigations.\nDiabetic ketoacidosis may be diagnosed when the combination of hyperglycemia (high blood sugars), ketones in the blood or on urinalysis and acidosis are demonstrated. In about 10% of cases the blood sugar is not significantly elevated (\"euglycemic diabetic ketoacidosis\").\nA pH measurement is performed to detect acidosis. Blood from a vein is adequate, as there is little difference between the arterial and the venous pH; arterial samples are only required if there are concerns about oxygen levels. Ketones can be measured in the urine (acetoacetate) and blood (\u03b2-hydroxybutyrate). When compared with urine acetoacetate testing, capillary blood \u03b2-hydroxybutyrate determination can reduce the need for admission, shorten the duration of hospital admission and potentially reduce the costs of hospital care. At very high levels, capillary blood ketone measurement becomes imprecise.\nIn addition to the above, blood samples are usually taken to measure urea and creatinine (measures of kidney function, which may be impaired in DKA as a result of dehydration) and electrolytes. Furthermore, markers of infection (complete blood count, C-reactive protein) and acute pancreatitis (amylase and lipase) may be measured. Given the need to exclude infection, chest radiography and urinalysis are usually performed.\nIf cerebral edema is suspected because of confusion, recurrent vomiting or other symptoms, computed tomography may be performed to assess its severity and to exclude other causes such as stroke.\nCriteria.\nDiabetic ketoacidosis is distinguished from other diabetic emergencies by the presence of large amounts of ketones in blood and urine, and marked metabolic acidosis. Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state (HHS, sometimes labeled \"hyperosmolar non-ketotic state\" or HONK) is much more common in type 2 diabetes and features increased plasma osmolarity (above 320\u00a0mosm/kg) due to profound dehydration and concentration of the blood; mild acidosis and ketonemia may occur in this state, but not to the extent observed in DKA. There is a degree of overlap between DKA and HHS, as in DKA the osmolarity may also be increased.\nKetoacidosis is not always the result of diabetes. It may also result from alcohol excess and from starvation; in both states the glucose level is normal or low. Metabolic acidosis may occur in people with diabetes for other reasons, such as poisoning with ethylene glycol or paraldehyde.\nThe American Diabetes Association categorizes DKA in adults into one of three stages of severity:\nA 2004 statement by the European Society for Paediatric Endocrinology and the Lawson Wilkins Pediatric Endocrine Society (for children) uses slightly different cutoffs, where mild DKA is defined by pH\u00a07.20\u20137.30 (bicarbonate 10\u201315\u00a0mmol/L), moderate DKA by pH\u00a07.1\u20137.2 (bicarbonate 5\u201310) and severe DKA by pH&lt;7.1 (bicarbonate below 5).\nPrevention.\nAttacks of DKA can be prevented in those known to have diabetes to an extent by adherence to \"sick day rules\"; these are clear-cut instructions to patients on how to treat themselves when unwell. Instructions include advice on how much extra insulin to take when sugar levels appear uncontrolled, an easily digestible diet rich in salt and carbohydrates, means to suppress fever and treat infection, and recommendations on when to call for medical help.\nPeople with diabetes can monitor their own ketone levels when unwell and seek help if they are elevated.\nManagement.\nThe main aim in the treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis is to replace the lost fluids and electrolytes while suppressing the high blood sugars and ketone production with insulin. Admission to an intensive care unit (ICU) or similar high-dependency area or ward for close observation may be necessary.\nFluid replacement.\nThe amount of fluid replaced depends on the estimated degree of dehydration. If dehydration is so severe as to cause shock (severely decreased blood pressure with insufficient blood supply to the body's organs), or a depressed level of consciousness, rapid infusion of saline (1\u00a0liter for adults, 10\u00a0mL/kg in repeated doses for children) is recommended to restore circulating volume. Slower rehydration based on calculated water and sodium shortage may be possible if the dehydration is moderate, and again saline is the recommended fluid. Very mild ketoacidosis with no associated vomiting and mild dehydration may be treated with oral rehydration and subcutaneous rather than intravenous insulin under observation for signs of deterioration.\nNormal saline (0.9% saline) has generally been the fluid of choice. There have been a few small trials looking at balanced fluids with few differences.\nA special but unusual consideration is cardiogenic shock, where the blood pressure is decreased not due to dehydration but due to the inability of the heart to pump blood through the blood vessels. This situation requires ICU admission, monitoring of the central venous pressure (which requires the insertion of a central venous catheter in a large upper body vein), and the administration of medication that increases the heart pumping action and blood pressure.\nInsulin.\nSome guidelines recommend a bolus (initial large dose) of insulin of 0.1\u00a0units of insulin per kilogram of body weight. This can be administered immediately after the potassium level is known to be higher than 3.3\u00a0mmol/L; if the level is any lower, administering insulin could lead to a dangerously low potassium level (see below). Other guidelines recommend a bolus given intramuscularly if there is a delay in commencing an intravenous infusion of insulin, whereas guidelines for the management of pediatric DKA recommend delaying the initiation of insulin until fluids have been administered. It is possible to use rapid acting insulin analogs injections under the skin for mild or moderate cases.\nIn general, insulin is given at 0.1\u00a0units/kg per hour to reduce blood sugars and suppress ketone production. Guidelines differ as to which dose to use when blood sugar levels start falling; American guidelines recommend reducing the dose of insulin once glucose falls below 16.6\u00a0mmol/L (300\u00a0mg/dL) and UK guidelines at 14\u00a0mmol/L (253\u00a0mg/dL). Others recommend infusing glucose in addition to saline to allow for ongoing infusion of higher doses of insulin.\nPotassium.\nPotassium levels can fluctuate severely during the treatment of DKA, because insulin decreases potassium levels in the blood by redistributing it into cells via increased sodium-potassium pump activity. A large part of the shifted extracellular potassium would have been lost in urine because of osmotic diuresis. Hypokalemia (low blood potassium concentration) often follows treatment. This increases the risk of dangerous irregularities in the heart rate. Therefore, continuous observation of the heart rate is recommended, as well as repeated measurement of the potassium levels and addition of potassium to the intravenous fluids once levels fall below 5.3\u00a0mmol/L. If potassium levels fall below 3.3\u00a0mmol/L, insulin administration may need to be interrupted to allow correction of the hypokalemia.\nSodium bicarbonate.\nThe administration of sodium bicarbonate solution to rapidly improve the acid levels in the blood is controversial. There is little evidence that it improves outcomes beyond standard therapy, and indeed some evidence that while it may improve the acidity of the blood, it may actually worsen acidity inside the body's cells and increase the risk of certain complications. Its use is therefore discouraged, although some guidelines recommend it for extreme acidosis (pH&lt;6.9), and smaller amounts for severe acidosis (pH\u00a06.9\u20137.0).\nCerebral edema.\nCerebral edema, if associated with coma, often necessitates admission to intensive care, artificial ventilation, and close observation. The administration of fluids is slowed. The ideal treatment of cerebral edema in DKA is not established, but intravenous mannitol and hypertonic saline (3%) are used\u2014as in some other forms of cerebral edema\u2014in an attempt to reduce the swelling. Cerebral edema is unusual in adults.\nResolution.\nResolution of DKA is defined as the general improvement in the symptoms, such as the ability to tolerate oral nutrition and fluids, normalization of blood acidity (pH&gt;7.3), and absence of ketones in the blood (&lt;1\u00a0mmol/L) or urine. Once this has been achieved, insulin may be switched to the usual subcutaneously administered regimen, one hour after which the intravenous administration can be discontinued.\nIn people with suspected ketosis-prone type 2 diabetes, determination of antibodies against glutamic acid decarboxylase and islet cells may aid in the decision whether to continue insulin administration long-term (if antibodies are detected), or whether to withdraw insulin and attempt treatment with oral medication as in type 2 diabetes. Generally speaking, routine measurement of C-peptide as a measure of insulin production is not recommended unless there is genuine doubt as to whether someone has type 1 or type 2 diabetes.\nEpidemiology.\nDiabetic ketoacidosis occurs in 4.6\u20138.0 per 1000 people with diabetes annually. Rates among those with type 1 diabetes are higher with about 4% in the United Kingdom developing DKA a year while in Malaysia the condition affects about 25% a year. In the United States, 135,000 hospital admissions occur annually as a result of DKA, at an estimated cost of $2.4\u00a0billion or a quarter to half the total cost of caring for people with type 1 diabetes. There has been a documented increasing trend in hospital admissions. The risk is increased in those with an ongoing risk factor, such as an eating disorder, and those who cannot afford insulin. About 30% of children with type 1 diabetes receive their diagnosis after an episode of DKA. Lower socio\u2010economic status and higher area\u2010level deprivation are associated with an increased risk of diabetic ketoacidosis in people with diabetes mellitus type 1.\nPreviously considered universally fatal, the risk of death with adequate and timely treatment is between &lt;1% and 5%. However, despite low acute mortality rates, an episode of DKA remains a significant predictor of death over the subsequent 12 months. Up to 1% of children with DKA develop a complication known as cerebral edema. Rates of cerebral edema in US children with DKA have risen from 0.4% in 2002 to 0.7% in 2012. Between 2 and 5 out of 10 children who develop brain swelling will die as a result.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56527", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56527", "title": "Galactose", "text": "Monosaccharide sugar\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nGalactose (, \"galacto-\" + \"-ose\", sometimes abbreviated Gal, is a common monosaccharide, i.e. a simple sugar. It is classified as a reducing hexose, more specifically an aldohexose. In terms of structure, it is a C-4 epimer of glucose. A white, water-soluble solid, it is about as sweet as glucose, and about 65% as sweet as sucrose.\nOccurrence.\nGalactan is a polymeric form of galactose found in hemicellulose, and forming the core of the galactans, a class of natural polymeric carbohydrates.\nD-Galactose is also known as brain sugar since it is a component of glycoproteins (oligosaccharide-protein compounds) found in nerve tissue.\nGalactofuranose occurs in bacteria, fungi and protozoa, and is recognized by a putative chordate immune lectin intelectin through its exocyclic 1,2-diol. \nRelationship to lactose.\nGalactose, when combined with glucose (another monosaccharide) through a condensation reaction, gives the disaccharide called lactose. The hydrolysis of lactose to glucose and galactose is catalyzed by the enzymes lactase and \u03b2-galactosidase. The latter is produced by the \"lac\" operon in \"Escherichia coli\".\nIn nature, lactose is found primarily in milk and milk products. Consequently, various food products made with dairy-derived ingredients can contain lactose. Galactose is metabolised to glucose by the three principal enzymes in a mechanism known as the Leloir pathway. The enzymes are listed in the order of the metabolic pathway: galactokinase (GALK), galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase (GALT), and UDP-galactose 4\u2032-epimerase (GALE).\nIn human lactation, galactose is required in a 1 to 1 ratio with glucose to enable the mammary glands to synthesize and secrete lactose. In a study where women were fed a diet containing galactose, 69 \u00b1 6% of glucose and 54 \u00b1 4% of galactose in the lactose they produced were derived directly from plasma glucose, while 7 \u00b1 2% of the glucose and 12 \u00b1 2% of the galactose in the lactose, were derived directly from plasma galactose. 25 \u00b1 8% of the glucose and 35 \u00b1 6% of the galactose was synthesized from smaller molecules in a process referred to in the paper as hexoneogenesis. This suggests that the synthesis of galactose is supplemented by direct uptake and of use of plasma galactose when present.\nStructure and isomerism.\nGalactose exists in both open-chain and cyclic form. The open-chain form is an aldehyde (RCHO).\nFour isomers are cyclic, two of them with a pyranose (six-membered) ring and two with a furanose (five-membered) ring. Each cyclic form can exist as two anomers, named alpha and beta, since a new stereocenter is generated upon cyclization at the site of the carbonyl. In the pyranose form, the OH group on C-3 is axial.\nMetabolism.\nGlucose is more stable than galactose and is less susceptible to the formation of nonspecific glycoconjugates, molecules with at least one sugar attached to a protein or lipid. Many speculate that it is for this reason that a pathway for rapid conversion from galactose to glucose has been highly conserved among many species.\nThe main pathway of galactose metabolism is the Leloir pathway; humans and other species, however, have been noted to contain several alternate pathways, such as the De Ley Doudoroff Pathway. The Leloir pathway consists of the latter stage of a two-part process that converts \u03b2-D-galactose to UDP-glucose. The initial stage is the conversion of \u03b2-D-galactose to \u03b1-D-galactose by the enzyme, mutarotase (GALM). The Leloir pathway then carries out the conversion of \u03b1-D-galactose to UDP-glucose via three principal enzymes: Galactokinase (GALK) phosphorylates \u03b1-D-galactose to galactose-1-phosphate, or Gal-1-P; Galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase (GALT) transfers a UMP group from UDP-glucose to Gal-1-P to form UDP-galactose; and finally, UDP galactose-4'-epimerase (GALE) interconverts UDP-galactose and UDP-glucose, thereby completing the pathway.\nThe above mechanisms for galactose metabolism are necessary because the human body cannot directly use galactose for energy metabolism, and it must first go through one of these processes.\nGalactosemia is an inability to properly break down galactose due to a genetically inherited mutation in one of the enzymes in the Leloir pathway. As a result, the consumption of even small quantities is harmful to galactosemics.\nSources.\nGalactose is found in dairy products, avocados, sugar beets, other gums and mucilages. It is also synthesized by the body, where it forms part of glycolipids and glycoproteins in several tissues; and is a by-product from the third-generation ethanol production process (from macroalgae).\nClinical significance.\nChronic systemic exposure of mice, rats, and \"Drosophila\" to D-galactose causes the acceleration of senescence (aging). It has been reported that high dose exposure of D-galactose (120\u00a0mg/kg) can cause reduced sperm concentration and sperm motility in rodents and has been extensively used as an aging model when administered subcutaneously.\nTwo studies have suggested a possible link between galactose in milk and ovarian cancer. Other studies show no correlation, even in the presence of defective galactose metabolism. More recently, pooled analysis done by the Harvard School of Public Health showed no specific correlation between lactose-containing foods and ovarian cancer, and showed statistically insignificant increases in risk for consumption of lactose at 30 g/day. More research is necessary to ascertain possible risks.\nSome ongoing studies suggest galactose may have a role in treatment of focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (a kidney disease resulting in kidney failure and proteinuria). This effect is likely to be a result of binding of galactose to FSGS factor.\nGalactose is a component of the antigens (chemical markers) present on blood cells that distinguish blood type within the ABO blood group system. In O and A antigens, there are two monomers of galactose on the antigens, whereas in the B antigens there are three monomers of galactose.\nA disaccharide composed of two units of galactose, galactose-alpha-1,3-galactose (alpha-gal), has been recognized as a potential allergen present in mammal meat. Alpha-gal allergy may be triggered by lone star tick bites.\nGalactose in sodium saccharin solution has also been found to cause conditioned flavor avoidance in adult female rats within a laboratory setting when combined with intragastric injections. The reason for this flavor avoidance is still unknown. However, a decrease in the levels of the enzymes required to convert galactose to glucose in the liver of the rats could be responsible.\nHistory.\nIn 1855, E. O. Erdmann noted that hydrolysis of lactose produced a substance besides glucose.\nGalactose was first isolated and studied by Louis Pasteur in 1856 and he called it \"lactose\". In 1860, Berthelot renamed it \"galactose\" or \"glucose lactique\". In 1894, Emil Fischer and Robert Morrell determined the configuration of galactose.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"galactose\" is derived from Greek , 'of milk', and the generic chemical suffix for sugars \"-ose\". The etymology is comparable to that of the word \"lactose\" in that both contain roots meaning \"milk sugar\".\nSpectroscopy.\nThe IR spectra for galactose shows a broad, strong stretch from roughly wavenumber 2500\u00a0cm\u22121 to wavenumber 3700\u00a0cm\u22121.\nThe Proton NMR spectra for galactose includes peaks at 4.7\u202fppm (D2O), 4.15\u202fppm (\u2212CH2OH), 3.75, 3.61, 3.48 and 3.20\u202fppm (\u2212CH2 of ring), 2.79\u20131.90\u202fppm (\u2212OH).\nFurther reading.\nIt is a white, water soluble solid.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56528", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56528", "title": "Endocrinologist", "text": ""}
{"id": "56531", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56531", "title": "Retinopathy", "text": "Damage to the retina of the eyes\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nRetinopathy is any damage to the retina of the eyes, which may cause vision impairment. Retinopathy often refers to retinal vascular disease, or damage to the retina caused by abnormal blood flow. Age-related macular degeneration is technically included under the umbrella term retinopathy but is often discussed as a separate entity. Retinopathy, or retinal vascular disease, can be broadly categorized into proliferative and non-proliferative types. Frequently, retinopathy is an ocular manifestation of systemic disease as seen in diabetes or hypertension. Diabetes is the most common cause of retinopathy in the U.S. as of 2008. Diabetic retinopathy is the leading cause of blindness in working-aged people. It accounts for about 5% of blindness worldwide and is designated a priority eye disease by the World Health Organization.\nSigns and symptoms.\nMany people often do not have symptoms until very late in their disease course. Patients often become symptomatic when there is irreversible damage. Symptoms are usually not painful and can include:\nPathophysiology.\nThe development of retinopathy can be broken down into proliferative and non-proliferative types. Both types cause disease by altering the normal blood flow to the retina through different mechanisms. The retina is supplied by small vessel branches from the central retinal artery. Proliferative retinopathy refers to damage caused by abnormal blood vessel growth. Normally, angiogenesis is a natural part of tissue growth and formation. When there is an unusually high or fast rate of angiogenesis, there is an overgrowth of blood vessels called neovascularization. In the non-proliferative type, abnormal blood flow to the retina occurs due to direct damage or compromise of the blood vessels themselves. Many causes of retinopathy may cause both proliferative and non-proliferative types, though some causes are more associated one type.\nNon-proliferative retinopathy.\nNon-proliferative retinopathy is often caused by direct damage or remodeling of the small blood vessels supplying the retina. Many common causes of non-proliferative damage include hypertensive retinopathy, retinopathy of prematurity, radiation retinopathy, solar retinopathy, sickle cell retinopathy, and anemic retinopathy (including secondary to vitamin B12 deficiency).\nThere are three main mechanisms of damage in non-proliferative retinopathy: blood vessel damage or remodeling, direct retinal damage, or occlusion of the blood vessels. The first mechanism is indirect damage by altering the blood vessels that supply the retina. In the case of hypertension, high pressures in the system cause the walls of the artery to thicken, which effectively reduces the amount of blood flow to the retina. This reduction in flow causes tissue ischemia leading to damage. Atherosclerosis, or hardening and narrowing of blood vessels, also reduces flow to the retina. The second mechanism is direct damage to the retina usually caused by free radicals that causes oxidative damage to the retina itself. Radiation, solar retinopathy, and retinopathy of prematurity fall under this category. The third common mechanism is occlusion of blood flow. This can be caused by either physically blocking the vessels of the retinal artery branches or causing the arteries to narrow. Again, the result is reduced blood flow to the retina causing tissue damage. Sickle cell disease compromises blood flow by causing blood to sludge, or thicken and flow slowly, through the retinal arteries. Other disorders that cause hyperviscosity syndrome may also cause blood sludging. Lastly, clots or central artery thrombosis directly blocks flow to the retina causing the cells to die.\nProliferative retinopathy.\nProliferative retinopathy is the result of aberrant blood flow to the retina due to blood vessel overgrowth, or neovascularization. These pathologically overgrown blood vessels are often fragile, weak, and ineffective at perfusing the retinal tissues. These weak, fragile vessels are also often leaky, allowing fluids, protein, and other debris to leach out into the retina. They are also prone to hemorrhage due to their poor strength. This makes proliferative types of retinopathy more risky since vessel hemorrhaging often leads to vision loss and blindness. Many of the causes mentioned in non-proliferative retinopathy may also cause proliferative retinopathy at later stages. Angiogenesis and neovascularization tend to be a later manifestation of non-proliferative retinopathy. Many types of non-proliferative retinopathies result in tissue ischemia or direct retinal damage. The body responds by trying to increase blood flow to damaged retinal tissues. Diabetes mellitus, which causes diabetic retinopathy, is the most common cause of proliferative retinopathy in the world.\nOther causes.\nGenetic mutations are rare causes of certain retinopathies and are usually X-linked including \"NDP\" family of genes causing Norrie disease, FEVR, and Coats disease among others. There is emerging evidence that there may be a genetic predisposition in patients who develop retinopathy of prematurity and diabetic retinopathy. Trauma, especially to the head, and several diseases may cause Purtscher's retinopathy. Physical exertion like weight lifting and aerobic exercise, coughing, sneezing, straining at stool, vomiting, sexual intercourse, blowing up balloons, blowing musical instruments, cardiopulmonary resuscitation or compression injuries may cause valsalva retinopathy.\nDiagnosis.\nRetinopathy is diagnosed by an ophthalmologist or an optometrist during eye examination. The clinician will need to examine the retina, at the back of the eye, to make this diagnosis. There are several ways to examine the retina. The clinician can directly view the retina by looking through the pupil with a light. In most cases, the clinician will dilate the pupil to make for better visualization. Stereoscopic fundus photography is the gold standard for the diagnosis of retinopathy.\nTelemedicine programs are available that allow primary care clinics to take images using specially designed retinal imaging equipment which can then be shared electronically with specialists at other locations for review. In 2009, Community Health Center, Inc. implemented a telemedicine retinal screening program for low-income patients with diabetes as part of those patients' annual visits at the Federally Qualified Health Center.\nPrevention.\nRetinopathy is often secondary to diseases such as diabetes or hypertension. Controlling blood sugar levels and blood pressure have been shown to help decrease incidence of retinopathy.\nBlood sugar control: If someone has diabetes, or is at high risk for diabetes, it is important for them to have their blood sugar levels checked. The gold standard blood sugar test is the HbA1C test. Many studies have suggested that lowering HbA1C levels in someone with elevated HbA1C levels can lower the incidence and progression of retinopathy. Fortunately, blood sugar control can have benefits beyond just the eye. A primary care physician can help with blood sugar control strategies.\nBlood pressure control: Controlling blood pressure can also lower the incidence and progression of retinopathy. A primary care physician can help with blood pressure control strategies.\nOther: Besides blood sugar and blood pressure control, there are other modifications that can help. Regular exercise may help lower the incidence and progression of retinopathy. If someone has sleep apnea, treatment of sleep apnea may help as well.\nTreatment.\nTreatment is based on the cause of the retinopathy and may include laser therapy to the retina. Laser photocoagulation therapy has been the standard treatment for many types of retinopathy. Evidence shows that laser therapy is generally safe and improves visual symptoms in sickle cell and diabetic retinopathy. In recent years targeting the pathway controlling vessel growth or angiogenesis has been promising. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) seems to play a vital role in promoting neovascularization. Using anti-VEGF drugs (antibodies to sequester the growth factor), research have shown significant reduction in the extent of vessel outgrowth. Low quality evidence supports the use of anti-VEGF antibodies, such as bevacizumab or pegaptanib which seems to improve outcomes when used in conjunction with laser therapy to treat retinopathy of prematurity, longer term systemic effects are not known however. The evidence is poorer for treatment of diabetic retinopathy. Use of anti-VEGF drugs did not appear to improve outcomes in a clinically significant way when compared to standard laser therapy for diabetic retinopathy.\nEpidemiology.\nThe two most common causes of retinopathy include diabetic retinopathy and retinopathy of prematurity. Diabetic retinopathy affects about 5 million people and retinopathy of prematurity affect about 50,000 premature infants each year worldwide. Hypertensive retinopathy is the next most common cause affecting anywhere from 3 to 14% of all non-diabetic adults.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56533", "revid": "42306392", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56533", "title": "Diabetic retinopathy", "text": "Diabetes-induced damage to the retina of the eye\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nDiabetic retinopathy (also known as diabetic eye disease) is a medical condition in which damage occurs to the retina due to diabetes. It is a leading cause of blindness in developed countries and one of the leading causes of sight loss in the world, even though there are many new therapies and improved treatments for helping people living with diabetes.\nDiabetic retinopathy affects up to 80 percent of those who have had both type 1 and type 2 diabetes for 20 years or more. In at least 90% of new cases, progression to more aggressive forms of sight-threatening retinopathy and maculopathy could be reduced with proper treatment and monitoring of the eyes. The longer a person has diabetes, the higher their chances of developing diabetic retinopathy. Each year in the United States, diabetic retinopathy accounts for 12% of all new cases of blindness. It is also the leading cause of blindness in people aged 20 to 64.\nSigns and symptoms.\nNearly all people with diabetes develop some degree of retina damage (\"retinopathy\") over several decades with the disease. For many, that damage can only be detected by a retinal exam, and has no noticeable effect on vision. Over time, progressive retinal damage may appear on a retinal exam, first with small bulges in retinal blood vessels called microaneurysms. Then larger abnormalities in retinal vessels: cotton wool spots, hemorrhages, lipid deposits called \"hard exudates\", intraretinal microvascular abnormalities, and abnormal-looking retinal veins. Eventually, many progress to a stage where new blood vessels grow throughout the retina. These new blood vessels often break and bleed. Minor bleeding can cause dark floating spots obstructing vision; major bleeding can completely block vision.\nAround half of people with diabetic retinopathy develop swelling of the macula, called macular edema, which can begin at any time. If the swelling occurs near the center of the macula, it can cause vision disruptions ranging from mildly blurred vision to severe loss of the center of an affected person's visual field. Left untreated, around 30% of those with such swelling experience vision disruption over the next 3\u20135 years. Macular edema is the most common cause of vision loss in people with diabetic retinopathy.\nThe repeated processes of blood vessel growth, swelling, and scarring can eventually cause retinal detachment, which manifests as the sudden appearance of dark floating spots, flashes of light, or blurred vision.\nCauses.\nDiabetic retinopathy is caused by prolonged high blood glucose damaging the small blood vessels of the retina, though the mechanism by which this occurs is unknown. Progression of diabetic retinopathy is accompanied by loss of capillary cells, increased blood vessel permeability in the retina, and altered retinal blood flow, all of which can reduce the amount of blood oxygen that gets delivered to the retina. Poor oxygenation of tissues drives the formation of new blood vessels throughout the retina, resulting in the proliferative stage of disease. These new blood vessels tend to rupture easily, causing bleeding within the eye, scarring, and damage to the retina or macula. Recent evidence has found a strong association between diabetic retinopathy and inflammation.\nRisk factors.\nThe major risk factors for developing diabetic retinopathy are duration of diabetes, poor blood sugar control, and, to a lesser extent, high blood pressure. Five years after diabetes diagnosis, around 25% of those with type 1 diabetes have some degree of diabetic retinopathy, while 2% have proliferative diabetic retinopathy. By 15 years after diagnosis, that increases to 80% with some retinopathy, and 25% with proliferative disease. Children are an exception\u2014regardless of duration of diabetes, children rarely experience sight-threatening retinopathy; however, puberty can accelerate retinopathy progression. Pregnancy can also accelerate the progression of diabetic retinopathy (although women with gestational diabetes are not at risk).\nBoth chronically high blood sugar (measured by a high HbA1c) and highly variable blood sugar are associated with developing diabetic retinopathy. Several more minor risk factors also exacerbate diabetic retinopathy, namely kidney disease, abnormal blood lipids, high body mass index, and smoking.\nGenetic predisposition to diabetic retinopathy in type 2 diabetes consists of many genetic variants across the genome that are collectively associated with diabetic retinopathy (polygenic risk) and overlaps with genetic risk for glucose, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and systolic blood pressure. Several variations in the \"VEGFC\" gene have also been associated with an increased risk of developing macular edema.\nPeople with Down syndrome, who have extra chromosome 21 material, rarely acquire diabetic retinopathy. This protection appears to be due to the elevated levels of endostatin, an anti-angiogenic protein, derived from collagen XVIII. The collagen XVIII gene is located on chromosome 21.\nIncidence of Retinitis Pigmentosa is observed to result in fewer and less severe microvascular lesions in both humans and mouse models. Retinitis Pigmentosa results in loss of rod receptors in the mid peripheral field, reducing the oxygen consumption that is linked with release of VEGF and growth of unwanted blood vessels in the retina.\nObstructive sleep apnea (OSA) has been associated with a higher incidence of diabetic eye disease due to blood desaturation caused by intermittent upper airway obstructions. Treatment for OSA can help reduce the risk of diabetic complications.\nPathogenesis.\nDiabetic retinopathy is the result of damage to the small blood vessels and neurons of the retina. The earliest changes leading to diabetic retinopathy include narrowing of the retinal arteries associated with reduced retinal blood flow; dysfunction of the neurons of the inner retina, followed in later stages by changes in the function of the outer retina, associated with subtle changes in visual function; dysfunction of the blood-retinal barrier, which protects the retina from many substances in the blood (including toxins and immune cells), leading to the leaking of blood constituents into the retinal neuropile. Later, the basement membrane of the retinal blood vessels thickens, capillaries degenerate and lose cells, particularly pericytes and vascular smooth muscle cells. This leads to loss of blood flow and progressive ischemia, and microscopic aneurysms which appear as balloon-like structures jutting out from the capillary walls, which recruit inflammatory cells; and advanced dysfunction and degeneration of the neurons and glial cells of the retina. The condition typically develops about 10\u201315 years after receiving the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus.\nAn experimental study suggests that pericyte death is caused by blood glucose persistently activating protein kinase C and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), which, through a series of intermediates, inhibits signaling through platelet-derived growth factor receptors\u2014signaling that supports cellular survival, proliferation, and growth. The resulting withdrawal of this signaling leads to the programmed cell death (apoptosis) of the cells in this experimental model.\nIn addition, excessive sorbitol in diabetics is deposited in the retina tissue, and it is also proposed to play a role in diabetic retinopathy.\nRecent studies have found a strong correlation between retinal inflammation and diabetic retinopathy progression.\nA genetic study showed that diabetic retinopathy shares a similar genetic predisposition with levels of glucose, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and systolic blood pressure, indicating that glycemic control and cardiometabolic factors may be important in the development of diabetic retinopathy.\nLipid peroxidation plays a notable role in the progression of diabetic retinopathy. Free radicals such as hydroxyl and hydroperoxyl species with oxygen as functional group oxidize lipids and phospholipids, and at the cellular level bring about membrane lipid peroxidation and in this way can trigger diabetic retinopathy.\nDiagnosis.\nDiabetic retinopathy is typically diagnosed by retinal exam observations using ophthalmoscopy. The American Academy of Ophthalmology divides diabetic retinopathy into five categories of progressive severity. The first category, \"no apparent retinopathy\", describes those with a healthy retinal exam. The next three categories: mild, moderate, and severe nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy (NPDR), describe increasing levels of damage to the retina. People with mild NPDR have microaneurysms in the retina, but no other damage. Those with severe NPDR have 20+ retinal hemorrhages in each quadrant of the retina, a distinctive pattern of damage on the veins of the retina called \"venous beading\" in at least two retinal quadrants, and obvious intraretinal microvascular abnormalities anywhere on the retina. Moderate NPDR is defined as more severe than mild NPDR, but not yet meeting the criteria for severe NPDR. The fifth stage, proliferative diabetic retinopathy, is for those with new blood vessels forming throughout the retina (\"retinal neovascularization\"), or blood leaking into the vitreous humor (\"vitreous hemorrhage\") or between the vitreous membrane and retina (\"preretinal hemorrhage\").\nThe same guidelines separately categorize macular edema into two categories: \"macular edema apparently absent\" and \"macular edema apparently present.\" The latter is further subdivided into \"mild\"\u2014retinal thickening or lipid deposits far from the macula's center; \"moderate\"\u2014 thickening or deposits near the center; and \"severe\"\u2014thickening or deposits on the macula center. Optical coherence tomography is frequently used to assess macular edema.\nFluorescein angiography is used by retina specialists to assess diabetic retinopathy severity further and to determine sites of macular damage.\nElectroretinography or ERGs, especially when combined with the pupillary response, can be used to predict which patients are likely to progress to having treatable disease.\nScreening.\nDue to the lack of symptoms, most people with diabetic retinopathy are unaware that they have the condition until they visit an eye doctor. Both the American Diabetes Association (ADA) and the International Council of Ophthalmology (ICO) recommend regular eye exams for those with diabetes to screen for diabetic retinopathy (except those with gestational diabetes). The ADA recommends a comprehensive eye examination at the time of type 2 diabetes diagnosis, and within five years of the onset of type 1 diabetes. For women with diabetes who become pregnant, the ADA recommends an eye examination before pregnancy, in each trimester, and for a year postpartum. The ICO recommends eye examinations for those with diabetes include a visual acuity examination and a retinal examination via ophthalmoscopy or retinal photography.\nIceland, Ireland, and the United Kingdom are the only countries with national diabetic retinopathy screening programs, while substantial regional screening programs have been implemented in parts of mainland Europe, parts of Asia, and Botswana. In the UK, screening for diabetic retinopathy is part of the standard of care for people with diabetes. After one normal screening in people with diabetes, further screening is recommended every year. Teleophthalmology has been employed in these programs.\nManagement.\nThere are four common treatments for diabetic retinopathy: anti-VEGF injections, steroid injections, panretinal laser photocoagulation, and vitrectomy. Current treatment regimens can prevent 90% of severe vision loss.\nAlthough these treatments are very successful (in slowing or stopping further vision loss), they do not cure diabetic retinopathy. Caution should be exercised in treatment with laser surgery since it causes a loss of retinal tissue. It is often more prudent to inject triamcinolone or anti-VEGF drugs. In some patients, it results in a marked increase in vision, especially if there is an edema of the macula.\nIn addition, standard treatment for diabetic retinopathy includes improving control of blood sugar, blood pressure, and blood cholesterol, all of which can reduce diabetic retinopathy progression.\nMild or moderate NPDR.\nFor those with mild to moderate non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy, the American Academy of Ophthalmology recommends only more frequent retinal exams\u2014every six to twelve months\u2014as these people are at an increased risk of developing proliferative retinopathy or macular edema. Injection of anti-VEGF drugs or steroids can reduce diabetic retinopathy progression in around half of eyes treated; however, whether this results in improved vision long term is not yet known. The lipid-lowering drug fenofibrate also reduces progression of disease in people with mild to moderate disease.\nDiabetic macular edema.\nThose at highest risk of vision loss \u2013 that is, with edema near the center of the macula \u2013 benefit most from eye injections of anti-VEGF therapies aflibercept, bevacizumab, or ranibizumab. There is no widely accepted dosing schedule, though people typically receive more frequent injections during the first year of treatment, with less frequent injections in subsequent years sufficient to maintain remission. Those whose eyes don't improve with anti-VEGF therapy may instead receive laser photocoagulation, typically in the form of short laser pulses.\nThose with macular edema but no vision loss do not benefit from treatment; the American Academy of Ophthalmology recommends deferring treatment until visual acuity falls to at least 20/30. The diabetic macular edema manifestation is difficult to predict. Autoantibodies against hexokinase 1 are commonly associated with diabetic macular edema manifestation. Nearly one-third of patients with diabetic macular edema were found to be positive for anti-hexokinase 1 autoantibodies. Importantly, these autoantibodies were rare in patients with diabetic retinopathy only or diabetes mellitus only. However, these autoantibodies fail to predict disease onset. They likely manifest secondary to the tissue-damaging stimulus at diabetic macular edema onset and cannot be used to predict diabetic macular edema before its onset.\nLaser photocoagulation.\nLaser photocoagulation can be used in two scenarios for the treatment of diabetic retinopathy. Firstly, to treat macular edema and secondly, for treating the whole retina (panretinal photocoagulation) for controlling neovascularization. It is widely used for the early stages of proliferative retinopathy. There are different types of lasers, and there is evidence available on their benefits to treat proliferative diabetic retinopathy.\nPanretinal laser photocoagulation.\nFor those with proliferative or severe non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy, vision loss can be prevented by treatment with panretinal laser photocoagulation.\nThe goal is to create 1,600\u20132,000 burns in the retina with the hope of reducing the retina's oxygen demand, and hence the possibility of ischemia. It is done in multiple sittings.\nIn treating advanced diabetic retinopathy, the burns are used to destroy the abnormal new blood vessels that form in the retina. This has been shown to reduce the risk of severe vision loss for eyes at risk by 50%.\nBefore using the laser, the ophthalmologist dilates the pupil and applies anaesthetic drops to numb the eye. In some cases, the doctor may also numb the area behind the eye to reduce discomfort. The patient sits facing the laser machine while the doctor holds a special lens on the eye. The physician can use a single spot laser, a pattern scan laser for two-dimensional patterns such as squares, rings, and arcs, or a navigated laser, which works by tracking retinal eye movements in real time. During the procedure, the patient will see flashes of light. These flashes often create an uncomfortable stinging sensation for the patient. After the laser treatment, patients should be advised not to drive for a few hours while the pupils are still dilated. Vision will most likely remain blurry for the rest of the day. Though there should not be much pain in the eye itself, an ice-cream headache like pain may last for hours afterwards.\nPatients will lose some of their peripheral vision after this surgery, although it may be barely noticeable by the patient. The procedure does, however, save the center of the patient's sight. Laser surgery may also slightly reduce colour and night vision.\nA person with proliferative retinopathy will always be at risk for new bleeding, as well as glaucoma, a complication from the new blood vessels. This means that multiple treatments may be required to protect vision.\nMedications.\nIntravitreal triamcinolone acetonide.\nTriamcinolone is a long-acting steroid preparation. Treating people with DME with intravitreal injections of triamcinolone may lead to some degree of improvement in visual acuity when compared to eyes treated with placebo injections. When injected in the vitreous cavity, the steroid decreases the macular edema (thickening of the retina at the macula) caused due to diabetic maculopathy, and that may increase visual acuity. The effect of triamcinolone is not permanent and may last up to three months, which necessitates repeated injections for maintaining the beneficial effect. Best results of intravitreal Triamcinolone have been found in eyes that have already undergone cataract surgery. Complications of intravitreal injection of triamcinolone may include cataract, steroid-induced glaucoma, and endophthalmitis.\nIntravitreal anti-VEGF.\nAflibercept may have advantages in improving visual outcomes over bevacizumab and ranibizumab, after one year, longer term advantages are unclear In cases with vitreous hemorrhage, however, anti-VEGF injections proved to be less effective in restoring visual acuity than vitrectomy combined with panretinal laser-photocoagulation.\nOther.\nFenofibrate, a drug that is also used to reduce cholesterol levels, has been studied for its role in helping to improve the negative effects caused by diabetes and reducing the occurrence of retinal inflammation. There is some evidence that overall, in people with type II diabetes, fenofibrate may not make a clinically significant difference in progression of DME. For people who have type II diabetes and have overt retinopathy, there is evidence that fenofibrate may be more effective at reducing the progression of retinal damage.\nSurgery.\nInstead of laser surgery, some people require a vitrectomy to restore vision. A vitrectomy is performed when there is a lot of blood in the vitreous. It involves removing the cloudy vitreous and replacing it with a saline solution.\nStudies show that people who have a vitrectomy soon after a large hemorrhage are more likely to protect their vision than someone who waits to have the operation. Early vitrectomy is especially effective in people with insulin-dependent diabetes, who may be at greater risk of blindness from a hemorrhage into the eye.\nVitrectomy may be done under general or local anesthesia. The doctor makes a tiny incision in the sclera, or white of the eye. Next, a small instrument is placed into the eye to remove the vitreous and insert the saline solution into the eye.\nPatients may be able to return home soon after the vitrectomy, or may be asked to stay in the hospital overnight. After the operation, the eye will be red and sensitive, and patients usually need to wear an eyepatch for a few days or weeks to protect the eye. Medicated eye drops are also prescribed to protect against infection. There is evidence which suggests anti-VEGF drugs given either before or during vitrectomy may reduce the risk of posterior vitreous cavity haemorrhage . Vitrectomy is frequently combined with other modalities of treatment.\nEpidemiology.\nAround 35% of people with diabetes have diabetic retinopathy; around 10% experience some degree of vision loss. Diabetic retinopathy is particularly common in those with type 1 diabetes, affecting 25% of people five years from diagnosis, 60% 10 years from diagnosis, and 80% 15 years from diagnosis. Chances of disease progression are heavily influenced by blood sugar control, but on average 7% of those with diabetes experiencing proliferative diabetic retinopathy and 7% diabetic macular edema. Diabetic retinopathy is the leading cause of vision loss in those 20\u201374 years old.\nThe global burden of diabetic retinopathy increased dramatically from 1990 to 2015\u2014from 1.4 million to 2.6 million people with visual impairment; from 0.2 million to 0.4 million blinded\u2014due in large part to the increasing burden of type 2 diabetes in low- and middle-income countries.\nResearch.\nSeveral large multicenter randomized clinical trials have been done to evaluate treatment protocols for those with diabetic retinopathy, namely the Early Treatment for Diabetic Retinopathy Study, Diabetic Retinopathy Vitrectomy Study, Diabetic Retinopathy Study, Diabetes Control and Complications Trial, UK Prospective Diabetes Study, and the Diabetic Retinopathy Clinical Research Network Protocols I, S, and T.\nLight treatment.\nA medical device comprising a mask that delivers green light through the eyelids while a person sleeps was under development in 2016. The light from the mask stops rod cells in the retina from dark adapting, which is thought to reduce their oxygen requirement, which in turn diminishes new blood vessel formation and thus prevents diabetic retinopathy. As of 2016, a large clinical trial was underway. As of 2018, the results from the clinical trial showed no long-term therapeutic benefit from using the mask in diabetic retinopathy patients.\nC-peptide.\nC-peptide had shown promising results in treatment of diabetic complications incidental to vascular degeneration. Creative Peptides, Eli Lilly, and Cebix all had drug development programs for a C-peptide product. Cebix had the only ongoing program until it completed a Phase IIb trial in December 2014 that showed no difference between C-peptide and placebo, and it terminated its program and went out of business.\nStem cell therapy.\nClinical trials are underway or are being populated in preparation for study at medical centers in Brazil, Iran, and the United States. Current trials involve using the patients' own stem cells derived from bone marrow and injected into the degenerated areas to regenerate the vascular system.\nBlood pressure control.\nA Cochrane review examined 29 randomized controlled trials to determine whether interventions that sought to control or reduce blood pressure in diabetics had any effects on diabetic retinopathy. While the results showed that interventions to control or reduce blood pressure prevented diabetic retinopathy for up to 4\u20135 years in diabetics, there was no evidence of any effect of these interventions on progression of diabetic retinopathy, preservation of visual acuity, adverse events, quality of life, and costs.\nFundoscopic image analyses.\nDiabetic retinopathy is diagnosed entirely by recognizing abnormalities on retinal images taken by fundoscopy. Color fundus photography is mainly used for staging the disease. Fluorescein angiography is used to assess the extent of retinopathy, which aids in treatment plan development. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) is used to determine the severity of edema and treatment response.\nBecause fundoscopic images are the main sources for the diagnosis of diabetic retinopathy, manually analyzing those images can be time-consuming and unreliable, as the ability to detect abnormalities varies by years of experience. Therefore, scientists have explored developing computer-aided diagnosis approaches to automate the process, which involves extracting information about the blood vessels and any abnormal patterns from the rest of the fundoscopic image and analyzing them.\nMonoclonal antibodies (mAbs).\nMonoclonal antibodies (mAbs) are critical in treating diabetic retinopathy (DR) and diabetic macular edema (DME) by targeting pathways such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), angiopoietin-2 (Ang-2), and interleukin-6 (IL-6). Anti-VEGF mAbs like bevacizumab (used off-label), ranibizumab (FDA-approved for DME), and faricimab (a bispecific mAb targeting VEGF-A and Ang-2) reduce neovascularization and retinal edema, improving visual acuity. Faricimab, approved for DME, offers extended dosing up to 16 weeks, as shown in Phase 3 YOSEMITE and RHINE trials. Vamikibart, an anti-IL-6 mAb (also known as RG6179/RO7200220), targets inflammation in DME and is in Phase 2 trials combined with ranibizumab, showing rapid visual acuity gains (~10 letters) and reduced retinal thickness in a Phase 1 DOVETAIL trial for uveitic macular edema.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article\u00a0incorporates text from a publication in the public domain:\u00a0\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56538", "revid": "998182", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56538", "title": "Rule of thumb", "text": "Approximate method for doing something\nIn English, the phrase rule of thumb refers to an approximate method for doing something, based on practical experience rather than theory. This usage of the phrase can be traced back to the 17th century and has been associated with various trades where quantities were measured by comparison to the width or length of a thumb.\nAn erroneous folk etymology began circulating in the 1970s falsely connecting the origins of the phrase \"rule of thumb\" to legal doctrine on domestic abuse. The error appeared in a number of law journals, and the United States Commission on Civil Rights published a report on domestic abuse titled \"Under the Rule of Thumb\" in 1982. Some efforts were made to discourage the phrase, which was seen as taboo owing to this false origin. During the 1990s, several authors correctly identified the spurious folk etymology; however, the connection to domestic violence was still being cited in some legal sources into the early 2000s.\nOrigin and usage.\nThe exact origin of the phrase is uncertain. Its earliest (1685) appearance in print comes from a posthumously published collection of sermons by Scottish preacher James Durham: \"Many profest Christians are like to foolish builders, who build by guess, and by rule of thumb (as we use to speak), and not by Square and Rule.\"\nThe phrase is also found in Sir William Hope's \"The Compleat Fencing Master\" (1692): \"What he doth, he doth by rule of Thumb, and not by Art.\" James Kelly's \"The Complete Collection of Scottish Proverbs\", 1721, includes: \"No Rule so good as Rule of Thumb, if it hit\", meaning a practical approximation.\nHistorically, the width of the thumb, or \"thumb's breadth\", was used as the equivalent of an inch in the cloth trade; similar expressions existed in Latin and French as well. The thumb has also been used in brewing beer, to gauge the heat of the brewing vat. Ebenezer Cobham Brewer writes that \"rule of thumb\" means a \"rough measurement\". He says that \"Ladies often measure yard lengths by their thumb. Indeed, the expression 'sixteen nails make a yard' seems to point to the thumb-nail as a standard\" and that \"Countrymen always measure by their thumb.\" According to \"Phrasefinder\", \"The phrase joins the whole nine yards as one that probably derives from some form of measurement but which is unlikely ever to be definitively pinned down.\"\nFolk etymology.\nA modern folk etymology holds that the phrase is derived from the maximum width of a stick allowed for wife-beating under English common law, but no such law has ever existed. \nIn the 1970s, through a misunderstanding of a figure of speech, a common misconception arose that the phrase \"rule of thumb\" was related to legally condoned wife beating.\nEnglish common law.\nA modern folk etymology relates the phrase to domestic violence via an alleged rule under English common law which permitted wife-beating provided that the implement used was a rod or stick no thicker than a man's thumb. Wife-beating has been officially outlawed in England and the United States for centuries, but enforcement of the law was inconsistent, and wife-beating did continue. However, a rule of thumb permitting wife-beating was never codified in law.\nEnglish jurist William Blackstone wrote in the late 1700s in his \"Commentaries on the Laws of England\" that, by an \"old law\", a husband had formerly been justified in using \"moderate correction\" against his wife but was barred from inflicting serious violence; Blackstone did not mention either thumbs or sticks. According to Blackstone, this custom was in doubt by the late 1600s, and a woman was allowed \"security of the peace\" against an abusive husband. Twentieth-century legal scholar William L. Prosser wrote that there was \"probably no truth to the legend\" that a husband was allowed to beat his wife \"with a stick no thicker than his thumb\".\nThe association between the thumb and implements of domestic violence can be traced to 1782, when English judge Sir Francis Buller was ridiculed for purportedly stating that a husband could beat his wife, provided that he used a stick no wider than his thumb. There is no record of Buller making such a statement, but the rumor generated much satirical press, with Buller being mocked as \"Judge Thumb\" in published jokes and cartoons.\nIn the following century, several court rulings in the United States referred to a supposed common-law doctrine which the judges believed had once allowed wife-beating with an implement smaller than a thumb. None of these courts referred to such a doctrine as a rule of thumb or endorsed such a rule, but all permitted some degree of wife-beating so long as it did not result in serious injury.\n19th-century United States.\nAn 1824 court ruling in Mississippi stated that a man was entitled to enforce \"domestic discipline\" by striking his wife with a whip or stick no wider than the judge's thumb. In a later case in North Carolina (\"State v. Rhodes\", 1868), the defendant was found to have struck his wife \"with a switch about the size of this fingers\"; the judge found the man not guilty due to the switch being smaller than a thumb.41 The judgment was upheld by the state supreme court, although the later judge stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Nor is it true that a husband has a right to whip his wife. And if he had, it is not easily seen how the thumb is the standard of size for the instrument which he may use, as some of the old authorities have said [...] The standard is the effect produced, and not the manner of producing it, or the instrument used.\nIn 1873, also in North Carolina, the judge in \"State v. Oliver\" ruled, \"We assume that the old doctrine that a husband had the right to whip his wife, provided that he used a switch no larger than his thumb, is not the law in North Carolina\".42 These latter two cases were cited by the legal scholar Beirne Stedman when he wrote in a 1917 law review article that an \"old common law rule\" had permitted a husband to use \"moderate personal chastisement on his wife\" so long as he used \"a switch no larger than his thumb\".\nBy the late 19th century, most American states had outlawed wife-beating; some had severe penalties such as forty lashes or imprisonment for offenders.40 Although it was commonly believed in parts of the United States that a man was legally permitted to beat his wife with a stick no wider than his thumb, that belief did not have any connection with the phrase \"rule of thumb\" until a misunderstanding arose in the 1970s.\n20th-century feminist revival.\nIn the 20th century, public concern with the problem of domestic violence declined at first, and then re-emerged along with the resurgent feminist movement in the 1970s. The first recorded link between wife-beating and the phrase \"rule of thumb\" appeared in 1976, in a report on domestic violence by women's-rights advocate Del Martin: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For instance, the common-law doctrine had been modified to allow the husband 'the right to whip his wife, provided that he used a switch no bigger than his thumb'\u2014a rule of thumb, so to speak.\nWhile Martin appears to have meant the phrase \"rule of thumb\" only as a figure of speech, some feminist writers treated it as a literal reference to an earlier law.43 The following year, a book on battered women stated: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One of the reasons nineteenth century British wives were dealt with so harshly by their husbands and by their legal system was the 'rule of thumb'. Included in the British Common Law was a section regulating wifebeating [...] The new law stipulated that the reasonable instrument be only 'a rod not thicker than his thumb.' In other words, wifebeating was legal.\nDespite this erroneous reading of the common law (which is a set of judicial principles rather than a written law with individual sections) the spurious legal doctrine of the \"rule of thumb\" was soon mentioned in a number of law journals. The myth was repeated in a 1982 report by the United States Commission on Civil Rights on domestic abuse titled \"Under the Rule of Thumb\", as well as a later United States Senate report on the Violence Against Women Act.\nIn the late 20th century, some efforts were made to discourage the phrase \"rule of thumb\", which was seen as taboo owing to this false origin. Patricia T. O'Conner, former editor of the \"New York Times Book Review\", described it as \"one of the most persistent myths of political correctness\". During the 1990s, several authors wrote about the false etymology of \"rule of thumb\", including English professor Henry Ansgar Kelly and conservative social critic Christina Hoff Sommers, who described its origin in a misunderstanding of Blackstone's commentary. Nonetheless, the myth persisted in some legal sources into the early 2000s.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; The dictionary definition of \"rule of thumb\" at Wiktionary"}
{"id": "56542", "revid": "50795442", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56542", "title": "Hanna-Barbera", "text": "American production company (1957\u20132001)\nHanna-Barbera Cartoons, Inc. ( ; formerly known as H-B Enterprises, Hanna-Barbera Productions, Inc. and H-B Production Co.), commonly known simply as Hanna-Barbera, was an American animation studio and production company that operated from 1957 until its absorption into Warner Bros. Animation in 2001. The studio was founded on July 7, 1957, by William Hanna and Joseph Barbera, the creators of \"Tom and Jerry\" and former MGM Cartoons employees, along with film producer George Sidney. Initially headquartered at Kling Studios in Los Angeles from 1957 to 1960, the company later moved to Cahuenga Boulevard until 1998, and finally to the Sherman Oaks Galleria in Sherman Oaks from 1998 to 2001.\nHanna-Barbera became known for producing a vast array of iconic animated series, including \"The Huckleberry Hound Show\", \"The Smurfs\" and multiple iterations of \"The Flintstones\", \"Yogi Bear\" and \"Scooby-Doo\". Through its extensive output of television shows, specials, and movies, Hanna-Barbera arguably became one of the most successful animation studios in the world, rivaling Disney, with its characters appearing across various media, merchandising, and consumer products.\nHowever, by the 1980s, the studio's dominance declined as the market for Saturday-morning cartoons weakened, and weekday syndication grew in importance. Hanna-Barbera was acquired by Taft Broadcasting in 1966 and remained under its ownership until 1991, when Turner Broadcasting System purchased the company. Turner used Hanna-Barbera's extensive back catalog to help launch Cartoon Network in 1992, giving a new platform for the studio's classic animated properties.\nAfter William Hanna died in 2001, Hanna-Barbera ceased to exist as an independent studio and was fully integrated into Warner Bros. Animation. Despite this, the Hanna-Barbera brand continues to be used for copyright, marketing, and branding purposes on many of its classic animated properties now managed by Warner Bros.\nHistory.\n\"Tom and Jerry\" and birth of a company (1938\u20131957).\nWilliam Denby \"Bill\" Hanna and Joseph Roland \"Joe\" Barbera met at the Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM) studio in 1938, while working at its animation unit. Having worked at other studios since the early 1930s, they solidified a six-decade working partnership. Following the 1940 release of \"Puss Gets the Boot\", the team's very first collaborative success, \"Tom and Jerry\" came about in 1941, centering on the madcap comical adventures of a cat and a mouse.\nHanna supervised the animation, while Barbera did the stories and pre-production for all 114 cartoons. Seven of the films won seven Oscars for \"Best Short Subject (Cartoons)\" between 1943 and 1953, and five additional shorts were nominated for twelve awards during this period. However, they were awarded to producer Fred Quimby, who was not involved in the development of the shorts.\nSequences for \"Anchors Aweigh\", \"Dangerous When Wet\" and \"Invitation to the Dance\" and shorts \"Swing Social\", \"Gallopin' Gals\", \"The Goose Goes South\", \"Officer Pooch\", \"War Dogs\" and \"Good Will to Men\" were also made. With Quimby's retirement in May 1955, Hanna and Barbera became the producers in charge of the MGM animation studio's output.\nIn addition to continuing to write and direct new \"Tom &amp; Jerry\" shorts, now in CinemaScope, Hanna and Barbera supervised the last seven shorts of Tex Avery's \"Droopy\" series and produced and directed the short-lived \"Spike and Tyke\", which ran for two entries. In addition to their work on the cartoons, the two men moonlighted on outside projects, including title sequences and commercials for \"I Love Lucy\".\nMGM decided in mid-1957 to close its cartoon studio, as it felt it had acquired a reasonable backlog of shorts for re-release. While contemplating their future, Hanna and Barbera began producing additional animated television commercials. During their last year at MGM, they had developed a concept for a new animated television program about a cat and a dog.\nAfter failing to convince the studio to back their venture, George Sidney offered to serve as their business partner and convinced Screen Gems to make a deal with the producers. Sidney, a veteran live-action producer-director, had worked with Hanna and Barbera on animated elements for several of his movies for MGM, \"Anchors Aweigh\" in particular. A coin toss gave Hanna precedence in naming the new studio. Harry Cohn, president and head of Columbia Pictures, took an 18% ownership in H-B Enterprises, and provided working capital.\nScreen Gems became the new distributor and its licensing agent, handling merchandizing of the characters from the animated programs as the cartoon firm officially opened for business in rented offices on the lot of Kling Studios (formerly Charlie Chaplin Studios) on July 7, 1957, one year after the MGM animation studio closed.\nSidney and several Screen Gems alumni became members of the studio's board of directors and much of the former MGM animation staff\u2014including animators Carlo Vinci, Kenneth Muse, Lewis Marshall, Michael Lah and Ed Barge and layout artists Ed Benedict and Richard Bickenbach\u2014became the new production staff while Hoyt Curtin was in charge of providing the music.\nSuccess with animated series (1957\u20131969).\n\"The Ruff and Reddy Show\", the studio's first animated television series, premiered on NBC on December 14, 1957, then \"The Huckleberry Hound Show\" debuted one year later, in 1958, airing in most markets, and was also the first cartoon to win an Emmy. Several animation alumni joined \u2013 in particular former Warner Bros. Cartoons storymen Michael Maltese and Warren Foster as head writers, Joe Ruby and Ken Spears as film editors and Iwao Takamoto as character designer.\nAfter reincorporating as Hanna-Barbera Productions, Inc., \"The Quick Draw McGraw Show\" and the theatrical cartoon short series \"Loopy De Loop\" followed in 1959. Walt Disney Productions laid off several of its animators after \"Sleeping Beauty\" (1959) bombed on the box-office during its initial theatrical run, with many of them moving to Hanna-Barbera shortly afterwards. In August 1960, it moved into a window-less, cinder block building at 3501 Cahuenga Boulevard West. Though too small to house the staff, some of its employees worked at home.\n\"The Flintstones\" premiered on ABC on September 30, 1960, becoming so the first animated series airing in prime time. It is loosely based on \"The Honeymooners\" and is set in a fictionalized Stone Age of cavemen and dinosaurs. Jackie Gleason considered suing Hanna-Barbera for copyright infringement, but decided not to because he did not want to be known as \"the man who yanked Fred Flintstone off the air\". For six seasons, it became the longest-running animated show in American prime time at the time (until \"The Simpsons\" beat it in 1997), a ratings and merchandising success and the top-ranking animated program in syndication history. It initially received mixed reviews from critics, but its reputation eventually improved and it is now considered a classic.\n\"The Yogi Bear Show\", \"Top Cat\", \"The Hanna-Barbera New Cartoon Series\" (consisting of \"Wally Gator\", \"Touch\u00e9 Turtle and Dum Dum\" and \"Lippy the Lion and Hardy Har Har\") and \"The Jetsons\" soon followed in 1961 and 1962. Several animated television commercials were produced as well, often starring their own characters (including the Pebbles cereal commercials for Post) and the opening credits for \"Bewitched\", in which animated caricatures of Samantha and Darrin appeared. These characterizations were reused in \"The Flintstones\"' sixth-season episode \"Samantha\".\nIn 1963, Hanna-Barbera's operations moved to 3400 Cahuenga Boulevard West in Hollywood Hills/Studio City. This contemporary office building was designed by architect Arthur Froehlich. Its ultra-modern design included a sculpted latticework exterior, moat, fountains, and a \"Jetsons\"-like tower. \"The Magilla Gorilla Show\", \"Jonny Quest\", \"The Peter Potamus Show\", \"Atom Ant\" and \"Secret Squirrel\" followed in 1964 and 1965.\nThe partnership with Screen Gems would last until 1965 when Hanna and Barbera announced the sale of their studio to Taft Broadcasting. Taft's acquisition of Hanna-Barbera was delayed for a year by a lawsuit from Cohn's family, wife Joan Perry and sons John and Harrison Cohn, who felt the studio undervalued the Cohns' 18% share in when it was sold a few years previously.\nIn 1966, \"Frankenstein Jr. and The Impossibles\" and \"Space Ghost\" debuted, and by December of that year the litigation had been settled, Taft finally acquired Hanna-Barbera for $12 million and folded the studio into its corporate structure in 1967 and 1968, becoming its distributor. Hanna and Barbera stayed on while Screen Gems retained licensing and distribution rights to their previous produced cartoons and trademarks to the characters into the 1970s and 1980s.\n\"Shazzan\", \"The Banana Splits\", \"Wacky Races\", and its spin-offs (\"Dastardly and Muttley in Their Flying Machines\" and \"The Perils of Penelope Pitstop\") and \"Cattanooga Cats\" followed from 1967 to 1969. The studio's record and music label, Hanna-Barbera Records, was headed by Danny Hutton and distributed by Columbia. Children's records featuring its characters were released by Colpix. Hanna-Barbera teamed up with the National Catholic Office for Radio and Television to produce 26 half-hour animated films in 1970, which never materialized.\nMysteries, spin-offs, and more (1969\u20131979).\n\"Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!\" debuted on CBS on September 13, 1969; it is a mystery-based program which blended comedy, action, and elements from \"I Love a Mystery\" and \"The Many Loves of Dobie Gillis\". For two seasons, it centered on four teenagers and a dog solving supernatural mysteries, and became one of Hanna-Barbera's most successful creations, spawning several new spin-offs, such as \"The New Scooby-Doo Movies\", \"Scooby-Doo and Scrappy-Doo\" and many others, which were regularly in production at Hanna-Barbera into the 1990s.\nReferred to as \"The General Motors of animation\", Hanna-Barbera produced nearly two-thirds of all Saturday-morning cartoons in a single year. \"Josie and the Pussycats\", \"The Funky Phantom\", \"The Amazing Chan and the Chan Clan\", \"Speed Buggy\", \"Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kids\", \"Goober and the Ghost Chasers\", \"Inch High, Private Eye\", \"Clue Club\", \"Jabberjaw\", \"Captain Caveman and the Teen Angels\" and \"The New Shmoo\" built upon the mystery-solving template set by \"Scooby-Doo\", with further shows built around teenagers solving mysteries with a comic relief pet of some sort.\nStarting in 1971, many new spin-offs, such as \"The Pebbles and Bamm-Bamm Show\", featuring Fred and Barney's now teenaged children along with \"The Flintstone Comedy Hour\", \"The Tom and Jerry Show\", \"The New Fred and Barney Show\" and \"all-star\" shows \"Yogi's Gang\", \"Laff-A-Lympics\", \"Yogi's Space Race\" and \"Galaxy Goof-Ups\" came to the airwaves.\nHanna-Barbera teamed up with Avco Broadcasting Corporation in 1971, a company that was once a rival to its owner Taft at that time, who maintains rivalry in the Columbus and Cincinnati markets, to produce two holiday specials for the syndicated market by way of its syndicated division. In 1972, H-B opened an animation studio in Australia, with the Hamlyn Group acquiring a 50% stake in 1974.\nHamlyn was acquired by James Hardie Industries. Hanna-Barbera Australia bought itself out from Hardie and Taft in 1988, changing its name to Southern Star Group, since becoming Endemol Shine Australia, a division of Banijay Entertainment. \"Super Friends\", an action-adventure show adapted from DC Comics' \"Justice League of America\" and the first of many iterations of the \"Super Friends\" series, premiered on ABC on September 8, 1973. It returned to production in 1976, remaining on ABC through 1985 with \"The All-New Super Friends Hour\", \"Challenge of the Superfriends\" and \"The World's Greatest Super Friends\".\nWhile \"Help!... It's the Hair Bear Bunch!\", \"Sealab 2020\", \"Wait Till Your Father Gets Home\" and \"Hong Kong Phooey\" aired, \"Charlotte's Web\", an adaptation of the novel of the same name, was released on March 1, 1973, by Paramount Pictures, to moderate critical and commercial success, and was the first of only four Hanna-Barbera films not to be based upon one of their famous television cartoons (the other three being \"C.H.O.M.P.S.\", \"Heidi's Song\" and \"Once Upon a Forest\").\nWith the majority of American television animation during the second half of the 20th century made by Hanna-Barbera and more cartoons like \"CB Bears\", \"Buford and the Galloping Ghost\", \"The All New Popeye Hour\", \"Godzilla\" and \"Casper and the Angels\", major competition was coming from Filmation and DePatie\u2013Freleng. Then-ABC president Fred Silverman gave its Saturday-morning time to them after dropping Filmation for its failure of \"Uncle Croc's Block\".\nNew live-action material was produced, as well as new live-action/animated combos since the mid-1960s. In 1975, former MGM executive Herbert F. Solow joined the company to start a live-action unit, Hanna-Barbera Television, to produce prime time programming, which later spun off and became Solow Production Company in 1976.\nAlong with the animation industry in the U.S., it moved away from producing in-house in the late 1970s and early 1980s. While \"The Great Grape Ape Show\" and \"The Mumbly Cartoon Show\" aired, Ruby and Spears worked with Hanna-Barbera in 1976 and 1977 as ABC network executives to create and develop new cartoons before leaving in 1977 to start their company, Ruby-Spears Enterprises, with Filmways as its parent division. In 1979, Taft bought Worldvision Enterprises, which became Hanna-Barbera's new distributor.\nControl decrease and \"The Smurfs\" dominance (1980\u20131991).\n\"Super Friends\", \"The Fonz and the Happy Days Gang\", \"Richie Rich\", \"The Flintstone Comedy Show\", \"Space Stars\", \"The Kwicky Koala Show\", \"Trollkins\" and \"Laverne and Shirley in the Army\" debuted in 1980 and 1981, while Taft purchased Ruby-Spears from Filmways (which was eventually absorbed into Orion Pictures the following year), making it a sister company to Hanna-Barbera and as a result, several early-1980s series were shared between both companies.\nWhile Filmation, Sunbow Productions, Marvel Productions, Rankin/Bass, DIC and other Hollywood animation studios introduced successful animated series syndicated, including some based on licensed properties, Hanna-Barbera fell behind, as it no longer dominated the TV animation market as it did years earlier and lost control over children's programming, going down from 80% to 20%.\n\"The Smurfs\", adapted from the Belgian comic by Peyo and centering on a group of tiny blue creatures led by Papa Smurf, debuted on NBC on September 12, 1981, and ran for nine seasons until December 2, 1989, becoming so the longest-running Saturday-morning cartoon series in broadcast history, a significant ratings success, the top-rated program in eight years and the highest for an NBC show since 1970. \"The Gary Coleman Show\", \"Shirt Tales\", \"Pac-Man\", \"The Little Rascals\", \"The Dukes\", \"Monchhichis\" and \"The Biskitts\" followed in 1982 and 1983.\nFollowing a 1982 strike, new cartoons were outsourced to Cuckoo's Nest Studios, Mr. Big Cartoons, Toei Animation and Fil-Cartoons in Australia and Asia, which provided production services from 1982 to the end of H-B's existence. \"Challenge of the GoBots\", \"Pink Panther and Sons\", ', \"Snorks\", \"The New Scooby &amp; Scrappy-Doo Show, The New Scooby-Doo Mysteries\", \"Yogi's Treasure Hunt\", \"Galtar and the Golden Lance\", \"Paw Paws\", ' and \"The 13 Ghosts of Scooby-Doo\" debuted in 1984 and 1985.\n\"Pound Puppies\", \"The Flintstone Kids\", \"Foofur\", \"Wildfire\", \"Sky Commanders\" and \"Popeye and Son\" arrived in 1986 and 1987. After its financial troubles affected Hanna-Barbera, the American Financial Corporation acquired Taft in 1987 and renamed it Great American Broadcasting. \"A Pup Named Scooby-Doo\", \"The Completely Mental Misadventures of Ed Grimley\", \"Fantastic Max\", \"The Further Adventures of SuperTed\" and \"Paddington Bear\" followed in 1988 and 1989.\nHanna-Barbera Poland, a Polish branch of the company, opened up and dealt with the promotion and distribution of the studio's animated content and is most well known for releasing VHS tapes with Polish music distributor P.P. Polskie Nagrania, which mostly consisted of numbered compilation releases of Hanna-Barbera shows on one tape. This would last until 1993, when the company separated and reincorporated itself as Curtis Art Productions.\nGreat American sold Worldvision to Aaron Spelling Productions, while Hanna-Barbera and its library remained with them. Hanna-Barbera split off from Worldvision Home Video in early 1989 to start out its own home video division, Hanna-Barbera Home Video. In January 1989, while working on \"A Pup Named Scooby-Doo\", Tom Ruegger got a call from Warner Bros. to resurrect its animation department.\nRuegger, along with several of his colleagues, left Hanna-Barbera at that time to develop \"Tiny Toon Adventures\" at Warner Bros. David Kirschner, known for \"An American Tail\" and \"Child's Play\", was later appointed as the studio's new CEO. Later that year, the company had a licensing agreement with MicroIllusions, a video game publisher, to produce video games based on its properties, namely \"Jonny Quest\" and others.\nIn 1990, while Kirschner and the company formed Bedrock Productions and Great American putting Hanna-Barbera and Ruby-Spears up for sale, \"\", \"Rick Moranis in Gravedale High\", \"Tom &amp; Jerry Kids\", \"Bill and Ted's Excellent Adventures\", \"The Adventures of Don Coyote and Sancho Panda\" and \"Wake, Rattle, and Roll\" debuted that year. \"The Pirates of Dark Water\", \"Yo Yogi!\" and \"Young Robin Hood\" would follow in 1991.\nAcquisition by Turner Broadcasting System and absorption into Warner Bros. Animation (1991\u20132001).\nTurner Broadcasting System outbid MCA (then-parent company of Universal Pictures), Hallmark Cards and other major companies in acquiring Hanna-Barbera while also purchasing Ruby-Spears as well. The two companies were acquired in a 50-50 joint venture between Turner Broadcasting System and Apollo Investment Fund for $320\u00a0million. Turner purchased these assets to launch a then-new all-animation network aimed at children and younger audiences.\nScott Sassa hired Fred Seibert to head Hanna-Barbera, who filled the gap left by Great American's crew with new animators, directors, producers and writers, including Craig McCracken, Donovan Cook, Genndy Tartakovsky, David Feiss, Seth MacFarlane, Van Partible and Butch Hartman. After being newly named as H-B Production Co., \"Capitol Critters\" and \"Fish Police\" followed in 1992. Cartoon Network launched on October 1 of that year, and became the first 24-hour all-animation channel to air its library of cartoon classics, of which Hanna-Barbera was the core contributor.\nIn 1993, the company again renamed itself to Hanna-Barbera Cartoons, Inc. (though the Hanna-Barbera Productions name was still used in regards to the pre-1992 properties) and, while Turner acquired its remaining interests from Apollo Investment Fund for $255\u00a0million, \"2 Stupid Dogs\", \"Droopy, Master Detective\", \"The New Adventures of Captain Planet\" and \"\" debuted that year. Turner refocused the studio to produce new shows exclusively for its networks.\nIn 1995 and 1996, \"Dumb and Dumber\" debuted, followed by \"What a Cartoon!\", \"Dexter's Laboratory\", \"The Real Adventures of Jonny Quest\" and \"Cave Kids\", then Turner merged with Time Warner (now Warner Bros. Discovery). While \"Johnny Bravo\" and \"Cow and Chicken\" aired, the Hanna-Barbera studio faced demolition after many of its staff vacated the facilities in 1997, despite the efforts of preserving it.\nIn 1998, following \"The Powerpuff Girls\", Hanna-Barbera moved from Cahuenga Blvd. to Sherman Oaks Galleria in Sherman Oaks, California, where Warner Bros. Animation was located. \"I Am Weasel\" would be its final show in 1999. After the company's absorption into Warner Bros. Animation, Hanna died of throat cancer on March 22, 2001, at the age of 90 years old.\nAftermath and Barbera's final years (2001\u20132006).\nWhile Cartoon Network Studios took over production of programming, the Los Angeles City Council approved a plan to preserve the Cahuenga Blvd. headquarters in May 2004, while allowing retail and residential development on the site.\nBarbera died of natural causes on December 18, 2006, at the age of 95. Warner Bros. Animation continues to produce new productions based on the Hanna-Barbera properties since then.\nTributes and legacy.\nCartoon Network Studios Europe was renamed Hanna-Barbera Studios Europe paying tribute to the studio in April 2021.\nProduction.\nProduction process changes.\nThe small budgets that television animation producers had to work within prevented Hanna-Barbera from working with the full theatrical-quality animation that Hanna and Barbera had been known for at Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. While the budget for MGM's seven-minute \"Tom and Jerry\" shorts was about $35,000, the Hanna-Barbera studios were required to produce five-minute \"Ruff and Reddy\" episodes for no more than $3,000 apiece. To keep within these tighter budgets, Hanna-Barbera furthered the concept of limited animation (also called \"planned animation\") practiced and popularized by the United Productions of America (UPA) studio, which also once had a partnership with Columbia Pictures. Character designs were simplified, and backgrounds and animation cycles (walks, runs, etc.) were regularly re-purposed.\nCharacters were often broken up into a handful of levels so that only the parts of the body that needed to be moved at a given time (i.e. a mouth, an arm, a head) were animated. The rest of the figure remained on a held animation cel. This allowed a typical seven-minute short to be done with only nearly 2,000 drawings instead of the usual 14,000. Dialogue, music, and sound effects were emphasized over action, leading Chuck Jones\u2014a contemporary who worked for Warner Bros. Cartoons and whose short \"The Dover Boys\" practically invented many of the concepts in limited animation\u2014to disparagingly refer to the limited television cartoons produced by Hanna-Barbera and others as \"illustrated radio\".\nIn a story published by \"The Saturday Evening Post\" in 1961, critics stated that Hanna-Barbera was taking on more work than it could handle and was resorting to shortcuts only a television audience would tolerate. An executive who worked for Walt Disney Productions said, \"We don't even consider [them] competition\". Animation historian Christopher P. Lehman argues that Hanna-Barbera attempted to maximize their bottom line by recycling story formulas and characterization instead of introducing new ones. Once a formula for an original series was deemed successful, the studio reused it in subsequent series. Besides copying their own works, Hanna-Barbera drew inspiration from the works of other people and studios.\nLehman considers that the studio served as the main example of how animation studios that focused on TV animation differed from those that focused on theatrical animation. Theatrical animation studios tried to maintain full and fluid animation and consequently struggled with the rising expenses associated with producing it. Limited animation as practiced by Hanna-Barbera kept production costs at a minimum. The cost in quality of using this technique was that Hanna-Barbera's characters only moved when necessary.\nIts solution to the criticism over its quality was to go into films. It produced six theatrical feature films, among them are higher-quality versions of its television cartoons and adaptations of other material. It was also one of the first animation studios to have their work produced overseas. One of these companies was a subsidiary began by Hanna-Barbera in November 1987 called Fil-Cartoons in the Philippines, with Jerry Smith as a consultant for the subsidiary. Wang Film Productions got its start as an overseas facility for the studio in 1978.\nDigital innovation.\nHanna-Barbera was among the first animation studios to incorporate digital tools into their pipeline. As early as the 1970s, they experimented with using Scanimate, a video synthesizer, to create an early form of digital cutout style. A clip of artists using the machine to manipulate scanned images of \"Scooby-Doo\" characters, scaling and warping the artwork to simulate animation, is available at the Internet Archive.\nLikewise, Hanna-Barbera was perhaps the first proponent of digital ink and paint, a process wherein animators' drawings were scanned into computers and colored using software. Led by Marc Levoy, Hanna-Barbera began developing a computerized digital ink and paint system in 1979 to help bypass much of the time-consuming labor of painting and photographing cels. The process was implemented on a third of Hanna-Barbera's animated programs, televised feature films and specials from 1982 through 1996.\nSound effects.\nHanna-Barbera was known for its large library of sound effects that modern audiences are now used to, which have been featured in exhibitions at the Norman Rockwell Museum.\nOwnership.\nAfter Hanna-Barbera's partnership with Screen Gems ended in 1966, it was sold to Taft Broadcasting, where it remained its owner until 1991 when Turner Broadcasting System acquired the company and its library for its flagship network, Cartoon Network. In 1996, Turner merged with Time Warner, then WarnerMedia, now Warner Bros. Discovery.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56543", "revid": "6781", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56543", "title": "Harold Bluetooth", "text": ""}
{"id": "56545", "revid": "4899266", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56545", "title": "IBM Golfball", "text": ""}
{"id": "56546", "revid": "375191451", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56546", "title": "List of rare diseases", "text": ""}
{"id": "56548", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56548", "title": "Beta Cell", "text": ""}
{"id": "56549", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56549", "title": "Beta cell", "text": "Type of cell found in pancreatic islets\nBeta cells (\u03b2-cells) are specialized endocrine cells located within the pancreatic islets of Langerhans responsible for the production and release of insulin and amylin. Constituting ~50\u201370% of cells in human islets, beta cells play a vital role in maintaining blood glucose levels. Problems with beta cells can lead to disorders such as diabetes.\nFunction.\nThe function of beta cells is primarily centered around the synthesis and secretion of hormones, particularly insulin and amylin. Both hormones work to keep blood glucose levels within a narrow, healthy range by different mechanisms. Insulin facilitates the uptake of glucose by cells, allowing them to use it for energy or store it for future use. Amylin helps regulate the rate at which glucose enters the bloodstream after a meal, slowing down the absorption of nutrients by inhibiting gastric emptying.\nInsulin synthesis.\nBeta cells are the only site of insulin synthesis in mammals. As glucose stimulates insulin secretion, it simultaneously increases proinsulin biosynthesis through translational control and enhanced gene transcription.\nThe insulin gene is first transcribed into mRNA and translated into preproinsulin. After translation, the preproinsulin precursor contains an N-terminal signal peptide that allows translocation into the rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER). Inside the RER, the signal peptide is cleaved to form proinsulin. Then, folding of proinsulin occurs forming three disulfide bonds. Subsequent to protein folding, proinsulin is transported to the Golgi apparatus and enters immature insulin granules where proinsulin is cleaved to form insulin and C-peptide. After maturation, these secretory vesicles hold insulin, C-peptide, and amylin until calcium triggers exocytosis of the granule contents.\nThrough translational processing, insulin is encoded as a 110 amino acid precursor but is secreted as a 51 amino acid protein.\nInsulin secretion.\nIn beta cells, insulin release is stimulated primarily by glucose present in the blood. As circulating glucose levels rise, such as after ingesting a meal, insulin is secreted in a dose-dependent fashion. This system of release is commonly referred to as glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS). There are four key events to the triggering pathway of GSIS: GLUT dependent glucose uptake, glucose metabolism, KATP channel closure, and the opening of voltage gated calcium channels causing insulin granule fusion and exocytosis.\nVoltage-gated calcium channels and ATP-sensitive potassium ion channels (KATP channels) are embedded in the plasma membrane of beta cells. Under non-glucose stimulated conditions, the KATP channels are open and the voltage gated calcium channels are closed. Via the KATP channels, potassium ions move out of the cell, down their concentration gradient, making the inside of the cell more negative with respect to the outside (as potassium ions carry a positive charge). At rest, this creates a potential difference across the cell surface membrane of -70mV.\nWhen the glucose concentration outside the cell is high, glucose molecules move into the cell by facilitated diffusion, down its concentration gradient through glucose transporters (GLUT). Rodent beta cells primarily express the GLUT2 isoform, whereas human beta cells, although also expressing GLUT2, mainly make use of GLUT1 and GLUT3 isoforms. Since beta cells use glucokinase to catalyze the first step of glycolysis, metabolism only occurs around physiological blood glucose levels and above. Metabolism of glucose produces ATP, which increases the ATP to ADP ratio.\nThe KATP channels close when the ATP to ADP ratio rises. The closure of the KATP channels causes the outward potassium ion current to diminish, leading to inward currents of potassium ions dominating. As a result, the potential difference across the membrane becomes more positive (as potassium ions accumulate inside the cell). This change in potential difference opens the voltage-gated calcium channels, which allows calcium ions from outside the cell to move into the cell down their concentration gradient. When the calcium ions enter the cell, they cause vesicles containing insulin to move to, and fuse with, the cell surface membrane, releasing insulin by exocytosis into the pancreatic capillaries. The venous blood then eventually empties into the hepatic portal vein.\nIn addition to the triggering pathway, the amplifying pathway can cause increased insulin secretion without a further increase in intracellular calcium levels. The amplifying pathway is modulated by byproducts of glucose metabolism along with various intracellular signaling pathways; incretin hormone signaling being one important example.\nClinical significance.\nBeta cells have significant clinical relevance as their proper function is essential for glucose regulation, and dysfunction is a key factor in the development and progression of diabetes and its associated complications. Here are some key clinical significances of beta cells:\nType 1 diabetes.\nType 1 diabetes mellitus, also known as insulin-dependent diabetes, is believed to be caused by an auto-immune mediated destruction of the insulin-producing beta cells in the body. The process of beta-cell destruction begins with insulitis activating antigen-presenting cells (APCs). APCs then trigger activation of CD4+ helper-T cells and chemokines/cytokines release. Then, the cytokines activate CD8+ cytotoxic\u2013T cells which leads to beta-cell destruction. The destruction of these cells reduces the body's ability to respond to glucose levels in the body, therefore making it nearly impossible to properly regulate glucose and glucagon levels in the bloodstream. The body destroys 70\u201380% of beta cells, leaving only 20\u201330% of functioning cells. This can cause the patient to experience hyperglycemia, which leads to other adverse short-term and long-term conditions. The symptoms of diabetes can potentially be controlled with methods such as regular doses of insulin and sustaining a proper diet. However, these methods can be tedious and cumbersome to continuously perform on a daily basis.\nType 2 diabetes.\nType 2 diabetes, also known as non insulin dependent diabetes and as chronic hyperglycemia, is caused primarily by genetics and the development of metabolic syndrome. The beta cells can still secrete insulin but the body has developed a resistance and its response to insulin has declined. It is believed to be due to the decline of specific receptors on the surface of the liver, adipose, and muscle cells which lose their ability to respond to insulin that circulates in the blood. In an effort to secrete enough insulin to overcome the increasing insulin resistance, the beta cells increase their function, size and number. Increased insulin secretion leads to hyperinsulinemia, but blood glucose levels remain within their normal range due to the decreased efficacy of insulin signaling. However, the beta cells can become overworked and exhausted from being overstimulated, leading to a 50% reduction in function along with a 40% decrease in beta-cell volume. At this point, not enough insulin can be produced and secreted to keep blood glucose levels within their normal range, causing overt type 2 diabetes.\nInsulinoma.\nInsulinoma is a rare tumor derived from the neoplasia of beta cells. Insulinomas are usually benign, but may be medically significant and even life-threatening due to recurrent and prolonged attacks of hypoglycemia.\nMedications.\nMany drugs to combat diabetes are aimed at modifying the function of the beta cell.\nResearch.\nExperimental techniques.\nMany researchers around the world are investigating the pathogenesis of diabetes and beta-cell failure. Tools used to study beta-cell function are expanding rapidly with technology.\nFor instance, transcriptomics have allowed researchers to comprehensively analyze gene transcription in beta-cells to look for genes linked to diabetes. A more common mechanism of analyzing cellular function is calcium imaging. Fluorescent dyes bind to calcium and allow \"in vitro\" imaging of calcium activity which correlates directly with insulin release. A final tool used in beta-cell research are \"in vivo\" experiments. Diabetes mellitus can be experimentally induced \"in vivo\" for research purposes by streptozotocin or alloxan, which are specifically toxic to beta cells. Mouse and rat models of diabetes also exist including ob/ob and db/db mice which are a type 2 diabetes model, and non-obese diabetic mice (NOD) which are a model for type 1 diabetes.\nType 1 diabetes.\nResearch has shown that beta cells can be differentiated from human pancreas progenitor cells. These differentiated beta cells, however, often lack much of the structure and markers that beta cells need to perform their necessary functions. Examples of the anomalies that arise from beta cells differentiated from progenitor cells include a failure to react to environments with high glucose concentrations, an inability to produce necessary beta cell markers, and abnormal expression of glucagon along with insulin.\nIn order to successfully re-create functional insulin producing beta cells, studies have shown that manipulating cell-signal pathways in early stem cell development will lead to those stem cells differentiating into viable beta cells. Two key signal pathways have been shown to play a vital role in the differentiation of stem cells into beta cells: the BMP4 pathway and the kinase C. Targeted manipulation of these two pathways has shown that it is possible to induce beta cell differentiation from stem cells. These variations of artificial beta cells have shown greater levels of success in replicating the functionality of natural beta cells, although the replication has not been perfectly re-created yet.\nStudies have shown that it is possible to regenerate beta cells \"in vivo\" in some animal models. Research in mice has shown that beta cells can often regenerate to the original quantity number after the beta cells have undergone some sort of stress test, such as the intentional destruction of the beta cells in the mice subject or once the auto-immune response has concluded. While these studies have conclusive results in mice, beta cells in human subjects may not possess this same level of versatility. Investigation of beta cells following acute onset of Type 1 diabetes has shown little to no proliferation of newly synthesized beta cells, suggesting that human beta cells might not be as versatile as rat beta cells, but there is actually no comparison that can be made here because healthy (non-diabetic) rats were used to prove that beta cells can proliferate after intentional destruction of beta cells, while diseased (type-1 diabetic) humans were used in the study which was attempted to use as evidence against beta cells regenerating.\nIt appears that much work has to be done in the field of regenerating beta cells. Just as in the discovery of creating insulin through the use of recombinant DNA, the ability to artificially create stem cells that would differentiate into beta cells would prove to be an invaluable resource to patients with Type 1 diabetes. An unlimited amount of beta cells produced artificially could potentially provide therapy to many of the patients who are affected by Type 1 diabetes.\nType 2 diabetes.\nResearch focused on non insulin dependent diabetes encompasses many areas of interest. Degeneration of the beta cell as diabetes progresses has been a broadly reviewed topic. Another topic of interest for beta-cell physiologists is the mechanism of insulin pulsatility which has been well investigated. Many genome studies have been completed and are advancing the knowledge of beta-cell function exponentially. Indeed, the area of beta-cell research is very active yet many mysteries remain.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56551", "revid": "18488491", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56551", "title": "Vocational education", "text": "Studies that prepare a person for a specific occupation\nVocational education is education that prepares people for a skilled craft. Vocational education can also be seen as that type of education given to an individual to prepare that individual to be gainfully employed or self employed with requisite skill. Vocational education is known by a variety of names, depending on the country concerned, including career and technical education, or acronyms such as TVET (technical and vocational education and training; used by UNESCO) and TAFE (technical and further education). TVE refers to all forms and levels of education which provide knowledge and skills related to occupations in various sectors of economic and social life through formal, non-formal and informal learning methods in both school-based and work-based learning contexts. To achieve its aims and purposes, TVE focuses on the learning and mastery of specialized techniques and the scientific principles underlying those techniques, as well as general knowledge, skills and values.\nA vocational school is a type of educational institution specifically designed to provide vocational education.\nVocational education can take place at the post-secondary, further education, or higher education level and can interact with the apprenticeship system. At the post-secondary level, vocational education is often provided by highly specialized trade schools, technical schools, community colleges, colleges of further education (UK), vocational universities, and institutes of technology (formerly called polytechnic institutes).\nOverview.\nHistorically, almost all vocational education took place in the classroom or on the job site, with students learning trade skills and trade theory from accredited instructors or established professionals. However, in recent years, online vocational education has grown in popularity, making learning various trade skills and soft skills from established professionals easier than ever for students, even those who may live far away from a traditional vocational school.\nTrends have emerged in the implementation of TVET and skills development worldwide. From the late 1980s onwards a number of governments began to emphasize on the role of education in preparing learners effectively for the world of work. This school of thought, termed \"new vocationalism\", placed the skills needs of industry at the centre of discussions on the purpose of public education. TVET and skills development were viewed as an important component in promoting economic growth in general and addressing youth unemployment in particular.\nGeneral education systems had not been effective in developing the skills that many adolescents and adults needed to secure employment in industry. The late 1980s and early 1990s saw the introduction and expansion of new vocational curricula and courses, often developed in collaboration with industry, and an increase in the variety of work-based learning routes on offer to young people.\nPurpose.\nTVET serves multiple purposes. One purpose is to prepare the youth for work. This is done through the learning and development of work related skills and the mastery of underlying knowledge and scientific principles. Work is broadly defined and therefore refers to both formal employment and self-employment. To support self-employment, TVET curricula often include entrepreneurship training. Related to this is the social reproduction and transformation of occupational and vocational practices.\nA related role is continuing professional development. The rapid technological changes demand that workers continuously update their knowledge and skills. Unlike the past where a job could be held for life, it is common place to change vocations several times. TVET enables that flexibility in two ways. One is providing broad based technical knowledge and transversal skills on which different occupations can be based on. The second is providing continuing vocational training to workers.\nIn contrast with the industrial paradigm of the old economy, today's global economy lays the onus on the worker to continually reinvent himself or herself. In the past, workers were assured of a job for life, with full-time employment, clear occupational roles and well established career paths. This is no longer the case. The knowledge dependent global economy is characterized by rapid changes in technology and related modes of work. Often, workers find themselves declared redundant and out of work. TVET today has the responsibility of re-skilling such workers to enable them find and get back to work\nApart from providing work related education, TVET is also a site for personal development and emancipation. These concerns the development of those personal capacities that relate to realizing one's full potential with regard to paid or self employment, occupational interests, and life goals outside of work. At the same time TVET seeks to enable individual overcome disadvantages due to circumstances of birth or prior educational experiences.\nFrom a development point of view, TVET facilitates provide economic growth by increasing the productivity of workers. The returns from increased output far exceed the costs of training, direct and indirect, leading to economic growth. TVET like any other form of education also facilitates socio-economic development by enhancing the capacity of individuals to adopt practices that are socially worthwhile.\nAs a form of education similar to all others, TVET aims to developing the broad range of personal capabilities that characterize an educated person. Thus, the provision of broad based knowledge seeks to ensure critic-creative thinking. TVET also aims at developing capacities for effective communication and effective interpersonal relations.\nOpinions and models.\nWilhelm von Humboldt's educational model goes beyond vocational training. In a letter to the Prussian king, he wrote: \"There are undeniably certain kinds of knowledge that must be of a general nature and, more importantly, a certain cultivation of the mind and character that nobody can afford to be without. People obviously cannot be good craftworkers, merchants, soldiers or businessmen unless, regardless of their occupation, they are good, upstanding and \u2013 according to their condition \u2013 well-informed human beings and citizens. If this basis is laid through schooling, vocational skills are easily acquired later on, and a person is always free to move from one occupation to another, as so often happens in life.\" The philosopher Julian Nida-R\u00fcmelin criticized discrepancies between Humboldt's ideals and the contemporary European education policy, which narrowly understands education as a preparation for the labor market, and argued that we need to decide between \"McKinsey\", to describe vocational training, and Humboldt.\nHybridisation.\nBecause of TVET's isolation with other education streams it was not widely adopted, in particularly in secondary education. Steps were taken to reduce segmentation of education and training and to address institutional barriers that restricted TVET learners\u2032 options including choices to move vertically to higher levels of learning, or horizontally to other streams.\nPolicy-makers have introduced forms of hybridization with other education systems, additionally some of the distinctions between TVET and \u2032academic\u2032 education streams have been blurred. This hybridisation has been termed the \u2032vocationalization of secondary education\u2032, a similar process has happened to a lesser extent in tertiary education. \nPrivate sector.\nPrivate TVET providers include for-profit and non-profit institutions. Several factors triggered actions to support the expansion of private TVET including the limited capacities of public TVET providers and their low responsiveness to enterprises and trainees. Private TVET providers were expected to be more responsive because they were subject to fewer bureaucratic restrictions than public institutions (particularly in centralized systems). Their presence was expected to help raise quality system-wide, in many developing countries, government budgets constituted a vulnerable and unreliable source of financing for TVET, an important objective was to finance TVET systems by increasing the contribution of beneficiaries, including employers and trainees.\nPrivate TVET provision over since 2005 has become a significant and growing part of TVET in sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle East and North Africa. In some countries, e.g. Lebanon, enrolments in private TVET institutions have exceeded enrolments in public institutions. In Jordan, private provision at the community college level has been promoted by the government. However, not all experiences has been positive with private proprietary institutions or NGOs, their courses have often been concentrated in professional areas that typically do not require large capital investment, permitting easy entry and exit by private providers from the sector. Quality issues have also emerged, where market information about quality has been unavailable.\nTechnological advancement and its impact.\nTVET has an important role to play in technology diffusion through transfer of knowledge and skills. Rapid technological progress has had and continues to have significant implications for TVET. Understanding and anticipating changes has become crucial for designing responsive TVET systems and, more broadly, effective skills policies. The flexibility to adapt the supply of skills to the rapidly, and in some cases radically, changing needs in sectors such as information technology and the green economy has become a central feature of TVET systems. Globally, the skills requirements and qualifications demanded for job entry are rising. This reflects a need for not just a more knowledgeable and skilled workforce, but one that can adapt quickly to new emerging technologies in a cycle of continuous learning.\nTVET courses have been created to respond to the diverse ICT needs of learners, whether these are related to work, education or citizenship. New courses have been introduced to address occupational changes in the ICT job market, while many TVET providers have shifted provision towards a blended approach, with significantly more self-directed and/or distance learning. In developed countries, new ICT approaches have been introduced to modernize TVET organizations and to manage administration and finance, including learner records. In developing areas, these processes often involve political conflicts over education policy priorities: a study on cases in the Global South finds that particularly in resource-scarce settings, formal political mechanisms, such as partisan preferences of stakeholders, become the primary currency for local governors to build industrial reform coalitions geared towards upgrading skills.\nEducation for all.\nThe Education for All (EFA) movement encourages free education.\nContinuing TVET.\nContinuing TVE involves ongoing training to upgrade existing skills and to develop new ones and has a much higher profile in ageing societies and knowledge-based economies. Increased recognition of the importance of human capital for economic growth and social development made it necessary to increase learning opportunities for adults in workplaces within the wider context of policies and strategies for lifelong learning.\nIn many countries policy-makers have considered ways to expand workplace learning opportunities for workers and to assess and give credit for knowledge and skills acquired in workplaces. Efforts were geared towards training for workers in companies, encouraged by legislation, financial incentives and contractual agreements. \nChallenges.\nLabour market demands and trends.\nAfter the 2008 financial crisis, labour markets across the world experienced structural changes that influenced the demand for skills and TVET. Unemployment worsened and the quality of jobs decreased, especially for youth. Gender differentials in labour force participation placed men ahead of women, and skill mismatches deepened. The crisis impacted labour markets adversely and led to deepening uncertainty, vulnerability of employment, and inequality. Furthermore, measures to improve efficiency and profitability in the economic recovery have often led to jobless growth, as happened in Algeria, India and post-apartheid South Africa.\nIn seeking to address the level of vulnerable employment, TVET systems have focused on increasing the employability of graduates and enhancing their capacity to function effectively within existing vulnerable labour markets and to adjust to other labour market constraints. This has meant enhanced coordination among government departments responsible for TVET and employment policies. It has also created the need for TVET systems to develop mechanisms that identify skills needs early on and make better use of labour market information for matching skills demands and supply. TVET systems have focused more on developing immediate job skills and wider competencies. This has been accomplished by adopting competency-based approaches to instruction and workplace learning that enable learners to handle vulnerable employment, adjust to changing jobs and career contexts, and build their capacity to learn and agility to adapt.\nMigration flows.\nIncreasing migration are significant challenges to the national character of TVET systems and qualifications. TVET qualifications are progressively expected not only to serve as proxies for an individual's competencies but to also act as a form of a currency that signals national and international value. TVET systems have been developing mechanisms to enable credible and fair cross-border recognition of skills. In 2007, the ILO identified three types of recognition that TVET system may use: unilateral (independent assessment by the receiving country), mutual (agreements between sending and receiving countries), and multilateral (mostly between a regional grouping of countries). The most prevalent of these is unilateral recognition, which is mostly under the control of national credential evaluation agencies. Countries have been slow to move from input-based skill evaluations to outcome-based methodologies that focus on competencies attained.\nTVET systems are responding to migration by providing qualifications that can stand the rigour of these recognition systems and by creating frameworks for mutual recognition of qualifications. Regional Qualifications Frameworks such as those in Southern Africa, Europe, Asia and the Caribbean aim to significantly support the recognition of qualifications across borders. These efforts are further supported through the introduction of outcome-based learning methodologies within the broader context of multilateral recognition agreements.\nProviding broader competencies alongside specialist skills.\nSkills for economic development include a mix of technical and soft skills. Empirical evidence and TVET policy reviews conducted by UNESCO suggest that TVET systems may not as yet sufficiently support the development of the so-called soft competencies. Many countries have, however, adopted competency-based approaches as measures for reforming TVET curricula.\nThe HEART Trust National Training Agency of Jamaica adopted this approach, with a particular emphasis on competency standards and balanced job-specific and generic skills. Competency standards aimed to ensure that the training was linked to industry and was up to date, and that competences were integrated into training programmes, along with the needed knowledge, skills and attitudes. The balancing of skill types was to ensure adequate attention was given to job-specific skills as well as the conceptual and experiential knowledge necessary to enable individuals to grow and develop in the workplace, and more generally in society.\nPromoting social equity and inclusive workplaces.\nPreparing marginalized groups of youths and adults in \nwith the right skills and helping them make the transition from school to work is part of the problem faced by TVET in promoting social equity. Ensuring that the workplace is inclusive poses numerous policy challenges, depending on the contextual dynamics of inclusion and exclusion, and the capabilities of individuals. For example, the experiences of exclusion by people with disabilities and disadvantaged women may be similar in some ways and different in others. Many individuals experience multiple forms of disadvantage in the workplace, to different degrees of severity, depending on social attitudes and traditions in a specific context or organization. Approaches to inclusiveness in the workplace will therefore vary according to population needs, social diversity and context. To give one example, the Netherlands set about the task of making workplaces more inclusive for low-skilled adults by offering programmes that combine language instruction with work, and in certain cases on-the-job training.\nA review of employer surveys in Australia, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom and the United States of America, reported that employers valued people with disabilities for their high levels of motivation and their diverse perspectives, and found their attendance records to be the same or better than those of other employees. Many employers mentioned that being seen as pro-inclusion was positive for the company or organization's image, an advantage that goes well beyond\u00a0providing employment opportunities to disadvantaged groups. In many cases, however, social and cultural perceptions are an obstacle to making workplaces more inclusive, and this will require sensitive and concerted attention. Some low- and middle-income countries have sought to address this through legislation. In Tanzania the Disabled Persons (Employment) Act of 1982 established a quota system that stipulates that 2 per cent of the workforce in companies with over fifty employees must be persons with disabilities.\nThe 2012 Education for All Global Monitoring Report concluded that 'all countries, regardless of income level, need to pay greater attention to the needs of young people who face disadvantage in education and skills development by virtue of their poverty, gender or other characteristics'. The report found that several barriers and constraints reduced the success of TVET in meeting social equity demands. First, national TVET policies in most cases failed to address the skills needs of young people living in urban poverty and in deprived rural areas. Second, additional funds were needed to support TVET learning opportunities on a much larger scale. Third, the training needs of disadvantaged young women were particularly neglected. The 2012 EFA Global Monitoring Report also noted that skills training alone was not sufficient for the most disadvantaged of the rural and urban poor. Coherent policies that link social protection, micro-finance and TVET are considered critical for ensuring better outcomes for marginalized groups.\nGender disparities.\nRecent years have seen rising numbers of young women enrolling in TVET programmes, especially in service sector subjects. At times the challenge is to bring more males into female-dominated streams. However, beyond number games, the real gender parity test that TVET systems are yet to pass is balancing the gender participation in programmes that lead to employability, as well as to decent and high-paying jobs. Gender disparities in learning opportunities, and earnings, are a cause for concern. The persistent gender-typing of TVET requires concerted attention if TVET is to really serve a key facilitative role in shared growth, social equity and inclusive development.\nThe absence of work, poor quality of work, lack of voice at work, continued gender discrimination and unacceptably high youth unemployment are all major drivers of TVET system reforms from the perspective of social equity. This is an area where TVET systems continue to be challenged to contribute proactively to the shaping of more equitable societies.\nGender equality has received significant international attention in recent years, and this has been reflected in a reduction in gender participation gaps in both primary and secondary schooling. Efforts to analyse and address gender equality in TVET are relevant to other aspects of equity and dimensions of inclusion/exclusion. In almost all parts of the world, the proportion of girls to total enrolment in secondary education defined as TVET is less than for 'general' secondary education.\nThe Shanghai Consensus of the Third International Congress on TVET.\nThe Shanghai Consensus of the Third International Congress on TVET made the following recommendations on expanding access and improving quality and equity, including to:\u00a0\n\"Improve gender equality by promoting equal access of females and males to TVET programmes, particularly in fields where there is strong labour market demand, and by ensuring that TVET curricula and materials avoid stereotyping by gender.\"\nBy country.\nArgentina.\nArgentina was one of the first countries in Latin America to run apprenticeship and vocational programs. From 1903 to 1909 basic programs were delivered at main cities. The entity charged with delivering these programs was the General Workers' Union (Spanish: Uni\u00f3n General de Trabajadores; abbreviated UGT), an Argentine national labor confederation.\nThe massive development of vocational education in Argentina took place during the period between World War I and World War II, with the large influx of immigrants from Europe. During the presidency of Juan Per\u00f3n, the first formal apprenticeship and vocational training programs were offered free of charge across the country, eventually becoming the National Workers' University (Universidad Obrera Nacional) under the National Vocational Programs Law 13229, implemented on August 19, 1948. These programs were created and supported by the federal government and delivered by provincial governments at various technical colleges and regional universities as well as industrial centers; they were meant to deal with the lack of technical specialists in Argentina at a time of rapid industrialization expansion across the country. The degrees granted were that of technician and factory engineer in many specialties.\nCurrently, vocational education programs are delivered by public and private learning organizations, supported by the Argentine Ministry of Labour and Ministry of Education. The leading providers of technical and vocational education in the country are the National Technological University (UTN) (Universidad Tecnol\u00f3gica Nacional, UTN) and the National University of the Arts (UNA) (Universidad Nacional de las Artes, UNA).\nAustralia.\nIn Australia vocational education and training is mostly post-secondary and provided through the vocational education and training (VET) system by registered training organisations. However some secondary schools do offer school-based apprenticeships and traineeships for students in years 10, 11 and 12. There were 24 Technical Colleges in Australia but now only 5 independent Trade Colleges remain with three in Queensland; one in Townsville (Tec-NQ), one in Brisbane (Australian Trade College) and one on the Gold Coast (Australian Industry Trade College) and one in Adelaide and Perth. This system encompasses both public, TAFE, and private providers in a national training framework consisting of the Australian Quality Training Framework, Australian Qualifications Framework and Industry Training Packages which define the competency standards for the different vocational qualifications.\nAustralia's apprenticeship system includes both apprenticeships in \"traditional\" trades and \"traineeships\" in other more service-oriented occupations. Both involve a legal contract between the employer and the apprentice or trainee and provide a combination of school-based and workplace training. Apprenticeships typically last three to four years, traineeships only one to two years. Apprentices and trainees receive a wage which increases as they progress through the training scheme.\nThe states and territories are responsible for providing funding for government subsidised delivery in their jurisdiction and the Commonwealth Government, through the https://, provides regulation of registered training organisations except in Victoria and Western Australia. A central concept of the VET system is \"national recognition\", whereby the assessments and awards of any one registered training organisation must be recognised by all others, and the decisions of any VET regulatory authority must be recognised by the all states and territories. This allows national portability of qualifications and units of competency.\nA crucial feature of the training package (which accounts for about 60% of publicly funded training and almost all apprenticeship training) is that the content of the vocational qualifications is theoretically defined by industry and not by government or training providers. A Training Package is endorsed by the Australian Industry and Skills Committee before it can be used by RTOs to deliver Nationally Accredited Training.\nThe National Centre for Vocational Education Research or NCVER is a not-for-profit company owned by the federal, state and territory ministries responsible for training. It is responsible for collecting, managing, analysing, evaluating and communicating research and statistics about vocational education and training (VET).\nThe boundaries between vocational education and tertiary education are becoming more blurred. A number of vocational training providers such as Melbourne Polytechnic, BHI and WAI are now offering specialised bachelor's degrees in specific areas not being adequately provided by universities. Such applied courses include equine studies, winemaking and viticulture, aquaculture, information technology, music, illustration, culinary management and many more.\nBangladesh.\nIntegrating women or men into areas of specialization in which they were previously under-represented is important to diversifying opportunities for TVET. The National Strategy for Promotion of Gender Equality in TVET in Bangladesh set clear priorities and targets for breaking gender stereotypes. The Strategy developed by a Gender Working Group comprising fifteen representatives from government ministries and departments, employers, workers and civil society organizations. It provided an overview of the current status and nature of gender inequalities in TVET, highlighted the priority areas for action, explored a number of steps to promote equal participation of women in TVET, and outlined the way forward.\nCambodia.\nIn Cambodia, TVET programmes set out to empower young women in traditional trades by upgrading their skills and technology in silk weaving. This led to the revitalization and reappraisal of a traditional craft by learners and society.\nCommonwealth of Independent States.\nThe largest and the most unified system of vocational education was created in the Soviet Union with the professional`no-tehnicheskoye uchilische and Tehnikum. But it became less effective with the transition of the economies of post-Soviet countries to a market economy.\nEuropean Union.\nEducation and training is the responsibility of member states, but the single European labour market makes some cooperation on education imperative, including on vocational education and training. The 'Copenhagen process', based on the open method of cooperation between Member States, was launched in 2002 in order to help make vocational education and training better and more attractive to learners throughout Europe. The process is based on mutually agreed priorities that are reviewed periodically. Much of the activity is monitored by Cedefop, the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training.\nThere is strong support, particularly in northern Europe, for a shift of resources from university education to vocational training. This is due to the perception that an oversupply of university graduates in many fields of study has aggravated graduate unemployment and underemployment. At the same time, employers are experiencing a shortage of skilled tradespeople.\nFinland.\nIn Finland, vocational education belongs to secondary education. After the nine-year comprehensive school, almost all students choose to go to either a \"lukio\" (high school), which is an institution preparing students for tertiary education, or to a vocational school. Both forms of secondary education last three years, and give a formal qualification to enter university or \"ammattikorkeakoulu\", i.e., Finnish polytechnics. In certain fields (e.g., the police school, air traffic control personnel training), the entrance requirements of vocational schools include completion of the \"lukio\", thus causing the students to complete their secondary education twice.\nThe education in vocational school is free, and students from low-income families are eligible for a state student grant. The curriculum is primarily vocational, and the academic part of the curriculum is adapted to the needs of a given course. The vocational schools are mostly maintained by municipalities.\nAfter completing secondary education, one can enter higher vocational schools (\"ammattikorkeakoulu\", or \"AMK\") or universities.\nIt is also possible for a student to choose both lukio and vocational schooling. The education in such cases lasts usually from three to four years.\nFrance and the Netherlands.\nThe baccalaur\u00e9at professionnel in France, and the middelbaar beroepsonderwijs (MBO) count work experience in the area they are specializing in.\nGermany.\nVocational education in Germany is based on the German model. A law (the \"Berufsausbildungsgesetz\") was passed in 1969 which regulated and unified the vocational training system and codified the shared responsibility of the state, the unions, associations and \"Industrie- und Handelskammer\" (chambers of trade and industry). The system is very popular in modern Germany: in 2001, two-thirds of young people aged under 22 began an apprenticeship, and 78% of them completed it, meaning that approximately 51% of all young people under 22 have completed an apprenticeship. One in three companies offered apprenticeships in 2003; in 2004 the government signed a pledge with industrial unions that all companies except very small ones must take on apprentices.\nFrom 2010 to 2023, the number of young people starting dual vocational training, has fallen. In recent years, Germany has invested a great deal of money to keep young people in the school system as long as possible. Apprenticeships enhanced content within occupational training courses and considerable emphasis has been placed on personal skills.\nGhana.\nIn Ghana, Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) programs aim to equip individuals with the technical and professional skills they need to drive the country's socioeconomic and industrial development. Notably, these programs place a strong emphasis on preparing Ghanaians for self-employment, empowering them to become not just employees but also job creators. In Ghana, TVET programs are designed specifically to address the needs of young Ghanaians who have completed Junior High School eager to acquire practical skills for immediate employment. There are new TVET schools under the Free education Policy under the auspices of the Government of Ghana set up to increase access and to purposely train students in pure technical skills. This is geared towards immediate job placement, this focus on hands-on learning and skill development sets Technical Vocational Institutes and Polytechnics apart from traditional universities, preparing graduates to hit the ground running in the workforce.\nGhana's Technical Universities, an upgrade of Polytechnics, have received a major boost with the introduction of state-of-the-art laboratories. These labs are equipped with industry-standard training systems, prioritizing a hands-on approach to education. This focus fosters a dynamic teaching and learning environment while simultaneously preparing graduates with the practical skills they need to hit the ground running in the industrial market. By providing technical knowledge and vocational skills in areas like agriculture, industry, commerce, science, and technology, vocational and technical programs at the tertiary level act as a catalyst for national development in these crucial sectors.\nThe Ministry of Education (Ghana) alongside the National Vocational Training Institute (NVTI), Commission for Technical and Vocational Education and Training (COTVET), and National Accreditation Board (NABTEX), has made significant strides in modernizing vocational education. With the support of the private sector and industry. The introduction of STEM programs in specialized secondary schools alongside the expanded access to senior high schools, demonstrates a clear commitment to improving education equity.\nFurthermore, initiatives like the retooling of technical schools with advanced equipment are equipping graduates with the practical skills needed for success in various industries. The upgrade of technical universities is also strategic move to strengthen TVET by offering advanced training opportunities in high-level technical skills. This, in turn, will provide a structured progression path for students coming from technical and vocational programs at the secondary level, contributing to a more skilled workforce. These efforts address the national skills gap and contribute to Ghana's industrialization goals.\nGreece.\nIn Greece, vocational education and training (VET) is usually for lyceum (senior high school) graduates and is provided by public or private Schools of Higher Vocational Training https:// [formerly known as Institute of Vocational Training (IEK) (IEK, the Greek abbreviation for the \u0399\u03bd\u03c3\u03c4\u03b9\u03c4\u03bf\u03cd\u03c4\u03bf \u0395\u03c0\u03b1\u03b3\u03b3\u03b5\u03bb\u03bc\u03b1\u03c4\u03b9\u03ba\u03ae\u03c2 \u039a\u03b1\u03c4\u03ac\u03c1\u03c4\u03b9\u03c3\u03b7\u03c2)]. The IEK course offerings are adult education only, except at times when it is rarely offered a course for non-adult students. The duration of study is two-and-a-half academic years full-time, 2 \u00bd years. 4 semesters in-school education and 1 semester being known as curricular practicum or on-the-job placement or internship, both involve a legal contract between the employer and the student-trainee on the job placement and provide a combination of school-based training and workplace practicum. Public IEKs are government-funded with free education, and it can be attended without tuition fee.\nHong Kong.\nIn Hong Kong, vocational education is usually for post-secondary 6 students. The Hong Kong Institute of Vocational Education (IVE) provides training in nine different vocational fields, namely: applied science, business administration, child education and community services, construction, design, printing, textiles and clothing, hotel service and tourism studies, information technology, electrical and electronic engineering, and mechanical, manufacturing and industrial engineering.\nHungary.\nNormally at the end of elementary school (at age 14) students are directed to one of three types of upper secondary education: one academic track (gymnasium) and two vocational tracks. Vocational secondary schools (szakgimn\u00e1zium) provide four years of general education and also prepare students for the \"maturata\" (school leaving certificate). These schools combine general education with some specific subjects, referred to as pre-vocational education and career orientation. At that point many students enrol in a post-secondary VET programme often at the same institution a vocational qualification, although they may also seek entry to tertiary education.\nVocational training schools (szakiskola) initially provide two years of general education, combined with some pre-vocational education and career orientation, they then choose an occupation, and then receive two or three years of vocational education and training focusing on that occupation\u2014such as bricklayer. Students do not obtain the \"maturata\" but a vocational qualification at the end of a successfully completed programme. Demand for vocational training, both from the labour market and among students, has declined while it has increased for upper secondary schools delivering the \"maturata\".\nIndia.\nVocational training in India historically has been a subject handled by the Ministry of Labour, other central ministries and various state-level organizations. To harmonize the variations and multiplicity in terms of standards and costs, the National Skills Qualification Framework was launched in December 2013.\nWork education has been included in the primary standards (grades 1\u20138) to make the students aware of work. At the lower secondary level (grades 9\u201310) pre-vocational education has been included with the aim to increase students\u2019 familiarity with the world of work.\nThe National Skills Qualifications Framework (NSQF) is a competency-based framework that organizes all qualifications according to a series of levels of knowledge, skills and aptitude. These levels, graded from one to ten, are defined in terms of learning outcomes which the learner must possess regardless of whether they are obtained through formal, non-formal or informal learning. NSQF in India was notified on 27 December 2013. All other frameworks, including the NVEQF (National Vocational Educational Qualification Framework) released by the Ministry of HRD, stand superseded by the NSQF.\nIn November 2014 the new Government in India formed the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship. Articulating the need for such a Ministry, the Prime Minister said, \"A separate Ministry, which will look after promoting entrepreneurship and skill development, would be created. Even developed countries have accorded priority to promoting skilled manpower\".\nAs a continuation of its efforts to harmonize and consolidate skill development activities across the country, the Government launched the 1st Skill India Development Mission (NSDM) on 15 July 2015. Also launched on the day was the National Policy for Skill Development &amp; Entrepreneurship.\nToday all skill development efforts through the Government (http://) and through the Public Private Partnership arm (National Skill Development Corporation) are carried out under the Ministry, through the Skill India Mission.\nThe Ministry works with various central ministries and departments and the State government in implementing the NSQF across all Government funded projects, based on a five-year implementation schedule for complete convergence.\nThe involvement of the private sector in various aspects of skill development has enhanced access, quality, and innovative financing models leading to sustainable skill development organizations on the ground. The short-term skill development programs (largely offered by private organizations) combined with the long-term programs offered by the Indian technical institutes (ITIs) complement each other under the larger framework. Credit equivalency, transnational standards, quality assurance and standards are being managed by the Ministry through the National Skill Development Agency (an autonomous body under the Ministry) in close partnership with industry-led sector-specific bodies (Sector Skill Councils) and various line ministries.\nIndia has bilateral collaboration with governments including those of the UK, Australia, Germany, Canada, and the UAE, with the intention of implementing globally acceptable standards and providing the Indian workforce with overseas job mobility.\nIran.\nThe Iran Technical and Vocational Training Organization or in brief I.R.T.V.T.O is one of the organizations affiliated to the Ministry of Cooperatives, Labour, and Social Welfare, which was formed from the merger of three educational institutions in 1980 in order to provide technical and vocational education. In addition to the central headquarters, this organization has 31 general administrations in provinces of Iran, an instructor training center, 552 Learning Center and over 11700 free technical and vocational schools. In order to achieve the latest science and technology news and to comply with international standards, the organization always tried to expand international relations, including with the International Labour Organization (ILO) and the International Organization for Vocational Training in other countries. In this regard, the organization, regardless of the interpretation of the overall organizational structure, carries out its activities only in the field of education, with the support of the research field.\nTVET is mostly presented by TVTO which is the most pervasive skill training body in Iran, which attempts to meet the skill needs of the labor market and also updates the skills of employees with the latest technologies.\nIt functions as the provider and executor of informal technical and vocational training in agriculture, industry, services, culture, and art. TVTO has headquarters in the capital city of Tehran, an instructor training center(ITC) in Karaj city, 31 provincial head offices, 641 public training centers, 4710 public workshops, and over 12000 private institutions across the country.\nThe Technical and Vocational University (TVU) (, \"Danushgah-e Feni-ye Herfehai\") includes higher education that runs all technical/vocational colleges across the country. The main objective of this University, training technicians in the majors technical. 4/5 of majors are belongs to Associate degree and 1/5 belongs to Bachelor's degree.\nThe university has more than 176 schools and colleges across the country, and with more than 180 thousand students, it is one of the largest universities in Iran. there are all of the technical and vocational Majors.\nTo achieve the goals, TVTO holds 3-18-month training courses for job seekers and employees in different sectors. Along with training programs, there are activities of research, construction, equipment and development of human resources, most importantly including: codifying training standards based on international codes, research, updating training standards, research in training programs, training aids, audiovisuals, setting up and equipping workshops of training centers, setting up new workshops, guilds\u2019 skill testing ,determining the technical competence of applicants of private institutions, holding specialized conferences, issuing skill certificates for construction workers.\nIraq.\nIt is a new experiment in Iraq about TVET, there are three ministries related to TVET in Iraq, the Ministry of Higher Education and scientific research which is represented by the technical universities, the Ministry of Education which is represented by the vocational education foundation, and the Ministry of Labor and Social Guaranty which is represented by vocational training centers. These associations are trained by UNESCO for the last three years on the main topics and fields of TVET, so they are now waiting for the Iraqi Perelman to put a suitable law for the TVET Council in Iraq to start its system and control these associations with the required outputs of TVET.\nIsrael.\nIsrael offers a post-high school college education system for technical occupations and engineering, aimed at high-school graduates of technological tracks. Students demonstrating technological potential in schools supervised by the Ministry of Labor, Social Affairs, and Services (MOLSA) may avail themselves of the MENTA Program, which provides scholastic, emotional, and social support throughout their high school and college studies. This support helps students meet the scholastic challenges and demands of the vocational track and, via the program, strives to expand both the number of youth continuing through college Grades 13-14 and the percentage eligible for a diploma at the end of their studies. The program was formulated by JDC-Ashalim in cooperation with the HEZNEK organization, the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Economy (and subsequently, MOLSA), and by education networks operating schools. A 2016-17 formative evaluation of MENTA found that the program was successful in helping students complete their matriculation, strengthen their sense of self-efficacy, and create for themselves a picture of the future. \u00a0At the same time, the findings suggested that program better clarify the target population, improve the supports for transition to college, and more clearly define the scope of the coordinators' role.\nJapan.\nJapanese vocational schools are known as . They are part of Japan's higher education system. They are two-year schools that many students study at after finishing high school (although it is not always required that students graduate from high school). Some have a wide range of majors, others only a few majors. Some examples are computer technology, fashion, and English.\nKazakhstan.\nVocational education (TVET) in Kazakhstan is a recognized level of education aimed at equipping students with the knowledge, skills, and competencies for specific professions or trades. Institutions providing vocational education include specialized schools (), colleges, and higher-education institutions. The overall structure, curricula, admission procedures, and governance of vocational institutions are determined by national legislation and model-rule regulations, with each institution implementing its own charter.\nEducation under TVET programs combines theoretical instruction with industrial or practical training, often including apprenticeships at enterprises or training workshops. Training may be delivered full-time, in the evening, via correspondence, or online, depending on the specialty and institution. TVET programs generally last 2\u20134 years, depending on whether students enter after grade 9 (secondary-vocational) or grade 11 (post-secondary), though exact durations vary by institution and specialty. \nState regulation ensures citizens can receive free vocational education under a state-order system if it is their first time obtaining that level of education. Kazakhstan first announced plans to provide free technical and vocational education in 2014, aiming to give school leavers without a profession their first vocational qualification, and the policy was formally implemented in 2017 under the national program \"Free Vocational and Technical Education for All\", which expanded state-order funding and guaranteed tuition-free places for eligible first-time TVET students; by 2025, the initiative was further extended so that all vocational and technical colleges universally offered free training in priority, in-demand specialties.\nAs of 2023, 67,500 people completed short-term vocational courses, and the national online platform trained 57,700 adults, 14,600 of whom gained employment. Due to increase demands of blue-collar workers, vocational-education system in Kazakhstan is undergoing major reforms with President Kassym-Jomart Tokayev declaring 2025 as the \"Year of Working Professions\", which launched a modernization program to expand enrollment, upgrade infrastructure, and strengthen industry cooperation.\nSouth Korea.\nVocational high schools offer programmes in five fields: agriculture, technology/engineering, commerce/business, maritime/fishery, and home economics. In principle, all students in the first year of high school (10th grade) follow a common national curriculum, In the second and third years (11th and 12th grades) students are offered courses relevant to their specialisation. In some programmes, students may participate in workplace training through co-operation between schools and local employers. The government is now piloting Vocational Meister Schools in which workplace training is an important part of the programme. Around 40% of secondary students are currently enrolled in TVET education, in some schools, academic and vocational students share almost 75% of the curriculum. Around half of all vocational high schools are private. Private and public schools operate according to similar rules; for example, they charge the same fees for high school education, with an exemption for poorer families.\nThe number of students in vocational high schools has decreased, from about half of students in 1995 down to about one-quarter today. To make vocational high schools more attractive, in April 2007 the Korean government changed the name of vocational high schools into professional high schools. With the change of the name the government also facilitated the entry of vocational high school graduates to colleges and universities.\nMost vocational high school students continue into tertiary education; in 2007 43% transferred to junior colleges and 25% to university. At tertiary level, vocational education and training is provided in junior colleges (two- and three-year programmes) and at polytechnic colleges. Education at junior colleges and in two-year programmes in polytechnic colleges leads to an Industrial associate degree. Polytechnics also provide one-year programmes for craftsmen and master craftsmen and short programmes for employed workers. The requirements for admission to these institutions are in principle the same as those in the rest of tertiary sector (on the basis of the College Scholastic Aptitude Test) but candidates with vocational qualifications are given priority in the admission process. Junior colleges have expanded rapidly in response to demand and in 2006 enrolled around 27% of all tertiary students.\n95% of junior college students are in private institutions. Fees charged by private colleges are approximately twice those of public institutions. Polytechnic colleges are state-run institutions under the responsibility of the Ministry of Labour; government funding keeps student fees much lower than those charged by other tertiary institutions. Around 5% of students are enrolled in polytechnic colleges.\nMalaysia.\nSkills training are no longer depicted as second-class education in Malaysia. There are numerous vocational education centres here including vocational schools (high schools to train skilled students), technic schools (high schools to train future engineers) and vocational colleges all of them under the Ministry of Education. Then there are 33 polytechnics and 86 community colleges under the Ministry of Higher Education; 10 MARA Advanced Skills Colleges, 13 MARA Skills Institutes, 286 GIATMARAs under Majlis Amanah Rakyat (MARA) and 15 National Youth Skills Institutes under Ministry of Youth and Sports. The first vocational institute in Malaysia is the Industrial Training Institute of Kuala Lumpur established in 1964 under the Manpower Department. Other institutes under the same department including 8 Advanced Technology Training Centres, one Centre for Instructor and Advanced Skill Training, one Japan-Malaysia Technical Institute and the other 21 ITIs.\nMexico.\nIn Mexico, both federal and state governments are responsible for the administration of vocational education. Federal schools are funded by the federal budget, in addition to their own funding sources. The state governments are responsible for the management of decentralised institutions, such as the State Centres for Scientific and Technological Studies (CECyTE) and Institutes of Training for Work (ICAT). These institutions are funded 50% from the federal budget and 50% from the state budget. The state governments also manage and fund \"decentralised institutions of the federation\", such as CONALEP schools.\nCompulsory education (including primary and lower secondary education) finishes at the age of 15 and about half of those aged 15-to-19 are enrolled full-time or part-time in education. All programmes at upper secondary level require the payment of a tuition fee.\nThe upper secondary vocational education system in Mexico includes over a dozen subsystems (administrative units within the Upper Secondary Education Undersecretariat of the Ministry of Public Education, responsible for vocational programmes) which differ from each other to varying degrees in content, administration, and target group. The large number of school types and corresponding administrative units within the Ministry of Public Education makes the institutional landscape of vocational education and training complex by international standards.\nVocational education and training provided under the Upper Secondary Education Undersecretariat includes three main types of programme:\nNetherlands.\nNearly all of those leaving lower secondary school enter upper secondary (vocational) education (Middelbaar BeroepsOnderwijs, MBO), and around 50% of them follow one of four vocational programmes; technology, economics, agricultural, personal/social services &amp; health care. These programmes vary from 1 to 4 years (by level; only level 2, 3 and 4 diplomas are considered formal \"start qualifications\" for successfully entering the labour market). The programmes can be attended in either of two pathways. One either involving a minimum of 20% of school time (apprenticeship pathway; BBL-BeroepsBegeleidende Leerweg) or the other, involving a maximum of 80% schooltime (BOL -BeroepsOpleidende Leerweg). The remaining time in both cases is apprenticeship/work in a company. So in effect, students have a choice out of 32 trajectories, leading to over 600 professional qualifications.\nBBL-Apprentices usually receive a wage negotiated in collective agreements. Employers taking on these apprentices receive a subsidy in the form of a tax reduction on the wages of the apprentice. (WVA-Wet vermindering afdracht).\nLevel 4 graduates of senior secondary VET may go directly to institutes for Higher Profession Education and Training (HBO-Hoger beroepsonderwijs), after which entering university is a possibility. This co-existence of upper secondary (MBO) and higher professional (HBO) education creates opportunities for further education and development, as well as a tension in the labour market because many vocations can be studied at various levels, and employers may prefer higher educated employees.\nThe social partners participate actively in the development of policy. As of January 1, 2012 they formed a foundation for Co operation Vocational Education and Entrepreneurship (St. SBB\u00a0\u2013 stichting Samenwerking Beroepsonderwijs Bedrijfsleven; www.s-bb.nl). Its responsibility is to advise the Minister on the development of the national vocational education and training system, based on the full consensus of the constituent members (the representative organisations of schools and of entrepreneurship and their centres of expertise). Special topics are Qualification &amp; Examination, Apprenticeships (BPV-Beroepspraktijkvorming) and (labourmarket) Efficiency of VET.\nThe Centres of Expertices are linked to the four vocational education programmes provided in senior secondary VET on the content of VET programmes and on trends and future skill needs.\nThe Local County Vocational Training (MBO Raad www.mboraad.nl) represents the VET schools in this foundation and advise on the quality, operations and provision of VET.\nNew Zealand.\nNew Zealand is served by 11 Industry Training Organisations (ITO). The unique element is that ITOs purchase training as well as set standards and aggregate industry opinion about skills in the labour market. Industry Training, as organised by ITOs, has expanded from apprenticeships to a more true lifelong learning situation with, for example, over 10% of trainees aged 50 or over. Moreover, much of the training is generic. This challenges the prevailing idea of vocational education and the standard layperson view that it focuses on apprenticeships.\nOne source for information in New Zealand is the Industry Training Federation. Another is the Ministry of Education.\nPolytechnics, Private Training Establishments, Wananga and others also deliver vocational training, amongst other areas.\nNigeria.\nThe educational system or structure of Nigeria has been changing over time. In the 1970's, the Nigerian educational system was 6-5-4. This changed as time passed, between 1980 and 2005, it was changed to 6-3-3-4. 2008 saw another educational system review to 9-3-4 system of education. All these reviews are shown in the National Policy on Education. Due to the type of education Nigeria inherited from her colonial masters, education in the 1960's were more book oriented. On 31 May 2025, the Nigeria\u2019s government through its minister of education launched TVET, aimed at tackling at rising unemployment in the country.https://\nNorway.\nNearly all those leaving lower secondary school enter upper secondary education, and around half follow one of nine vocational programmes. These programmes typically involve two years in school followed by two years of apprenticeship in a company. The first year provides general education alongside introductory knowledge of the vocational area. During the second year, courses become more trade-specific.\nApprentices receive a wage negotiated in collective agreements ranging between 30% and 80% of the wage of a qualified worker; the percentage increase over the apprenticeship period. Employers taking on apprentices receive a subsidy, equivalent to the cost of one year in school.\nAfter the two years vocational school programme some students opt for a third year in the \"general\" programme as an alternative to an apprenticeship. Both apprenticeship and a third year of practical training in school lead to the same vocational qualifications. Upper secondary VET graduates may go directly to Vocational Technical Colleges, while those who wish to enter university need to take a supplementary year of education.\nThe social partners participate actively in the development of policy. The National Council for Vocational Education and Training advises the Minister on the development of the national vocational education and training system. The Advisory Councils for Vocational Education and Training are linked to the nine vocational education programmes provided in upper secondary education and advise on the content of VET programmes and on trends and future skill needs. The National Curriculum groups assist in deciding the contents of the vocational training within the specific occupations. The Local County Vocational Training Committees advise on the quality, provision of VET and career guidance.\nParaguay.\nIn Paraguay, vocational education is known as \"Bachillerato T\u00e9cnico\" and is part of the secondary education system. These schools combine general education with some specific subjects, referred to as pre-vocational education and career orientation. After nine years of \"Educaci\u00f3n Escolar B\u00e1sica\" (Primary School), the student can choose to go to either a \"Bachillerato T\u00e9cnico\" (Vocational School) or a \"Bachillerato Cient\u00edfico\" (High School). Both forms of secondary education last three years, and are usually located in the same campus called \"Colegio\".\nAfter completing secondary education, one can enter to the universities. It is also possible for a student to choose both T\u00e9cnico and Cient\u00edfico schooling.\nPoland.\nIn Poland vocational programmes for the technical occupations are the part of the public system of post-secondary academic education. Post-secondary vocational school (post-secondary technical school) in Poland is known as . It is an equivalent to a technical college in English-speaking countries. Admission to Post-secondary School in Poland is contingent upon the completion of secondary education. Post-secondary vocational schools offer professional training programs lasting to 2.5 years, including mandatory completion of internships at enterprises. The completion of Post-secondary vocational school in Poland results in the awarding of a technical diploma.\nPost-secondary educational programs focus on practical and technical skills required for the work in specific industries, such as information technology, electronics, mechatronics, construction.\nIn the field of information technology, such education includes training for programmers, database administrators and analysts, computer network specialists, and hardware specialists. In the field of electronics, it includes training for electronic circuit designers and microelectronics specialists.\nAccording to the International Standard Classification of Education, the academic program of a post-secondary school in Poland is classified as ISCED 4.\nRussia.\nA new approach to vocationalization of secondary schooling has been introduced within the framework of general educational reform. This has been guided by the Ministry of Education's strategy of modernization. Vocationalization in the Russian Federation refers to the introduction of profile education at the upper-secondary level (the last two years of schooling, grades 10 and 11) and the process of preparation for profile selection. Profile education provided students with the opportunity to study a chosen area in depth, usually one that would be related to their further study (TVET or academic). Schools could design their own profiles, e.g. science, socio-economics, humanities, and technology, or keep a general orientation curriculum. In preparation for the upper-secondary specialization, a \u2032pre-profiling\u2032 programme in grade 9 has been introduced to help students make their choices in grade 10.\nSpain.\nIn Spain, vocational education is divided into 3 stages as of 2014. They're known as \"Formaci\u00f3n profesional B\u00e1sica\", which can be started in 3\u00ba ESO; \"Formaci\u00f3n profesional de Grado Medio\", which can be started after 4\u00ba ESO or after graduating from \"Formaci\u00f3n profesional B\u00e1sica\"; and \"Formaci\u00f3n profesional de Grado Superior\", which can be started after 2\u00ba Bachillerato, or after graduating from \"Formaci\u00f3n profesional de Grado Medio\". University can then be accessed after graduating from \"Formaci\u00f3n profesional de Grado Superior\", without the need to pass through Bachillerato.\nThere are typically two courses imparted until graduation. Each titulation is called a Ciclo, heavily specialized depending on its related professional discipline.\nSpanish vocational education also features a Dual education system named \"Formaci\u00f3n Profesional Dual\", although not all Vocational Schools may feature it.\nSri Lanka.\nVocational training from Agricultural subjects to ICT related subjects are available in Sri Lanka. \nIn 2005 the Ministry of Vocational and Technical Training (MVTT) introduced the National Vocational Qualifications (NVQ) framework which was an important milestone for the education, economic and social development of Sri Lanka. The NVQ framework consists of seven levels of instruction. NVQ levels 1 to 4 are for craftsmen designation and successful candidates are issued with National certificates. NVQ levels 5 and 6 are Diploma level, whereas Level 7 is for degree equivalent qualification.\nTraining courses are provided by many institutions island wide. All training providers (public and private) must obtain institutional registration and course accreditation from the Tertiary and Vocational Education Commission (TVEC).In order to obtain registration institutions must satisfy specific criteria: infrastructure, basic services, tools and equipment, quality of instruction and staff, based on curriculum and syllabus, and quality of management and monitoring systems.\nGovernment Ministries and Agencies involved in Vocational Training are The Ministry of Vocational and Technical Training (MVTT), The Tertiary and Vocational Education Commission (TVEC), The National Apprentice and Industrial Training Authority (NAITA), The Department of Technical Education and Training (DTET), University of Vocational Technology(UoVT), The Vocational Training Authority (VTA) and the National Youth Services Council (NYSC).\nSweden.\nNearly all of those leaving compulsory schooling immediately enter upper secondary schools, and most complete their upper secondary education in three years. Upper secondary education is divided into 13 vocationally oriented and 4 academic national programmes. Slightly more than half of all students follow vocational programmes. All programmes offer broad general education and basic eligibility to continue studies at the post-secondary level. In addition, there are local programmes specially designed to meet local needs and \"individual\" programmes.\nA 1992 school reform extended vocational upper secondary programmes by one year, aligning them with three years of general upper secondary education, increasing their general education content, and making core subjects compulsory in all programmes. The core subjects (which occupy around one-third of total teaching time in both vocational and academic programmes) include English, artistic activities, physical education and health, mathematics, natural science, social studies, Swedish or Swedish as a second language, and religious studies. In addition to the core subjects, students pursue optional courses, subjects which are specific to each programme and a special project.\nVocational programmes include 15 weeks of workplace training (Arbetsplatsf\u00f6rlagt l\u00e4rande\u00a0\u2013 APL) over the three-year period. Schools are responsible for arranging workplace training and verifying its quality. Most municipalities have advisory bodies: programme councils (programmr\u00e5d) and vocational councils (yrkesr\u00e5d) composed of employers' and employees' representatives from the locality. The councils advise schools on matters such as provision of workplace training courses, equipment purchase and training of supervisors in APL.\nSwitzerland.\nThe Swiss vocational education and training system (VET) is regarded by many international experts as the strongest in Europe. It is the mainstream upper secondary program serving 65-70% of Swiss young people. It results in one of the lowest youth unemployment rates in Europe. Managers and the staff take pride in their young apprentices. Several Swiss CEOs of big multinational companies and government members have started their own careers as VET-apprentices, for example Sergio Ermotti, CEO of UBS. At this level, vocational education and training is mainly provided through the \"dual system\". Apprentices rotate between workplace, vocational school and industry training centers where they develop complementary practical skills relating to the occupation. They spend the biggest amount of time at the workplace emphasizing the importance of on-the-job training. Rotation can be organised in different ways \u2013 either by switching places during the week or by allocating entire weeks to one place and form of learning. The program can also start with most of the time devoted to in-school education and then gradually increase the share of in-company training.\nBesides the three- or four-year VET programme with Federal VET Diploma, there is also the option of two-year vocational education and training VET programme with Federal VET Certificate for adolescents with lower learning performance. Switzerland draws a distinction between vocational education and training programmes at upper-secondary level, and professional education and training (PET) programmes, which take place at tertiary B level. In 2007, more than half of the population aged 25\u201364 had a VET or PET qualification as their highest level of education. In addition, universities of applied sciences (Fachhochschulen) offer vocational education at tertiary A level. Pathways enable people to shift from one part of the education system to another.\nTurkey.\nStudents in Turkey may choose vocational high schools after completing the 8-year-long compulsory primary and secondary education. Vocational high school graduates may pursue two year-long polytechnics or may continue with a related tertiary degree. \nAccording to a survey by OECD, 38% of 15-year-old students attend vocational study programmes that are offered by \"Anatolian vocational\", \"Anatolian technical\", and \"technical high schools\".\nMunicipalities in Turkey also offer vocational training. The metropolitan municipality of Istanbul, the most populous city in Turkey, offers year long free vocational programs in a wide range of topics through ISMEK, an umbrella organization formed under the municipality.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe first \"Trades School\" in the UK was \"Stanley Technical Trades School\" (now Harris Academy South Norwood) which was designed, built and set up by William Stanley. The initial idea was thought of in 1901, and the school opened in 1907.\nThe system of vocational education in the UK initially developed independently of the state, with bodies such as the RSA and City &amp; Guilds setting examinations for technical subjects. The Education Act 1944 made provision for a Tripartite System of grammar schools, secondary technical schools and secondary modern schools, but by 1975 only 0.5% of British senior pupils were in technical schools, compared to two-thirds of the equivalent German age group.\nSuccessive recent British Governments have made attempts to promote and expand vocational education. In the 1970s, the Business And Technology Education Council was founded to confer further and higher education awards, particularly to further education colleges in the United Kingdom. In the 1980s and 1990s, the Conservative Government promoted the Youth Training Scheme, National Vocational Qualifications and General National Vocational Qualifications. However, youth training was marginalised as the proportion of young people staying on in full-time education increased. Vocational technical qualifications (VTQs) are now () offered to learners alongside GCSE courses.\nIn 1994, publicly funded Modern Apprenticeships were introduced to provide \"quality training on a work-based (educational) route\". Numbers of apprentices have grown in recent years and the Department for Children, Schools and Families has stated its intention to make apprenticeships a \"mainstream\" part of England's education system.\nIn the UK some higher engineering-technician positions that require 4\u20135 years' apprenticeship require academic study to HNC / HND or higher City &amp; Guilds level. Apprenticeships are increasingly recognised as the gold standard for work-based training. There are four levels of apprenticeship available for those aged 16 and over:\n\"There is also a perception, deriving from centuries of social stratification and selectivity in the status and provision of different kinds of education in England, that vocational education is inevitably more narrowly utilitarian, less influential and less important than its more academic cousin: advanced ('A') levels. This divide between the sectors of 'vocational' and 'higher' education, in many ways peculiarly English, is also reflected in higher education institutions and occupations (regarding academic credentials and some related provisions). These academic-vocational divisions in the 'English model', together with negative social and political perceptions, have to some extent stymied the debate regarding the significance and relevance of vocational education provision to learning, work and the economy\" (Loo and Jameson, 2017, p.\u00a01). The authors suggest that the divisions between further and higher education sectors in England be reconsidered. They (Loo and Jameson, 2017) call for an opening up of new pathways of \"occupation-related\" provisions that offer greater parity, progression and enhanced social mobility in vocational education across the academic levels of England's educational provision.\nLoo (2018) uses the term, technical and vocational education and training (TVET) by UNESCO (2012) as in the section below, to offer a more rational term than \"vocational\" in England, and to reach out to like-minded users in the global educational community. He offers insights into the study of the pedagogy of teachers of work-related programmes. Especially, he investigates the complex issue of how teachers use their know-how in their delivery of work-related programmes. This complexity surrounds the need for these deliverers to have the disciplinary and wider elements relating to knowledge of the relevant work practices, which involves the learning of the type of know-how and its application in their work practices. The combination of these work know-how (e.g. knowledge, experiences, dispositions and values) are then used to enable them to deliver to the learners. These pedagogic activities rely on different types of knowledge and experiences \u2013 pedagogic and work-related.\nThe theoretical framework uses, initially, a dual professionalism concept to review the literature sources of knowledge concerning the occupational pedagogy of teachers. From a pedagogic delineation of knowledge, teaching knowledge may include knowledge of the relevant disciplines (Becher 1994; Bernstein 1996; Smeby 1996) such as psychology and sociology (e.g. learning theories) for the education field. Teaching knowledge may be explicit or tacit (Shulman 1987; Polanyi 1966; Nonaka and Takeuchi 1995; Verloop et al. 2001; Loughran et al. 2003; Collins 2010), and may include a teacher's wider life experiences (Clandinin 1985) and occupational or work-related practices (Loo 2012).\nKnowledge concerning occupational practices (i.e. non-teaching) also requires a base of disciplinary or theoretical know-how that may be explicit and a process of application to specific work contexts and the environment it operates in (Bernstein 1996; Loo 2012). This occupational knowledge base also includes knowledge of procedures, skills (e.g. interpersonal and intrapersonal ones which are usually tacit), techniques, transversal abilities, project management abilities, personal capabilities and occupational capacity/awareness (Eraut 2004; Winch 2014). This knowledge base is a wider spectrum than a pedagogic one.\nThese two forms of knowledge \u2013 pedagogic and occupational \u2013 may be applied through the processes of recontextualization (Bernstein 1996; van Oers 1998; Barnett 2006, Evans et al. 2010, Loo 2012, 2014). The knowledge forms can be changed through selecting, relocating and refocusing aspects when used in another setting. In particular, the recontextualization processes regarding content (relating to specifications of a programme), pedagogic (relating to teaching activities), occupational (relating to working activities), and work (relating to the systems and processes that are specific to a workplace or organisation). From the initial teaching and occupational dimensions, the final modified know-how of Occupational Pedagogic Knowledge or Occupational Teachers' Capacities is formed via content recontextualization, pedagogic recontextualization, occupational recontextualization, and integrated applied recontextualization (IAR). There are also relevant concepts that offer insights to the application of teaching and occupational know-how. These include knowledgeable practice (Evans 2016), practice architecture (Kemmis and Green 2013), and Systems 1 and 2 (Kahneman 2012). For a detailed description of the theoretical framework, please refer to Chapter 4 in Teachers and Teaching in Vocational and Professional Education (Loo, 2018). The conceptual framework of the occupational pedagogy of teachers is illustrated on page 50 (Loo 2018).\nThe analysed empirical data is discussed in the separate sections of TVET, higher and professional education courses, five case studies of fashion and textiles, airline industry, dental hygiene, clinical training in emergency medicine and doctors, and a comparison chapter. These chapters offer critical understandings of how pedagogic and occupational know-how are acquired and applied in highly contextualized pedagogic and occupational contexts culminating in the use of teaching strategies/approaches in teaching sessions.\nThe observations from this investigation include (Loo 2018):\n1. there are programme pathways to occupational work\n2. occupational pathways are more direct for work-related provisions at higher academic levels than those at the TVET level\n3. two strands of practices exist at the outset: teaching and occupational where \"basic\" disciplinary or theoretical knowledge is used to provide occupational relevance to pedagogic and work-related areas\n4. IAR process provides a critical understanding of how the modified teaching, occupational and work capacities are combined to inform the application of appropriate teaching strategies to specific pedagogic settings\n5. users acquire the occupational capacities over the course duration, and they include abilities, capabilities, dispositions, experiences, judgement, knowledge, protocols, skill sets and techniques\n6. deliverers require the relevant occupational experiences to teach on work-related programmes, and continuous professional development is needed for deliverers to maintain their ongoing professionalism in the two practice strands of teaching and work\nFinally, this investigation has implications for teachers, managers and policymakers of occupational courses. For teachers, these include insights of the sources and types of knowledge that are acquired, recontextualized and applied for teaching and working in the related occupational areas. Managers need to empathise with the deliverers and support their professional needs, and policymakers need to acknowledge the complexities of teaching in occupational programmes and that the curriculum, professional staff and institution are adequately supported (Loo 2018).\nUnited States.\nTech-prep programmes in the United States of America are examples of how the \u2032blending\u2032 approach was used to help students make the connections between school and work. In year nine, programmes in broad occupational fields such as the health professions, automotive technology, computer systems networking are offered within general technology studies. The programmes continue for at least two years after the end of secondary school, through a tertiary education or an apprenticeship programme, with students achieving an associate degree or certificate by the end of the programme.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56552", "revid": "48297426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56552", "title": "Jet lag", "text": "Condition due to travel across time zones\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nJet lag is a temporary physiological condition that occurs when a person's circadian rhythm is out of sync with the time zone they are in, and is a typical result from travelling rapidly across multiple time zones (east\u2013west or west\u2013east). For example, someone travelling from New York to London, i.e. from west to east, feels as if the time were five hours \"earlier\" than local time, and someone travelling from London to New York, i.e. from east to west, feels as if the time were five hours \"later\" than local time. The phase shift when travelling from east to west is referred to as \"phase-delay\" of the circadian cycle, whereas going west to east is \"phase-advance\" of the cycle. Most travellers find that it is harder to adjust time zones when travelling east. Jet lag is caused by a misalignment between the internal circadian clock and the external environment, and it has been classified within the category of a circadian rhythm sleep disorder, reflecting its basis in disrupted biological timing rather than general travel fatigue.\nThe condition may last several days before a traveller becomes fully adjusted to a new time zone; it takes on average one day per hour of time zone change to reach circadian re-entrainment. Jet lag is especially an issue for airline pilots, aircraft crew, and frequent travellers. Airlines have regulations aimed at combating pilot fatigue caused by jet lag.\nJet lag has been the subject of research across multiple fields including chronobiology, sleep medicine, and aviation health. Numerous peer-reviewed studies have examined its underlying mechanisms, health implications, and treatment strategies. Research efforts are ongoing, particularly within laboratories focused on circadian biology and sleep disorders, reflecting the condition's relevance to both clinical practice and occupational health.\nThe term \"jet lag\" was created after the arrival of jet aircraft, because prior to that it was uncommon to travel far and fast enough to cause the condition (most long distance travel was done by sea and rail).\nDiscovery.\nAccording to a 1969 study by the Federal Aviation Administration, aviator Wiley Post was the first to write about the effects of flying across time zones in his 1931 co-authored book, \"Around the World in Eight Days\". However, Post and the Federal Aviation Administration initially did not link these symptoms to circadian disruption. Instead, these effects were attributed to \"travel fatigue factors\" such as anxiety about air travel, disruption to routine, and dehydration from the dryness of the prolonged aircraft time. Jet lag started associating with circadian rhythms in the 1970s with the rise of entrainment and phase shift research, mimicking similar symptoms to jet lag when rhythms were disrupted. These associations began the official recognition of jet lag as an effect of circadian disruption rather than a factor of travel fatigue.\nThe term jet lag is inspired by how people feel after travelling rapidly over several time zones, typically on a plane or jet-like form of transportation. The body's feeling of having to adjust to the new time zone serves as the inspiration for the \"lag\" component of the term. The term's first use was found in a \"Los Angeles Times\" article on February 13, 1966. Horace Sutton wrote, \"If you're going to be a member of the Jet Set and fly off to Katmandu for coffee with King Mahedra, you can count on contracting Jet lag, a debility not unakin to a hangover. Jet Lag derives from the simple fact that jets travel so fast they leave your rhythms behind.\" The term began gaining popularity soon after, continuing to increase to this day.\nSigns and symptoms.\nThe symptoms of jet lag can be quite varied, depending on the amount of time zone alteration, time of day, and individual differences. Sleep disturbance occurs, with poor sleep upon arrival or sleep disruptions such as trouble falling asleep (when flying east), early awakening (when flying west), and trouble remaining asleep. Cognitive effects include poorer performance on mental tasks and concentration; dizziness, nausea, insomnia, confusion, anxiety, increased fatigue, headaches, and irritability; and problems with digestion, including indigestion, changes in the frequency and consistency of bowel movements, and reduced appetite. The symptoms are caused by a circadian rhythm that is out of sync with the day\u2013night cycle of the destination, as well as the possibility of internal desynchronisation. Jet lag has been measured with simple analogue scales, but a study has shown that these are relatively blunt for assessing all the problems associated with jet lag. The Liverpool Jet Lag Questionnaire was developed to measure all the symptoms of jet lag at several times of day, and has been used to assess jet lag in athletes.\nJet lag may require three hour or more hours of time zone change to occur, but some individuals can be affected by a single hour of time zone change which can include the single-hour shift to or from daylight saving time. Symptoms and consequences of jet lag can be a significant concern for athletes travelling east or west to competitions, as performance is often dependent on a combination of physical and mental characteristics that are affected by jet lag. This is often a common concern at international sporting events like the Olympics and FIFA World Cup. However many athletes arrive at least 2\u20134 weeks ahead of these events, to help adjust from any jet lag issues.\nTravel fatigue.\nTravel fatigue is general fatigue, disorientation, and headache caused by a disruption in routine, time spent in a cramped space with little chance to move around, a low-oxygen environment, and dehydration caused by dry air and limited food and drink. It does not necessarily involve the shift in circadian rhythms that cause jet lag. Travel fatigue can occur without crossing time zones, and it often disappears after one day accompanied by a night of good quality sleep.\nCause.\nJet lag is a chronobiological problem, similar to issues often induced by shift work and circadian rhythm sleep disorders. During jet lag, there is a shift in the sleep-wake cycle, disrupting the coordinated regulation of the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) of the hypothalamus. The output of the SCN influences oscillatory sleep and arousal controls, which can later lead to an effect on daily sleep-wake behavior. When travelling across a number of time zones, a person's body clock (circadian rhythm) will be out of synchronisation with the destination time, as it experiences daylight and darkness contrary to the rhythms to which it was accustomed. The body's natural pattern is disturbed, as the rhythms that dictate times for eating, sleeping, hormone regulation, body temperature variation, and other functions no longer correspond to the environment, nor to each other in some cases. To the degree that the body cannot immediately realign these rhythms, it is jet lagged.\nThe speed at which the body adjusts to a new rhythm depends on the individual as well as the direction of travel; some people may require several days to adjust to a new time zone, while others experience little disruption.\nCrossing the International Date Line does not in itself contribute to jet lag, as the guide for calculating jet lag is the number of time zones crossed, with a maximum possible time difference of plus or minus 12 hours. If the absolute time difference between two locations is greater than 12 hours, one must subtract 24 from or add 24 to that number. For example, the time zone UTC+14 will be at the same time of day as UTC\u221210, though the former is one day \"ahead\" of the latter.\nJet lag is linked only to the distance travelled along the east\u2013west axis. A ten-hour flight between Europe and southern Africa does not cause jet lag, as the direction of travel is primarily north\u2013south. A four-hour flight between Miami, Florida, and Phoenix, Arizona, in the United States may result in jet lag, as the direction of travel is primarily east\u2013west.\nRisk factors.\nJet lag has a stronger impact when crossing more time zones over a few days. If someone has had jet lag before, then they are likely to have it again. Additional factors include arrival time, age, stress levels, sleep before travel, and use of caffeine or alcohol. Those over the age of 60 are more sensitive to circadian rhythm changes. The chances of jet lag increase with less sleep before a flight and higher stress levels.\nAdditionally, insufficient sleep before a flight can exacerbate jet lag symptoms. A well-rested state prior to travel helps the body adapt more efficiently to new time zones. \nHigh stress levels can also disrupt the body's natural rhythms, making it more difficult to adjust to a new time zone. Stress-induced hormonal changes may interfere with sleep quality and circadian alignment. \nPersonal factors such as chronotype (morningness or eveningness preference), genetic predispositions, and overall health can affect how one experiences jet lag. For instance, individuals with a natural tendency to stay up late may find it easier to adjust to westward travel.\nDouble desynchronisation.\nDouble desynchronisation is the misalignment between: The body's internal clocks and the external environment (e.g., local time at your travel destination) and the body's central and peripheral circadian clocks (i.e., misalignment within different parts of your own body). \nThere are two separate processes related to biological timing: circadian oscillators and homeostasis. The master clock of the circadian system is located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) in the hypothalamus of the brain. There are also peripheral oscillators in other tissues and organs, each having their own oscillatory rates that could be synchronized to the SCN oscillatory rate. The SCN's role is to send signals to the peripheral oscillators, which synchronise them for physiological functions. The SCN responds to light information sent from the retina and entrains its circadian rhythm to the external environment. It is hypothesised that peripheral oscillators respond to internal signals such as hormones, food intake, and \"nervous stimuli\" and may take longer time to synchronize to local time.\nThe implication of independent internal clocks may explain some of the symptoms of jet lag. People who travel across several time zones can, within a few days, adapt their master clock SCN with light from the environment earlier. However, their skeletal muscles, liver, lungs, and other organs may adapt at different rates (peripheral circadian clocks may lag behind). This internal biological de-synchronisation is exacerbated as the body is not in sync with the environment\u00a0\u2013 a \"double desynchronisation\", which has implications for health and mood.\nEntrainment to a local time.\nEntrainment to a local time zone refers to the synchronization of an individual's internal circadian rhythms to the external environment's 24-hour cycle, particularly in relation to light-dark cues (zeitgebers). This process is critical for overcoming jet lag, which occurs when a person's endogenous circadian timing becomes misaligned with the new local time following transmeridian travel.\nCircadian rhythms in humans are generated by the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) of the hypothalamus and are typically slightly longer than 24 hours, requiring daily resetting by external cues to maintain alignment with the environment. Light is the most powerful zeitgeber, and its timing, intensity, and spectral composition are key determinants of circadian phase adjustments.\nThe effect of light on circadian rhythms is described by the Phase Response Curve (PRC), which illustrates how light exposure at different subjective times produces phase advances or delays. A phase-advance happens when your internal clock shifts to an earlier time\u2014you go to sleep and wake up earlier than usual. A phase-delay happens when your internal clock shifts to a later time\u2014you go to sleep and wake up later than usual. Light exposure in the early biological morning tends to advance the circadian phase, whereas exposure in the late biological evening delays it.\nWhen individuals arrive in a new time zone, their internal biological night may still coincide with local daytime hours. Adaptation thus requires a shift in circadian phase to realign internal rhythms with the external light-dark cycle. For example, a study using bright light exposure (1,200\u20133,000 lux) demonstrated that strategically timed light can induce phase shifts of several hours, facilitating adaptation to new time zones.\nEntrainment is also influenced by additional zeitgebers such as meal timing, scheduled activity, and chronopharmacological agents like melatonin. Melatonin, a hormone secreted during biological night, exhibits a PRC that is roughly opposite to that of light: it advances circadian rhythms when taken in the afternoon or early evening and delays them when taken in the morning. This complementarity allows for the combined use of light and melatonin to optimize re-entrainment.\nHowever, individual variability plays a substantial role. Factors such as age, diurnal preference (chronotype), and genetic polymorphisms (e.g., in the PER gene) can affect how quickly one adapts, also in relation to the direction of travel (east-west or west-east). Older adults tend to have an earlier phase angle of entrainment and may show a leftward shift in their PRC, meaning their window for phase shifting occurs earlier relative to clock time than in younger adults.\nHealth effects of chronic jet lag.\nMental health implications.\nJet lag may affect the mental health of vulnerable individuals. When travelling across time zones, there is a \"phase-shift of body temperature, rapid-eye-movement sleep, melatonin production, and other circadian rhythms\". A 2002 study found that relapse of bipolar and psychotic disorders occurred more frequently when seven or more time zones had been crossed in the past week than when three or fewer had been crossed. Although significant circadian rhythm disruption has been documented as affecting individuals with bipolar disorder, an Australian team studied suicide statistics from 1971 to 2001 to determine whether the one-hour shifts involved in daylight saving time had an effect. They found increased incidence of male suicide after the commencement of daylight saving time but not after returning to standard time.\nObesity and type 2 diabetes.\nConstant disruption caused by chronic jet lag can cause complications to the daily metabolic cycle of an individual due to a hinted link between circadian rhythm and metabolic/epigenetic mechanisms. This is due to the process of food intake acting as a Zeitgeber towards the circadian mechanisms and their control on the metabolic systems. The multiple disruptions of the circadian clock due to chronic jet lag alter eating habits causing irregular eating times, over/under eating, and metabolic inconsistencies that lead to a higher risk of type 2 diabetes and obesity.\nCancer.\nResearch on animal models have shown that cancer growth has a potential link to chronic jet lag's effect on the circadian rhythm due to constant disruption. This is due to the nature of jet lag's ability to disturb molecular structures clocks and that include cells within the body. The circadian rhythm regulates the pace of cell processes such as decay and growth, and a disturbance towards the circadian rhythm is theorized to insight tumor growth. This is even of more concerned for scientist when looking at immune cells which are told to be heavily dependent on its molecular clock and now risk tumor growth and decrease functionality due to chronic jet lag.\nChronic inflammation.\nRecent studies have demonstrated the delicate balance that circadian rhythm provides towards gut-microbiome. Chronic circadian rhythm disruption introduces a variety of disturbances within the gut that can potentially cause a multitude of issues such as inflammation. This is due to, what researchers call, a misalignment of regulatory clocks that control metabolic processes that spike insulin levels when there's an irregular timing of food intake causing inflammation. Researchers have longed believed in the correlation of proper circadian balance, the disruption of the balance and its side effects, and metabolism though more research is needed to understand underlying mechanisms.\nManagement.\nLight exposure.\nLight is the most powerful external cue\u2013known as Zeitgeber\u2013for synchronizing a person's circadian rhythm to a new time zone. Timed light exposure can significantly affect a traveler's ability to adapt to a new time zone and reduce jet lag severity. The effectiveness of light as a chronotherapeutic intervention depends on several factors including direction of travel, chronotype, and the traveler's planned activities at the final destination.\nExposure to morning light can help advance an individual's circadian phase, making it easier for them to fall asleep earlier. This is useful for eastward travel since an individual will gain time in their final destination. Similarly, exposure to evening light can delay the phase, which is beneficial for westward travel since time will be lost at the final destination.\nStrict adherence to timing is required for timed light exposure since it can be effective to help people match their circadian rhythms with the expected cycle at their destination. Light therapy is a popular method used by professional athletes to reduce jet lag. Timed correctly, the light may contribute to an advance or delay of the circadian phase to match the destination. To aid in timing, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends mobile apps which use personalized algorithms to suggest for the correct timing of light exposure and avoidance, when to use caffeine, and when to sleep.\nMelatonin administration.\nMelatonin, a hormone secreted by the pineal gland in response to darkness, serves as a biological signal of night. In contrast to light, which suppresses melatonin and delays sleep onset, exogenous melatonin can phase-shift the circadian clock by mimicking nighttime, making it an effective chronopharmacological agent for realigning circadian rhythms. Melatonin receptors are situated on the SCN, which is the anatomical site of the circadian clock. The results of a few field studies of melatonin administration, monitoring circadian phase, have provided evidence for a correlation between the reduction of jet lag symptoms and the accelerated realignment of the circadian clock. When administered exogenously, via melatonin pills or melatonin gummies, it can advance or delay the circadian phase and help travelers shift faster and sleep better as they are transitioning between time zones.\nThe efficacy of melatonin depends on the dosage, timing, and individual response to it. If taken early in the evening at the final destination, especially when traveling east, melatonin can help promote sleep and shift the circadian rhythm earlier. Conversely, taking it in the morning instead may delay rhythm and slow adaptation to the new eastern time zone. In addition to the concern around appropriate timing of melatonin use, the legality of the substance in certain countries is also a variable to consider. For athletes, anti-doping agencies may prohibit or limit its use, preventing them from adapting to new time zones when traveling for games and performing optimally. \nShort duration trips.\nIn the case of short duration trips, jet lag may be minimized by maintaining a sleep-wake schedule based on the originating time zone after arriving at the destination, but this strategy is often impractical in regard to desired social activities or work obligations. Alternatively, shifting one's sleep schedule before departure by 1\u20132 hours to match the destination time zone may also shorten the duration of jet lag. Especially when combined with targeted light exposure and melatonin, symptoms can be further reduced through a combination of artificial exposure to light and rescheduling, as these have been shown to augment phase-shifting.\nPharmaceutical treatment.\nThe short-term use of hypnotic medication has shown efficacy in reducing insomnia related to jet lag. In a study, zolpidem improved sleep quality and reduced awakenings for people travelling across five to nine time zones. The potential adverse effects of hypnotic agents, like amnesia and confusion, have led some doctors to advise patients to test such medications prior to using them for treating jet lag. Several cases using triazolam to promote sleep during a flight reported dramatic global amnesia.\nCordycepin, a derivative of a natural fungal compound, has been shown to be a potential modulator of the circadian clock. Administration of synthetic cordycepin in mice accelerated circadian re-entrainment following an abrupt shift in the light-dark cycle. The compound was found to interact with the RUVBL2 protein, which influences gene transcription associated with circadian timing. These findings suggest a possible future application of circadian-targeting compounds as pharmacological therapeutics for jet lag and other circadian sleep-wake disorders.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56553", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56553", "title": "Jetlag", "text": ""}
{"id": "56555", "revid": "963275555", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56555", "title": "Cardiovascular", "text": ""}
{"id": "56556", "revid": "35246606", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56556", "title": "Ketone bodies", "text": "Chemicals produced during fat metabolism\nKetone bodies are water-soluble molecules or compounds that contain the ketone groups produced from fatty acids by the liver (ketogenesis). Ketone bodies are readily transported into tissues outside the liver, where they are converted into acetyl-CoA (acetyl-Coenzyme A)\u00a0\u2013 which then enters the citric acid cycle (Krebs cycle) and is oxidized for energy. These liver-derived ketone groups include acetoacetic acid (acetoacetate), beta-hydroxybutyrate, and acetone, a spontaneous breakdown product of acetoacetate (see graphic).\nKetone bodies are produced by the liver during periods of caloric restriction of various scenarios: low food intake (fasting), carbohydrate restrictive diets, starvation, prolonged intense exercise, alcoholism, or during untreated (or inadequately treated) type 1 diabetes mellitus. Ketone bodies are produced in liver cells by the breakdown of fatty acids. They are released into the blood \"after\" glycogen stores in the liver have been depleted. (Glycogen stores typically are depleted within the first 24 hours of fasting.) Ketone bodies are also produced in glial cells under periods of food restriction to sustain memory formation.\nWhen two acetyl-CoA molecules lose their -CoAs (or coenzyme A groups), they can form a (covalent) dimer called acetoacetate. \u03b2-hydroxybutyrate is a reduced form of acetoacetate, in which the ketone group is converted into an alcohol (or hydroxyl) group (see illustration on the right). Both are 4-carbon molecules that can readily be converted back into acetyl-CoA by most tissues of the body, with the notable exception of the liver. Acetone is the decarboxylated form of acetoacetate which cannot be converted back into acetyl-CoA except via detoxification in the liver where it is converted into lactic acid, which can, in turn, be oxidized into pyruvic acid, and only then into acetyl-CoA.\nKetone bodies have a characteristic smell, which can easily be detected in the breath of persons in ketosis and ketoacidosis. It is often described as fruity or like nail polish remover (which usually contains acetone or ethyl acetate).\nApart from the three endogenous ketone bodies, other ketone bodies like \u03b2-ketopentanoate and \u03b2-hydroxypentanoate may be created as a result of the metabolism of synthetic triglycerides, such as triheptanoin.\nProduction.\nFats stored in adipose tissue are released from the fat cells into the blood as free fatty acids and glycerol when insulin levels are low and glucagon and epinephrine levels in the blood are high. This occurs between meals, during fasting, starvation and strenuous exercise, when blood glucose levels are likely to fall. Fatty acids are very high energy fuels and are taken up by all metabolizing cells that have mitochondria. This is because fatty acids can only be metabolized in the mitochondria. Red blood cells do not contain mitochondria and are therefore entirely dependent on anaerobic glycolysis for their energy requirements. In all other tissues, the fatty acids that enter the metabolizing cells are combined with coenzyme A to form acyl-CoA chains. These are transferred into the mitochondria of the cells, where they are broken down into acetyl-CoA units by a sequence of reactions known as \u03b2-oxidation.\nThe acetyl-CoA produced by \u03b2-oxidation enters the citric acid cycle in the mitochondrion by combining with oxaloacetate to form citrate. This results in the complete combustion of the acetyl group of acetyl-CoA (see diagram above, on the right) to CO2 and water. The energy released in this process is captured in the form of 1 GTP and 9 ATP molecules per acetyl group (or acetic acid molecule) oxidized. This is the fate of acetyl-CoA wherever \u03b2-oxidation of fatty acids occurs, except under certain circumstances in the liver. In the liver oxaloacetate is wholly or partially diverted into the gluconeogenic pathway during fasting, starvation, a low carbohydrate diet, prolonged strenuous exercise, and in uncontrolled type 1 diabetes mellitus. Under these circumstances oxaloacetate is hydrogenated to malate which is then removed from the mitochondrion to be converted into glucose in the cytoplasm of the liver cells, from where the glucose is released into the blood. In the liver, therefore, oxaloacetate is unavailable for condensation with acetyl-CoA when significant gluconeogenesis has been stimulated by low (or absent) insulin and high glucagon concentrations in the blood. Under these circumstances, acetyl-CoA is diverted to the formation of acetoacetate and beta-hydroxybutyrate. Acetoacetate, beta-hydroxybutyrate, and their spontaneous breakdown product, acetone, are known as ketone bodies. The ketone bodies are released by the liver into the blood. All cells with mitochondria can take ketone bodies up from the blood and reconvert them into acetyl-CoA, which can then be used as fuel in their citric acid cycles, as no other tissue can divert its oxaloacetate into the gluconeogenic pathway in the way that the liver does this. Unlike free fatty acids, ketone bodies can cross the blood\u2013brain barrier and are therefore available as fuel for the cells of the central nervous system, acting as a substitute for glucose, on which these cells normally survive. The occurrence of high levels of ketone bodies in the blood during starvation, a low carbohydrate diet and prolonged heavy exercise can lead to ketosis, and in its extreme form in out-of-control type 1 diabetes mellitus, as ketoacidosis.\nAcetoacetate has a highly characteristic smell, for the people who can detect this smell, which occurs in the breath and urine during ketosis. On the other hand, most people can smell acetone, whose \"sweet &amp; fruity\" odor also characterizes the breath of persons in ketosis or, especially, ketoacidosis.\nFuel utilization across different organs.\nKetone bodies can be used as fuel in the heart, brain and muscle, but not the liver. They yield 2 guanosine triphosphate (GTP) and 22 adenosine triphosphate (ATP) molecules per acetoacetate molecule when oxidized in the mitochondria. Ketone bodies are transported from the liver to other tissues, where acetoacetate and \u03b2-hydroxybutyrate can be reconverted to acetyl-CoA to produce reducing equivalents (NADH and FADH2), via the citric acid cycle. Though it is the source of ketone bodies, the liver cannot use them for energy because it lacks the enzyme thiophorase (\u03b2-ketoacyl-CoA transferase). Acetone is taken up by the liver in low concentrations and undergoes detoxification through the methylglyoxal pathway which ends with lactate. Acetone in high concentrations, as can occur with prolonged fasting or a ketogenic diet, is absorbed by cells outside the liver and metabolized through a different pathway via propylene glycol. Though the pathway follows a different series of steps requiring ATP, propylene glycol can eventually be turned into pyruvate.\nHeart.\nUnder normal physiologic conditions fatty acids provide the majority (60-90%) of metabolic energy production in the heart. However, under ketotic conditions, the heart will burn ketone bodies in preference to fatty acids.\nBrain.\nFor several decades the liver has been considered as the main supplier of ketone bodies to fuel brain energy metabolism. However, recent evidence has demonstrated that glial cells can fuel neurons with locally synthesized ketone bodies to sustain memory formation upon food restriction.\nThe brain gets a portion of its fuel requirements from ketone bodies when glucose is less available than normal. In the event of low glucose concentration in the blood, most other tissues have alternative fuel sources besides ketone bodies and glucose (such as fatty acids), but studies have indicated that the brain has an obligatory requirement for some glucose. After strict fasting for 3 days, the brain gets 25% of its energy from ketone bodies. After about 24 days, ketone bodies become the major fuel of the brain, making up to two-thirds of brain fuel consumption. Many studies suggest that human brain cells can survive with little or no glucose, but proving the point is ethically questionable. During the initial stages of ketosis, the brain does not burn ketones, since they are an important substrate for lipid synthesis in the brain. Furthermore, ketones produced from omega-3 fatty acids may reduce cognitive deterioration in old age.\nKetogenesis helped fuel the enlargement of the human brain during its evolution. It was previously proposed that ketogenesis is key to the evolution and viability of bigger brains in general. However, the loss of HMGCS2 (and consequently this ability) in three large-brained mammalian lineages (cetaceans, elephants\u2013mastodons, Old World fruit bats) shows otherwise. Out of the three lineages, only fruit bats have the expected sensitivity to starvation; the other two have found alternative ways to fuel the body during starvation.\nKetosis and ketoacidosis.\nIn normal individuals, there is a constant production of ketone bodies by the liver and their utilization by extrahepatic tissues. The concentration of ketone bodies in blood is maintained around 1 mg/dL. Their excretion in urine is very low and undetectable by routine urine tests (Rothera's test).\nWhen the rate of synthesis of ketone bodies exceeds the rate of utilization, their concentration in blood increases; this is known as \"ketonemia\". This is followed by \"ketonuria\" \u2013 excretion of ketone bodies in urine. The overall picture of ketonemia and ketonuria is commonly referred to as ketosis. The smell of acetoacetate and/or acetone in breath is a common feature in ketosis.\nWhen a type 1 diabetic suffers acute biological stress (infection, heart attack, or physical trauma) or fails to administer enough insulin, they may enter the pathological state of diabetic ketoacidosis. Under these circumstances, the low or absent insulin levels in the blood, combined with the inappropriately high glucagon concentrations, induce the liver to produce glucose at an inappropriately increased rate, causing acetyl-CoA resulting from the beta-oxidation of fatty acids, to be converted into ketone bodies. The resulting very high levels of ketone bodies lower the pH of the blood plasma, which reflexively triggers the kidneys to excrete urine with very high acid levels. The high levels of glucose and ketones in the blood also spill passively into the urine (due to the inability of the renal tubules to reabsorb glucose and ketones from the tubular fluid, being overwhelmed by the high volumes of these substances being filtered into the tubular fluid). The resulting osmotic diuresis of glucose causes the removal of water and electrolytes from the blood resulting in potentially fatal dehydration.\nIndividuals who follow a low-carbohydrate diet will also develop ketosis. This induced ketosis is sometimes called nutritional ketosis, but the level of ketone body concentrations are on the order of 0.5\u20135 mM whereas the pathological ketoacidosis is 15\u201325 mM.\nThe process of ketosis has been studied for its effects in improving the cognitive symptoms of neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer's disease. Clinical trials have also looked to ketosis in children for Angelman syndrome.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56557", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56557", "title": "Blood glucose monitoring", "text": "Use of a glucose monitor for testing the concentration of glucose in the blood\nBlood glucose monitoring is the use of a glucose meter for testing the concentration of glucose in the blood (glycemia). Particularly important in diabetes management, a blood glucose test is typically performed by piercing the skin (typically, via fingerstick) to draw blood, then applying the blood to a chemically active disposable 'test-strip'. The other main option is continuous glucose monitoring (CGM). Different manufacturers use different technology, but most systems measure an electrical characteristic and use this to determine the glucose level in the blood. Skin-prick methods measure capillary blood glucose (i.e., the level found in capillary blood), whereas CGM correlates interstitial fluid glucose level to blood glucose level. Measurements may occur after fasting or at random nonfasting intervals (random glucose tests), each of which informs diagnosis or monitoring in different ways.\nHealthcare professionals advise patients with diabetes mellitus on the appropriate monitoring regimen for their condition. Most people with type 2 diabetes test at least once per day. The Mayo Clinic generally recommends that diabetics who use insulin (all type 1 diabetics and many type 2 diabetics) test their blood sugar more often (4\u20138 times per day for type 1 diabetics, 2 or more times per day for type 2 diabetics), both to assess the effectiveness of their prior insulin dose and to help determine their next insulin dose.\nPurpose.\nBlood glucose monitoring reveals individual patterns of blood glucose changes, and helps in the planning of meals, activities, and at what time of day to take medications.\nAlso, testing allows for a quick response to high blood sugar (hyperglycemia) or low blood sugar (hypoglycemia). This might include diet adjustments, exercise, and insulin (as instructed by the health care provider).\nBlood glucose meters.\nA blood glucose meter is an electronic device for measuring the blood glucose level. A relatively small drop of blood is placed on a disposable test strip which interfaces with a digital meter. Within several seconds, the level of blood glucose will be shown on the digital display. Needing only a small drop of blood for the meter means that the time and effort required for testing are reduced and the compliance of diabetic people to their testing regimens is improved significantly. Blood glucose meters provide results in various units such as eAG (mg/dL) and eAG (mmol/L), and may also estimate A1C levels. These measurements can aid in classifying blood glucose levels as normal, prediabetic, or diabetic, facilitating effective diabetes management for users. While some models offer interpretative features that indicate the health status based on these results, not all meters provide this functionality, focusing instead on providing raw glucose measurements. Users of blood glucose meters without interpretative features can utilize online calculators to determine their blood glucose status based on measured values. The cost of using blood glucose meters is believed to be a cost-benefit relative to the avoided medical costs of the complications of diabetes.\nRecent advances include:\nContinuous glucose monitoring.\nA continuous glucose monitor determines glucose levels on a continuous basis (every few minutes). A typical system consists of:\nContinuous glucose monitors measure the concentration of glucose in a sample of interstitial fluid. Shortcomings of CGM systems due to this fact are:\nPatients, therefore, require traditional fingerstick measurements for calibration (typically twice per day) and are often advised to use fingerstick measurements to confirm hypo- or hyperglycemia before taking corrective action.\nThe lag time mentioned above has been reported to be about 5 minutes. Anecdotally, some users of the various systems report lag times of up to 10\u201315 minutes. This lag time is insignificant when blood sugar levels are relatively consistent. However, blood sugar levels, when changing rapidly, may read in the normal range on a CGM system while in reality the patient is already experiencing symptoms of an out-of-range blood glucose value and may require treatment. Patients using CGM are therefore advised to consider both the absolute value of the blood glucose level given by the system as well as any trend in the blood glucose levels. For example, a patient using CGM with a blood glucose of 100\u00a0mg/dl on their CGM system might take no action if their blood glucose has been consistent for several readings, while a patient with the same blood glucose level but whose blood glucose has been dropping steeply in a short period of time might be advised to perform a fingerstick test to check for hypoglycemia.\nContinuous monitoring allows examination of how the blood glucose level reacts to insulin, exercise, food, and other factors. The additional data can be useful for setting correct insulin dosing ratios for food intake and correction of hyperglycemia. Monitoring during periods when blood glucose levels are not typically checked (e.g. overnight) can help to identify problems in insulin dosing (such as basal levels for insulin pump users or long-acting insulin levels for patients taking injections). Monitors may also be equipped with alarms to alert patients of hyperglycemia or hypoglycemia so that a patient can take corrective action(s) (after fingerstick testing, if necessary) even in cases where they do not feel symptoms of either condition. While the technology has its limitations, studies have demonstrated that patients with continuous sensors experience a smaller number of hyperglycemic and hypoglycemic events, a reduction in their glycated hemoglobin levels and a decrease in glycemic variability. Compared to intermittent testing, it is likely to help reduce hypertensive complications during pregnancy. In a recent systematic review with meta-analysis about glycaemia monitoring in critical patients who are haemodynamically unstable and require intensive monitoring of glycaemia it concluded that should be undertaken using arterial blood samples and POC blood gas analysers, as this is more reliable and is not affected by the variability of different confusion factors. Determining glycaemia in capillary blood using glucometry may be suitable in stable patients or when close monitoring of glycaemia is not required.\nContinuous blood glucose monitoring is not automatically covered by health insurance in the United States in the same way that most other diabetic supplies are covered (e.g. standard glucose testing supplies, insulin, and insulin pumps). However, an increasing number of insurance companies do cover continuous glucose monitoring supplies (both the receiver and disposable sensors) on a case-by-case basis if the patient and doctor show a specific need. The lack of insurance coverage is exacerbated by the fact that disposable sensors must be frequently replaced. Some sensors have been U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved for 7- and 3-day use, (although some patients wear sensors for longer than the recommended period) and the receiving meters likewise have finite lifetimes (less than 2 years and as little as 6 months). This is one factor in the slow uptake in the use of sensors that have been marketed in the United States.\nThe principles, history and recent developments of operation of electrochemical glucose biosensors are discussed in a chemical review by Joseph Wang.\nGlucose sensing bio-implants.\nInvestigations on the use of test strips have shown that the required self-injury acts as a psychological barrier restraining the patients from sufficient glucose control. As a result, secondary diseases are caused by excessive glucose levels. A significant improvement of diabetes therapy might be achieved with an implantable sensor that would continuously monitor blood sugar levels within the body and transmit the measured data outside. The burden of regular blood testing would be taken from the patient, who would instead follow the course of their glucose levels on an intelligent device like a laptop or a smartphone.\nGlucose concentrations do not necessarily have to be measured in blood vessels, but may also be determined in the interstitial fluid, where the same levels prevail \u2013 with a time lag of a few minutes \u2013 due to its connection with the capillary system. However, the enzymatic glucose detection scheme used in single-use test strips is not directly suitable for implants. One main problem is caused by the varying supply of oxygen, by which glucose is converted to glucono lactone and H2O2 by glucose oxidase. Since the implantation of a sensor into the body is accompanied by growth of encapsulation tissue, the diffusion of oxygen to the reaction zone is continuously diminished. This decreasing oxygen availability causes the sensor reading to drift, requiring frequent re-calibration using finger-sticks and test strips.\nOne approach to achieving long-term glucose sensing is to measure and compensate for the changing local oxygen concentration. Other approaches replace the troublesome glucose oxidase reaction with a reversible sensing reaction, known as an affinity assay. This scheme was originally put forward by Schultz &amp; Sims in 1978. A number of different affinity assays have been investigated, with fluorescent assays proving most common. MEMS technology has recently allowed for smaller and more convenient alternatives to fluorescent detection, via measurement of viscosity. Investigation of affinity-based sensors has shown that encapsulation by body tissue does not cause a drift of the sensor signal, but only a time lag of the signal compared to the direct measurement in blood. A new implantable continuous glucose monitor based on affinity principles and fluorescence detection is the Eversense device manufactured by Senseonics Inc. This device has been approved by the FDA for 90 day implantation.\nNon-invasive technologies.\nSome new technologies to monitor blood glucose levels will not require access to blood to read the glucose level. Non-invasive technologies include microwave/RF sensing, near IR detection, ultrasound&lt;ref name=\"Diabetes U/S SMBG\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; and dielectric spectroscopy. These may free the person with diabetes from finger sticks to supply the drop of blood for blood glucose analysis.\nMost of the non-invasive methods under development are continuous glucose monitoring methods and offer the advantage of providing additional information to the subject between the conventional finger stick, blood glucose measurements, and overtime periods where no finger stick measurements are available (i.e. while the subject is sleeping).\nEffectiveness.\nFor patients with diabetes mellitus type 2, the importance of monitoring and the optimal frequency of monitoring are not clear. A 2011 study found no evidence that blood glucose monitoring leads to better patient outcomes in actual practice. Randomized controlled trials found that self-monitoring of blood glucose did not improve glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) among \"reasonably well controlled non-insulin treated patients with type 2 diabetes\" or lead to significant changes in quality of life. However a recent meta-analysis of 47 randomized controlled trials encompassing 7677 patients showed that self-care management intervention improves glycemic control in diabetics, with an estimated 0.36% (95% CI, 0.21\u20130.51) reduction in their glycated hemoglobin values. Furthermore, a recent study showed that patients described as being \"Uncontrolled Diabetics\" (defined in this study by HbA1C levels &gt;8%) showed a statistically significant decrease in the HbA1C levels after a 90-day period of seven-point self-monitoring of blood glucose (SMBG) with a relative risk reduction (RRR) of 0.18% (95% CI, 0.86\u20132.64%, p&lt;.001). Regardless of lab values or other numerical parameters, the purpose of the clinician is to improve quality of life and patient outcomes in diabetic patients. A recent study included 12 randomized controlled trials and evaluated outcomes in 3259 patients. The authors concluded through a qualitative analysis that SMBG on quality of life showed no effect on patient satisfaction or the patients' health-related quality of life. Furthermore, the same study identified that patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus diagnosed greater than one year prior to initiation of SMBG, who were not on insulin, experienced a statistically significant reduction in their HbA1C of 0.3% (95% CI, -0.4 \u2013 -0.1) at six months follow up, but a statistically insignificant reduction of 0.1% (95% CI, -0.3 \u2013 0.04) at twelve months follow up. Conversely, newly diagnosed patients experienced a statistically significant reduction of 0.5% (95% CI, -0.9 \u2013 -0.1) at 12 months follow up. A recent study found that a treatment strategy of intensively lowering blood sugar levels (below 6%) in patients with additional cardiovascular disease risk factors poses more harm than benefit. For type 2 diabetics who are not on insulin, exercise and diet are the best tools. Blood glucose monitoring is, in that case, simply a tool to evaluate the success of diet and exercise. Insulin-dependent type 2 diabetics do not need to monitor their blood sugar as frequently as type 1 diabetics. In a recent systematic review with meta-analysis, about glycaemia monitoring in critical patients who are haemodynamically unstable and require intensive monitoring of glycaemia it concluded that should be undertaken using arterial blood samples and POC blood gas analysers, as this is more reliable and is not affected by the variability of different confusion factors. Determining glycaemia in capillary blood using glucometry may be suitable in stable patients or when close monitoring of glycaemia is not required.\nRecommendations.\nThe National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE), UK released updated diabetes recommendations on 30 May 2008, which recommend that self-monitoring of plasma glucose levels for people with newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes must be integrated into a structured self-management education process. The recommendations have been updated in August 2015 for children and young adults with type 1 diabetes.\nThe http://, which produces guidelines for diabetes care and clinical practice recommendations, recently updated its \"Standards of Medical Care\" in January 2019 to acknowledge that routine self-monitoring of blood glucose in people who are not using insulin is of limited additional clinical benefit. A randomized controlled trial evaluated once-daily self-monitoring that included tailored patient messaging and did not show that this strategy led to significant changes in A1C after a year.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56558", "revid": "69412", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56558", "title": "Blood pressure", "text": "Pressure exerted by circulating blood upon the walls of arteries\nBlood pressure (BP) is the pressure of circulating blood against the walls of blood vessels. Most of this pressure results from the heart pumping blood through the circulatory system. When used without qualification, the term \"blood pressure\" refers to the pressure in a brachial artery, where it is most commonly measured. Blood pressure is usually expressed in terms of the systolic pressure (maximum pressure during one heartbeat) over diastolic pressure (minimum pressure between two heartbeats) in the cardiac cycle. It is measured in millimetres of mercury (mmHg) above the surrounding atmospheric pressure, or in kilopascals (kPa). The difference between the systolic and diastolic pressures is known as pulse pressure, while the average pressure during a cardiac cycle is known as mean arterial pressure.\nBlood pressure is one of the vital signs\u2014together with respiratory rate, heart rate, oxygen saturation, and body temperature\u2014that healthcare professionals use in evaluating a patient's health. Normal resting blood pressure in an adult is approximately systolic over diastolic, denoted as \"120/80\u00a0mmHg\". Globally, the average blood pressure, age standardized, has remained about the same since 1975 to the present, at approximately 127/79 mmHg in men and 122/77 mmHg in women, although these average data mask significantly diverging regional trends.\nTraditionally, a health-care worker measured blood pressure non-invasively by auscultation (listening) through a stethoscope for sounds in one arm's artery as the artery is squeezed, closer to the heart, by an aneroid gauge or a mercury-tube sphygmomanometer. Auscultation is still generally considered to be the gold standard of accuracy for non-invasive blood pressure readings in clinic. However, semi-automated methods have become common, largely due to concerns about potential mercury toxicity, although cost, ease of use and applicability to ambulatory blood pressure or home blood pressure measurements have also influenced this trend. Early automated alternatives to mercury-tube sphygmomanometers were often seriously inaccurate, but modern devices validated to international standards achieve an average difference between two standardized reading methods of 5\u00a0mm Hg or less, and a standard deviation of less than 8\u00a0mm Hg. Most of these semi-automated methods measure blood pressure using oscillometry (measurement by a pressure transducer in the cuff of the device of small oscillations of intra-cuff pressure accompanying heartbeat-induced changes in the volume of each pulse).\nBlood pressure is influenced by cardiac output, systemic vascular resistance, blood volume and arterial stiffness, and varies depending on person's situation, emotional state, activity and relative health or disease state. In the short term, blood pressure is regulated by baroreceptors, which act via the brain to influence the nervous and the endocrine systems.\nBlood pressure that is too low is called hypotension, pressure that is consistently too high is called hypertension, and normal pressure is called normotension. Both hypertension and hypotension have many causes and may be of sudden onset or of long duration. Long-term hypertension is a risk factor for many diseases, including stroke, heart disease, and kidney failure. Long-term hypertension is more common than long-term hypotension.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nClassification, normal and abnormal values.\nSystemic arterial pressure.\nBlood pressure measurements can be influenced by circumstances of measurement. Guidelines use different thresholds for office (also known as clinic), home (when the person measures their own blood pressure at home), and ambulatory blood pressure (using an automated device over a 24-hour period).\nThe risk of cardiovascular disease increases progressively above 90\u00a0mmHg, especially among women.\nObservational studies demonstrate that people who maintain arterial pressures at the low end of these pressure ranges have much better long-term cardiovascular health. There is an ongoing medical debate over what is the optimal level of blood pressure to target when using drugs to lower blood pressure with hypertension, particularly in older people.\nBlood pressure fluctuates from minute to minute and normally shows a circadian rhythm over a 24-hour period, with highest readings in the early morning and evenings and lowest readings at night. Loss of the normal fall in blood pressure at night is associated with a greater future risk of cardiovascular disease and there is evidence that night-time blood pressure is a stronger predictor of cardiovascular events than day-time blood pressure. Blood pressure varies over longer time periods (months to years) and this variability predicts adverse outcomes. Blood pressure also changes in response to temperature, noise, emotional stress, consumption of food or liquid, dietary factors, physical activity, changes in posture (such as standing-up), drugs, and disease. The variability in blood pressure and the better predictive value of ambulatory blood pressure measurements has led some authorities, such as the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) in the UK, to advocate for the use of ambulatory blood pressure as the preferred method for diagnosis of hypertension.\nVarious other factors, such as age and sex, also influence a person's blood pressure. Differences between left-arm and right-arm blood pressure measurements tend to be small. However, occasionally there is a consistent difference greater than 10\u00a0mmHg which may need further investigation, e.g. for peripheral arterial disease, obstructive arterial disease or aortic dissection.\nThere is no accepted diagnostic standard for hypotension, although pressures less than 90/60 are commonly regarded as hypotensive. In practice blood pressure is considered too low only if symptoms are present.\nSystemic arterial pressure and age.\nFetal blood pressure.\nIn pregnancy, it is the fetal heart and not the mother's heart that builds up the fetal blood pressure to drive blood through the fetal circulation. The blood pressure in the fetal aorta is approximately 30\u00a0mmHg at 20 weeks of gestation, and increases to approximately 45\u00a0mmHg at 40 weeks of gestation.\nThe average blood pressure for full-term infants:\nChildhood.\nIn children the normal ranges for blood pressure are lower than for adults and depend on height. Reference blood pressure values have been developed for children in different countries, based on the distribution of blood pressure in children of these countries.\nAging adults.\nIn adults in most societies, systolic blood pressure tends to rise from early adulthood onward, up to at least age 70; diastolic pressure tends to begin to rise at the same time but start to fall earlier in mid-life, approximately age 55. Mean blood pressure rises from early adulthood, plateauing in mid-life, while pulse pressure rises quite markedly after the age of 40. Consequently, in many older people, systolic blood pressure often exceeds the normal adult range, if the diastolic pressure is in the normal range this is termed isolated systolic hypertension. The rise in pulse pressure with age is attributed to increased stiffness of the arteries. An age-related rise in blood pressure is not considered healthy and is not observed in some isolated unacculturated communities.\nSystemic venous pressure.\nBlood pressure generally refers to the arterial pressure in the systemic circulation. However, measurement of pressures in the venous system and the pulmonary vessels plays an important role in intensive care medicine but requires invasive measurement of pressure using a catheter.\nVenous pressure is the vascular pressure in a vein or in the atria of the heart. It is much lower than arterial pressure, with common values of 5\u00a0mmHg in the right atrium and 8\u00a0mmHg in the left atrium.\nVariants of venous pressure include:\nPulmonary pressure.\nNormally, the pressure in the pulmonary artery is about 15\u00a0mmHg at rest.\nIncreased blood pressure in the capillaries of the lung causes pulmonary hypertension, leading to interstitial edema if the pressure increases to above 20\u00a0mmHg, and to pulmonary edema at pressures above 25\u00a0mmHg.\nAortic pressure.\nAortic pressure, also called central aortic blood pressure, or central blood pressure, is the blood pressure at the root of the aorta. Elevated aortic pressure has been found to be a more accurate predictor of both cardiovascular events and mortality, as well as structural changes in the heart, than has peripheral blood pressure (such as measured through the brachial artery). Traditionally it involved an invasive procedure to measure aortic pressure, but now there are non-invasive methods of measuring it indirectly without a significant margin of error.\nCertain researchers have argued for physicians to begin using aortic pressure, as opposed to peripheral blood pressure, as a guide for clinical decisions. The way antihypertensive drugs impact peripheral blood pressure can often be very different from the way they impact central aortic pressure.\nMean systemic pressure.\nIf the heart is stopped, blood pressure falls, but it does not fall to zero. The remaining pressure measured after cessation of the heart beat and redistribution of blood throughout the circulation is termed the mean systemic pressure or mean circulatory filling pressure; typically this is proximally ~7\u00a0mmHg.\nDisorders of blood pressure.\nDisorders of blood pressure control include high blood pressure, low blood pressure, and blood pressure that shows excessive or maladaptive fluctuation.\nHigh blood pressure.\nArterial hypertension can be an indicator of other problems and may have long-term adverse effects. Sometimes it can be an acute problem, such as in a hypertensive emergency when blood pressure is more than 180/120 mmHg.\nLevels of arterial pressure put mechanical stress on the arterial walls. Higher pressures increase heart workload and progression of unhealthy tissue growth (atheroma) that develops within the walls of arteries. The higher the pressure, the more stress that is present and the more atheroma tend to progress and the heart muscle tends to thicken, enlarge and become weaker over time.\nPersistent hypertension is one of the risk factors for strokes, heart attacks, heart failure, and arterial aneurysms, and is the leading cause of chronic kidney failure. Even moderate elevation of arterial pressure leads to shortened life expectancy. At severely high pressures, mean arterial pressures 50% or more above average, a person can expect to live no more than a few years unless appropriately treated. For people with high blood pressure, higher heart rate variability (HRV) is a risk factor for atrial fibrillation.\nBoth high systolic pressure and high pulse pressure (the numerical difference between systolic and diastolic pressures) are risk factors. Elevated pulse pressure has been found to be a stronger independent predictor of cardiovascular events, especially in older populations, than has systolic, diastolic, or mean arterial pressure. In some cases, it appears that a decrease in excessive diastolic pressure can actually increase risk, probably due to the increased difference between systolic and diastolic pressures (ie. widened pulse pressure). If systolic blood pressure is elevated (&gt;140\u00a0mmHg) with a normal diastolic blood pressure (&lt;90\u00a0mmHg), it is called isolated systolic hypertension and may present a health concern. According to the 2017 American Heart Association blood pressure guidelines state that a systolic blood pressure of 130\u2013139 mmHg with a diastolic pressure of 80\u201389 mmHg is \"stage one hypertension\".\nFor those with heart valve regurgitation, a change in its severity may be associated with a change in diastolic pressure. In a study of people with heart valve regurgitation that compared measurements two weeks apart for each person, there was an increased severity of aortic and mitral regurgitation when diastolic blood pressure increased, whereas when diastolic blood pressure decreased, there was a decreased severity.\nLow blood pressure.\nBlood pressure that is too low is known as hypotension. This is a medical concern if it causes signs or symptoms, such as dizziness, fainting, or in extreme cases in medical emergencies, circulatory shock. Causes of low arterial pressure include sepsis, hypovolemia, bleeding, cardiogenic shock, reflex syncope, hormonal abnormalities such as Addison's disease, and eating disorders \u2013 particularly anorexia nervosa and bulimia.\nOrthostatic hypotension.\nA large fall in blood pressure upon standing (typically a systolic/diastolic blood pressure decrease of &gt;20/10\u00a0mmHg) is termed orthostatic hypotension (postural hypotension) and represents a failure of the body to compensate for the effect of gravity on the circulation. Standing results in an increased hydrostatic pressure in the blood vessels of the lower limbs. The consequent distension of the veins below the diaphragm (venous pooling) causes ~500 ml of blood to be relocated from the chest and upper body. This results in a rapid decrease in central blood volume and a reduction of ventricular preload which in turn reduces stroke volume, and mean arterial pressure. Normally this is compensated for by multiple mechanisms, including activation of the autonomic nervous system which increases heart rate, myocardial contractility and systemic arterial vasoconstriction to preserve blood pressure and elicits venous vasoconstriction to decrease venous compliance. Decreased venous compliance also results from an intrinsic myogenic increase in venous smooth muscle tone in response to the elevated pressure in the veins of the lower body.\nOther compensatory mechanisms include the veno-arteriolar axon reflex, the 'skeletal muscle pump' and 'respiratory pump'. Together these mechanisms normally stabilize blood pressure within a minute or less. If these compensatory mechanisms fail and arterial pressure and blood flow decrease beyond a certain point, the perfusion of the brain becomes critically compromised (i.e., the blood supply is not sufficient), causing lightheadedness, dizziness, weakness or fainting. Usually this failure of compensation is due to disease, or drugs that affect the sympathetic nervous system. A similar effect is observed following the experience of excessive gravitational forces (G-loading), such as routinely experienced by aerobatic or combat pilots 'pulling Gs' where the extreme hydrostatic pressures exceed the ability of the body's compensatory mechanisms.\nVariable or fluctuating blood pressure.\nSome fluctuation or variation in blood pressure is normal. Variation in blood pressure that is significantly greater than the norm is known as labile hypertension and is associated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease brain small vessel disease, and dementia independent of the average blood pressure level. Recent evidence from clinical trials has also linked variation in blood pressure to mortality, stroke, heart failure, and cardiac changes that may give rise to heart failure. These data have prompted discussion of whether excessive variation in blood pressure should be treated, even among normotensive older adults.\nOlder individuals and those who had received blood pressure medications are more likely to exhibit larger fluctuations in pressure, and there is some evidence that different antihypertensive agents have different effects on blood pressure variability; whether these differences translate to benefits in outcome is uncertain.\nPhysiology.\nDuring each heartbeat, blood pressure varies between a maximum (systolic) and a minimum (diastolic) pressure. The blood pressure in the circulation is principally due to the pumping action of the heart. However, blood pressure is also regulated by neural regulation from the brain (see Hypertension and the brain), as well as osmotic regulation from the kidney. Differences in mean blood pressure drive the flow of blood around the circulation. The rate of mean blood flow depends on both blood pressure and the resistance to flow presented by the blood vessels. In the absence of hydrostatic effects (e.g. standing), mean blood pressure decreases as the circulating blood moves away from the heart through arteries and capillaries due to viscous losses of energy. Mean blood pressure drops over the whole circulation, although most of the fall occurs along the small arteries and arterioles. Pulsatility also diminishes in the smaller elements of the arterial circulation, although some transmitted pulsatility is observed in capillaries. Gravity affects blood pressure via hydrostatic forces (e.g., during standing), and valves in veins, breathing, and pumping from contraction of skeletal muscles also influence blood pressure, particularly in veins.\nHemodynamics.\nA simple view of the hemodynamics of systemic arterial pressure is based around mean arterial pressure (MAP) and pulse pressure. Most influences on blood pressure can be understood in terms of their effect on cardiac output, systemic vascular resistance, or arterial stiffness (the inverse of arterial compliance). Cardiac output is the product of stroke volume and heart rate. Stroke volume is influenced by 1) the end-diastolic volume or filling pressure of the ventricle acting via the Frank\u2013Starling mechanism\u2014this is influenced by blood volume; 2) cardiac contractility; and 3) afterload, the impedance to blood flow presented by the circulation. In the short-term, the greater the blood volume, the higher the cardiac output. This has been proposed as an explanation of the relationship between high dietary salt intake and increased blood pressure; however, responses to increased dietary sodium intake vary between individuals and are highly dependent on autonomic nervous system responses and the renin\u2013angiotensin system, changes in plasma osmolarity may also be important. In the longer-term the relationship between volume and blood pressure is more complex. In simple terms, systemic vascular resistance is mainly determined by the caliber of small arteries and arterioles. The resistance attributable to a blood vessel depends on its radius as described by the Hagen-Poiseuille's equation (resistance\u221d1/radius4). Hence, the smaller the radius, the higher the resistance. Other physical factors that affect resistance include: vessel length (the longer the vessel, the higher the resistance), blood viscosity (the higher the viscosity, the higher the resistance) and the number of vessels, particularly the smaller numerous, arterioles and capillaries. The presence of a severe arterial stenosis increases resistance to flow, however this increase in resistance rarely increases systemic blood pressure because its contribution to total systemic resistance is small, although it may profoundly decrease downstream flow. Substances called vasoconstrictors reduce the caliber of blood vessels, thereby increasing blood pressure. Vasodilators (such as nitroglycerin) increase the caliber of blood vessels, thereby decreasing arterial pressure. In the longer term a process termed remodeling also contributes to changing the caliber of small blood vessels and influencing resistance and reactivity to vasoactive agents. Reductions in capillary density, termed capillary rarefaction, may also contribute to increased resistance in some circumstances.\nIn practice, each individual's autonomic nervous system and other systems regulating blood pressure, notably the kidney, respond to and regulate all these factors so that, although the above issues are important, they rarely act in isolation and the actual arterial pressure response of a given individual can vary widely in the short and long term.\nPulse pressure.\nThe pulse pressure is the difference between the measured systolic and diastolic pressures,\nformula_1\nThe pulse pressure is a consequence of the pulsatile nature of the cardiac output, i.e. the heartbeat. The magnitude of the pulse pressure is usually attributed to the interaction of the stroke volume of the heart, the compliance (ability to expand) of the arterial system\u2014largely attributable to the aorta and large elastic arteries\u2014and the resistance to flow in the arterial tree.\nClinical significance of pulse pressure.\nA healthy pulse pressure is around 40 mmHg. A pulse pressure that is consistently 60 mmHg or greater is likely to be associated with disease, and a pulse pressure of 50 mmHg or more increases the risk of cardiovascular disease as well as other complications such as eye and kidney disease. Pulse pressure is considered low if it is less than 25% of the systolic. (For example, if the systolic pressure is 120 mmHg, then the pulse pressure would be considered low if it is less than 30 mmHg, since 30 is 25% of 120.) A very low pulse pressure can be a symptom of disorders such as congestive heart failure.\nElevated pulse pressure has been found to be a stronger independent predictor of cardiovascular events, especially in older populations, than has systolic, diastolic, or mean arterial pressure. This increased risk exists for both men and women and even when no other cardiovascular risk factors are present. The increased risk also exists even in cases in which diastolic pressure decreases over time while systolic remains steady.\nA meta-analysis in 2000 showed that a 10\u00a0mmHg increase in pulse pressure was associated with a 20% increased risk of cardiovascular mortality, and a 13% increase in risk for all coronary end points. The study authors also noted that, while risks of cardiovascular end points do increase with higher systolic pressures, at any given systolic blood pressure the risk of major cardiovascular end points increases, rather than decreases, with lower diastolic levels. This suggests that interventions that lower diastolic pressure without also lowering systolic pressure (and thus lowering pulse pressure) could actually be counterproductive. There are no drugs currently approved to lower pulse pressure, although some antihypertensive drugs may modestly lower pulse pressure, while in some cases a drug that lowers overall blood pressure may actually have the counterproductive side effect of raising pulse pressure.\nPulse pressure can both widen or narrow in people with sepsis depending on the degree of hemodynamic compromise. A pulse pressure of over 70 mmHg in sepsis is correlated with an increased chance of survival and a more positive response to IV fluids.\nMean arterial pressure.\nMean arterial pressure (MAP) is the average of blood pressure over a cardiac cycle and is determined by the cardiac output (CO), systemic vascular resistance (SVR), and central venous pressure (CVP):\nformula_2\nIn practice, the contribution of CVP (which is small) is generally ignored and so\nformula_3\nMAP is often estimated from measurements of the systolic pressure, formula_4 and the diastolic pressure, formula_5\u00a0 using the equation:\nformula_6\nwhere \"k\" = 0.333 although other values for \"k\" have been advocated.\nRegulation of blood pressure.\nThe endogenous, homeostatic regulation of arterial pressure is not completely understood, but the following mechanisms of regulating arterial pressure have been well-characterized:\nThese different mechanisms are not necessarily independent of each other, as indicated by the link between the RAS and aldosterone release. When blood pressure falls many physiological cascades commence in order to return the blood pressure to a more appropriate level.\nThe RAS is targeted pharmacologically by ACE inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor antagonists (also known as angiotensin receptor blockers; ARB). The aldosterone system is directly targeted by aldosterone antagonists. The fluid retention may be targeted by diuretics; the antihypertensive effect of diuretics is due to its effect on blood volume. Generally, the baroreceptor reflex is not targeted in hypertension because if blocked, individuals may experience orthostatic hypotension and fainting.\nMeasurement.\nArterial pressure is most commonly measured via a sphygmomanometer, which uses the height of a column of mercury, or an aneroid gauge, to reflect the blood pressure by auscultation. The most common automated blood pressure measurement technique is based on the oscillometric method. Fully automated oscillometric measurement has been available since 1981. This principle has recently been used to measure blood pressure with a smartphone. Measuring pressure invasively, by penetrating the arterial wall to take the measurement, is much less common and usually restricted to a hospital setting. Novel methods to measure blood pressure without penetrating the arterial wall, and without applying any pressure on patient's body are being explored, for example, cuffless measurements that uses only optical sensors.\nIn office blood pressure measurement, terminal digit preference is common. According to one study, approximately 40% of recorded measurements ended with the digit zero, whereas \"without bias, 10%\u201320% of measurements are expected to end in zero\"\nIn animals.\nBlood pressure levels in non-human mammals may vary depending on the species. Heart rate differs markedly, largely depending on the size of the animal (larger animals have slower heart rates). The giraffe has a distinctly high arterial pressure of about 190\u00a0mm Hg, enabling blood perfusion through the -long neck to the head. In other species subjected to orthostatic blood pressure, such as arboreal snakes, blood pressure is higher than in non-arboreal snakes. A heart near to the head (short heart-to-head distance) and a long tail with tight integument favor blood perfusion to the head.\nAs in humans, blood pressure in animals differs by age, sex, time of day, and environmental circumstances: measurements made in laboratories or under anesthesia may not be representative of values under free-living conditions. Rats, mice, dogs and rabbits have been used extensively to study the regulation of blood pressure.\nHypertension in cats and dogs.\nHypertension in cats and dogs is generally diagnosed if the blood pressure is greater than 150\u00a0mm Hg (systolic), although sight hounds have higher blood pressures than most other dog breeds; a systolic pressure greater than 180 mmHg is considered abnormal in these dogs.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56559", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56559", "title": "Bronze diabetes", "text": ""}
{"id": "56560", "revid": "2174319", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56560", "title": "Anaesthetic", "text": ""}
{"id": "56561", "revid": "5320876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56561", "title": "Anesthesia", "text": "State of medically-controlled temporary loss of sensation or awareness\nAnesthesia (American English) or anaesthesia (British English) is a state of controlled, temporary loss of sensation or awareness that is induced for medical or veterinary purposes. It may include some or all of analgesia (relief from or prevention of pain), paralysis (muscle relaxation), amnesia (loss of memory), and unconsciousness. An individual under the effects of anesthetic drugs is referred to as being anesthetized.\nAnesthesia enables the painless performance of procedures that would otherwise require physical restraint in a non-anesthetized individual, or would otherwise be technically unfeasible. Three broad categories of anesthesia exist:\nIn preparing for a medical or veterinary procedure, the clinician chooses one or more drugs to achieve the types and degree of anesthesia characteristics appropriate for the type of procedure and the particular patient. The types of drugs used include general anesthetics, local anesthetics, hypnotics, dissociatives, sedatives, adjuncts, neuromuscular-blocking drugs, narcotics, and analgesics.\nThe risks of complications during or after anesthesia are often difficult to separate from those of the procedure for which anesthesia is being given, but in the main they are related to three factors: the health of the individual, the complexity and stress of the procedure itself, and the anaesthetic technique. Of these factors, the individual's health has the greatest impact. Major perioperative risks can include death, heart attack, and pulmonary embolism whereas minor risks can include postoperative nausea and vomiting and hospital readmission. Some conditions, like local anesthetic toxicity, airway trauma or malignant hyperthermia, can be more directly attributed to specific anesthetic drugs and techniques.\nMedical uses.\nThe purpose of anesthesia can be distilled down to three basic goals or endpoints:\nDifferent types of anesthesia affect the endpoints differently. Regional anesthesia, for instance, affects analgesia; benzodiazepine-type sedatives (used for sedation, or \"twilight anesthesia\") favor amnesia; and general anesthetics can affect all of the endpoints. The goal of anesthesia is to achieve the endpoints required for the given surgical procedure with the least risk to the subject.\nTo achieve the goals of anesthesia, drugs act on different but interconnected parts of the nervous system. Hypnosis, for instance, is generated through actions on the nuclei in the brain and is similar to the activation of sleep. The effect is to make people less aware and less reactive to noxious stimuli.\nLoss of memory (amnesia) is created by action of drugs on multiple (but specific) regions of the brain. Memories are created as either declarative or non-declarative memories in several stages (short-term, long-term, long-lasting) the strength of which is determined by the strength of connections between neurons termed synaptic plasticity. Each anesthetic produces amnesia through unique effects on memory formation at variable doses. Inhalational anesthetics will reliably produce amnesia through general suppression of the nuclei at doses below those required for loss of consciousness. Drugs like midazolam produce amnesia through different pathways by blocking the formation of long-term memories.\nNevertheless, a person can dream under anesthesia or are conscious of the procedure despite giving no indication of this during it. An estimated 22% of people do dream under general anesthesia, and one or two cases in a thousand have some consciousness, termed \"anesthesia awareness\". It is not known whether animals dream while under general anesthesia.\nTechniques.\nAnesthesia is not a direct treatment in its own right, but rather it facilitates other treatments, diagnoses, or cures which would otherwise be painful or complicated. The best anesthetic, therefore, is the one with the lowest risk to the patient while still achieving the endpoints required to complete the procedure. The first stage in anesthesia is pre-operative risk assessment consisting of the medical history, physical examination and lab tests. Diagnosing the patient's pre-operative physical status allows the clinician to minimize anesthetic risks. A well completed medical history will arrive at the correct diagnosis 56% of the time which increases to 73% with a physical examination. Lab tests help in diagnosis but only in 3% of cases, underscoring the need for a full history and physical examination prior to anesthetics. Incorrect pre-operative assessments or preparations are the root cause of 11% of all adverse anesthetic events.\nSafe anesthesia care depends greatly on well-functioning teams of highly trained healthcare workers. The medical specialty centred around anesthesia is called anesthesiology, and doctors specialised in the field are termed anesthesiologists. Additional healthcare professionals involved in anesthesia provision have varying titles and roles depending on the jurisdiction, and include anesthetic nurses, nurse anesthetists, anesthesiologist assistants, anaesthetic technicians, anaesthesia associates, operating department practitioners and anesthesia technologists. International standards for the safe practice of anesthesia, jointly endorsed by the World Health Organization and the World Federation of Societies of Anaesthesiologists, highly recommend that anesthesia should be provided, overseen or led by anesthesiologists, with the exception of minimal sedation or superficial procedures performed under local anesthesia.\nA trained, vigilant anesthesia provider should continually care for the patient; where the provider is not an anesthesiologist, they should be locally directed and supervised by an anesthesiologist, and in countries or settings where this is not feasible, care should be led by the most qualified local individual within a regional or national anesthesiologist-led framework. The same minimum standards for patient safety apply regardless of the provider, including continuous clinical and biometric monitoring of tissue oxygenation, perfusion and blood pressure; confirmation of correct placement of airway management devices by auscultation and carbon dioxide detection; use of the WHO Surgical Safety Checklist; and safe onward transfer of the patient's care following the procedure.\nOne part of the risk assessment is based on the patient's health. The American Society of Anesthesiologists has developed a six-tier scale that stratifies the patient's pre-operative physical state. It is called the ASA physical status classification. The scale assesses risk as the patient's general health relates to an anesthetic.\nThe more detailed pre-operative medical history aims to discover genetic disorders (such as malignant hyperthermia or pseudocholinesterase deficiency), habits (tobacco, drug and alcohol use), physical attributes (such as obesity or a difficult airway) and any coexisting diseases (especially cardiac and respiratory diseases) that might impact the anesthetic. The preanesthetic physical examination helps quantify the impact of anything found in the medical history in addition to lab tests.\nAside from the generalities of the patient's health assessment, an evaluation of specific factors as they relate to the surgery also need to be considered for anesthesia. For instance, anesthesia during childbirth must consider not only the mother but the baby. Cancers and tumors that occupy the lungs or throat create special challenges to general anesthesia. After determining the health of the patient undergoing anesthesia and the endpoints that are required to complete the procedure, the type of anesthetic can be selected. Choice of surgical method and anesthetic technique aims to reduce risk of complications, shorten time needed for recovery and minimize the surgical stress response.\nGeneral anesthesia.\nAnesthesia is a combination of the endpoints (discussed above) that are reached by drugs acting on different but overlapping sites in the central nervous system. General anesthesia (as opposed to sedation or regional anesthesia) has three main goals: lack of movement (paralysis), unconsciousness, and blunting of the stress response. In the early days of anesthesia, anesthetics could reliably achieve the first two, allowing surgeons to perform necessary procedures, but many patients died because the extremes of blood pressure and pulse caused by the surgical insult were ultimately harmful. Eventually, the need for blunting of the surgical stress response was identified by Harvey Cushing, who injected local anesthetic prior to hernia repairs. This led to the development of other drugs that could blunt the response, leading to lower surgical mortality rates.\nThe most common approach to reach the endpoints of general anesthesia is through the use of inhaled general anesthetics. Each anesthetic has its own potency, which is correlated to its solubility in oil. This relationship exists because the drugs bind directly to cavities in proteins of the central nervous system, although several theories of general anesthetic action have been described. Inhalational anesthetics are thought to exact their effects on different parts of the central nervous system. For instance, the immobilizing effect of inhaled anesthetics results from an effect on the spinal cord whereas sedation, hypnosis and amnesia involve sites in the brain. The potency of an inhalational anesthetic is quantified by its minimum alveolar concentration (MAC). The MAC is the percentage dose of anesthetic that will prevent a response to painful stimulus in 50% of subjects. The higher the MAC, generally, the less potent the anesthetic.\nThe ideal anesthetic drug would provide hypnosis, amnesia, analgesia, and muscle relaxation without undesirable changes in blood pressure, pulse or breathing. In the 1930s, physicians started to augment inhaled general anesthetics with intravenous general anesthetics. The drugs used in combination offered a better risk profile to the subject under anesthesia and a quicker recovery. A combination of drugs was later shown to result in lower odds of dying in the first seven days after anesthetic. For instance, propofol (injection) might be used to start the anesthetic, fentanyl (injection) used to blunt the stress response, midazolam (injection) given to ensure amnesia and sevoflurane (inhaled) during the procedure to maintain the effects. More recently, several intravenous drugs have been developed which, if desired, allow inhaled general anesthetics to be avoided completely.\nEquipment.\nThe core instrument in an inhalational anesthetic delivery system is an anesthetic machine. It has vaporizers, ventilators, an anesthetic breathing circuit, waste gas scavenging system and pressure gauges. The purpose of the anesthetic machine is to provide anesthetic gas at a constant pressure, oxygen for breathing and to remove carbon dioxide or other waste anesthetic gases. Since inhalational anesthetics are flammable, various checklists have been developed to confirm that the machine is ready for use, that the safety features are active and the electrical hazards are removed. Intravenous anesthetic is delivered either by bolus doses or an infusion pump. There are also many smaller instruments used in airway management and monitoring the patient. The common thread to modern machinery in this field is the use of fail-safe systems that decrease the odds of catastrophic misuse of the machine.\nMonitoring.\nPatients under general anesthesia must undergo continuous physiological monitoring to ensure safety. In the US, the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) has established minimum monitoring guidelines for patients receiving general anesthesia, regional anesthesia, or sedation. These include electrocardiography (ECG), heart rate, blood pressure, inspired and expired gases, oxygen saturation of the blood (pulse oximetry), and temperature. In the UK the Association of Anaesthetists (AAGBI) have set minimum monitoring guidelines for general and regional anesthesia. For minor surgery, this generally includes monitoring of heart rate, oxygen saturation, blood pressure, and inspired and expired concentrations for oxygen, carbon dioxide, and inhalational anesthetic agents. For more invasive surgery, monitoring may also include temperature, urine output, blood pressure, central venous pressure, pulmonary artery pressure and pulmonary artery occlusion pressure, cardiac output, cerebral activity, and neuromuscular function. In addition, the operating room environment must be monitored for ambient temperature and humidity, as well as for accumulation of exhaled inhalational anesthetic agents, which might be deleterious to the health of operating room personnel.\nSedation.\nSedation (also referred to as \"dissociative anesthesia\" or \"twilight anesthesia\") creates hypnotic, sedative, anxiolytic, amnesic, anticonvulsant, and centrally produced muscle-relaxing properties. From the perspective of the person giving the sedation, the patient appears sleepy, relaxed and forgetful, allowing unpleasant procedures to be more easily completed. Sedatives such as benzodiazepines are usually given with pain relievers (such as narcotics, or local anesthetics or both) because they do not, by themselves, provide significant pain relief.\nFrom the perspective of the subject receiving a sedative, the effect is a feeling of general relaxation, amnesia (loss of memory) and time passing quickly. Many drugs can produce a sedative effect including benzodiazepines, propofol, thiopental, ketamine and inhaled general anesthetics. The advantage of sedation over a general anesthetic is that it generally does not require support of the airway or breathing (no tracheal intubation or mechanical ventilation) and can have less of an effect on the cardiovascular system which may add to a greater margin of safety in some patients.\nRegional anesthesia.\nWhen pain is blocked from a part of the body using local anesthetics, it is generally referred to as regional anesthesia. There are many types of regional anesthesia either by injecting into the tissue itself, a vein that feeds the area or around a nerve trunk that supplies sensation to the area. The latter are called nerve blocks and are divided into peripheral or central nerve blocks.\nThe following are the types of regional anesthesia:\nA 2018 Cochrane review found moderate quality evidence that regional anesthesia may reduce the frequency of persistent postoperative pain (PPP) from 3 to 18 months following thoracotomy and 3 to 12 months following caesarean. Low quality evidence was found 3 to 12 months following breast cancer surgery. This review acknowledges certain limitations that impact its applicability beyond the surgeries and regional anesthesia techniques reviewed.\nNerve blocks.\nWhen local anesthetic is injected around a larger diameter nerve that transmits sensation from an entire region it is referred to as a nerve block or regional nerve blockade. Nerve blocks are commonly used in dentistry, when the mandibular nerve is blocked for procedures on the lower teeth. With larger diameter nerves (such as the interscalene block for upper limbs or psoas compartment block for lower limbs) the nerve and position of the needle is localized with ultrasound or electrical stimulation. Evidence supports the use of ultrasound guidance alone, or in combination with peripheral nerve stimulation, as superior for improved sensory and motor block, a reduction in the need for supplementation and fewer complications. Because of the large amount of local anesthetic required to affect the nerve, the maximum dose of local anesthetic has to be considered. Nerve blocks are also used as a continuous infusion, following major surgery such as knee, hip and shoulder replacement surgery, and may be associated with lower complications. Nerve blocks are also associated with a lower risk of neurologic complications compared to the more central epidural or spinal neuraxial blocks.\nSpinal, epidural and caudal anesthesia.\nCentral neuraxial anesthesia is the injection of local anesthetic around the spinal cord to provide analgesia in the abdomen, pelvis or lower extremities. It is divided into either spinal (injection into the subarachnoid space), epidural (injection outside of the subarachnoid space into the epidural space) and caudal (injection into the cauda equina or tail end of the spinal cord). Spinal and epidural are the most commonly used forms of central neuraxial blockade.\nSpinal anesthesia is a \"one-shot\" injection that provides rapid onset and profound sensory anesthesia with lower doses of anesthetic, and is usually associated with neuromuscular blockade (loss of muscle control). Epidural anesthesia uses larger doses of anesthetic infused through an indwelling catheter which allows the anesthetic to be augmented should the effects begin to dissipate. Epidural anesthesia does not typically affect muscle control.\nBecause central neuraxial blockade causes arterial and venous vasodilation, a drop in blood pressure is common. This drop is largely dictated by the venous side of the circulatory system which holds 75% of the circulating blood volume. The physiologic effects are much greater when the block is placed above the 5th thoracic vertebra. An ineffective block is most often due to inadequate anxiolysis or sedation rather than a failure of the block itself.\nAcute pain management.\nNociception (pain sensation) is not hard-wired into the body. Instead, it is a dynamic process wherein persistent painful stimuli can sensitize the system and either make pain management difficult or promote the development of chronic pain. For this reason, preemptive acute pain management may reduce both acute and chronic pain and is tailored to the surgery, the environment in which it is given (in-patient/out-patient) and the individual.\nPain management is classified into either pre-emptive or on-demand. On-demand pain medications typically include either opioid or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs but can also make use of novel approaches such as inhaled nitrous oxide or ketamine. On demand drugs can be administered by a clinician (\"as needed drug orders\") or by the patient using patient-controlled analgesia (PCA). PCA has been shown to provide slightly better pain control and increased patient satisfaction when compared with conventional methods. Common preemptive approaches include epidural neuraxial blockade or nerve blocks. One review which looked at pain control after abdominal aortic surgery found that epidural blockade provides better pain relief (especially during movement) in the period up to three postoperative days. It reduces the duration of postoperative tracheal intubation by roughly half. The occurrence of prolonged postoperative mechanical ventilation and myocardial infarction is also reduced by epidural analgesia.\nRisks and complications.\nRisks and complications as they relate to anesthesia are classified as either morbidity (a disease or disorder that results from anesthesia) or mortality (death that results from anesthesia). Quantifying how anesthesia contributes to morbidity and mortality can be difficult because the patient's health prior to surgery and the complexity of the surgical procedure can also contribute to the risks.\nPrior to the introduction of anesthesia in the early 19th century, the physiologic stress from surgery caused significant complications and many deaths from shock. The faster the surgery was, the lower the rate of complications (leading to reports of very quick amputations). The advent of anesthesia allowed more complicated and life-saving surgery to be completed, decreased the physiologic stress of the surgery, but added an element of risk. It was two years after the introduction of ether anesthetics that the first death directly related to the use of anesthesia was reported.\nMorbidity can be major (myocardial infarction, pneumonia, pulmonary embolism, kidney failure/chronic kidney disease, postoperative cognitive dysfunction and allergy) or minor (minor nausea, vomiting, readmission). There is usually overlap in the contributing factors that lead to morbidity and mortality between the health of the patients, the type of surgery being performed and the anesthetic. To understand the relative risk of each contributing factor, consider that the rate of deaths totally attributed to the patient's health is 1:870. Compare that to the rate of deaths totally attributed to surgical factors (1:2860) or anesthesia alone (1:185,056) illustrating that the single greatest factor in anesthetic mortality is the health of the patient. These statistics can also be compared to the first such study on mortality in anesthesia from 1954, which reported a rate of death from all causes at 1:75 and a rate attributed to anesthesia alone at 1:2680. Direct comparisons between mortality statistics cannot reliably be made over time and across countries because of differences in the stratification of risk factors, however, there is evidence that anesthetics have made a significant improvement in safety but to what degree is uncertain.\nRather than stating a flat rate of morbidity or mortality, many factors are reported as contributing to the relative risk of the procedure and anesthetic combined. For instance, an operation on a person who is between the ages of 60\u201379 years old places the patient at 2.3 times greater risk than someone less than 60 years old. Having an ASA score of 3, 4 or 5 places the person at 10.7 times greater risk than someone with an ASA score of 1 or 2. Other variables include age greater than 80 (3.3 times risk compared to those under 60), gender (females have a lower risk of 0.8), urgency of the procedure (emergencies have a 4.4 times greater risk), experience of the person completing the procedure (less than 8 years experience and/or less than 600 cases have a 1.1 times greater risk) and the type of anesthetic (regional anesthetics are lower risk than general anesthetics). Obstetrical, the very young and the very old are all at greater risk of complication so extra precautions may need to be taken.\nOn 14 December 2016, the Food and Drug Administration issued a Public Safety Communication warning that \"repeated or lengthy use of general anesthetic and sedation drugs during surgeries or procedures in children younger than 3 years or in pregnant women during their third trimester may affect the development of children's brains.\" The warning was criticized by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, which pointed out the absence of direct evidence regarding use in pregnant women and the possibility that \"this warning could inappropriately dissuade providers from providing medically indicated care during pregnancy.\" Patient advocates noted that a randomized clinical trial would be unethical, that the mechanism of injury is well-established in animals, and that studies had shown exposure to multiple uses of anesthetic significantly increased the risk of developing learning disabilities in young children, with a hazard ratio of 2.12 (95% confidence interval, 1.26\u20133.54).\nRecovery.\nThe immediate time after anesthesia is called emergence. Emergence from general anesthesia or sedation requires careful monitoring because there is still a risk of complication. Nausea and vomiting are reported at 9.8% but will vary with the type of anesthetic and procedure. There is a need for airway support in 6.8%, there can be urinary retention (more common in those over 50 years of age) and hypotension in 2.7%. Hypothermia, shivering and confusion are also common in the immediate post-operative period because of the lack of muscle movement (and subsequent lack of heat production) during the procedure. Furthermore, the rare manifestation in the post-anesthetic period may be the occurrence of functional neurological symptom disorder (FNSD).\nPostoperative cognitive dysfunction (also known as \"POCD\" and post-anesthetic confusion) is a disturbance in cognition after surgery. It may also be variably used to describe emergence delirium (immediate post-operative confusion) and early cognitive dysfunction (diminished cognitive function in the first post-operative week). Although the three entities (delirium, early POCD and long-term POCD) are separate, the presence of delirium post-operatively predicts the presence of early POCD. There does not appear to be an association between delirium or early POCD and long-term POCD. According to a recent study conducted at the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, the brain navigates its way through a series of activity clusters, or \"hubs\" on its way back to consciousness. Andrew Hudson, an assistant professor in anesthesiology states, \"Recovery from anesthesia is not simply the result of the anesthetic 'wearing off,' but also of the brain finding its way back through a maze of possible activity states to those that allow conscious experience. Put simply, the brain reboots itself.\"\nLong-term POCD is a subtle deterioration in cognitive function, that can last for weeks, months, or longer. Most commonly, relatives of the person report a lack of attention, memory and loss of interest in activities previously dear to the person (such as crosswords). In a similar way, people in the workforce may report an inability to complete tasks at the same speed they could previously. There is good evidence that POCD occurs after cardiac surgery and the major reason for its occurrence is the formation of microemboli. POCD also appears to occur in non-cardiac surgery. Its causes in non-cardiac surgery are less clear but older age is a risk factor for its occurrence.\nHistory.\nThe first attempts at general anesthesia were probably herbal remedies administered in prehistory. Alcohol is one of the oldest known sedatives and it was used in ancient Mesopotamia thousands of years ago. The Sumerians are said to have cultivated and harvested the opium poppy (\"Papaver somniferum\") in lower Mesopotamia as early as 3400 BCE. The ancient Egyptians had some surgical instruments, as well as crude analgesics and sedatives, including possibly an extract prepared from the mandrake fruit.\nIn China, Bian Que (Chinese: \u6241\u9e4a, Wade\u2013Giles: \"Pien Ch'iao\", c.\u2009300 BCE) was a legendary Chinese internist and surgeon who reportedly used general anesthesia for surgical procedures. Despite this, it was the Chinese physician Hua Tuo whom historians considered the first verifiable historical figure to develop a type of mixture of anesthesia, though his recipe has yet to be fully discovered.\nThroughout Europe, Asia, and the Americas, a variety of \"Solanum\" species containing potent tropane alkaloids was used for anesthesia. In 13th-century Italy, Theodoric Borgognoni used similar mixtures along with opiates to induce unconsciousness, and treatment with the combined alkaloids proved a mainstay of anesthesia until the 19th century. Local anesthetics were used in Inca civilization where shamans chewed coca leaves and performed operations on the skull while spitting into the wounds they had inflicted to anesthetize. Cocaine was later isolated and became the first effective local anesthetic. It was first used in eye surgery in 1884 by Karl Koller, at the suggestion of Sigmund Freud. German surgeon August Bier (1861\u20131949) was the first to use cocaine for intrathecal anesthesia in 1898. Romanian surgeon Nicolae Racoviceanu-Pite\u015fti (1860\u20131942) was the first to use opioids for intrathecal analgesia; he presented his experience in Paris in 1901.\nThe \"soporific sponge\" (\"sleep sponge\") used by Arabic physicians was introduced to Europe by the Salerno school of medicine in the late 12th century and by Ugo Borgognoni (1180\u20131258) in the 13th century. The sponge was promoted and described by Ugo's son and fellow surgeon, Theodoric Borgognoni (1205\u20131298). In this anesthetic method, a sponge was soaked in a dissolved solution of opium, mandragora, hemlock juice, and other substances. The sponge was then dried and stored; just before surgery the sponge was moistened and then held under the patient's nose. When all went well, the fumes rendered the individual unconscious.\nThe most famous anesthetic, ether, may have been synthesized as early as the 8th century, but it took many centuries for its anesthetic importance to be appreciated, even though the 16th century physician and polymath Paracelsus noted that chickens made to breathe it not only fell asleep but also felt no pain. By the early 19th century, ether was being used by humans, but only as a recreational drug.\nMeanwhile, in 1772, English scientist Joseph Priestley discovered the gas nitrous oxide. Initially, people thought this gas to be lethal, even in small doses, like some other nitrogen oxides. However, in 1799, British chemist and inventor Humphry Davy decided to find out by experimenting on himself. To his astonishment he found that nitrous oxide made him laugh, so he nicknamed it \"laughing gas\". In 1800 Davy wrote about the potential anesthetic properties of nitrous oxide in relieving pain during surgery, but nobody at that time pursued the matter any further.\nOn 14 November 1804, Hanaoka Seish\u016b, a Japanese doctor, became the first person to successfully perform surgery using general anesthesia. Hanaoka learned traditional Japanese medicine as well as Dutch-imported European surgery and Chinese medicine. After years of research and experimentation, he finally developed a formula which he named ts\u016bsensan (also known as mafutsu-san), which combined Korean morning glory and other herbs.\nHanaoka's success in performing this painless operation soon became widely known, and patients began to arrive from all parts of Japan. Hanaoka went on to perform many operations using ts\u016bsensan, including resection of malignant tumors, extraction of bladder stones, and extremity amputations. Before his death in 1835, Hanaoka performed more than 150 operations for breast cancer. However, this finding did not benefit the rest of the world until 1854 as the national isolation policy of the Tokugawa shogunate prevented Hanaoka's achievements from being publicized until after the isolation ended. Nearly forty years would pass before Crawford Long, who is titled as the inventor of modern anesthetics in the West, used general anesthesia in Jefferson, Georgia.\nLong noticed that his friends felt no pain when they injured themselves while staggering around under the influence of diethyl ether. He immediately thought of its potential in surgery. Conveniently, a participant in one of those \"ether frolics\", a student named James Venable, had two small tumors he wanted excised. But fearing the pain of surgery, Venable kept putting the operation off. Hence, Long suggested that he have his operation while under the influence of ether. Venable agreed, and on 30 March 1842 he underwent a painless operation. However, Long did not announce his discovery until 1849.\nHorace Wells conducted the first public demonstration of the inhalational anesthetic at the Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston in 1845. However, the nitrous oxide was improperly administered and the person cried out in pain. On 16 October 1846, Boston dentist William Thomas Green Morton gave a successful demonstration using diethyl ether to medical students at the same venue. Morton, who was unaware of Long's previous work, was invited to the Massachusetts General Hospital to demonstrate his new technique for painless surgery. After Morton had induced anesthesia, surgeon John Collins Warren removed a tumor from the neck of Edward Gilbert Abbott. This occurred in the surgical amphitheater now called the Ether Dome. The previously skeptical Warren was impressed and stated, \"Gentlemen, this is no humbug.\" In a letter to Morton shortly thereafter, physician and writer Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. proposed naming the state produced \"anesthesia\", and the procedure an \"anesthetic\".\nMorton at first attempted to hide the actual nature of his anesthetic substance, referring to it as Letheon. He received a US patent for his substance, but news of the successful anesthetic spread quickly by late 1846. Respected surgeons in Europe including Liston, Dieffenbach, Pirogov, and Syme quickly undertook numerous operations with ether. An American-born physician, Boott, encouraged London dentist James Robinson to perform a dental procedure on a Miss Lonsdale. This was the first case of an operator-anesthetist. On the same day, 19 December 1846, in Dumfries Royal Infirmary, Scotland, a Dr. Scott used ether for a surgical procedure. The first use of anesthesia in the Southern Hemisphere took place in Launceston, Tasmania, that same year. Drawbacks with ether such as excessive vomiting and its explosive flammability led to its replacement in England with chloroform.\nDiscovered in 1831 by an American physician Samuel Guthrie (1782\u20131848), and independently a few months later by Frenchman Eug\u00e8ne Soubeiran (1797\u20131859) and Justus von Liebig (1803\u20131873) in Germany, chloroform was named and chemically characterized in 1834 by Jean-Baptiste Dumas (1800\u20131884). In 1842, Dr Robert Mortimer Glover in London discovered the anaesthetic qualities of chloroform on laboratory animals.\nIn 1847, Scottish obstetrician James Young Simpson was the first to demonstrate the anesthetic properties of chloroform on humans and helped to popularize the drug for use in medicine. This first supply came from local pharmacists, James Duncan and William Flockhart, and its use spread quickly, with 750,000 doses weekly in Britain by 1895. Simpson arranged for Flockhart to supply Florence Nightingale. Chloroform gained royal approval in 1853 when John Snow administered it to Queen Victoria when she was in labor with Prince Leopold. For the experience of child birth itself, chloroform met all the Queen's expectations; she stated it was \"delightful beyond measure\". Chloroform was not without fault though. The first fatality directly attributed to chloroform administration was recorded on 28 January 1848 after the death of Hannah Greener. This was the first of many deaths to follow from the untrained handling of chloroform. Surgeons began to appreciate the need for a trained anesthetist. The need, as Thatcher writes, was for an anesthetist to \"(1) Be satisfied with the subordinate role that the work would require, (2) Make anesthesia their one absorbing interest, (3) not look at the situation of anesthetist as one that put them in a position to watch and learn from the surgeons technique (4) accept the comparatively low pay and (5) have the natural aptitude and intelligence to develop a high level of skill in providing the smooth anesthesia and relaxation that the surgeon demanded\" These qualities of an anesthetist were often found in submissive medical students and even members of the public. More often, surgeons sought out nurses to provide anesthesia. By the time of the Civil War, many nurses had been professionally trained with the support of surgeons.\nJohn Snow of London published articles from May 1848 onwards \"On Narcotism by the Inhalation of Vapours\" in the London Medical Gazette. Snow also involved himself in the production of equipment needed for the administration of inhalational anesthetics, the forerunner of today's anesthesia machines.\nAlice Magaw, born in November 1860, is often referred to as \"The Mother of Anesthesia\". Her renown as the personal anesthesia provider for William and Charles Mayo was solidified by Mayo's own words in his 1905 article in which he described his satisfaction with and reliance on nurse anesthetists: \"The question of anaesthesia is a most important one. We have regular anaesthetists [on] whom we can depend so that I can devote my entire attention to the surgical work.\" Magaw kept thorough records of her cases and recorded these anesthetics. In her publication reviewing more than 14,000 surgical anesthetics, Magaw indicates she successfully provided anesthesia without an anesthetic-related death. Magaw describes\nin another article, \"We have administered an anesthetic 1,092 times; ether alone 674 times; chloroform 245 times; ether and chloroform combined 173 times. I can report that out of this number, 1,092 cases, we have not had an accident\". Magaw's records and outcomes created a legacy defining that the delivery of anesthesia by nurses would serve the surgical community without increasing the risks to patients. In fact, Magaw's outcomes would eclipse those of practitioners today.\nThe first comprehensive medical textbook on the subject, \"Anesthesia\", was authored in 1914 by anesthesiologist Dr. James Tayloe Gwathmey and the chemist Dr. Charles Baskerville. This book served as the standard reference for the specialty for decades and included details on the history of anesthesia as well as the physiology and techniques of inhalation, rectal, intravenous, and spinal anesthesia.\nOf these first famous anesthetics, only nitrous oxide is still widely used today, with chloroform and ether having been replaced by safer but sometimes more expensive general anesthetics, and cocaine by more effective local anesthetics with less abuse potential.\nSociety and culture.\nAlmost all healthcare providers use anesthetic drugs to some degree, but most health professions have their own field of specialists in the field including medicine, nursing and dentistry.\nDoctors specializing in anaesthesiology, including perioperative care, development of an anesthetic plan, and the administration of anesthetics are known in the US as \"anesthesiologists\" and in the UK, Canada, Australia, and NZ as \"anaesthetists\" or \"anaesthesiologists\". All anesthetics in the UK, Australia, New Zealand, Hong Kong and Japan are administered by doctors. Nurse anesthetists also administer anesthesia in 109 nations. In the US, 35% of anesthetics are provided by physicians in solo practice, about 55% are provided by anesthesia care teams (ACTs) with anesthesiologists medically directing certified registered nurse anesthetists (CRNAs) or anesthesiologist assistants, and about 10% are provided by CRNAs in solo practice. There can also be anesthesiologist assistants (US) or physicians' assistants (anaesthesia) (UK) who assist with anesthesia.\nSpecial populations.\nThere are many circumstances when anesthesia needs to be altered for special circumstances due to the procedure (such as in cardiac surgery, cardiothoracic anesthesiology or neurosurgery), the patient (such as in pediatric anesthesia, geriatric, bariatric or obstetrical anesthesia) or special circumstances (such as in trauma, prehospital care, robotic surgery or extreme environments).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56564", "revid": "15950772", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56564", "title": "Thymus gland", "text": ""}
{"id": "56565", "revid": "8565473", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56565", "title": "Circadian rhythm", "text": "Natural internal process that regulates the sleep-wake cycle\nA circadian rhythm (), or circadian cycle, is a natural oscillation that repeats roughly every 24 hours. Circadian rhythms can refer to any process that originates within an organism (i.e., endogenous) and responds to the environment (is entrained by the environment). Circadian rhythms are regulated by a circadian clock whose primary function is to rhythmically co-ordinate biological processes so they occur at the correct time to maximize the fitness of an individual. Circadian rhythms have been widely observed in animals, plants, fungi and cyanobacteria and there is evidence that they evolved independently in each of these kingdoms of life.\nThe term \"circadian\" comes from the Latin ', meaning \"around\", and ', meaning \"day\". Processes with 24-hour cycles are more generally called diurnal rhythms; diurnal rhythms should not be called circadian rhythms unless they can be confirmed as endogenous, and not environmental.\nAlthough circadian rhythms are endogenous, they are adjusted to the local environment by external cues called zeitgebers (from German \"\" (; lit.\u2009'time giver')), which include light, temperature and redox cycles. In clinical settings, an abnormal circadian rhythm in humans is known as a circadian rhythm sleep disorder.\nHistory.\nThe earliest recorded account of a circadian process is credited to Theophrastus, dating from the 4th century BC, probably provided to him by report of Androsthenes, a ship's captain serving under Alexander the Great. In his book, '\u03a0\u03b5\u03c1\u1f76 \u03c6\u03c5\u03c4\u1ff6\u03bd \u1f31\u03c3\u03c4\u03bf\u03c1\u03af\u03b1', or 'Enquiry into plants', Theophrastus describes a \"tree with many leaves like the rose, and that this closes at night, but opens at sunrise, and by noon is completely unfolded; and at evening again it closes by degrees and remains shut at night, and the natives say that it goes to sleep.\" The mentioned tree was much later identified as the tamarind tree by the botanist H. Bretzl, in his book on the botanical findings of the Alexandrian campaigns.\nThe observation of a circadian or diurnal process in humans is mentioned in Chinese medical texts dated to around the 13th century, including the \"Noon and Midnight Manual\" and the \"Mnemonic Rhyme to Aid in the Selection of Acu-points According to the Diurnal Cycle, the Day of the Month and the Season of the Year\".\nIn 1729, French scientist Jean-Jacques d'Ortous de Mairan conducted the first experiment designed to distinguish an endogenous clock from responses to daily stimuli. He noted that 24-hour patterns in the movement of the leaves of the plant \"Mimosa pudica\" persisted, even when the plants were kept in constant darkness.\nIn 1896, Patrick and Gilbert observed that during a prolonged period of sleep deprivation, sleepiness increases and decreases with a period of approximately 24 hours. In 1918, J. S. Szymanski showed that animals are capable of maintaining 24-hour activity patterns in the absence of external cues such as light and changes in temperature.\nIn the early 20th century, circadian rhythms were noticed in the rhythmic feeding times of bees. Auguste Forel, Ingeborg Beling, and Oskar Wahl conducted numerous experiments to determine whether this rhythm was attributable to an endogenous clock. The existence of circadian rhythm was independently discovered in fruit flies in 1935 by two German zoologists, Hans Kalmus and Erwin B\u00fcnning.\nIn 1954, an important experiment reported by Colin Pittendrigh demonstrated that eclosion (the process of pupa turning into adult) in \"Drosophila pseudoobscura\" was a circadian behaviour. He demonstrated that while temperature played a vital role in eclosion rhythm, the period of eclosion was delayed but not stopped when temperature was decreased.\nThe term \"circadian\" was coined by Franz Halberg in 1959. According to Halberg's original definition:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The term \"circadian\" was derived from \"circa\" (about) and \"dies\" (day); it may serve to imply that certain physiologic periods are close to 24 hours, if not exactly that length. Herein, \"circadian\" might be applied to all \"24-hour\" rhythms, whether or not their periods, individually or on the average, are different from 24 hours, longer or shorter, by a few minutes or hours.\nIn 1977, the International Committee on Nomenclature of the International Society for Chronobiology formally adopted the definition:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Circadian: relating to biologic variations or rhythms with a frequency of 1 cycle in 24 \u00b1 4 h; \"circa\" (about, approximately) and \"dies\" (day or 24 h). Note: term describes rhythms with an about 24-h cycle length, whether they are frequency-synchronized with (acceptable) or are desynchronized or free-running from the local environmental time scale, with periods of slightly yet consistently different from 24-h.\nRon Konopka and Seymour Benzer identified the first clock mutation in \"Drosophila\" in 1971, naming the gene \"period\" (\"per\") gene, the first discovered genetic determinant of behavioral rhythmicity. The \"per\" gene was isolated in 1984 by two teams of researchers. Konopka, Jeffrey Hall, Michael Roshbash, and their team showed that the \"per\" locus is the centre of the circadian rhythm, and that loss of \"per\" stops circadian activity. At the same time, Michael W. Young's team reported similar effects of \"per\", and that the gene covers 7.1-kilobase (kb) interval on the X chromosome and encodes a 4.5-kb poly(A)+ RNA. They went on to discover the key genes and neurones in \"Drosophila\" circadian system, for which Hall, Rosbash, and Young received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine 2017.\nJoseph Takahashi discovered the first mammalian circadian clock mutation (\"clock\u039419\") using mice in 1994. However, recent studies show that deletion of \"clock\" does not lead to a behavioral phenotype (the animals still have normal circadian rhythms), which questions its importance in rhythm generation.\nThe first human clock mutation was identified in an extended Utah family by Chris Jones, and genetically characterized by Ying-Hui Fu and Louis Ptacek. Affected individuals are extreme 'morning larks' with 4-hour advanced sleep and other rhythms. This form of familial advanced sleep phase syndrome is caused by a single amino acid change, S662\u2794G, in the human PER2 protein.\nCriteria.\nTo be called circadian, a biological rhythm must meet these three general criteria:\nOrigin.\nCircadian rhythms allow organisms to anticipate and prepare for precise and regular environmental changes. They thus enable organisms to make better use of environmental resources (e.g. light and food) compared to those that cannot predict such availability. It has therefore been suggested that circadian rhythms put organisms at a selective advantage in evolutionary terms. However, rhythmicity appears to be as important in regulating and coordinating \"internal\" metabolic processes, as in coordinating with the \"environment\". This is suggested by the maintenance (heritability) of circadian rhythms in fruit flies after several hundred generations in constant laboratory conditions, as well as in creatures in constant darkness in the wild, and by the experimental elimination of behavioral\u2014but not physiological\u2014circadian rhythms in quail.\nWhat drove circadian rhythms to evolve has been an enigmatic question. Previous hypotheses emphasized that photosensitive proteins and circadian rhythms may have originated together in the earliest cells, with the purpose of protecting replicating DNA from high levels of damaging ultraviolet radiation during the daytime. As a result, replication was relegated to the dark. However, evidence for this is lacking: in fact the simplest organisms with a circadian rhythm, the cyanobacteria, do the opposite of this: they divide more in the daytime. Recent studies instead highlight the importance of co-evolution of redox proteins with circadian oscillators in all three domains of life following the Great Oxidation Event approximately 2.3 billion years ago. The current view is that circadian changes in environmental oxygen levels and the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the presence of daylight are likely to have driven a need to evolve circadian rhythms to preempt, and therefore counteract, damaging redox reactions on a daily basis.\nThe simplest known circadian clocks are bacterial circadian rhythms, exemplified by the prokaryote cyanobacteria. Recent research has demonstrated that the circadian clock of \"Synechococcus elongatus\" can be reconstituted \"in vitro\" with just the three proteins (KaiA, KaiB, KaiC) of their central oscillator. This clock has been shown to sustain a 22-hour rhythm over several days upon the addition of ATP. Previous explanations of the prokaryotic circadian timekeeper were dependent upon a DNA transcription/translation feedback mechanism.\nA defect in the human homologue of the \"Drosophila\" \"period\" gene was identified as a cause of the sleep disorder FASPS (Familial advanced sleep phase syndrome), underscoring the conserved nature of the molecular circadian clock through evolution. Many more genetic components of the biological clock are now known. Their interactions result in an interlocked feedback loop of gene products resulting in periodic fluctuations that the cells of the body interpret as a specific time of the day.\nIt is now known that the molecular circadian clock can function within a single cell. That is, it is cell-autonomous. This was shown by Gene Block in isolated mollusk basal retinal neurons (BRNs). At the same time, different cells may communicate with each other resulting in a synchronized output of electrical signaling. These may interface with endocrine glands of the brain to result in periodic release of hormones. The receptors for these hormones may be located far across the body and synchronize the peripheral clocks of various organs. Thus, the information of the time of the day as relayed by the eyes travels to the clock in the brain, and, through that, clocks in the rest of the body may be synchronized. This is how the timing of, for example, sleep/wake, body temperature, thirst, and appetite are coordinately controlled by the biological clock.\nImportance in animals.\nCircadian rhythmicity is present in the sleeping and feeding patterns of animals, including human beings. There are also clear patterns of core body temperature, brain wave activity, hormone production, cell regeneration, and other biological activities. In addition, photoperiodism, the physiological reaction of organisms to the length of day or night, is vital to both plants and animals, and the circadian system plays a role in the measurement and interpretation of day length. Timely prediction of seasonal periods of weather conditions, food availability, or predator activity is crucial for survival of many species. Although not the only parameter, the changing length of the photoperiod (day length) is the most predictive environmental cue for the seasonal timing of physiology and behavior, most notably for timing of migration, hibernation, and reproduction.\nEffect of circadian disruption.\nMutations or deletions of clock genes in mice have demonstrated the importance of body clocks to ensure the proper timing of cellular/metabolic events; clock-mutant mice are hyperphagic and obese, and have altered glucose metabolism. In mice, deletion of the Rev-ErbA alpha clock gene can result in diet-induced obesity and changes the balance between glucose and lipid utilization, predisposing to diabetes. However, it is not clear whether there is a strong association between clock gene polymorphisms in humans and the susceptibility to develop the metabolic syndrome.\nEffect of light\u2013dark cycle.\nThe rhythm is linked to the light\u2013dark cycle. Animals, including humans, kept in total darkness for extended periods eventually function with a free-running rhythm. Their sleep cycle is pushed back or forward each \"day\", depending on whether their \"day\", their endogenous period, is shorter or longer than 24 hours. The environmental cues that reset the rhythms each day are called zeitgebers. Totally blind subterranean mammals (e.g., blind mole rat \"Spalax\" sp.) are able to maintain their endogenous clocks in the apparent absence of external stimuli. Although they lack image-forming eyes, their photoreceptors (which detect light) are still functional; they do surface periodically as well.\nFree-running organisms that normally have one or two consolidated sleep episodes will still have them when in an environment shielded from external cues, but the rhythm is not entrained to the 24-hour light\u2013dark cycle in nature. The sleep\u2013wake rhythm may, in these circumstances, become out of phase with other circadian or ultradian rhythms such as metabolic, hormonal, CNS electrical, or neurotransmitter rhythms.\nRecent research has influenced the design of spacecraft environments, as systems that mimic the light\u2013dark cycle have been found to be highly beneficial to astronauts. Light therapy has been trialed as a treatment for sleep disorders.\nArctic animals.\nNorwegian researchers at the University of Troms\u00f8 have shown that some Arctic animals (e.g., ptarmigan, reindeer) show circadian rhythms only in the parts of the year that have daily sunrises and sunsets. In one study of reindeer, animals at 70 degrees North showed circadian rhythms in the autumn, winter and spring, but not in the summer. Reindeer on Svalbard at 78 degrees North showed such rhythms only in autumn and spring. The researchers suspect that other Arctic animals as well may not show circadian rhythms in the constant light of summer and the constant dark of winter.\nA 2006 study in northern Alaska found that day-living ground squirrels and nocturnal porcupines strictly maintain their circadian rhythms through 82 days and nights of sunshine. The researchers speculate that these two rodents notice that the apparent distance between the sun and the horizon is shortest once a day, and thus have a sufficient signal to entrain (adjust) by.\nButterflies and moths.\nThe navigation of the fall migration of the Eastern North American monarch butterfly (\"Danaus plexippus\") to their overwintering grounds in central Mexico uses a time-compensated sun compass that depends upon a circadian clock in their antennae. Circadian rhythm is also known to control mating behavioral in certain moth species such as \"Spodoptera littoralis\", where females produce a specific pheromone that attracts and resets the male circadian rhythm to induce mating at night.\nOther synchronizers of circadian rhythms.\nAlthough light is the primary synchronizer of the circadian rhythm through the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), other environmental signals also influence the biological clock. Feeding plays a key role in regulating peripheral clocks found in the liver, muscles, and adipose tissues. Time-restricted feeding can adjust these clocks by modifying light signals. Additionally, physical activity affects the circadian phase, notably by adjusting melatonin production and body temperature. Temperature itself is an important synchronizer, capable of modifying cellular circadian rhythms. Finally, stress and the release of glucocorticoids influence the expression of clock genes, potentially disrupting biological cycles. Integrating these factors is essential for understanding circadian rhythms beyond simple light regulation.\nIn plants.\nPlant circadian rhythms tell the plant what season it is and when to flower for the best chance of attracting pollinators. Behaviors showing rhythms include leaf movement (Nyctinasty), growth, germination, stomatal/gas exchange, enzyme activity, photosynthetic activity, and fragrance emission, among others. Circadian rhythms occur as a plant entrains to synchronize with the light cycle of its surrounding environment. These rhythms are endogenously generated, self-sustaining and are relatively constant over a range of ambient temperatures. Important features include two interacting transcription-translation feedback loops: proteins containing PAS domains, which facilitate protein-protein interactions; and several photoreceptors that fine-tune the clock to different light conditions. Anticipation of changes in the environment allows appropriate changes in a plant's physiological state, conferring an adaptive advantage. A better understanding of plant circadian rhythms has applications in agriculture, such as helping farmers stagger crop harvests to extend crop availability and securing against massive losses due to weather.\nLight is the signal by which plants synchronize their internal clocks to their environment and is sensed by a wide variety of photoreceptors. Red and blue light are absorbed through several phytochromes and cryptochromes. Phytochrome A, phyA, is light labile and allows germination and de-etiolation when light is scarce. Phytochromes B\u2013E are more stable with phyB, the main phytochrome in seedlings grown in the light. The cryptochrome (cry) gene is also a light-sensitive component of the circadian clock and is thought to be involved both as a photoreceptor and as part of the clock's endogenous pacemaker mechanism. Cryptochromes 1\u20132 (involved in blue\u2013UVA) help to maintain the period length in the clock through a whole range of light conditions.\nThe central oscillator generates a self-sustaining rhythm and is driven by two interacting feedback loops that are active at different times of day. The morning loop consists of CCA1 (Circadian and Clock-Associated 1) and LHY (Late Elongated Hypocotyl), which encode closely related MYB transcription factors that regulate circadian rhythms in \"Arabidopsis\", as well as PRR 7 and 9 (Pseudo-Response Regulators.) The evening loop consists of GI (Gigantea) and ELF4, both involved in regulation of flowering time genes. When CCA1 and LHY are overexpressed (under constant light or dark conditions), plants become arrhythmic, and mRNA signals reduce, contributing to a negative feedback loop. Gene expression of CCA1 and LHY oscillates and peaks in the early morning, whereas TOC1 gene expression oscillates and peaks in the early evening. While it was previously hypothesised that these three genes model a negative feedback loop in which over-expressed CCA1 and LHY repress TOC1 and over-expressed TOC1 is a positive regulator of CCA1 and LHY, it was shown in 2012 by Andrew Millar and others that TOC1, in fact, serves as a repressor not only of CCA1, LHY, and PRR7 and 9 in the morning loop but also of GI and ELF4 in the evening loop. This finding and further computational modeling of TOC1 gene functions and interactions suggest a reframing of the plant circadian clock as a triple negative-component repressilator model rather than the positive/negative-element feedback loop characterizing the clock in mammals.\nIn 2018, researchers found that the expression of PRR5 and TOC1 hnRNA nascent transcripts follows the same oscillatory pattern as processed mRNA transcripts rhythmically in \"A. thaliana\". LNKs binds to the 5'region of PRR5 and TOC1 and interacts with RNAP II and other transcription factors. Moreover, RVE8-LNKs interaction enables a permissive histone-methylation pattern (H3K4me3) to be modified and the histone-modification itself parallels the oscillation of clock gene expression.\nIt has previously been found that matching a plant's circadian rhythm to its external environment's light and dark cycles has the potential to positively affect the plant. Researchers came to this conclusion by performing experiments on three different varieties of \"Arabidopsis thaliana\". One of these varieties had a normal 24-hour circadian cycle. The other two varieties were mutated, one to have a circadian cycle of more than 27 hours, and one to have a shorter than normal circadian cycle of 20 hours.\nThe \"Arabidopsis\" with the 24-hour circadian cycle was grown in three different environments. One of these environments had a 20-hour light and dark cycle (10 hours of light and 10 hours of dark), the other had a 24-hour light and dark cycle (12 hours of light and 12 hours of dark), and the final environment had a 28-hour light and dark cycle (14 hours of light and 14 hours of dark). The two mutated plants were grown in both an environment that had a 20-hour light and dark cycle and in an environment that had a 28-hour light and dark cycle. It was found that the variety of \"Arabidopsis\" with a 24-hour circadian rhythm cycle grew best in an environment that also had a 24-hour light and dark cycle. Overall, it was found that all the varieties of \"Arabidopsis thaliana\" had greater levels of chlorophyll and increased growth in environments whose light and dark cycles matched their circadian rhythm.\nResearchers suggested that a reason for this could be that matching an \"Arabidopsis\"'s circadian rhythm to its environment could allow the plant to be better prepared for dawn and dusk, and thus be able to better synchronize its processes. In this study, it was also found that the genes that help to control chlorophyll peaked a few hours after dawn. This appears to be consistent with the proposed phenomenon known as metabolic dawn.\nAccording to the metabolic dawn hypothesis, sugars produced by photosynthesis have potential to help regulate the circadian rhythm and certain photosynthetic and metabolic pathways. As the sun rises, more light becomes available, which normally allows more photosynthesis to occur. The sugars produced by photosynthesis repress PRR7. This repression of PRR7 then leads to the increased expression of CCA1. On the other hand, decreased photosynthetic sugar levels increase PRR7 expression and decrease CCA1 expression. This feedback loop between CCA1 and PRR7 is what is proposed to cause metabolic dawn.\nIn \"Drosophila\".\nThe molecular mechanism of circadian rhythm and light perception are best understood in \"Drosophila\". Clock genes are discovered from \"Drosophila\", and they act together with the clock neurones. There are two unique rhythms, one during the process of hatching (called eclosion) from the pupa, and the other during mating. The clock neurones are located in distinct clusters in the central brain. The best-understood clock neurones are the large and small lateral ventral neurons (l-LNvs and s-LNvs) of the optic lobe. These neurones produce pigment dispersing factor (PDF), a neuropeptide that acts as a circadian neuromodulator between different clock neurones.\n\"Drosophila\" circadian rhythm is through a transcription-translation feedback loop. The core clock mechanism consists of two interdependent feedback loops, namely the PER/TIM loop and the CLK/CYC loop. The CLK/CYC loop occurs during the day and initiates the transcription of the \"per\" and \"tim\" genes. But their proteins levels remain low until dusk, because during daylight also activates the \"doubletime\" (\"dbt\") gene. DBT protein causes phosphorylation and turnover of monomeric PER proteins. TIM is also phosphorylated by shaggy until sunset. After sunset, DBT disappears, so that PER molecules stably bind to TIM. PER/TIM dimer enters the nucleus several at night, and binds to CLK/CYC dimers. Bound PER completely stops the transcriptional activity of CLK and CYC.\nIn the early morning, light activates the \"cry\" gene and its protein CRY causes the breakdown of TIM. Thus PER/TIM dimer dissociates, and the unbound PER becomes unstable. PER undergoes progressive phosphorylation and ultimately degradation. Absence of PER and TIM allows activation of \"clk\" and \"cyc\" genes. Thus, the clock is reset to start the next circadian cycle.\nPER-TIM model.\nThis protein model was developed based on the oscillations of the PER and TIM proteins in the \"Drosophila\". It is based on its predecessor, the PER model where it was explained how the PER gene and its protein influence the biological clock. The model includes the formation of a nuclear PER-TIM complex which influences the transcription of the PER and the TIM genes (by providing negative feedback) and the multiple phosphorylation of these two proteins. The circadian oscillations of these two proteins seem to synchronise with the light-dark cycle even if they are not necessarily dependent on it. Both PER and TIM proteins are phosphorylated and after they form the PER-TIM nuclear complex they return inside the nucleus to stop the expression of the PER and TIM mRNA. This inhibition lasts as long as the protein, or the mRNA is not degraded. When this happens, the complex releases the inhibition. Here can also be mentioned that the degradation of the TIM protein is sped up by light.\nIn mammals.\nThe primary circadian clock in mammals is located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (or nuclei) (SCN), a pair of distinct groups of cells located in the hypothalamus. Destruction of the SCN results in the complete absence of a regular sleep\u2013wake rhythm. The SCN receives information about illumination through the eyes. The retina of the eye contains \"classical\" photoreceptors (\"rods\" and \"cones\"), which are used for conventional vision. But the retina also contains specialized ganglion cells that are directly photosensitive, and project directly to the SCN, where they help in the entrainment (synchronization) of this master circadian clock. The proteins involved in the SCN clock are homologous to those found in the fruit fly.\nThese cells contain the photopigment melanopsin and their signals follow a pathway called the retinohypothalamic tract, leading to the SCN. If cells from the SCN are removed and cultured, they maintain their own rhythm in the absence of external cues.\nThe SCN takes the information on the lengths of the day and night from the retina, interprets it, and passes it on to the pineal gland, a tiny structure shaped like a pine cone and located on the epithalamus. In response, the pineal secretes the hormone melatonin. Secretion of melatonin peaks at night and ebbs during the day and its presence provides information about night-length.\nSeveral studies have indicated that pineal melatonin feeds back on SCN rhythmicity to modulate circadian patterns of activity and other processes. However, the nature and system-level significance of this feedback are unknown.\nThe circadian rhythms of humans can be entrained to slightly shorter and longer periods than the Earth's 24 hours. Researchers at Harvard have shown that human subjects can at least be entrained to a 23.5-hour cycle and a 24.65-hour cycle.\nHumans.\nEarly research into circadian rhythms suggested that most people preferred a day closer to 25 hours when isolated from external stimuli like daylight and timekeeping. However, this research was faulty because it failed to shield the participants from artificial light. Although subjects were shielded from time cues (like clocks) and daylight, the researchers were not aware of the phase-delaying effects of indoor electric lights. The subjects were allowed to turn on light when they were awake and to turn it off when they wanted to sleep. Electric light in the evening delayed their circadian phase. A more stringent study conducted in 1999 by Harvard University estimated the natural human rhythm to be closer to 24 hours and 11 minutes: much closer to the solar day. Consistent with this research was a more recent study from 2010, which also identified sex differences, with the circadian period for women being slightly shorter (24.09 hours) than for men (24.19 hours). In this study, women tended to wake up earlier than men and exhibit a greater preference for morning activities than men, although the underlying biological mechanisms for these differences are unknown.\nBiological markers and effects.\nThe classic phase markers for measuring the timing of a mammal's circadian rhythm are:\nFor temperature studies, subjects must remain awake but calm and semi-reclined in near darkness while their rectal temperatures are taken continuously. Though variation is great among normal chronotypes, the average human adult's temperature reaches its minimum at about 5:00\u00a0a.m., about two hours before habitual wake time. Baehr et al. found that, in young adults, the daily body temperature minimum occurred at about 04:00 (4 a.m.) for morning types, but at about 06:00 (6 a.m.) for evening types. This minimum occurred at approximately the middle of the eight-hour sleep period for morning types, but closer to waking in evening types.\nMelatonin is absent from the system or undetectably low during daytime. Its onset in dim light, \"dim-light melatonin onset\" (DLMO), at roughly 21:00 (9 p.m.) can be measured in the blood or the saliva. Its major metabolite can also be measured in morning urine. Both DLMO and the midpoint (in time) of the presence of the hormone in the blood or saliva have been used as circadian markers. However, newer research indicates that the melatonin \"offset\" may be the more reliable marker. Benloucif et al. found that melatonin phase markers were more stable and more highly correlated with the timing of sleep than the core temperature minimum. They found that both sleep offset and melatonin offset are more strongly correlated with phase markers than the onset of sleep. In addition, the declining phase of the melatonin levels is more reliable and stable than the termination of melatonin synthesis.\nOther physiological changes that occur according to a circadian rhythm include heart rate and many cellular processes \"including oxidative stress, cell metabolism, immune and inflammatory responses, epigenetic modification, hypoxia/hyperoxia response pathways, endoplasmic reticular stress, autophagy, and regulation of the stem cell environment.\" In a study of young men, it was found that the heart rate reaches its lowest average rate during sleep, and its highest average rate shortly after waking.\nIn contradiction to previous studies, it has been found that there is no effect of body temperature on performance on psychological tests. This is likely due to evolutionary pressures for higher cognitive function compared to the other areas of function examined in previous studies.\nOutside the \"master clock\".\nMore-or-less independent circadian rhythms are found in many organs and cells in the body outside the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN), the \"master clock\". Indeed, neuroscientist Joseph Takahashi and colleagues stated in a 2013 article that \"almost every cell in the body contains a circadian clock\". For example, these clocks, called peripheral oscillators, have been found in the adrenal gland, oesophagus, lungs, liver, pancreas, spleen, thymus, and skin. There is also some evidence that the olfactory bulb and prostate may experience oscillations, at least when cultured.\nThough oscillators in the skin respond to light, a systemic influence has not been proven. In addition, many oscillators, such as liver cells, for example, have been shown to respond to inputs other than light, such as feeding.\nLight and the biological clock.\nLight resets the biological clock in accordance with the phase response curve (PRC). Depending on the timing, light can advance or delay the circadian rhythm. Both the PRC and the required illuminance vary from species to species, and lower light levels are required to reset the clocks in nocturnal rodents than in humans. Light systems designed to support circadian rhythms, such as the CircadianLux ceiling round, can dynamically adjust lighting levels based on metrics such as melanopic equivalent daylight illuminance (M-EDI), aiming to better support the biological clock.\nEnforced longer or shorter cycles.\nVarious studies on humans have made use of enforced sleep/wake cycles strongly different from 24 hours, such as those conducted by Nathaniel Kleitman in 1938 (28 hours) and Derk-Jan Dijk and Charles Czeisler in the 1990s (20 hours). Because people with a normal (typical) circadian clock cannot entrain to such abnormal day/night rhythms, this is referred to as a forced desynchrony protocol. Under such a protocol, sleep and wake episodes are uncoupled from the body's endogenous circadian period, which allows researchers to assess the effects of circadian phase (i.e., the relative timing of the circadian cycle) on aspects of sleep and wakefulness including sleep latency and other functions - both physiological, behavioral, and cognitive.\nStudies also show that \"Cyclosa turbinata\" is unique in that its locomotor and web-building activity cause it to have an exceptionally short-period circadian clock, about 19 hours. When \"C. turbinata\" spiders are placed into chambers with periods of 19, 24, or 29 hours of evenly split light and dark, none of the spiders exhibited decreased longevity in their own circadian clock. These findings suggest that \"C. turbinata\" do not have the same costs of extreme desynchronization as do other species of animals.\nHuman health.\nFoundation of circadian medicine.\nThe leading edge of circadian biology research is translation of basic body clock mechanisms into clinical tools, and this is especially relevant to the treatment of cardiovascular disease. Timing of medical treatment in coordination with the body clock, chronotherapeutics, may also benefit patients with hypertension (high blood pressure) by significantly increasing efficacy and reduce drug toxicity or adverse reactions. 3) \"Circadian Pharmacology\" or drugs targeting the circadian clock mechanism have been shown experimentally in rodent models to significantly reduce the damage due to heart attacks and prevent heart failure. Importantly, for rational translation of the most promising Circadian Medicine therapies to clinical practice, it is imperative that we understand how it helps treat disease in both biological sexes.\nCauses of disruption to circadian rhythms.\nIndoor lighting.\nLighting requirements for circadian regulation are not simply the same as those for vision; planning of indoor lighting in offices and institutions is beginning to take this into account. Animal studies on the effects of light in laboratory conditions have until recently considered light intensity (irradiance) but not color, which can be shown to \"act as an essential regulator of biological timing in more natural settings\".\nBlue LED lighting suppresses melatonin production five times more than the orange-yellow high-pressure sodium (HPS) light; a metal halide lamp, which is white light, suppresses melatonin at a rate more than three times greater than HPS. Depression symptoms from long term nighttime light exposure can be undone by returning to a normal cycle.\nAirline pilots and cabin crew.\nDue to the nature of work of airline pilots, who often cross several time zones and regions of sunlight and darkness in one day, and spend many hours awake both day and night, they are often unable to maintain sleep patterns that correspond to the natural human circadian rhythm; this situation can easily lead to fatigue. The NTSB cites this as contributing to many accidents, and has conducted several research studies in order to find methods of combating fatigue in pilots.\nEffect of drugs.\nStudies conducted on both animals and humans show major bidirectional relationships between the circadian system and abusive drugs. It is indicated that these abusive drugs affect the central circadian pacemaker. Individuals with substance use disorder display disrupted rhythms. These disrupted rhythms can increase the risk for substance abuse and relapse. It is possible that genetic and/or environmental disturbances to the normal sleep and wake cycle can increase the susceptibility to addiction.\nIt is difficult to determine if a disturbance in the circadian rhythm is at fault for an increase in prevalence for substance abuse\u2014or if other environmental factors such as stress are to blame.\nChanges to the circadian rhythm and sleep occur once an individual begins abusing drugs and alcohol. Once an individual stops using drugs and alcohol, the circadian rhythm continues to be disrupted.\nAlcohol consumption disrupts circadian rhythms, with acute intake causing dose-dependent alterations in melatonin and cortisol levels, as well as core body temperature, which normalize the following morning, while chronic alcohol use leads to more severe and persistent disruptions that are associated with alcohol use disorders (AUD) and withdrawal symptoms.\nThe stabilization of sleep and the circadian rhythm might possibly help to reduce the vulnerability to addiction and reduce the chances of relapse.\nCircadian rhythms and clock genes expressed in brain regions outside the suprachiasmatic nucleus may significantly influence the effects produced by drugs such as cocaine. Moreover, genetic manipulations of clock genes profoundly affect cocaine's actions.\nConsequences of disruption to circadian rhythms.\nDisruption.\nDisruption to rhythms usually has a negative effect. Many travelers have experienced the condition known as jet lag, with its associated symptoms of fatigue, disorientation and insomnia.\nA number of other disorders, such as bipolar disorder, depression, and some sleep disorders such as delayed sleep phase disorder (DSPD), are associated with irregular or pathological functioning of circadian rhythms.\nDisruption to rhythms in the longer term is believed to have significant adverse health consequences for peripheral organs outside the brain, in particular in the development or exacerbation of cardiovascular disease.\nStudies have shown that maintaining normal sleep and circadian rhythms is important for many aspects of brain and health. A number of studies have also indicated that a power-nap, a short period of sleep during the day, can reduce stress and may improve productivity without any measurable effect on normal circadian rhythms. Circadian rhythms also play a part in the reticular activating system, which is crucial for maintaining a state of consciousness. A reversal in the sleep\u2013wake cycle may be a sign or complication of uremia, azotemia or acute kidney injury. Studies have also helped elucidate how light has a direct effect on human health through its influence on the circadian biology.\nRelationship with cardiovascular disease.\nOne of the first studies to determine how disruption of circadian rhythms causes cardiovascular disease was performed in the Tau hamsters, which have a genetic defect in their circadian clock mechanism. When maintained in a 24-hour light-dark cycle that was \"out of sync\" with their normal 22 circadian mechanism they developed profound cardiovascular and renal disease; however, when the Tau animals were raised for their entire lifespan on a 22-hour daily light-dark cycle they had a healthy cardiovascular system. The adverse effects of circadian misalignment on human physiology has been studied in the laboratory using a misalignment protocol, and by studying shift workers. Circadian misalignment is associated with many risk factors of cardiovascular disease. High levels of the atherosclerosis biomarker, resistin, have been reported in shift workers indicating the link between circadian misalignment and plaque build up in arteries. Additionally, elevated triacylglyceride levels (molecules used to store excess fatty acids) were observed and contribute to the hardening of arteries, which is associated with cardiovascular diseases including heart attack, stroke and heart disease. Shift work and the resulting circadian misalignment is also associated with hypertension.\nObesity and diabetes.\nObesity and diabetes are associated with lifestyle and genetic factors. Among those factors, disruption of the circadian clockwork and/or misalignment of the circadian timing system with the external environment (e.g., light\u2013dark cycle) can play a role in the development of metabolic disorders.\nShift work or chronic jet lag have profound consequences for circadian and metabolic events in the body. Animals that are forced to eat during their resting period show increased body mass and altered expression of clock and metabolic genes. In humans, shift work that favours irregular eating times is associated with altered insulin sensitivity, diabetes and higher body mass.\nCognitive effects.\nReduced cognitive function has been associated with circadian misalignment. Chronic shift workers display increased rates of operational error, impaired visual-motor performance and processing efficacy which can lead to both a reduction in performance and potential safety issues. Increased risk of dementia is associated with chronic night shift workers compared to day shift workers, particularly for individuals over 50 years old.\nSociety and culture.\nIn 2017, Jeffrey C. Hall, Michael W. Young, and Michael Rosbash were awarded Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine \"for their discoveries of molecular mechanisms controlling the circadian rhythm\".\nCircadian rhythms was taken as an example of scientific knowledge being transferred into the public sphere.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56566", "revid": "50649442", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56566", "title": "Chronobiology", "text": "Study of rhythms in biological processes of living organisms\nChronobiology is a field of biology that examines timing processes, including periodic (cyclic) phenomena in living organisms, such as their adaptation to solar- and lunar-related rhythms. These cycles are known as biological rhythms. Chronobiology comes from the ancient Greek \u03c7\u03c1\u03cc\u03bd\u03bf\u03c2 (\"chr\u00f3nos\", meaning \"time\"), and biology, which pertains to the study, or science, of life. The related terms \"chronomics\" and \"chronome\" have been used in some cases to describe either the molecular mechanisms involved in chronobiological phenomena or the more quantitative aspects of chronobiology, particularly where comparison of cycles between organisms is required.\nChronobiological studies include but are not limited to comparative anatomy, physiology, genetics, molecular biology and behavior of organisms related to their biological rhythms. Other aspects include epigenetics, development, reproduction, ecology and evolution.\nSubject.\nChronobiology studies variations of the timing and duration of biological activity in living organisms which occur for many essential biological processes. These occur in animals (eating, sleeping, mating, hibernating, migration, cellular regeneration, etc.), in plants (leaf movements, photosynthetic reactions, etc.), as well as in microbial organisms such as fungi and protozoa. They have also been found in bacteria, especially among the cyanobacteria (blue-green algae). The best studied rhythm in chronobiology is the circadian rhythm, a roughly 24-hour cycle shown by physiological processes in all these organisms. The term \"circadian\" comes from the Latin \"circa\", meaning \"around\" and \"dies\", \"day\", meaning \"approximately a day.\" It is regulated by circadian clocks.\nThe circadian rhythm regulates behaviour including timing of the activity phase. Depending on their innate active phase, organisms can be classified into one of three categories:\nWhile circadian rhythms are generated by endogenous processes, they can be regulated by both endogenous and exogenous signals. Other biological cycles may be regulated by exogenous signals. \nMany other important cycles are also studied, including:\nWithin each cycle, the time period during which the process is more active is called the \"acrophase\". When the process is less active, the cycle is in its \"bathyphase\" or \"trough\" phase. The particular moment of highest activity is the \"peak\" or \"maximum\"; the lowest point is the \"nadir\".\nHistory.\nA circadian cycle was first observed in the 18th century in the movement of plant leaves by the French scientist Jean-Jacques d'Ortous de Mairan. In 1751, Swedish botanist and naturalist Carl Linnaeus (Carl von Linn\u00e9) designed a flower clock using certain species of flowering plants. By arranging the selected species in a circular pattern, he designed a clock that indicated the time of day by the flowers that were open at each given hour. For example, among members of the daisy family, he used the hawk's beard plant which opened its flowers at 6:30 am and the hawkbit which did not open its flowers until 7 am.\nThe 1960 symposium at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory laid the groundwork for the field of chronobiology.\nIt was also in 1960 that Patricia DeCoursey invented the phase response curve, one of the major tools used in the field since.\nFranz Halberg of the University of Minnesota, who coined the word \"circadian\", is widely considered the \"father of American chronobiology.\" However, it was Colin Pittendrigh and not Halberg who was elected to lead the \"Society for Research in Biological Rhythms\" in the 1970s. Halberg wanted more emphasis on the human and medical issues while Pittendrigh had his background more in evolution and ecology. With Pittendrigh as leader, the Society members did basic research on all types of organisms, plants as well as animals. More recently it has been difficult to get funding for such research on any other organisms than mice, rats, humans and fruit flies.\nThe role of Retinal Ganglion cells.\nMelanopsin as a circadian photopigment.\nIn 2002, Hattar and his colleagues showed that melanopsin plays a key role in a variety of photic responses, including pupillary light reflex, and synchronization of the biological clock to daily light-dark cycles. He also described the role of melanopsin in ipRGCs. Using a rat melanopsin gene, a melanopsin-specific antibody, and fluorescent immunocytochemistry, the team concluded that melanopsin is expressed in some RGCs. Using a Beta-galactosidase assay, they found that these RGC axons exit the eyes together with the optic nerve and project to the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), the primary circadian pacemaker in mammals. They also demonstrated that the RGCs containing melanopsin were intrinsically photosensitive. Hattar concluded that melanopsin is the photopigment in a small subset of RGCs that contributes to the intrinsic photosensitivity of these cells and is involved in their non-image forming functions, such as photic entrainment and pupillary light reflex.\nMelanopsin cells relay inputs from rods and cones.\nHattar, armed with the knowledge that melanopsin was the photopigment responsible for the photosensitivity of ipRGCs, set out to study the exact role of the ipRGC in photoentrainment. In 2008, Hattar and his research team transplanted diphtheria toxin genes into the mouse melanopsin gene locus to create mutant mice that lacked ipRGCs. The research team found that while the mutants had little difficulty identifying visual targets, they could not entrain to light-dark cycles. These results led Hattar and his team to conclude that ipRGCs do not affect image-forming vision, but significantly affect non-image forming functions such as photoentrainment.\nDistinct ipRGCs.\nFurther research has shown that ipRGCs project to different brain nuclei to control both non-image forming and image forming functions. These brain regions include the SCN, where input from ipRGCs is necessary to photoentrain circadian rhythms, and the olivary pretectal nucleus (OPN), where input from ipRGCs control the pupillary light reflex. Hattar and colleagues conducted research that demonstrated that ipRGCs project to hypothalamic, thalamic, stratal, brainstem and limbic structures. Although ipRGCs were initially viewed as a uniform population, further research revealed that there are several subtypes with distinct morphology and physiology. Since 2011, Hattar's laboratory has contributed to these findings and has successfully distinguished subtypes of ipRGCs.\nDiversity of ipRGCs.\nHattar and colleges utilized Cre-based strategies for labeling ipRGCs to reveal that there are at least five ipRGC subtypes that project to a number of central targets. Five classes of ipRGCs, M1 through M5, have been characterized to date in rodents. These classes differ in morphology, dendritic localization, melanopsin content, electrophysiological profiles, and projections.\nDiversity in M1 cells.\nHattar and his co-workers discovered that, even among the subtypes of ipRGC, there can be designated sets that differentially control circadian versus pupillary behavior. In experiments with M1 ipRGCs, they discovered that the transcription factor Brn3b is expressed by M1 ipRGCs that target the OPN, but not by ones that target the SCN. Using this knowledge, they designed an experiment to cross Melanopsin-Cre mice with mice that conditionally expressed a toxin from the Brn3b locus. This allowed them to selectively ablate only the OPN projecting M1 ipRGCS, resulting in a loss of pupil reflexes. However, this did not impair circadian photo entrainment. This demonstrated that the M1 ipRGC consist of molecularly distinct subpopulations that innervate different brain regions and execute specific light-induced functions. This isolation of a 'labeled line' consisting of differing molecular and functional properties in a highly specific ipRGC subtype was an important first for the field. It also underscored the extent to which molecular signatures can be used to distinguish between RGC populations that would otherwise appear the same, which in turn facilitates further investigation into their specific contributions to visual processing.\nPsychological impact of light exposure.\nPrevious studies in circadian biology have established that exposure to light during abnormal hours leads to sleep deprivation and disruption of the circadian system, which affect mood and cognitive functioning. While this indirect relationship had been corroborated, not much work had been done to examine whether there was a direct relationship between irregular light exposure, aberrant mood, cognitive function, normal sleep patterns and circadian oscillations. In a study published in 2012, the Hattar Laboratory was able to show that deviant light cycles directly induce depression-like symptoms and lead to impaired learning in mice, independent of sleep and circadian oscillations.\nEffect on mood.\nipRGCs project to areas of the brain that are important for regulating circadian rhythmicity and sleep, most notably the SCN, subparaventricular nucleus, and the ventrolateral preoptic area. In addition, ipRGCs transmit information to many areas in the limbic system, which is strongly tied to emotion and memory. To examine the relationship between deviant light exposure and behavior, Hattar and his colleagues studied mice exposed to alternating 3.5-hour light and dark periods (T7 mice) and compared them with mice exposed to alternating 12-hour light and dark periods (T24 mice). Compared to a T24 cycle, the T7 mice got the same amount of total sleep and their circadian expression of PER2, an element of the SCN pacemaker, was not disrupted. Through the T7 cycle, the mice were exposed to light at all circadian phases. Light pulses presented at night lead to expression of the transcription factor c-Fos in the amygdala, lateral habenula, and subparaventricular nucleus further implicating light's possible influence on mood and other cognitive functions.\nMice subjected to the T7 cycle exhibited depression-like symptoms, exhibiting decreased preference for sucrose (sucrose anhedonia) and exhibiting more immobility than their T24 counterparts in the forced swim test (FST). Additionally, T7 mice maintained rhythmicity in serum corticosterone, however the levels were elevated compared to the T24 mice, a trend that is associated with depression. Chronic administration of the antidepressant Fluoxetine lowered corticosterone levels in T7 mice and reduced depression-like behavior while leaving their circadian rhythms unaffected.\nEffect on learning.\nThe hippocampus is a structure in the limbic system that receives projections from ipRGCs. It is required for the consolidation of short-term memories into long-term memories as well as spatial orientation and navigation. Depression and heightened serum corticosterone levels are linked to impaired hippocampal learning. Hattar and his team analyzed the T7 mice in the Morris water maze (MWM), a spatial learning task that places a mouse in a small pool of water and tests the mouse's ability to locate and remember the location of a rescue platform located just below the waterline. Compared to the T24 mice, the T7 mice took longer to find the platform in subsequent trials and did not exhibit a preference for the quadrant containing the platform. In addition, T7 mice exhibited impaired hippocampal long-term potentiation (LTP) when subjected to theta burst stimulation (TBS). Recognition memory was also affected, with T7 mice failing to show preference for novel objects in the novel object recognition test.\nNecessity of ipRGCs.\nMice without (Opn4aDTA/aDTA mice) are not susceptible to the negative effects of an aberrant light cycle, indicating that light information transmitted through these cells plays an important role in regulation of mood and cognitive functions such as learning and memory.\nResearch developments.\nMore recently, light therapy and melatonin administration have been explored by Alfred J. Lewy (OHSU), Josephine Arendt (University of Surrey, UK) and other researchers as a means to reset animal and human circadian rhythms. Additionally, the presence of low-level light at night accelerates circadian re-entrainment of hamsters of all ages by 50%; this is thought to be related to simulation of moonlight.\nIn the second half of 20th century, substantial contributions and formalizations have been made by Europeans such as J\u00fcrgen Aschoff and Colin Pittendrigh, who pursued different but complementary views on the phenomenon of entrainment of the circadian system by light (parametric, continuous, tonic, gradual vs. nonparametric, discrete, phasic, instantaneous, respectively).\nHumans can have a propensity to be morning people or evening people; these behavioral preferences are called chronotypes for which there are various assessment questionnaires and biological marker correlations.\nThere is also a food-entrainable biological clock, which is not confined to the suprachiasmatic nucleus. The location of this clock has been disputed. Working with mice, however, Fuller \"et al.\" concluded that the food-entrainable clock seems to be located in the dorsomedial hypothalamus. During restricted feeding, it takes over control of such functions as activity timing, increasing the chances of the animal successfully locating food resources.\nIn 2018 a study published in PLoS ONE showed how 73 psychometric indicators measured on Twitter Content follow a diurnal pattern.\nA followup study appeared on Chronobiology International in 2021 showed that these patterns were not disrupted by the 2020 UK lockdown.\nIn 2021, scientists reported the development of a light-responsive days-lasting modulator of circadian rhythms of tissues via Ck1 inhibition. Such modulators may be useful for chronobiology research and repair of organs that are \"out of sync\".\nOther fields.\nChronobiology is an interdisciplinary field of investigation. It interacts with medical and other research fields such as sleep medicine, endocrinology, geriatrics, sports medicine, space medicine, psychiatry and photoperiodism.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56567", "revid": "34077026", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56567", "title": "Hyperbolic functions", "text": "Collective name of 6 mathematical functions\nIn mathematics, hyperbolic functions are analogues of the ordinary trigonometric functions, but defined using the hyperbola rather than the circle. Just as the points (cos \"t\", sin \"t\") form a circle with a unit radius, the points (cosh \"t\", sinh \"t\") form the right half of the unit hyperbola. Also, similarly to how the derivatives of sin(\"t\") and cos(\"t\") are cos(\"t\") and \u2013sin(\"t\") respectively, the derivatives of sinh(\"t\") and cosh(\"t\") are cosh(\"t\") and sinh(\"t\") respectively.\nHyperbolic functions are used to express the angle of parallelism in hyperbolic geometry. They are used to express Lorentz boosts as hyperbolic rotations in special relativity. They also occur in the solutions of many linear differential equations (such as the equation defining a catenary), cubic equations, and Laplace's equation in Cartesian coordinates. Laplace's equations are important in many areas of physics, including electromagnetic theory, heat transfer, and fluid dynamics.\nThe basic hyperbolic functions are:\nfrom which are derived:\ncorresponding to the derived trigonometric functions.\nThe inverse hyperbolic functions are:\nThe hyperbolic functions take a real argument called a hyperbolic angle. The magnitude of a hyperbolic angle is the area of its hyperbolic sector to \"xy\" = 1. The hyperbolic functions may be defined in terms of the legs of a right triangle covering this sector.\nIn complex analysis, the hyperbolic functions arise when applying the ordinary sine and cosine functions to an imaginary angle. The hyperbolic sine and the hyperbolic cosine are entire functions. As a result, the other hyperbolic functions are meromorphic in the whole complex plane.\nBy Lindemann\u2013Weierstrass theorem, the hyperbolic functions have a transcendental value for every non-zero algebraic value of the argument.\nHistory.\nThe first known calculation of a hyperbolic trigonometry problem is attributed to Gerardus Mercator when issuing the Mercator map projection circa 1566. It requires tabulating solutions to a transcendental equation involving hyperbolic functions.\nThe first to suggest a similarity between the sector of the circle and that of the hyperbola was Isaac Newton in his 1687 \"Principia Mathematica\".\nRoger Cotes suggested to modify the trigonometric functions using the imaginary unit formula_1 to obtain an oblate spheroid from a prolate one.\nHyperbolic functions were formally introduced in 1757 by Vincenzo Riccati. Riccati used \"Sc.\" and \"Cc.\" () to refer to circular functions and \"Sh.\" and \"Ch.\" () to refer to hyperbolic functions. As early as 1759, Daviet de Foncenex showed the interchangeability of the trigonometric and hyperbolic functions using the imaginary unit and extended de Moivre's formula to hyperbolic functions.\nDuring the 1760s, Johann Heinrich Lambert systematized the use functions and provided exponential expressions in various publications. Lambert credited Riccati for the terminology and names of the functions, but altered the abbreviations to those used today.\nDefinitions.\nWith hyperbolic angle \"u\", the hyperbolic functions sinh and cosh can be defined with the exponential function eu. In the figure\nformula_2 .\nDifferential equation definitions.\nThe hyperbolic functions may be defined as solutions of differential equations: The hyperbolic sine and cosine are the solution (\"s\", \"c\") of the system\nformula_9\nwith the initial conditions formula_10 The initial conditions make the solution unique; without them any pair of functions formula_11 would be a solution.\nsinh(\"x\") and cosh(\"x\") are also the unique solution of the equation \"f\"\u2009\u2033(\"x\") = \"f\"\u2009(\"x\"),\nsuch that \"f\"\u2009(0) = 1, \"f\"\u2009\u2032(0) = 0 for the hyperbolic cosine, and \"f\"\u2009(0) = 0, \"f\"\u2009\u2032(0) = 1 for the hyperbolic sine.\nComplex trigonometric definitions.\nHyperbolic functions may also be deduced from trigonometric functions with complex arguments:\nwhere i is the imaginary unit with \"i\"2 = \u22121.\nThe above definitions are related to the exponential definitions via Euler's formula (See below).\nCharacterizing properties.\nHyperbolic cosine.\nIt can be shown that the area under the curve of the hyperbolic cosine (over a finite interval) is always equal to the arc length corresponding to that interval:\nformula_18\nHyperbolic tangent.\nThe hyperbolic tangent is the (unique) solution to the differential equation \"f\"\u2009\u2032 = 1 \u2212 \"f\"\u20092, with \"f\"&amp;hairsp;(0) = 0.\nUseful relations.\nThe hyperbolic functions satisfy many identities, all of them similar in form to the trigonometric identities. In fact, Osborn's rule (named after George Osborn) states that one can convert any trigonometric identity (up to but not including sinhs or implied sinhs of 4th degree) for formula_19, formula_20, formula_21 or formula_19 and formula_23 into a hyperbolic identity, by:\nOdd and even functions:\nformula_24\nHence:\nformula_25\nThus, cosh \"x\" and sech \"x\" are even functions; the others are odd functions.\nformula_26\nHyperbolic sine and cosine satisfy:\nformula_27\nwhich are analogous to Euler's formula, and\nformula_28\nwhich is analogous to the Pythagorean trigonometric identity.\nOne also has\nformula_29\nfor the other functions.\nSums of arguments.\nformula_30\nparticularly\nformula_31\nAlso:\nformula_32\nProduct formulas.\nformula_33\nSubtraction formulas.\nformula_34\nAlso:\nformula_35\nHalf argument formulas.\nformula_36\nwhere sgn is the sign function.\nIf \"x\" \u2260 0, then\nformula_37\nSquare formulas.\nformula_38\nInequalities.\nThe following inequality is useful in statistics:\nformula_39\nIt can be proved by comparing the Taylor series of the two functions term by term.\nInverse functions as logarithms.\nformula_40\nDerivatives.\nformula_41\nformula_42\nso:\nformula_43\nThus, hyperbolic functions are periodic with respect to the imaginary component, with period formula_44 (formula_45 for hyperbolic tangent and cotangent).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56568", "revid": "51024705", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56568", "title": "Pleiades", "text": "Star cluster in the constellation of Taurus\nThe Pleiades ( ), also known as Seven Sisters and Messier 45 (M45), is an asterism of an open star cluster containing young B-type stars in the northwest of the constellation Taurus. At a distance of about 444 light-years, it is among the nearest star clusters to Earth and the nearest Messier object to Earth, being the most obvious star cluster to the naked eye in the night sky. It contains the reflection nebulae NGC 1432, an HII region, and NGC 1435, known as the Merope Nebula. Around 2330 BC the Pleiades marked the vernal point. Due to the brightness of its stars, the Pleiades is viewable from most areas on Earth, even in locations with significant light pollution.\nThe cluster is dominated by hot blue luminous stars that have formed within the last 100 million years. Reflection nebulae around the brightest stars were once thought to be leftover material from their formation, but are now considered likely to be an unrelated dust cloud in the interstellar medium through which the stars are currently passing. This dust cloud is estimated to be moving at a speed of approximately 18\u00a0km/s relative to the stars in the cluster.\nComputer simulations have shown that the Pleiades were probably formed from a compact configuration that once resembled the Orion Nebula. Astronomers estimate that the cluster will survive for approximately another 250 million years, after which the clustering will be lost due to gravitational interactions with the galactic neighborhood.\nTogether with the open star cluster of the Hyades, the Pleiades form the Golden Gate of the Ecliptic. The Pleiades have been said to \"resemble a tiny dipper,\" and should not be confused with the \"Little Dipper,\" or Ursa Minor.\nOrigin of name.\nThe name, Pleiades, comes from . It probably derives from ( 'to sail') because of the cluster's importance in delimiting the sailing season in the Mediterranean Sea: \"the season of navigation began with their heliacal rising\". In Classical Greek mythology the name was used for seven divine sisters called the Pleiades. In time, the name was said to be derived from that of a mythical mother, Pleione, effectively meaning \"daughters of Pleione\". In reality, the ancient name of the star cluster related to sailing almost certainly came first in the culture, naming of a relationship to the sister deities followed, and eventually appearing in later myths, to interpret the group name, a mother, Pleione.\nAstronomical role of M45 in antiquity.\nThe M45 group played an important role in ancient times for the establishment of many calendars thanks to the combination of two remarkable elements. The first, which is still valid, is its unique and easily identifiable appearance on the celestial vault near the ecliptic. The second, essential for the ancients, is that in the middle of the third millennium BC, this asterism (a prominent pattern or group of stars that is smaller than a constellation) marked the vernal point. (2330 BC with ecliptic latitude about +3.5\u00b0 according to Stellarium)\nThe importance of this asterism is also evident in northern Europe. The Pleiades cluster is displayed on the Nebra sky disc that was found in Germany and is dated to around 1600 BC. On the disk the cluster is represented in a high position between the Sun and the Moon.\nThis asterism also marks the beginning of several ancient calendars:\nNomenclature and mythology.\nThe Pleiades are a prominent sight in winter in the Northern Hemisphere, and are easily visible from mid-southern latitudes. They have been known since antiquity to cultures all around the world, including the Celts (, ); pre-colonial Filipinos (who called it , or , among other names), for whom it indicated the beginning of the year; Hawaiians (who call them ), M\u0101ori (who call them ); Indigenous Australians (from several traditions); the Achaemenid Empire, whence in Persians (who called them or ); the Arabs (who call them ; ); the Chinese (who called them ; ); the Quechua (who call them Qullqa or the storehouse); the Japanese (who call them ; ); the Maya; the Aztec; the Sioux; the Kiowa; and the Cherokee. In Hinduism, the Pleiades are known as ; and are scripturally associated with the war deity () and are also identified or associated with the (Seven Mothers). Hindus celebrate the first day (new moon) of the month of Kartik (month) as Diwali, a festival of abundance and lamps. The Pleiades are also mentioned three times in the Bible, using the constellation's Hebrew name ; .\nThe earliest known depiction of the Pleiades is likely a Northern German Bronze Age artifact known as the Nebra sky disk, dated to approximately 1600 BC. The Babylonian star catalogues name the Pleiades (), meaning 'stars' (literally 'star star'), and they head the list of stars along the ecliptic, reflecting the fact that they were close to the point of the vernal equinox around the twenty-third century BC. The Ancient Egyptians may have used the names \"Followers\" and \"Ennead\" in the prognosis texts of the Calendar of Lucky and Unlucky Days of papyrus Cairo 86637. Some Greek astronomers considered them to be a distinct constellation, and they are mentioned by Hesiod's \"Works and Days\", Homer's \"Iliad\" and \"Odyssey\", and the \"Geoponica\". The Pleiades was the most well-known \"star\" among pre-Islamic Arabs and so often referred to simply as \"the Star\" (; ). Some scholars of Islam suggested that the Pleiades are the \"star\" mentioned in ('The Star') in the Quran.\nOn numerous cylinder seals from the beginning of the first millennium BC, M45 is represented by seven points, while the \"Seven Gods\" appear, on low-reliefs of Neo-Assyrian royal palaces, wearing long open robes and large cylindrical headdresses surmounted by short feathers and adorned with three frontal rows of horns and a crown of feathers, while carrying both an ax and a knife, as well as a bow and a quiver.\nAs noted by scholar Stith Thompson, the constellation was \"nearly always imagined\" as a group of seven sisters, and their myths explain why there are only six. Some scientists suggest that these may come from observations as far back as 100,000 BC when Pleione was farther from Atlas and hence, more visible as a separate star to the unaided eye.\nSubaru.\nIn Japan, the cluster is mentioned under the name (\"six stars\") in the eighth-century \"Kojiki\". The cluster is now known in Japan as \"Subaru\", from the intransitive verb \"subaru\", meaning \"to cluster together\".\nThe Subaru Telescope, the flagship telescope of the National Astronomical Observatory of Japan, located at the Mauna Kea Observatory on the island of Hawaii, was named after the cluster. It had the largest monolithic primary mirror in the world from its commissioning in 1998 until 2005.\nIt also was chosen as the brand name of Subaru automobiles to reflect the origins of the firm as the joining of five companies, and is depicted in the firm's six-star logo.\nTolkien's Legendarium.\nIn J. R. R. Tolkien's legendarium, where \"The Lord of the Rings\" is set, Pleiades is referred to as Remmirath, the netted stars, as are several other celestial bodies, such as the constellation Orion as Menelvagor, swordsman of the Sky.\nObservational history.\nGalileo Galilei was the first astronomer to view the Pleiades through a telescope. He thereby discovered that the cluster contains many stars too dim to be seen with the naked eye. He published his observations, including a sketch of the Pleiades showing 36 stars, in his treatise \"Sidereus Nuncius\" in March 1610.\nThe Pleiades have long been known to be a physically related group of stars rather than any chance alignment. John Michell calculated in 1767 that the probability of a chance alignment of so many bright stars was only 1 in 500,000, and so surmised that the Pleiades and many other clusters must consist of physically related stars. When studies were first made of the proper motions of the stars, it was found that they are all moving in the same direction across the sky, at the same rate, further demonstrating that they were related.\nCharles Messier measured the position of the cluster and included it as \"M45\" in his catalogue of comet-like objects, published in 1771. Along with the Orion Nebula and the Praesepe cluster, Messier's inclusion of the Pleiades has been noted as curious, as most of Messier's objects were much fainter and more easily confused with comets\u2014something that seems scarcely possible for the Pleiades. One possibility is that Messier simply wanted to have a larger catalogue than his scientific rival Lacaille, whose 1755 catalogue contained 42 objects, and so he added some bright, well-known objects to boost the number on his list.\nEdme-S\u00e9bastien Jeaurat then drew in 1782 a map of 64 stars of the Pleiades from his observations in 1779, which he published in 1786.\nDistance.\n px;\n left: px; \"&gt;\n px;\n top: -px;\"&gt;\n Location of Pleiades (circled) in the night sky\n \nThe distance to the Pleiades can be used as a key first step to calibrate the cosmic distance ladder. As the cluster is relatively close to the Earth, the distance should be relatively easy to measure and has been estimated by many methods. Accurate knowledge of the distance allows astronomers to plot a Hertzsprung\u2013Russell diagram for the cluster, which, when compared with those plotted for clusters whose distance is not known, allows their distances to be estimated. Other methods may then extend the distance scale from open clusters to galaxies and clusters of galaxies, and a cosmic distance ladder may be constructed. Ultimately astronomers' understanding of the age and future evolution of the universe is influenced by their knowledge of the distance to the Pleiades. Yet some authors argue that the controversy over the distance to the Pleiades discussed below is a red herring, since the cosmic distance ladder can (presently) rely on a suite of other nearby clusters where consensus exists regarding the distances as established by the \"Hipparcos\" satellite and independent means (e.g., the Hyades, the Coma Berenices cluster, etc.).\nMeasurements of the distance have elicited much controversy. Results prior to the launch of the \"Hipparcos\" satellite generally found that the Pleiades were approximately 135 parsecs (pc) away from Earth. Data from \"Hipparcos\" yielded a surprising result, namely a distance of only 118 pc, by measuring the parallax of stars in the cluster\u2014a technique that should yield the most direct and accurate results. Later work consistently argued that the \"Hipparcos\" distance measurement for the Pleiades was erroneous: In particular, distances derived to the cluster via the Hubble Space Telescope and infrared color\u2013magnitude diagram fitting (so-called \"spectroscopic parallax\") favor a distance between 135 and 140 pc; a dynamical distance from optical interferometric observations of the inner pair of stars within Atlas (a bright triple star in the Pleiades) favors a distance of 133 to 137 pc. However, the author of the 2007\u20132009 catalog of revised \"Hipparcos\" parallaxes reasserted that the distance to the Pleiades is ~120 pc and challenged the dissenting evidence. In 2012, Francis and Anderson proposed that a systematic effect on \"Hipparcos\" parallax errors for stars in clusters would bias calculation using the weighted mean; they gave a \"Hipparcos\" parallax distance of 126 pc and photometric distance of 132 pc based on stars in the AB Doradus, Tucana-Horologium and Beta Pictoris moving groups, which are all similar in age and composition to the Pleiades. Those authors note that the difference between these results may be attributed to random error.\nMore recent results using very-long-baseline interferometry (VLBI) (August 2014), and preliminary solutions using Gaia Data Release 1 (September 2016) and Gaia Data Release 2 (August 2018), determine distances of 136.2 \u00b1 1.2 pc, 134 \u00b1 6 pc and 136.2 \u00b1 5.0 pc, respectively. The Gaia Data Release\u00a01 team were cautious about their result, and the VLBI authors assert \"that the \"Hipparcos\"-measured distance to the Pleiades cluster is in error\".\nThe most recent distance estimate of the distance to the Pleiades based on the Gaia Data Release 3 is .\nComposition.\nThe cluster core radius is approximately 8 light-years and tidal radius is approximately 43 light-years. The cluster contains more than 1,000 statistically confirmed members, not counting the number that would be added if all binary stars could be resolved. Its light is dominated by young, hot blue stars, up to 14 of which may be seen with the naked eye, depending on local observing conditions and visual acuity of the observer. The brightest stars form a shape somewhat similar to that of Ursa Major and Ursa Minor. The total mass contained in the cluster is estimated to be approximately 800 solar masses and is dominated by fainter and redder stars. An estimate of the frequency of binary stars in the Pleiades is approximately 57%.\nThe cluster contains many brown dwarfs, such as Teide 1. These are objects with less than approximately 8% of the Sun's mass, insufficient for the nuclear fusion of hydrogen to start in their cores and become proper stars. They may constitute up to 25% of the total population of the cluster, although they contribute less than 2% of the total mass. Astronomers have made great efforts to find and analyze brown dwarfs in the Pleiades and other young clusters, because they are still relatively bright and observable, while brown dwarfs in older clusters have faded and are much more difficult to study.\nBrightest stars.\nThe brightest stars of the cluster are named the Seven Sisters in early Greek mythology: Sterope, Merope, Electra, Maia, Taygeta, Celaeno, and Alcyone. Later, they were assigned parents, Pleione and Atlas. As daughters of Atlas, the Hyades were sisters of the Pleiades.\nThe following table gives details of the brightest stars in the cluster:\nAge and future evolution.\nAges for star clusters may be estimated by comparing the Hertzsprung\u2013Russell diagram for the cluster with theoretical models of stellar evolution. Using this technique, ages for the Pleiades of between 75 and 150 million years have been estimated. The wide spread in estimated ages is a result of uncertainties in stellar evolution models, which include factors such as convective overshoot, in which a convective zone within a star penetrates an otherwise non-convective zone, resulting in higher apparent ages.\nAnother way of estimating the age of the cluster is by looking at the lowest-mass objects. In normal main-sequence stars, lithium is rapidly destroyed in nuclear fusion reactions. Brown dwarfs can retain their lithium, however. Due to lithium's very low ignition temperature of 2.5 million K, the highest-mass brown dwarfs will burn it eventually, and so determining the highest mass of brown dwarfs still containing lithium in the cluster may give an idea of its age. Applying this technique to the Pleiades gives an age of about 115 million years.\nThe cluster is slowly moving in the direction of the feet of what is currently the constellation of Orion. Like most open clusters, the Pleiades will not stay gravitationally bound forever. Some component stars will be ejected after close encounters with other stars; others will be stripped by tidal gravitational fields. Calculations suggest that the cluster will take approximately 250 million years to disperse, because of gravitational interactions with giant molecular clouds and the spiral arms of our galaxy hastening its demise.\nReflection nebulosity.\nWith larger amateur telescopes, the nebulosity around some of the stars may be easily seen, especially when long-exposure photographs are taken. Under ideal observing conditions, some hint of nebulosity around the cluster may be seen even with small telescopes or average binoculars. It is a reflection nebula, caused by dust reflecting the blue light of the hot, young stars.\nIt was formerly thought that the dust was left over from the formation of the cluster, but at the age of approximately 100 million years generally accepted for the cluster, almost all the dust originally present would have been dispersed by radiation pressure. Instead, it seems that the cluster is simply passing through a particularly dusty region of the interstellar medium.\nStudies show that the dust responsible for the nebulosity is not uniformly distributed, but is concentrated mainly in two layers along the line of sight to the cluster. These layers may have been formed by deceleration due to radiation pressure as the dust has moved toward the stars.\nPossible planets.\nAnalyzing deep-infrared images obtained by the Spitzer Space Telescope and Gemini North telescope, astronomers discovered that one of the stars in the cluster, HD 23514, which has a mass and luminosity a bit greater than that of the Sun, is surrounded by an extraordinary number of hot dust particles. This could be evidence for planet formation around HD 23514.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56569", "revid": "45203278", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56569", "title": "Ashgabat", "text": "Capital and largest city of Turkmenistan\nAshgabat is the capital and largest city of Turkmenistan. It lies between the Karakum Desert and the Kopetdag mountain range in Central Asia, approximately 50\u00a0km (30\u00a0mi) away from the Iran-Turkmenistan border. The city has a population of 1,030,063 (2022 census).\nThe city was founded in 1881 on the basis of an Ahal Teke tribal village, and made the capital of the Turkmen Soviet Socialist Republic in 1924 when it was known as Poltoratsk. Much of the city was destroyed by the 1948 Ashgabat earthquake, but has since been extensively rebuilt under the rule of Saparmurat Niyazov's \"White City\" urban renewal project, resulting in monumental projects sheathed in costly white marble. The Soviet-era Karakum Canal runs through the city, carrying waters from the Amu Darya from east to west.\nToday, as the capital of an independent Turkmenistan, Ashgabat retains a multiethnic population, with ethnic Turkmen as the majority. In 2021, it celebrated 140 years of its written history.\nEtymology.\nAshgabat is called \"A\u015fgabat\" (transliterated as \"Ashgabat\") in Turkmen, in Russian from 1925 to 1991, and (\"'E\u0161q\u0101b\u0101d\") in Persian. Before 1991, the name was usually spelled \"Ashkhabad\" in English, a transliteration of the Russian form. It has also been variously spelled Ashkhabat and Ashgabad. From 1919 until 1927, the city was renamed Poltoratsk after a local revolutionary, Pavel Poltoratskiy.\nAlthough the name literally means \"city of love\" or \"city of devotion\" in modern Persian, the name might have been modified through folk etymology. Turkmen historian Ovez Gundogdiyev believes that the name goes back to the Parthian era, 3rd century BC, deriving from the name of the founder of the Parthian Empire, Arsaces I of Parthia, in Persian Ashk-Abad (the city of \"Ashk\"/Arsaces).\nGeography.\nAshgabat is in near proximity, approximately 50\u00a0km (30\u00a0mi), to the Iranian border. It occupies a highly seismically active oasis plain bounded on the south by the foothills of the Kopet Dag mountains () and on the north by the Karakum Desert. It is surrounded by, but not part of, Ahal Province (). The highest point in the city is the high sandhill upon which the Yyldyz Hotel was built, but most of the city lies between of elevation. The Karakum Canal runs through the city.\nLike the rest of Turkmenistan, Ashgabat's soil is primarily sediment that accumulated on the bottom of the Paratethys Ocean. The Kopet Dag mountains emerged toward the end of the Cretaceous Period.\nUrban layout.\n1881 to 1929.\nPrior to 1881 any buildings other than yurts were made solely from adobe and were limited to one story in height due to the seismic risk. As of 1900 only one building in the city was two stories tall, the municipal museum. City planning began following the Russian conquest, with \"very simple planning schemes\". The basic layout of downtown streets \"has been preserved to this day and defined the unique character of the city structure combining linear and radial types of layout of blocks\". The Russian writer Vasily Yan, who lived in Askhabad from 1901 to 1904, described the city as \"a little tidy town consisting of numerous clay houses, surrounded by fruit gardens with straight streets, planted with slim cottonwood, chestnut, and white acacia planned by the hand of military engineers\". Another description noted,\n The fortress was the center of the bureaucratic part of the city. Here stood especially sturdy thick-walled houses, with strong window grates and corner buttresses. Earthquakes were less frightening in such houses, and behind the thick walls even in the hottest months some measure of indoor coolness was retained. Each house had a garden around it, on maintenance of which residents spared neither expenditures nor water...Nearer the rail station lived the railroad workers and craftsmen. Here the houses were shorter and more densely spaced, gardens smaller, and dust on the streets greater...\n Gradually a third center of Ashkhabad started to emerge, of the merchants. Roughly equidistant from the rail station and the fortress was laid out a sad marketplace, becoming not only a center of stores and stalls, but a center of gravity for merchants' residence.\n1930 to 1948.\nIn 1930, asphalt was used for the first time to pave Ashgabat's streets. The water supply was increased by piping water from springs in neighboring G\u00e4mi and Bagyr.\nThe first master plan for Ashgabat, developed between 1935 and 1937 at the Moscow Institute of Geodesy, Aerial Imagery, and Cartography, envisioned expansion to the west, including irrigation and greening of the Bikrova canyon (today Bekrewe). The city architect's office was created in 1936 but was unable to implement the new master plan \"as it implied significant demolition of the existing buildings\". A description of Ashgabat published in 1948 just before the earthquake noted, \"In Ashgabat there are nearly no tall buildings, thus every two-story building is visible from above...\", i.e., from the foothills. The tallest structures were the clock tower of the textile mill, the \"round smokestack of the glass factory\", two \"exceptionally thin minarets\" of the \"former mosque\", and \"two splendid towers over the long building of the main city hotel\".\nImpact of the 1948 earthquake.\nDuring the 1948 earthquake, since the bulk of Ashgabat at that time was built of either adobe or fired brick, all but a very few buildings collapsed or were damaged beyond repair (the reinforced concrete grain elevator, Church of St. Alexander Nevsky, and K\u00e4rz Bank were among the structures that survived). According to Turkmenistan's official news agency,\n Nearly all one-story residential buildings in the city made of mud brick were destroyed, 95 percent of all one-story buildings made of fired brick, and the remaining structures were damaged beyond repair. The number of inhabitable buildings was in single digits, and at that, only after capital renovation.\nA new general plan was hastily developed by July 1949. The city was divided into four zones: central, northern, eastern, and southwestern. Reconstruction of the city began in that year. Thus from the early 1950s through 1991 Ashgabat's skyline was dominated by the Brutalist Style favored by post-Stalin Soviet architects. The city's central avenue, Magtymguly (former Kuropatkin, Freedom, and Stalin Avenue), featured \"monotonous and primarily two-story construction of administrative and residential buildings\". This reconstruction \"preserved the existing network of city streets as it was economically unjustified to redesign them\". The city was described as \"...a Communist-era backwater, rebuilt into a typically drab provincial Soviet city...\" The plan was updated in 1959.\nAmong the buildings erected in the 1950s and 1960s were the headquarters of the Central Committee of the Turkmenistan Communist Party, the Council of Ministers Building, the Mollanepes Academic Drama Theater, the former Ashkhabad Hotel (now renamed Paytagt), the Academy of Sciences complex, and the downtown library building. On then-Karl Marx Square stood a monument to the Soviet \"fighters for victory of Soviet power in Turkmenistan\".\nThe 1960s master plan.\nThe Turkmen State Project Institute undertook a feasibility study in the mid-1960s to forecast Ashgabat's development to the year 2000, and on that basis to develop a new master plan. Up until then the city had largely expanded to the east, but now the plan called for development to the south and west. This plan was used for about 20 years, and led to construction of the city's first four-story apartment buildings in the Howdan () microdistricts, formerly the site of the Ashgabat-South aerodrome, as well as annexation of three collective farms in the near suburbs and their conversion into residential neighborhoods, one of which, Leningrad kolkhoz, to this day is referred to informally by its former name. The plan was reworked in 1974, and this resulted in relocation of several industrial plants away from the city center, and thus creation of the industrial zones to the northwest, south, southeast, and northeast.\nBetween 1961 and 1987 the city architect was Abdulla Ahmedov, who introduced Soviet modernism to Ashgabat. Ahmedov's greatest architectural accomplishment during this period is considered the Ashgabat Hotel (today renamed Paytagt Hotel), built between 1964 and 1970, \"a harmonious synthesis of architecture and monumental art\".\nGrowth.\nIn 1948 Ashgabat was described before the earthquake as lying \"on a sloping plain of the Kopet-Dag foothills, stretching seven kilometers from west to east and five kilometers from the railroad right-of-way to the south, in the direction of the mountains\". Through the mid-1970s, Ashgabat was a compact city, as shown by the 1974 Soviet military's General Staff map J-40-081. The village of K\u00f6\u015fi, collective farm \"Leningrad\", airport, and suburbs to the north were outside the city limits.\nBeginning in the 1970s, Ashgabat's boundaries shifted outward, with the aforementioned municipalities annexed, the aerodrome at Howdan redeveloped, and creation of the Parahat () neighborhoods to the south and industrial parks to the east. In 2013, Ashgabat annexed a portion of the then-Ruhabat district of Ahal Province as well as the city of Abadan (previously named B\u00fczme\u00fdin, and renamed that as a neighborhood) plus all land and villages in between. The southern boundary of Ashgabat was extended southward to the foothills of the Kopet Dag mountains. Overall, Ashgabat's land area rose by 37,654 hectares. The following municipalities were abolished due to their incorporation into the city of Ashgabat: city of Abadan, towns of J\u00fclge and Ruhabat, villages of G\u00f6kje, Gypjak, Birle\u015fik, Magaryf, Herrikgala, \u00ddalkym, Gurtly, Hellewler, Ylmy-Tejribe bazasy, \u00ddasmansalyk, K\u00f6ne Gurtly, Gulant\u00e4zekli, Serdar \u00fdoly, Ga\u0148tar, Gyzyljagala, Iner\u00e7\u00fdage, Tarhan, Topurly, and Ussagulla. A further expansion occurred January 5, 2018, when additional land to the north was annexed, incorporating the Gurtly Reservoir and two greenfield residential construction projects, known today as T\u00e4ze Zaman. This statute also established the current four boroughs of Ashgabat.\nClimate.\nThe Kopet Dag mountain range is about to the south, and Ashgabat's northern boundary touches the Kara-Kum desert. Because of this Ashgabat has a cold desert climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"BWk\", bordering on \"BWh\") with mediterranean influences. It features very hot, dry summers and cool, short, somewhat moist, winters. The average high temperature in July is . Nighttimes in the summer are warm, with an average minimum temperature in July of . The average January high temperature is , and the average low temperature is . The highest temperature ever recorded in Ashgabat is , recorded in June 2015. A low temperature of was recorded in January 1969. Snow is infrequent in the area. Annual precipitation is only ; March and April are the wettest months, and June to September are the driest months. In May 2022, , 1,352% of the monthly normal, was reported.\nHistory.\nAshgabat grew on the ruins of the Silk Road city of Konjikala, first mentioned as a wine-producing village in the 1st-2nd century BC and leveled by an earthquake in the 1st century BC. Konjikala was rebuilt because of its advantageous location on the Silk Road and it flourished until its destruction by Mongols in the 13th century. After that it survived as a small village until Russians took over in the 19th century.\nThe near suburb of K\u00f6\u015fi, until 2013 a separate village but in that year annexed by Ashgabat, may have been site of a Parthian fortress constructed to protect the capital city, Nisa, based on discoveries of pottery and other artifacts in the 1970s and as recently as 2020. Other artifacts indicating settlement during the Parthian period were reportedly discovered during laying of telephone cables on the site of the G\u00fclistan (Russian) Bazaar in downtown Ashgabat.\nAccording to Muradov, the first mention of the settlement in modern times is found in Khiva chronicles of 1811.\nBritish Lieutenant Colonel H.C. Stuart reported in 1881 that the Ahal branch of the Teke tribe of the Turkmen ethnic group arrived in the area around 1830 and established several semi-nomadic villages (\"auls\") between what are now the city of Gyzylarbat and village of G\u00e4wers, inclusive. One of these villages was named Askhabad. The first Russian reference to Ashgabat dates to 1850, in a document kept in the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs archives listing 43 Ahal fortresses, \"Ishkhabad\" among them. It was described as a \"typical Turkmen \"aul\"\".\nIt was formally part of Persia but \"de facto\" autonomous under Turkoman tribal control until Russian forces defeated the Teke army at the Battle of Geok Tepe in January 1881. Persia ceded Askhabad to the Russian Empire in September 1881 under the terms of the Akhal Treaty.\nRussian Empire.\nThe city was officially founded January 18, 1881, as a fortified garrison and was named after the Turkmen village on that site. Russian military engineers platted the garrison settlement \"on the western edge of the \"aul\" (village) of Askhabad on the Gaudan (Howdan) road leading to Persia. The fortress stood on a hill 12 meters high, on which was constructed a citadel-redoubt, and below [it], the residential area, surrounded by walls and a moat.\" Sixty-seven Turkmen families were compensated for the land confiscated from them for this construction.\nRussia developed the area due to its proximity to the border of British-influenced Persia. In 1882 a wagon road was built through the mountains to Quchan, Iran, which led to increased trade as well as settlement of Persian and Armenian merchants in Askhabad. The Trans-Caspian railway reached Askhabad in 1885. The population grew from 2,500 in 1881 to 10,000 in 1886 and 19,428 (of whom one third were Persian) by 1897. The Transcaspian Public Library was established in 1885, boys and girls high schools were founded in 1886, and the Kuropatkin School of Horticulture and Viticulture appeared in 1890. The first telephone station was installed in 1900.\nThe city was regarded as a pleasant municipality with European-style buildings, shops, and hotels. Several streets were named after Russian military figures, reflecting its status as a garrison town, including the main square, named in honor of General Mikhail Skobelev, commander of Russian forces during the 1880\u20131881 Trans-Caspian military campaign. These included as well the western boundary avenue, named in honor of General Nikolai Grodekov, and the city's central avenue, renamed in the 1890s to honor General and Trans-Caspian Governor-General Aleksey Kuropatkin, both of whom had served in the Trans-Caspian campaign under Skobolev's command.\nIn 1908, the first Bah\u00e1'\u00ed House of Worship was built in Askhabad. It was badly damaged in the 1948 earthquake and finally demolished in 1963. The community of the Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith in Turkmenistan was largely based in Askhabad.\nBy 1915 Askhabad featured branches of the Russian State Bank, Persian Accounting Loan Bank, Russian-Asian Bank, Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 G\u00e9n\u00e9rale, and Askhabat Mutual Credit Union.\nSoviet period.\nSoviet rule was established in Ashgabat in December 1917. However, in July 1918, a coalition of Mensheviks, Social Revolutionaries, and Tsarist former officers of the Imperial Russian Army revolted against the Bolshevik rule emanating from Tashkent and established the Ashkhabad Executive Committee. After receiving some support (but even more promises) from General Malleson, the British withdrew in April 1919 and the Tashkent Soviet resumed control of the city.\nIn 1919, the city was renamed Poltoratsk (), after Pavel Poltoratskiy, the Chairman of the Soviet of National Economy of the Turkestan Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic. When the Turkmen SSR was established in 1924, Poltoratsk became its capital. The original name but in the form of \"Ashkhabad\" rather than \"Askhabad\" was restored in 1927. In keeping with standard Soviet practice, Imperial Russian street names were changed to honor prominent Communists, Russians, or socialist ideals. For example, Skobolev Square became Karl Marx Square, Grodekov Street became Ostrovskiy Street, and Kuropatkin Avenue became Freedom Avenue (and from 1953 to 1961, following Joseph Stalin's death, Stalin Avenue). In 1927 a statue of Vladimir Lenin designed by A.A. Karelin and Ye.R. Tripolskaya was erected.\nDuring World War II Ashgabat became a refuge for both institutions, including Moscow State University and the Kiev film studio, and individuals. Roughly 8,000 refugees were quartered in private homes during the war. Among the outsiders who escaped to Ashgabat during the war were Andrei Sakharov and author Yury Olesha. In 1944 Ukrainian motion picture director Mark Donskoy filmed \"Rainbow\" (, ) in Ashgabat, which was nominated for an Academy Award as best foreign film.\nFrom this period onward, the city experienced rapid growth and industrialisation, although severely disrupted by a major earthquake on October 6, 1948. An estimated 7.3 on the Surface magnitude scale, the earthquake killed 110\u2013176,000 (two-thirds of the population of the city), although the official number announced by Soviet news was only 40,000. The earthquake was recorded as one of the deadliest natural disasters in Soviet history.\nIndependence.\nIn July 2003, street names in Ashgabat were replaced by serial numbers except for nine major highways, some named after Saparmurat Niyazov, his father, and his mother. The Presidential Palace Square was designated 2000 to symbolize the beginning of the 21st century. The rest of the streets were assigned larger or smaller four-digit numerical names. Following Niyazov's death in 2006, Soviet-era street names were restored, though in the years since, many of them have been replaced with names honoring Turkmen scholars, poets, military heroes, and figures from art and culture, as well as celebrating the nation's independence. For example, Karl Marx Square became Gara\u015fsyzlyk (Independence) Square, Ostrovskiy Street became Abba Anna\u00fdew (in honor of President Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedov's great-uncle), and Freedom Avenue became Magtymguly.\nIn 2013, the city was included in the \"Guinness Book of Records\" as possessing the world's highest concentration of white marble buildings.\nAshgabat's \"11th Line\" project was dedicated on June 29, 2012, including 17 high-rise apartment buildings along 10 \u00fdyl Abadan\u00e7ylyk \u015fa\u00fdoly, two secondary schools, two kindergartens, a fire station, and a health clinic. The \"12th Line\" project was completed October 1, 2014, consisting of a straightening and widening of Atamyrat Ny\u00fdazow \u015fa\u00fdoly plus construction of 13 high-rise apartment buildings, two secondary schools, two kindergartens, a new headquarters building for the Union of Industrialists and Entrepreneurs, the Teleke\u00e7i shopping center, and the Development Bank. On that same date, the new Cabinet of Ministers building was also opened.\nIn preparation for the 2017 Asian Indoor and Martial Arts Games, the city spent $5\u00a0billion on residential construction. December 4, 2014, the president issued a decree calling for construction of 60 9-story apartment buildings in the Parahat-7 microdistrict, a greenfield project in the southeast quadrant of the city. On November 10, 2015, the \"13th Line\" was dedicated, a complete reconstruction of buildings along Oguzhan k\u00f6\u00e7esi west of Gara\u015fsyzlyk \u015fa\u00fdoly. Projects included demolition and redevelopment of the Leningrad kolkhoz neighborhood as the \"14th Line\", and the Gazha and Vosmushka neighborhoods as the \"15th Line\".\nSubsequent to conclusion of the Asian Indoor and Martial Arts Games, the \"16th Line\" project, a redevelopment of the K\u00f6\u015fi neighborhood and extension of Magtymguly Avenue to the west, was begun in 2018. The \"16th Line\" was dedicated on November 10, 2020; it includes 16 high-rise apartment buildings, the G\u00fcl zemin shopping center, and a monument to the Alabay sheepdog. In addition, the Gurtly and Choganly housing complexes, both greenfield projects, were constructed. In May 2021 the government announced plans for the \"17th Line\", consisting of a resort complex encircling Golden Lake (), the former Gurtly Reservoir, to include 268 vacation cottages plus buildings for public services and amenities.\nOn 23 August 2022 the government announced plans to demolish one- and two-story houses in several microdistricts of central Ashgabat and to replace them with modern apartment buildings. A map of the areas intended for urban renewal was broadcast on national television that day, but no indication of a timeline was given.\nThe largest current residential project is construction of \"Ashgabat-City\" \"()\" north of the Choganly residential neighborhood, which is planned to include over 200 buildings on 744 hectares, and for the first time in the city's history to feature some buildings as tall as 35 stories. These will include 180 12- to 35-story residential buildings containing 17,836 apartments intended to house over 107,000 occupants.\nAshgabat milestones:\nDistricts.\nBoroughs.\nAs of January 5, 2018, Ashgabat includes four boroughs (\"uly etraplar\"), each with a presidentially appointed mayor ():\nThis is a reduction from the previous number of boroughs. Ar\u00e7abil and \u00c7andybil boroughs were merged on February 4, 2015, and the new \"etrap\", named Ar\u00e7abil, was in turn renamed B\u00fczme\u00fdin in January 2018. At that time the Abadan borough of Ashgabat, created in 2013 by annexing the town of Abadan and surrounding villages to Abadan's south, was abolished and its territory was merged into the newly renamed B\u00fczme\u00fdin borough. The former Ruhabat borough was abolished at the same time and its territory absorbed by Bagty\u00fdarlyk borough.\nOn 15 June 2020, Turkmen President Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedov announced intention to create a fifth borough of Ashgabat, to be called Altyn etraby, centered on the new resort zone created on the shores of the former Gurtly Water Reservoir, recently renamed \"Golden Lake\" (Altyn k\u00f6l).\nMicrodistricts.\nAshgabat's boroughs are subdivided into microdistricts (, ). These are administrative units that possess no independent governance structures. They are used for management of utilities and publicly owned housing. Ashgabat includes the following microdistricts:\nDemographics.\nIn 1871, a Russian visitor named Strebnitskiy counted over four thousand \"nomad tents\" (yurts), implying a population of 16 to 20 thousand Ahal Teke Turkmen, many of whom were killed or dispersed in the 1881 Battle of Geok Tepe. The population was 2,500 in 1881, virtually all Russian. By 1886, Askhabad's population was about 10,000, mainly ethnic Russians. Construction of the Trans-Caspian Railway stimulated an influx of migrants seeking employment, particularly from the Caucasus, Volga Valley, and Iran, and Askhabad's subsequent population growth was as follows:\nEthnic Russians dominated the population after 1881, with about 20 percent admixture of Caucasus-origin migrants (mainly Armenian). One source indicates that pre-revolutionary Askhabad had no Turkmen residents at all, and that they lived in nearby \"auls\". This began to change in the 1920s, following imposition of Soviet power, which brought with it forced collectivization. In 1926 Ashkhabad's population of 51,593 included 52.4% Russians, 13.53% Armenian, 4.3% Persians, and 29.8% \"other\". By 1939, Ashkhabad counted 126,500 residents, including 11.7% Armenian. The 1959 census recorded a population of 169,900, which grew to 338,000 by 1983, including 105 nationalities, of which ethnic Armenians constituted 40 percent.\nAccording to estimates of the 2012 Turkmen census, the Turkmens form 78.5% of the city's population. Russians form 10% of the population, followed by Turks (1.1%), Uzbeks (1.1%), and Azeris (1%).\nArchitecture.\nPost-1991.\nFollowing independence in 1991, President Saparmurat Niyazov began hiring foreign architectural and construction firms, most prominently Bouygues of France and the Turkish firms Polimeks and Gap In\u015faat, the latter a subsidiary of \u00c7al\u0131k Holding. These firms blended Persian-style domes, which Niyazov favored, with Greco-Roman architectural elements such as pillars.\nFollowing Niyazov's death, domes began to go out of fashion for buildings other than mosques, and public buildings began to take on more modernist characteristics, often with a motif reflecting the structure's intended occupant. For example, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs building is topped by a globe of the Earth, inside which is a conference center; the Development Bank building is topped by a giant coin; the Ministry of Health and Medical Industry building is shaped like a stylized caduceus, the dental hospital is shaped like a molar and the international terminal of Ashgabat International Airport is shaped like a falcon. The dominant characteristic of new construction since 1991 has been nearly universal facing with white marble. Another recurring motif is the eight-pointed star of Oguz Han, the largest of which is on the television tower and has entered the Guinness Book of World Records. The official Turkmen government guide book to Ashgabat refers to the star of Oguz Khan as \"...the basic dominant of the whole architectural-art decor...\"\nAfter independence, the city architect's office ordered construction of many high-rise (generally 12-story) residential buildings. Modern construction techniques allow high-rise development with good seismic safety. Primarily consisting of residential towers, the first floor is typically used as retail space and for building maintenance.\nMonuments and statues.\nAshgabat features many sculptures honoring Turkmen, Turkic, and other Islamic poets and heroes. Four statues, of Lenin, Alexander Pushkin, Taras Shevchenko, and Magtymguly, date to the Soviet period, as do a statue and a bust of Turkmen composer Nury Halmammedov. Since then, however, much new sculpture has appeared. In Ylham (Inspiration) Park are found numerous busts and statues. Additional statues can be seen in the VDNH Park. A monumental statue of the current president was dedicated in May 2015 near Ashgabat Stadium. One also finds statues of Mustafa Kemal Atat\u00fcrk and Alp Arslan. In addition to the statue of former President Niyazov atop the Neutrality Monument, a gilded statue of him stands before the Ministry of Internal Affairs, and a gilded seated statue of him graces the entry to the Turkmen Agricultural University.\nSince independence in 1991, several monuments to features of Turkmenistan's governance have been erected: to neutrality, to the constitution, to the renaissance of Turkmenistan, to independence, as well as a special monument to former President Saparmurat Niyazov's magnum opus, \"Ruhnama\".\nThe memorial complex in Bekrewe includes a statue of a bull with the Earth balanced on its horns, symbolizing the 1948 earthquake, and a statue of two traditionally dressed Turkmen warriors guarding a widow grieving the death of her husband in World War II. The exterior wall of the museum features bas reliefs depicting events in Turkmenistan's history.\nIn advance of the V Asian Indoor and Martial Arts Games held in September 2017, roughly one billion dollars was spent on widening and upgrading Ashgabat's major thoroughfares. Several traffic circles were created, in which were placed mainly abstract monuments. As of 2020 the most recent addition to these are the Bicycle Monument (), which President Berdimuhamedov dedicated on June 3, 2020, and the Turkmen Alabay monument, dedicated on November 10, 2020.\nIn May 2024, a monument dedicated to the 300th anniversary of the birth of Turkmen poet and philosopher Magtymguly Pyragy was unveiled in Ashgabat, near Walk of Health at the foot of the Kopetdag mountain range. The 60-meter sculpture of the poet stands on a 20-meter pedestal, to which a majestic staircase with massive granite bowls leads.\nIn October 2024, a statue of Kazakh poet Abai Qunanbaiuly was unveiled in Lachyn Park in Ashgabat.\nControversies.\nMuch of the urban renewal since 1991 has involved demolition of traditional single-family residential housing, commonly with allegedly forced eviction of residents, and often without compensation to the homeowners. In particular, private homes rebuilt in neighborhoods flattened by the 1948 earthquake, many of which were never formally registered with the government, were subject to confiscation and demolition without compensation, as were former dacha communities like Ruhabat, Berzengi, and Choganly, which in nearly all cases lacked formal ownership documents.\nFirst Baha'i Temple in the world.\nWhen Ashgabat was under Russian rule, the number of Bah\u00e1'\u00eds in the city rose to over 1,000, and a Bah\u00e1'\u00ed community was established, with its own schools, medical facilities and cemetery. The community elected one of the first Bah\u00e1'\u00ed local administrative institutions. In 1908 the Bah\u00e1'\u00ed community completed the construction of the first Bah\u00e1'\u00ed House of Worship, sometimes referred to by its Arabic name of \"ma\u0161riqu-l-'a\u1e0fk\u0101r\" (), where people of all religions may worship God without denominational restrictions. The building was designed under the guidance of `Abdu'l-Bah\u00e1 by Ustad' Ali-Akbar Banna Yazdi who also wrote a history of the Baha'is in Ashgabat.\nThe House of Worship itself was surrounded by gardens, with four buildings at the four corners of the gardens: a school, a hostel where travelling Bah\u00e1'\u00eds were entertained, a small hospital, and a building for groundskeepers.\nUnder the Soviet policy towards religion, the Bah\u00e1'\u00eds, strictly adhering to their principle of obedience to legal government, abandoned these properties in 1928. For the decade from 1938 to 1948, when it was seriously damaged by the earthquake, it was an art gallery. It was demolished in 1963.\nOther notable structures.\nThe Arch of Neutrality was dismantled and re-erected in its original form in the south of the capital.\nTurkmenistan Tower, the television and radio broadcasting tower, at a height of 211 meters is the tallest structure in the country. It was dedicated on October 17, 2011.\nThe administrative center of Ashgabat as the national capital is on the Archabil highway, where several ministries and agencies, as well as educational, research, and cultural centers, are found. The former Novofiryuzenskoye shosse (New Firyuza Highway) was rebuilt by Gap In\u015faat in 2004.\nEconomy.\nThe principal industries are cotton textiles and metal working. It is a major stop on the Trans-Caspian railway. A large percentage of the employment in Ashgabat is provided by the state institutions; such as the ministries, undersecretariats, and other administrative bodies of the Turkmenistan government. There are also many foreign citizens working as diplomats or clerks in the embassies of their respective countries. Ashgabat lends its name to the Ashgabat Agreement, signed by India, Oman, Iran, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan, for creating an international transport and transit corridor facilitating transportation of goods between Central Asia and the Persian Gulf.\nIn 2019 and 2020, Ashgabat was the most expensive city in the world for foreign expatriates in ECA International's Cost of Living Survey. It was also listed as the second most expensive city in the world overall by the 2020 Mercer Cost of Living Survey. Its high cost of living for foreigners has been attributed to severe inflation and rising import costs.\nIndustry.\nBetween 1881 and 1921, little industry existed in Ashgabat. Muradov relates that in 1915 the city featured \"68 enterprises, mainly semi-handicrafts, with a total of 200-300 workers\". Another source relates that as of 1911 roughly half the workforce of somewhat more than 400 \"workers\" was employed at the railroad depot, engaged in locomotive and railcar maintenance and repair, with the rest occupied in cotton ginning, cottonseed oil extraction, flour milling, and leather-, brick-, glass-, and iron production. By 1915 the city boasted as well three printing houses, an electrical power station, three cotton gins, a creamery, a tannery, and 35 brickyards.\nIn 1921 Soviet authorities built a new glass plant plus a wine and spirits factory. In the years following several more factories were added, including the \"Red Metalworker\" iron-working plant (1925), the silk spinning plant (1928), a cotton spinning plant and textile plant (1929), candy factory (1930), garment factory (1933), shoe factory (1934), and a meat cannery (1938). As of 1948, Ashgabat boasted \"about twenty large factory-plant enterprises, which produce fabrics, glass, footwear, garments, meat products, dredges, agricultural implement parts and much else\".\nAnnexation of the former city of Buzmeyin (), which from 2002 to 2018 was known as Abadan, brought into Ashgabat's city limits its major industrial suburb. Today's Buzmeyin neighborhood features the Buzmeyin State Electrical Power Plant, and factories for production of reinforced concrete, cement, asbestos roofing, pipes, and concrete blocks, as well as a carpet-weaving factory and soft-drink bottling plant.\nToday more than 43 large and 128 medium-sized industrial enterprises along with over 1,700 small industrial facilities are located in Ashgabat and its suburbs. The most important are Ashneftemash, Turkmenkabel, and Turkmenbashy Textile Complex.\nElectrical power generation.\nThe Abadan State Power Plant (now B\u00fczme\u00fdin State Power Plant), commissioned in 1957, was the first large power plant in Turkmenistan. Two gas turbine plants with a capacity of 123 MW each currently generate electricity in this plant. The Ashgabat State Power Plant, located in the southern part of city, began operating in 2006. It is equipped with gas turbine generators with a total capacity of 254.2 megawatts.\nAshgabat also draws power from the Ahal State Power Plant, located outside the city in Ahal Province. It began operating in 2010 with two gas turbines producing 254.2 MW. Three small gas turbines were added in 2013 and two more gas turbines in 2014, bringing capacity to 648.1 MW.\nShopping.\nAltyn Asyr Bazaar in Choganly, also known as \"Tolkuchka\", features manufactured items including traditional fabrics and hand-woven carpets, as well as livestock and used automobiles.\nModern shopping areas are found mostly in central streets, including the modern Berkarar Mall, Arka\u00e7 Mall, Ashgabat Shopping and Entertainment Center, G\u00fcl Zemin and Pa\u00fdtagt, as well as the 15 Years of Independence Shopping Centre (), colloquially known as the \"Wholesale Market\" ().\nLocal residents tend to shop at traditional bazaars: G\u00fclistan (Russian) Bazaar, Teke Bazaar, Da\u015foguz Bazaar, Paytagt (Mir) Bazaar, and Jennet Bazaar. The Turkish-owned Yimpa\u015f department store closed as of December 2016.\nTransportation.\nOn 18 October 2006, the Ashgabat Cable Car opened, connecting the city with the foothills of the Kopetdag.\nAshgabat Monorail commenced service in 2016, becoming the first monorail in the Central Asia region. It is a loop 5.2 kilometers long and circulates exclusively on the territory of the Olympic Village ().\nIn January 2018, it was reported that black cars had been impounded for weeks in Ashgabat, a result of President Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedov's conviction that black cars bring bad luck.\nThe Ukrainian construction firm Interbudmontazh has proposed construction of a subway (metropolitan) line, to connect the Ashgabat-Siti residential area in the northern suburbs to downtown Ashgabat.\nAir transport.\nThe city is served by the Ashgabat International Airport, expansion of which cost $2.3\u00a0billion and which has a design capacity of 14,000,000 passengers per year. Turkmenistan Airlines is headquartered at the airport. Among the companies that fly from there are Turkmenistan Airlines, S7 Airlines, China Southern Airlines, flyDubai and Turkish Airlines. The destinations mainly European, Southeast Asia and Middle East. Ashgabat also offers air service to and from all the major cities of the Turkmenistan.\nCitizens of all countries have the right to visa-free transit through the international transit area of Ashgabat International Airport.\nAshgabat International Airport is connected to the city by a network of public buses.\nAutobahn.\nAshgabat is linked to Tejen, Mary, T\u00fcrkmenabat and neighbouring countries by the country's 600\u00a0km autobahn network. A six-lane highway is equipped with an advanced traffic management system featuring continuous video surveillance to ensure effective road monitoring. The toll rates range from 0.35 to 0.45 Turkmen manats per kilometer, depending on the type of vehicle.\nRailway.\nAshgabat has a single central railway station. In May 2009 the restoration of the Ashgabat railway station was completed. The railway station is made in Soviet-style architecture with its long point on the building roof.\nThe Trans-Caspian Railway (T\u00fcrkmenba\u015fy\u2013Balkanabat\u2013Bereket\u2013Ashgabat\u2013Mary\u2013T\u00fcrkmenabat) runs through Ashgabat from east to west. Since 2006 there is also a train line from Ashgabat to the north, the Trans-Karakum Railway.\nAs of June 2025, the following railway routes are scheduled from and to Ashgabat:\nCity buses and trolleybus.\nPublic transport in the city consists mainly of buses. More than 100 bus lines cover a total range of more than with 700 buses running on urban routes. In the 1990s, Iran Khodro O457 (Mercedes-Benz) buses were used in Ashgabat. In the 2000s, they were replaced by korean Hyundai New Super Aero City. buses. Since September 2025, 700 chinese Yutong ZK6128HG buses have been delivered to the city. This buses are equipped with a spacious interior, soft seats with armrests, an air conditioning system, USB charging ports, three doors, video surveillance, GPS, cameras, and a digital fare payment system.\nBus timetables and detailed schematic map of the route are at every stop. Distances between stops are about 300\u2013500 meters.\nIn Ashgabat, travel on city public transport requires a fare. Passengers can either pay in cash by placing money in a box next to the driver (with change provided for large bills) or use the \u00ddol karty electronic payment system, which has been in full operation since September 20, 2017. The fare is 50 Turkmen tenge for city buses and 1 manat for route taxis (marshrutkas). Electronic transport cards, valid for four years, are available in three types: general, student, and pensioner. When boarding through the front door, passengers validate their cards using a special device. \nInformation about bus routes and stops in Ashgabat is available in the mobile application Duralga and \u00ddolag\u00e7y.\nThe new International Passenger Bus Terminal of Ashgabat was inaugurated on September 5, 2014. It offers intercity service to B\u00e4herden, T\u00fcrkmenba\u015fy, Dashoguz, Turkmenabat, Archman, Konye-Urgench, and Mollagara, as well as points in between. The main intracity bus terminals serving Ashgabat are near the Teke Bazaar and at the domestic airport terminal. Intercity lines are operated by Hyundai Universe Luxury, Iran Khodro SC 0457, Sahab Renault and Yutong ZK6129H.\nAlso, suburban communication has been established with \u00dda\u015flyk, Geok Tepe, Gorjaw, Yzgant, Babarap, Bugda\u00fdly, Annau, G\u00e4mi, Owadandepe, Watan, Khurmant, Onaldy, Gami Dacha, Kasamly Julge, G\u00e4wers, Yashyldepe, Akdashayak, Niyazow, Suitchilik, Parahat. PAZ 32054 buses and Volkswagen minibuses operate on suburban routes. Some intercity buses also stop at various other points in Ashgabat, including the airport and railway station.\nFrom October 19, 1964, to December 31, 2011, the city also had the Ashgabat trolleybus system. At the beginning of the twentieth century a narrow-gauge steam railway connected the city with the suburb of Firyuza. As of 2011, there were 7 routes in the city. As of 2011, the Ashgabat trolleybus fleet had 47 trolleybuses (\u0160koda 14TrM) on its balance sheet. In 2000, the last obsolete trolleybuses of the JuMZ-T2 model were written off.\nTaxi.\nIn Ashgabat and Turkmenistan, taxicabs are mostly white or yellow coloured . Taxis have a small green illuminated cylinder-like \"TAXI\" sign on the roof of the car.\nTypically the taxicabs are Toyota Corolla, JAC J7 and Hyundai Elantra along with other, mainly Asian, brands. Taxicabs are either sedans, station wagons, or MPVs. Most taxicabs are automatic transmission, and some have navigation systems on board.\nIn Ashgabat taxis are available at any time of the day or night. Passengers may also hire taxicabs via mobile apps. Other hailing methods, such as telephone based calls or raising one's hand on the street, are also common as well.\nTelecommunication.\nAs of 2025, Ashgabat has two mobile phone service providers:\nIn addition to the mobile network providers, Turkmentelecom provides internet services.\nAs of June 2025, there are six Turkmentelecom internet caf\u00e9s operating in Ashgabat. Despite the widespread availability of high-speed internet and devices in Turkmenistan, these caf\u00e9s remain popular as multifunctional spaces for work, study, and cultural activities. They offer modern equipment and various digital services, such as scanning, printing, and online conferencing.\nTurkmenpochta is the official national postal operator of Turkmenistan. Based in Ashgabat, it currently operates through 38 postal offices in city.\nMedia.\nNotable newspapers published in Ashgabat include the daily newspapers \"T\u00fcrkmenistan\" and \"Neytralny Turkmenistan\".\nTV.\nThe main offices of 7 television channels are located in Ashgabat: Altyn Asyr, Yashlyk, Miras, Turkmenistan Sport, Turkmen Owazy, Ashgabat and Turkmenistan TV.\nAshgabat TV is main city channel. The channel tells about the events of social, cultural, economic life, the activities of scientific and educational institutions of the Ashgabat.\nAlmost 136 international TV channels are available in the IPTV playlist for subscribers of the Ashgabat City Telephone Network. Most of them are thematic channels: news, sports, scientific and educational, TV channels for children, channels of various genres of cinema, music.\nResidents of Ashgabat also watch television via satellite dishes.\nRadio.\nAs of 2008, Ashgabat has 4 FM stations: Owaz, Char Tarapdan, Miras and Watan. These stations can additionally be streamed through Turkmentelecom's website.\nHuman resources.\nScience and education.\nAshgabat is the most important educational center of Turkmenistan with several institutions of higher education. Magtymguly Turkmen State University was founded in 1950. The main university building is located on Be\u00fdik Saparmyrat T\u00fcrkmenba\u015fy \u015fa\u00fdoly. Turkmen State Medical University is situated in Ashgabat as well. It is subordinate to the Ministry of Health and Pharmaceutical Industry of Turkmenistan. Other prominent institutions are the Turkmen State Institute of Economics and Management, a main business school founded in 1980, as well as the Turkmen State Institute of Architecture and Construction, Turkmen Agricultural University, and The National Institute of Sports and Tourism of Turkmenistan. In 2016, the English- and Japanese-medium Oguz Khan University of Engineering Technologies was opened with support of the Japanese government. The International University of Humanities and Development is another English-medium institution of higher education. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs' training ground is the Institute of International Relations.\nIn 2025, the International University of Industrialists and Entrepreneurs opened in Ashgabat. The first private university in the country. It offers paid 5-year programs in fields like construction, agriculture, IT, business, and trade, with instruction in Turkmen and English.\nAshgabat is home to five military academies: the , the Naval Institute, the Border Guards Institute, the Institute of National Security, and the Ministry of Internal Affairs Institute. In 2020 the Military Institute began accepting applications from women.\nFour international secondary schools operate in Ashgabat. The Russian Embassy sponsors the Russian-medium A.S. Pushkin Russo-Turkmen School, the French construction company Bouygues sponsors a French school for children of its Francophone employees, the Turkish Embassy sponsors the Turkish-medium Turgut Ozal Turkmen-Turkish School, and the American Embassy sponsors the English-medium Ashgabat International School.\nPrior to establishment of Soviet authority in Turkmenistan, Ashgabat had only 11 schools and no scientific or research centers. By 1948 Ashgabat had three institutions of higher education, 20 technical schools, 60 libraries, \"and approximately the same number of kindergartens\".\nThe Turkmen Academy of Sciences was founded June 29, 1951, and includes the unique Desert Institute among its 26 scientific research institutes, as well as the State Seismological Service, 17-degree-granting schools, two medical research centers, a library, and two print shops. The Academy of Sciences is the only institution in Turkmenistan accredited to award postgraduate degrees. In 2019, President Berdimuhamedov decreed that state funding of the Academy of Sciences would end within three years. Prior to founding of the Turkmen Academy of Sciences, local scientific-research institutes, all located in a single two-story building, were subordinate to the USSR Academy of Sciences.\nHealth.\nAshgabat is a center for healthcare and medical training of Turkmenistan. Large-scale reconstruction work on buildings and modernization of the material and technical base of existing healthcare institutions is constantly ongoing in the city.\nThe Directorate of International Medical Centers in Ashgabat includes International Center Ene m\u00e4hri (maternity hospital), International Center of Endocrinology and Surgery, International Center of Head and Neck Diseases, International Center of Eye Diseases, Ashgabat Dental Center, International Center of Cardiology, International Center of Internal Medicine, International Center of Neurology, International Diagnostic Center, International Education and Science Center, International Diagnostic Center, International Education and Science Center, International Center of Traumatology and International Burn Center. The main medical centers are located along Professor Hans Meissner Avenue in the south of Ashgabat. In 2024, they were opened International Health and Rehabilitation Center, and the International Scientific and Clinical Center of Physiology.\nMedical and preventive institutions in Ashgabat include: Scientific-Clinical Center of Oncology, Scientific-clinical center for Maternal and Child health, Treatment and Consultative centre named after S.\u0410.Niyazov, Hospital with Scientific Clinical Centre of Cardiology, Emergency First Aid Center, Central Bureau of Pathologic Anatomy, Central Bureau of Forensic Medicine, Central Medical-Recovery Hospital, Medical Diagnostic Center.\nThe Directorate of Infectious Disease Centers is located in the Choganly residential complex in the north of Ashgabat, which includes Central Dermatovenerological Hospital, Treatment and prevention Center for infectious diseases, Blood Center, National AIDS Prevention Center, Center for Treatment and Prevention of Tuberculosis and Centralized Laboratory.\nThe central office of the State Sanitary and Epidemiological Service is located in Ashgabat. The Center for Public Health and Nutrition and the Center for the Prevention of Particularly Dangerous Infections operate in Ashgabat.\nAs of 2018, there are 16 outpatient clinic's operating in the Ashgabat.\nMedical education.\nThe following higher and secondary medical educational institutions operate in Ashgabat: Turkmen State Medical University named after Myrat Garryev, Indira Gandhi Secondary Medical School of Ashgabat. The following were established at the Turkmen State Medical University: in 2011 \u2013 the Scientific and Clinical Center for Eye Diseases, in 2013 \u2013 the Educational and Industrial Center for Dentistry, and in 2015 \u2013 the Educational and Scientific Center for the Protection of Maternal and Child Health.\nMedical industry.\nThe city pays great attention to the development of the pharmaceutical industry. The following medical industry and pharmaceutical supply institutions operate in Ashgabat: Turkmendermansenagat Association, Main Pharmacy Association, Center for Drug Registration and State Quality Control, Institute of Medicinal Plants, Saglyk Pharmaceutical Enterprise, T\u00fcrkmen Ajanta Pharma Limited Joint Venture, Tenek\u00e4r Pharmaceutical Enterprise, Berzengi Mineral Healing Water Enterprise, Disinfectant Solutions Production Enterprise.\nSanatoriums.\nThe Berze\u0148\u0148i Sanatorium is located at the foothills of the Kopetdag mountains, 7.5 kilometers south of center of Ashgabat. Operating since 1967, a new building was inaugurated in 2012. The sanatorium features a unique mineral water source from a 1,600-meter-deep well. This water has a distinct hydrochemical composition, including magnesium sulfate, potassium, and low mineralization, and has various therapeutic properties. It is used to treat conditions such as digestive system diseases, hypertension, cardiovascular issues, and joint diseases. The sanatorium operates year-round, offering both outpatient and spa treatments.\nCulture.\nAshgabat is the cultural heart of Turkmenistan. Ashgabat enjoys numerous theatres, museums, galleries, concert halls, cinemas and foreign cultural institutions.\nMuseums and galleries.\nOn March 17, 1899, the official opening of the Trans-Caspian Regional Museum took place in Ashgabat. On November 12, 1998, the opening of the National Museum of Turkmenistan took place. Its primary goal is to chronicle Turkmenistan's history in various forms from the earliest periods using historical and archaeological collections. Since 2013, the museum began to be called The State Museum of the State Cultural Center of Turkmenistan. The total area of the museum is 165,323.21 m2. On the ground floor of the main building there is a department of Turkmenistan Independence, a department of Turkmen carpet and temporary exhibitions, on the second floor there is a department of Ancient History, Margush, Parthia and two halls of the history of the Middle Ages. The Museum of the President of Turkmenistan of the State Museum of the State Cultural Center of Turkmenistan was commissioned in June 2009. The main objective of this museum is a thorough study of information about the domestic and foreign policies of Turkmenistan. The Museum of Ethnography and Local History of the State Museum of the State Cultural Center of Turkmenistan opened in May 2009. The exhibition on the first floor of the museum is dedicated to the nature of Turkmenistan. On the second floor there is an exhibition concerning the ethnography of Turkmenistan. The exhibition of the Museum of Nature consists of 11 sections.\nMuseums include the Turkmen Fine Arts Museum and Turkmen Carpet Museum, noted for their impressive collection of woven carpets as well as a Turkmen history museum and the Ashgabat National Museum of History, which displays artifacts dating back to the Parthian and Persian civilizations.\nThe Watan Mukaddesligi Museum is located in the southwest of Ashgabat, within the Halk Hakydasy Memorial Complex. Opened in 2014, the museum focuses on preserving and showcasing the historical and cultural heritage of Turkmenistan. It features four thematic halls dedicated to events such as the Battle of Geoktepe, World War II, the 1948 Ashgabat earthquake, and the modern development of Ashgabat. The museum houses over 1,000 exhibits.\nSince 2024, a private art gallery ART-bazar has been operating in Ashgabat. ART-bazar is a creative space in Ashgabat showcasing works by artisans from various regions of Turkmenistan. It features a range of traditional crafts, including ceramics, paintings, felt tapestries, leather items, and handmade paper, offering visitors an introduction to the country's artistic and cultural heritage.\nPerforming arts.\nAshgabat's major theaters are:\nEach of several former municipalities annexed by Ashgabat also features local a \"house of culture\" .\nCinemas.\nAshgabat has six cinemas. In 2011, A\u015fgabat Cinema, the first 3D cinema in Turkmenistan, opened in Ashgabat. The Watan and Turkmenistan theaters were reconstructed. Additional cinemas are located in the Berkarar Mall, the G\u00fcl Zemin Mall and Arkach Mall.\nLibraries.\nThe State Library of Turkmenistan was founded in 1892 and has undergone several name changes since then. In 1976, a new building was constructed for the library, and in 1992, it was granted national status. Since 2007, it has been part of the State Culture Center of Turkmenistan. The library houses over 6 million items and actively develops electronic resources.\nThe State Children's Library of Turkmenistan named after Bazar Amanov was established in 1935. It serves as the national repository of children's literature and a methodological center for children's and school libraries. The library includes specialized sections for book storage, cataloging, and services for different age groups, from preschool children to high school students, as well as an arts department. Since 2016, the library has been operating an integrated electronic library system. The library's collection consists of over 250,000 items.\nMain sights.\nAshgabat was home to the Arch of Neutrality, a 75\u00a0m (250\u00a0ft) tall tripod crowned by a golden statue of late president Saparmurat Niyazov (also known as \"Turkmenbashy\", or head Turkmen). The 15\u00a0m (50\u00a0ft) high statue, which rotated in order to always face the sun during daylight hours, was removed on August 26, 2010, after Niyazov's successor, current President Berdimuhamedov, made clear earlier in the year that the statue was to be taken out of Ashgabat's Independence Square. In 2011 a Monument to the Constitution was built, its total height of 185\u00a0m (607\u00a0ft) makes it the second tallest structure in Turkmenistan.\nAlem Cultural and Entertainment Center was recognised by \"Guinness World Records\" as the world's tallest Ferris wheel in an enclosed space. The Ashgabat Flagpole is the fifth tallest free\u2013standing flagpole in the world, standing at tall. The Ashgabat Fountain has the world's greatest number of fountain pools in a public place. Ashgabat also features Turkmenistan Tower which is the tallest tower in Turkmenistan, the decorative octagonal Star of Oguzkhan is recognized as the world's largest architectural image of the star and entered in the \"Guinness World Records\".\nParks and squares.\nAshgabat has many parks and open spaces, mainly established in the early years of the Independence and well maintained and expanded thereafter. The most important of these parks are: the Botanical Garden, G\u00fcne\u015f, Turkmen-Turkish friendship, Independence. The oldest city park, Ashgabat, was founded in 1887 and is colloquially known as First Park. In the center of Ashgabat is the Inspiration Alley, an art-park complex which is a favorite place for many locals. The amusement park World of Turkmenbashi Tales is a local equivalent to Disneyland. Squares: 10 Years of Turkmenistan Independence, Magtymguly, Eternal Flame, Zelili, Chyrchyk, Garashsyzlyk, March 8, Gerogly, Dolphin, 15 years of Independence, Ruhy\u00fdet, 10 \u00fdyl Abadan\u00e7ylyk, Ylham and Tashkent.\nThe Ashgabat Botanical Garden was founded on 1 October 1929, and is the oldest botanical garden in Central Asia. It covers a territory of approximately 18 hectares, and contains a live exhibition of more than 500 different species of plants coming from various parts of the world.\nHalk Hakydasy Memorial Complex.\nHalk Hakydasy Memorial Complex was opened in 2014 in remembrance of those killed in the Battle of Geok Tepe in 1881, during World War II, and to commemorate of the victims of the 1948 Ashgabat earthquake. It is located in the southwestern part of the city on Bekreve street.\nMagtymguly Pyragy Cultural and Park Complex.\nIn 2024, monuments dedicated to 24 foreign writers and poets were erected in the Magtymguly Pyragy Cultural and Park Complex in Ashgabat. These statues honor renowned figures such as Sayat-Nova, Yanka Kupala, Du Fu, Honor\u00e9 de Balzac, Shota Rustaveli, Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, S\u00e1ndor Pet\u0151fi, Rabindranath Tagore, Hafez Shirazi, Dante Alighieri, Yasunari Kawabata, Kurmangazy Sagyrbayuly, Chingiz Aitmatov, Raja Ali Haji, Adam Mickiewicz, Mihai Eminescu, Fyodor Dostoevsky, Juan Jim\u00e9nez, Sayido Nasafiy, Yunus Emre, Hryhorii Skovoroda, William Shakespeare, Langston Hughes and Alisher Navoi. Each sculpture captures the essence and unique spirit of the artist's work.\nMosques.\nMajor mosques in Ashgabat include:\nThere are also several mosques in former towns and villages annexed by Ashgabat and thus now neighborhoods within the city limits.\nChurches.\nAshgabat has five operating Christian churches. Four are Russian Orthodox churches:\nThe Roman Catholic Chapel of the Transfiguration operates on the grounds of the Apostolic nunciature.\nOther Christian denominations exist but as of 2019 only two were registered with the government and thus able to operate legally. The U.S. Department of State reported that Turkmen authorities \"scrutinize or obstruct religious\ngroups attempting to purchase or lease buildings or land for religious purposes\".\nSports.\nThe main sporting venues in Ashgabat are the Olympic Stadium, Ashgabat Stadium, the National Olympic ice rink, Sports complex for winter sports and the Ashgabat Watersports Complex.\nAshgabat was chosen as the host city of the 2017 Asian Indoor and Martial Arts Games. Between 2010 and 2017 an Olympic Village was built by the Turkish firm Polimeks south of the city center, at a cost of $5\u00a0billion.\nIn October 2017 a Jack Nicklaus Designs Signature 18-hole golf course opened in Ashgabat. It features 82 sand traps and covers 70 hectares.\nAshgabat was the host of the 2018 IWF World Weightlifting Championships and 2023 World Kurash Championships.\nThe city's professional football clubs Altyn Asyr FK, FC A\u015fgabat and FK K\u00f6petdag A\u015fgabat play in the \u00ddokary Liga, the top league of Turkmenistan.\nAshgabat is home to several professional ice hockey teams. Galkan, Merdana, Nesil, Shir, Oguzkhan, Watanchy play in the Turkmenistan Hockey Championship. Ashgabat annually hosts the President of the Turkmeinistan Cup ice hockey tournament. There are three ice arenas in Ashgabat: Winter Sports Complex Ashgabat (10,300 seats capacity), Ashgabat Ice Palace (1000 seats) and Galkan Ice Palace (630 seats).\nInha Babakova, 1999 World High Jump champion, was born in Ashgabat.\nBorn in Ashgabat weightlifter Polina Guryeva captured Turkmenistan's first Olympic medal at the 2020 Summer Olympics, taking silver in the women's 59\u00a0kg.\nInternational relations.\nDiplomatic missions.\nThe city hosts 32 foreign embassies and serves as the headquarters for the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea and United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia (UNRCCA).\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nAshgabat is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPartner cities.\nAshgabat cooperates with:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56571", "revid": "1808194", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56571", "title": "Guignol", "text": "Main character in a French puppet show\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGuignol () is the main character in a French puppet show which has come to bear his name. It represents the workers in the silk industry of France. Although often thought of as children's entertainment, Guignol's sharp wit and linguistic verve have always been appreciated by adults as well, as shown by the motto of a prominent Lyon troupe: \"Guignol amuses children\u2026 and witty adults.\"\nHistory.\nLaurent Mourguet, Guignol's creator, was born into a family of modest silk weavers on 3 March 1769. The certificate of his marriage to Jeanne Esterle in 1788 shows he was unable to read. When hard times fell on the silk trade during the French Revolution, he became a peddler and, in 1797, started to practice dentistry, which in those days was simply the pulling of teeth. The service was free; the money was made from the medicines sold afterward to ease the pain. To attract patients, he started setting up a puppet show in front of his dentist's chair.\nMourguet's first shows featured Polichinelle, a character borrowed from the Italian commedia dell'arte who, in Britain, would become Punch. By 1804, the success was such that he gave up dentistry altogether and became a professional puppeteer, creating his own scenarios drawing on the concerns of his working-class audience and improvising references to the news of the day. He developed characters closer to the daily lives of his Lyon audience, first Gnafron, a wine-loving cobbler, later Guignol, in 1808. Other characters, including Guignol's wife Madelon and the gendarme Flageolet soon followed, but these are never much more than foils for the two heroes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAlthough nominally a silkweaver like much of his original audience, Guignol's profession changes, as does his marital status; he can be in turn valet, peddler, carpenter, shoemaker, or unemployed; at times he is Madelon's husband, at times her smitten suitor, according to requirements of the scenario. What remain constant are his poverty, but more importantly his good humor and his sense of justice. The use in French of \"guignol\" as an insult meaning \"buffoon\" is a curious misnomer, as Guignol is clever, courageous, and generous; his inevitable victory is always the triumph of good over evil.\nSixteen of Mourguet's children and grandchildren continued his tradition, and many of the companies performing today can trace their artistic heritage back to him, although Laurent Mourguet's last descendant, Jean-Guy Mourguet, died on 8 October 2012, at the age of 82, after working all his life in the Theatre de Guignol at Lyon. Jean-Guy learned his job helping his grandmother Augustine and then his parents. He later became the director of the theatre until his death.\nGuignol's original caustic satire has often been watered down to simple children's fare, and has even been used to parody grand opera, but his original spirit still survives in his hometown of Lyon, where both traditional and original contemporary performances are an integral part of local culture. In addition to his social satire, Guignol has become an important protector of the local dialect, the \"parler lyonnais\" (\"Lyonnais dialect\").\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56572", "revid": "1222043", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56572", "title": "Ashkabat", "text": ""}
{"id": "56573", "revid": "17488477", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56573", "title": "Messier", "text": "Messier may refer to:\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "56574", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56574", "title": "Maria Edgeworth", "text": "Anglo-Irish novelist (1768\u20131849)\nMaria Edgeworth (1 January 1768 \u2013 22 May 1849) was an Anglo-Irish novelist of adults' and children's literature. She was one of the first realist writers in children's literature and a significant figure in the evolution of the novel in Europe. She held critical views on estate management, politics, and education, and corresponded with some of the leading literary and economic writers, including Sir Walter Scott and David Ricardo. During the first decade of the 19th century she was one of the most widely read novelists in Britain and Ireland. Her name today is most commonly associated with \"Castle Rackrent\", her first novel, in which she, while Anglican herself, used the voice of an Irish Catholic character to narrate the dissipation and decline of a family from her own landed Anglo-Irish class.\nLife.\nEarly life.\nMaria Edgeworth was born in Black Bourton, Oxfordshire. She was the second child of Richard Lovell Edgeworth (who eventually fathered twenty-two surviving children by four wives) and Anna Maria Edgeworth (\"n\u00e9e\" Elers); Maria was thus an aunt of Francis Ysidro Edgeworth. She spent her early years with her mother's family in England, living at The Limes (now known as Edgeworth House) in Northchurch, by Berkhamsted in Hertfordshire. Her mother died when Maria was five, and when her father married his second wife Honora Sneyd in 1773, she went with him to his estate, Edgeworthstown, in County Longford, Ireland.\nMaria was sent to Mrs. Lattafi\u00e8re's school in Derby after Honora fell ill in 1775. After Honora died in 1780 Maria's father married Honora's sister Elizabeth (then socially disapproved and legally forbidden from 1833 until the Deceased Wife's Sister's Marriage Act 1907). Maria transferred to Mrs. Devis's school in London. Her father's attention became fully focused on her in 1781 when she nearly lost her sight to an eye infection. Returning home at the age of 14, she took charge of her many younger siblings and was home-tutored in law, Irish economics and politics, science, and literature by her father. She also started her lifelong correspondences with learned men, mainly members of the Lunar Society.\nShe became her father's assistant in managing the Edgeworthstown estate, which had become run-down during the family's 1777\u20131782 absence; she would live and write there for the rest of her life. With their bond strengthened, Maria and her father began a lifelong academic collaboration \"of which she was the more able and nimble mind\". Present at Edgeworthstown was an extended family, servants and tenants. She observed and recorded the details of daily Irish life, later drawing on this experience for her novels about the Irish. She also mixed with the Anglo-Irish gentry, particularly Kitty Pakenham (later the wife of Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington), Lady Moira, and her aunt Margaret Ruxton of Blackcastle. Margaret supplied her with the novels of Ann Radcliffe and William Godwin and encouraged her in her writing.\nTravels.\nIn 1798 Richard married Frances Beaufort, daughter of Daniel Augustus Beaufort, who instigated the idea of travelling to England and the European continent. Frances, a year younger than Maria, became her lifelong confidante. The family travelled first to London in 1800.\nIn 1802 the Edgeworths toured The Midlands. They then travelled to Continental France, first to Brussels and then to France (during the Peace of Amiens, a brief lull in the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars). They met all the notables, and Maria received a marriage proposal from a Swedish courtier, Abraham Niclas Edelcrantz. Her letter on the subject seems very cool, but her stepmother assures us in the Augustus Hare \"Life and Letters\" that Maria loved him very much and did not get over the affair quickly. They came home to Ireland in 1803 on the eve of the resumption of the wars and Maria returned to writing. \"Tales of Fashionable Life\", \"The Absentee\" and \"Ormond\" are novels of Irish life. Edgeworth was an extremely popular author who was compared with her contemporary writers Jane Austen and Sir Walter Scott. She initially earned more than them, and used her income to help her siblings.\nOn a visit to London in 1813, where she was received as a literary lion, Maria met Lord Byron (whom she disliked) and Humphry Davy. She entered into a long correspondence with the ultra-Tory Sir Walter Scott after the publication of \"Waverley\" in 1814, in which he gratefully acknowledged her influence, and they formed a lasting friendship. She visited him in Scotland at Abbotsford House in 1823, where he took her on a tour of the area. The next year, Sir Walter visited Edgeworthstown. When passing through the village, one of the party wrote, \"We found neither mud hovels nor naked peasantry, but snug cottages and smiles all about\". A counter view was provided by another visitor who stated that the residents of Edgeworthstown treated Edgeworth with contempt, refusing even to feign politeness.\nLater life.\nRichard Edgeworth was comparatively fair and forgiving in his dealings with his tenants and was actively involved in the estate's management. After debating the issue with the economist David Ricardo, Maria came to believe that better management and the further application of science to agriculture would raise food production and lower prices. Both Richard and Maria were also in favour of Catholic Emancipation, enfranchisement for Catholics without property restrictions (although he believed it was against his own interest), agricultural reform and increased educational opportunities for women. She particularly worked hard to improve the living standards of the poor in Edgeworthstown. In trying to improve conditions in the village she provided schools for the local children of all denominations.\nAfter her father's death in 1817 she edited his memoirs, and extended them with her biographical comments. She was an active writer to the last, with her final work, the novella \"Orlandino,\" being written and published in 1848.\nShe worked for the relief of the famine-stricken Irish peasants during the Great Famine. She wrote \"Orlandino\" for the benefit of the Relieve Fund. Her letters to the Quaker Relief Committee provide a vivid account of the desperate plight facing the tenants in Edgeworthstown, the extreme conditions under which they lived, and the struggle to obtain whatever aid and assistance she could to alleviate their plight. Through her efforts she received gifts for the poor from America.\nDuring the Irish Famine Edgeworth insisted that only those of her tenants who had paid their rent in full would receive relief. Edgeworth also punished those of her tenants who voted against her Tory preferences.\nWith the election of William Rowan Hamilton to president of the Royal Irish Academy, Maria became a dominant source of advice for Hamilton, particularly on the issue of literature in Ireland. She suggested that women should be allowed to participate in events held by the academy. For her guidance and help, Hamilton made Edgeworth an honorary member of the Royal Irish Academy in 1837, following in the footsteps of Louisa Beaufort, a former member of the academy and a relative of hers.\nAfter a visit to see her relations in Trim, Maria, now in her eighties, began to feel heart pains and died suddenly of a heart attack in Edgeworthstown on 22 May 1849.\nViews.\nThough Maria Edgeworth spent most of her childhood in England, her life in Ireland had a profound impact on both her thinking and views on Irish culture. Fauske and Kaufman conclude, \"[She] used her fiction to address the inherent problems of acts delineated by religious, national, racial, class based, sexual, and gendered identities\". Edgeworth used works such \"Castle Rackrent\" and \"Harrington\" to express her feelings on controversial issues.\nIreland.\nIn her works, Edgeworth created a nostalgic and imagined Irish past in an attempt to celebrate the culture of Ireland. Academic Suvendrini Perera argued Edgeworth's novels traced \"the gradual anglicanization of feudal Irish society\". Edgeworth's goal in her works was to show the Irish as equal to the British, and therefore warranting an equal, though not separate, status. \"Essay on Irish Bulls\" rejects the Irish bulls stereotype and portrays the people of Ireland accurately in realistic, everyday settings. This is a common theme in her works on Ireland, combating stereotypes of Irish people with accurate representations. In her works, Edgeworth also placed a special focus on the linguistic differences between Irish and British culture, attempting to showcase the dynamism and intricacies of Irish society. Irish novelist Seamus Deane connected Edgeworth's depiction of Ireland and its relationship to Britain as being in line with wider Enlightenment ideals, noting that Edgeworth \"was not the first novelist to have chosen Ireland as her \u2018scene\u2019; but she was the first to realize that there was, within it, a missionary opportunity to convert it to Enlightenment faith and rescue it from its \u2018romantic\u2019 conditions\".\nEdgeworth's writing on Ireland, especially her early Irish stories, offer an important rearticulation of Burkean local attachment and philosophical cosmopolitanism to produce an understanding of the nation as neither tightly bordered (like nations based on historical premises such as blood or inheritance) or not borderless (like those based on rational notions of universal inclusion). Edgeworth used her writing to reconsider the meaning of the denomination \"Anglo-Irish\", and through her interrogation she reinterpreted both cosmopolitan and national definitions of belonging so as to reconstitute \"Anglo-Irish\" less as a category than as an ongoing mediation between borders. In Edgeworth's Irish novels, education is the key to both individual and national improvement, according to Edgeworth, \"it is the foundation of the well-governed estate and the foundation of the well-governed nation\". More specifically, a slow process of education instils transnational understanding in the Irish people while retaining the bonds of local attachment by which the nation is secured. The centrality of education not only suggests Edgeworth's wish for a rooted yet cosmopolitan or transnational judgment, but also distinguishes her writing from constructions of national identity as national character, linking her through to earlier cosmopolitan constructions of universal human subjects. By claiming national difference as anchored in education, culture rather than nature, Edgeworth gives to national identity a sociocultural foundation, and thereby opens a space in which change can happen.\nSocial.\nMaria agreed with the Acts of Union 1800, but thought that it should not be passed against the wishes of the Irish people. Concerning education, she thought boys and girls should be educated equally and together, drawing upon Rousseau's ideas.\nShe believed a woman should only marry someone who suits her in \"character, temper, and understanding\". Becoming an old maid was preferable to an incompatible union. \"Tales of Fashionable Life\" and \"Patronage\" attacked the Whigs' governance of Ireland as corrupt and unrepresentative.\nEdgeworth strove for the self-realization of women and stressed the importance of the individual. She also wanted greater participation in politics by middle-class women. Her work \"Helen\" clearly demonstrates this point in the passage:\n\"Women are now so highly cultivated, and political subjects are at present of so much importance, of such high interest, to all human creatures who live together in society, you can hardly expect, Helen, that you, as a rational being, can go through the world as it now is, without forming any opinion on points of public importance. You cannot, I conceive, satisfy yourself with the common namby-pamby little missy phrase, 'ladies have nothing to do with politics'.\"\nShe sympathised with Catholics and supported gradual, though not immediate, Catholic Emancipation.\nEducation.\nIn her 1798 book \"Practical Education\", she advanced a scientific approach to education, acknowledging the difficulty of doing such research which was \"patiently reduced to an experimental science\". She claimed no adherence to a school of thought, no new theory and purposefully avoided religion and politics. In the book's 25 chapters, she presages modern improvements to age-related educational materials, for example: in geography, maps bordered with suitable illustrated biographies; in chronology, something \"besides merely committing names and dates to memory\"; in chemistry, safe chemical experiments that children might undertake. She maintained that unnecessarily causing fatigue should be a great concern of educators. To help illustrate the care that must be taken in teaching children and to emphasise the necessity of properly directing and managing their attentiveness, Maria Edgeworth drew several comparisons with non-European peoples. In making the point that any mode of instruction that tired the attention was hurtful to children, her reasoning was that people can pay attention only to one thing at a time, and because children can appear resistant to repetition, teachers naturally should vary things. However, educators should always be mindful of the fact that, \"while variety relieves the mind, the objects which are varied must not all be entirely new, for novelty and variety when joined, fatigue the mind\" as Edgeworth states. The teaching of children needed to follow carefully considered methods, needed to evidence concern for appropriateness and proper sequencing, and needed to be guided by consideration from forms of teaching that would be empowering and enabling, not fatiguing or disabling. In Edgeworth's work, the attention of the child appears as a key site for pedagogical work and interventions.\nWork.\nEdgeworth's early literary efforts have often been considered melodramatic rather than realistic. Recent scholarship, however, has uncovered the importance of Edgeworth's previously unpublished juvenilia manuscript, \"The Double Disguise\" (1786). In particular, \"The Double Disguise\" signals Edgeworth's turn toward realism and is now considered a seminal regional narrative predating \"Castle Rackrent\" (1800). In addition, Edgeworth wrote many children's novels that conveyed moral lessons to their audience (often in partnership with her friend Louise Swanton Belloc, a French writer, translator, and advocate for the education of women and children, whose many translations of Edgeworth's works were largely responsible for her popularity in France). One of her schoolgirl novels features a villain who wore a mask made from the skin of a dead man's face. Edgeworth's first published work was \"Letters for Literary Ladies\" in 1795. This work was a response to Thomas Day's, a member of the Lunar Society, belief that women should not be authors or taught to think. Her work, \"An Essay on the Noble Science of Self-Justification\" (1795) is written for a female audience in which she convinces women that the fair sex is endowed with an art of self-justification and women should use their gifts to continually challenge the force and power of men, especially their husbands, with wit and intelligence. It humorously and satirically explores the feminine argumentative method. This was followed in 1796 by her first children's book, \"The Parent's Assistant\", which included Edgeworth's celebrated short story \"The Purple Jar\". \"The Parent's Assistant\" was influenced by her father's work and perspectives on children's education.\nMr. Edgeworth, a well-known author and inventor, encouraged his daughter's career. At the height of her creative endeavours, Maria wrote, \"Seriously it was to please my Father I first exerted myself to write, to please him I continued\". Though the impetus for Maria's works, Mr. Edgeworth has been criticised for his insistence on approving and editing her work. The tales in \"The Parent's Assistant\" were approved by her father before he would allow them to be read to her younger siblings. It is speculated that her stepmother and siblings also helped in the editing process of Edgeworth's work.\n\"Practical Education\" (1798) is a progressive work on education that combines the ideas of Locke and Rousseau with scientific inquiry. Edgeworth asserts that \"learning should be a positive experience and that the discipline of education is more important during the formative years than the acquisition of knowledge\". The system attempted to \"adapt both the curriculum and methods of teaching to the needs of the child; the endeavour to explain moral habits and the learning process through associationism; and most important, the effort to entrust the child with the responsibility for his own mental culture\". The ultimate goal of Edgeworth's system was to create an independent thinker who understands the consequences of his or her actions.\nHer first novel, \"Castle Rackrent\" (1800) was written and submitted for anonymous publication in 1800 without her father's knowledge. It was an immediate success and firmly established Edgeworth's appeal. Set prior to the securing of Irish legislative independence in 1782, the novel is a satire on the corruption and incompetence of Ireland's Protestant gentry. Inspired by a chronicle of Edgeworth's own family, the story of four generations of an Ascendancy family is narrated by a loyal Catholic retainer, their estate steward, Thady Quirk. His recollections portray not only the dissipation of his Protestant masters but also, assisted by their increasing indebtedness, the rise of an Irish catholic middle class. Before its publication, an introduction, glossary and footnotes, written in the voice of an English narrator, were added in effort to offset the danger of the book blunting English enthusiasm for the Act of Union 1800.\n\"Belinda\" (1801), a 3-volume work published in London, was Maria Edgeworth's first full-length novel. It dealt with love, courtship, and marriage, dramatising the conflicts within her \"own personality and environment; conflicts between reason and feeling, restraint and individual freedom, and society and free spirit\". \"Belinda\" was also notable for its controversial depiction of interracial marriage between a Black servant and an English farmgirl. Later editions of the novel, however, removed these sections.\n\"Tales of Fashionable Life\" (1809 and 1812) is a 2-series collection of short stories which often focus on the life of a woman. The second series was particularly well received in England, making her the most commercially successful novelist of her age. After this, Edgeworth was regarded as the preeminent female writer in England alongside Jane Austen.\nFollowing an anti-Semitic remark in \"The Absentee\", Edgeworth received a letter from an American Jewish woman named Rachel Mordecai in 1815 complaining about Edgeworth's depiction of Jewish characters. As an amende honorable, she wrote \"Harrington\" (1817), a fictitious autobiography of a young English gentleman whose is cured of his youthful prejudices by contact\u2014in one of the first sympathetic Jewish characters in an English novel-- with various Jewish characters, particularly a young woman. Set between the passing of the Jewish Naturalisation Act 1753 and the Gordon Riots of 1780, it draws parallels between the discrimination against Jews and the disabilities suffered by Catholics in Ireland.\n\"Helen\" (1834) is Maria Edgeworth's final novel, the only one she wrote after her father's death. She chose to write a novel focused on the characters and situation, rather than moral lessons. In a letter to her publisher, Maria wrote, \"I have been reproached for making \"my moral\" in some stories too prominent. I am sensible of the inconvenience of this both to reader and writer &amp; have taken much pains to avoid it in \"Helen\"\". Her novel is also set in England, a conscious choice as Edgeworth found Ireland too troubling for a fictitious work in the political climate of the 1830s.\nStyle and purpose.\nHaving come to her literary maturity at a time when the ubiquitous and unvarying stated defence of the novel was its educative power, Maria Edgeworth was among the few authors who truly espoused the educator's role. Her novels are morally and socially didactic in the extreme. A close analysis of the alterations which Edgeworth's style underwent when it was pressed into the service of overt didacticism should serve to illuminate the relationship between prose technique and didactic purpose in her work. The convention which Maria Edgeworth has adopted and worked to death is basic to the eighteenth-century novel, but its roots lie in the drama, tracing at least to the Renaissance separation of high and low characters by their forms of speech. Throughout the eighteenth-century drama, and most noticeably in the sentimental comedy, the separation becomes more and more a means of moral judgment as well as social identification. The only coherent reason for Edgeworth's acceptance is the appeal of didactic moralism. In the first place, she is willing to suspend judgment wherever the service of the moral is the result. Everything else may go, so long as the lesson is enforced. the lesson might be a warning against moral impropriety, as in Miss Milner's story, or against social injustice, as in \"The Absentee\". Furthermore, the whole reliance on positive exemplars had been justified long before by Richard Steele, who argued that the stage must supply perfect heroes since its examples are imitated and since simple natures are incapable of making the necessary deductions from the negative exemplars of satire.\nThe characteristic of Edgeworth is to connect an identifiable strain of formal realism, both philosophical and rhetorical, and therefore display an objective interest in human nature and the way it manifests itself in social custom. One would expect this from Edgeworth, an author whose didacticism often has struck modern readers as either gendered liability, technical regression, or familial obligation. Critics have responded to Edgeworth's eccentricities by attributing them to something more deep-seated, temperamental, and psychological. In their various, often insightful representation, Edgeworth's fondness for the real, the strange, and the pedagogically useful verges on the relentless, the obsessive, and the instinctive. There is an alternative literary answer to explain Edgeworth's cultural roots and ideological aims which shifts focus away from Edgeworth's familial, psychological, and cultural predicaments to the formal paradigms by which her work has been judged. Rather than locating Edgeworth's early romances of real life exclusively within the traditions of eighteenth-century children's literature or domestic realism, they can be read primarily as responses to late eighteenth-century debates over the relation between history and romance, because the genre attempts to mediate between the two differentiating itself from other kinds of factual fiction. Edgeworth's romances of real life operate in the same discursive field but do not attempt to traverse between self-denied antinomies. In fact, they usually make the opposite claim.\nEdgeworth's repeated self-effacement needs to be seen in the context of the times, where learning in women was often disapproved of and even ridiculed, such as the satirical poem of the Rev. Richard Polwhele, \"The Unsex'd Females\" (1798).\nThe Oxford English Dictionary credits Edgeworth with the earliest published usage of the word \"argh.\"\nList of published works.\nA partial list of published works:\nAlso:\nLegacy.\nDuring the period 1800\u20131814 (when Walter Scott's \"Waverley\" was published) Edgeworth was the most celebrated and successful living English novelist. Her reputation equalled that of Fanny Burney (Madame d'Arblay) (1752\u20131840) earlier, in a time that saw a number of other female writers including Elizabeth Hamilton, Amelia Opie, Hannah More and Elizabeth Inchbald. Her only potential male competitor prior to Scott was William Godwin. She was certainly well received by the critics and literary figures of her time. Croker (1780\u20131857) compared her work to \"Don Quixote\" and \"Gil Blas\" and to the work of Henry Fielding, while Francis Jeffrey (1773\u20131850) called her work 'perfect'.\nThe Ulster Gaelic Society, established in 1830, succeeded in a single publication in its history, namely the translation into Irish of two stories by Maria Edgeworth: Tom\u00e1s \u00d3 Fiannachtaigh translated \"Forgive and Forget\" and \"Rosanna\" into Irish in the 1830s.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56575", "revid": "1315592854", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56575", "title": "Castle Rackrent", "text": "1800 novel by Maria Edgeworth\nCastle Rackrent is a short novel by Maria Edgeworth published in 1800. Unlike many of her other novels, which were heavily \"edited\" by her father, Richard Lovell Edgeworth, before their publication, the published version is close to her original intention.\nShortly before its publication, an introduction, glossary and footnotes, written in the voice of an English narrator, were added to the original text to blunt the negative impact the Edgeworths feared the book might have on English enthusiasm for the Act of Union 1800. One of the main sources of inspiration for the novel was a chronicle of her own family history called \"The Black Book of Edgeworthstown,\" which contain legal struggles of the Edgeworths similar to those portrayed in the novel.\nPlot summary.\nThe novel is set prior to the Constitution of 1782. It tells the story of four generations of Rackrent heirs through their steward, Thady Quirk. The heirs are: the dissipated spendthrift Sir Patrick O'Shaughlin, the litigious Sir Murtagh Rackrent, the cruel husband and gambling absentee Sir Kit Rackrent, and the generous but improvident Sir Condy Rackrent. Their sequential mismanagement of the estate is resolved through the machinations\u2014and to the benefit\u2014of the narrator's astute son, Jason Quirk.\nThemes and style.\nKathryn Kirkpatrick suggests that the novel \"both borrows from and originates a variety of literary genres and subgenres without neatly fitting into any one of them\". It satirises Anglo-Irish landlords and their overall mismanagement of the estates they owned at a time when the British and Irish parliaments were working towards formalising their union through the Acts of Union. Through this and other works, Edgeworth is credited with serving the political, national interests of Ireland and the United Kingdom the way Sir Walter Scott did for Scotland.\n\"Castle Rackrent\" is a dialogic novel, comprising a preface and conclusion by an editor bookending a first person narrative proper. It is widely regarded as the first Irish novel to use the device of a narrator who is both unreliable and an observer of, rather than a player in, the actions he chronicles. It also has a glossary (which was a last-minute addition).\nImportance.\n\"Castle Rackrent\" is sometimes regarded as the first historical novel, the first regional novel in English, the first Anglo-Irish novel, the first Big House novel, and the first saga novel. William Butler Yeats pronounced \"Castle Rackrent\" \"one of the most inspired chronicles written in English\". Sir Walter Scott, who met and carried on a correspondence with Edgeworth, credited her novel for inspiring him to write his Waverley series of novels:Without being so presumptuous as to hope to emulate the rich humour, pathetic tenderness, and admirable tact, which pervade the works of my accomplished friend, I felt that something might be attempted for my own country, of the same kind with that which Miss Edgeworth so fortunately achieved for Ireland\u2014something which might introduce her natives to those of the sister kingdom in a more favourable light than they have been placed hitherto.The novel is alluded to in \"The Great Gatsby\" by F. Scott Fitzgerald, \"A Mother in History\" by Jean Stafford and \"Milkman\" by Anna Burns.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56576", "revid": "15763484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56576", "title": "Humphrey B. Bear", "text": "Australian children's television character\nHumphrey B. Bear is a fictional character first created in an Australian children's television series called \"Here's Humphrey\", which first went to air in 1965. Its fictional character namesake is an icon of Australian children's television. \"Humphrey B. Bear\" first aired on Adelaide's NWS-9 on Monday, 24 May 1965. The show became one of the most successful programs for pre-schoolers in Australia. Edwin \"Ted\" Duryea (c.1930-2009), an actor, singer and dancer, first played the part of Humphrey.\nThe character of Humphrey is a tall, shaggy honey-loving brown bear with a large, round, shining, glossy black nose, straw boater hat, tartan waist-coat and oversized yellow bow-tie. His television show always features a companion who assists and narrates Humphrey's various adventures in the \"magic forest\" including his brightly coloured treehouse. In the early days, the character was known as Bear Bear, and was named Humphrey B. Bear as the result of an on-air competition.\nTelevision show.\nThe show has won Logies for Best Children's Series and the Humphrey character has received national awards and commendations, including the \"Citizen of the Year\" Award at the 1994 Australia Day celebrations. \"Humphrey B. Bear\" has viewers all over the world thanks to the United States version of his show shown on PBS in America and the Spanish version shown on Galavision. It has been translated or produced in 55 different languages.\nThe writers of \"Humphrey B. Bear\", including Anthony O'Donohue (also long-time host of the show), attempt to set up each show as a new adventure for Humphrey. Each episode parallels the needs, encounters and interests of the average young child. The character of Humphrey explores life as they do, trying to reinforce their self-esteem and showing them it's all right to embrace challenges. The series attempts to show it's important to be the best that you can be, and to give things your best shot. The series also encourages the viewer to simply take part in your life, family, community and the world.\nOn 14 February 2007, it was reported that the Nine Network would record a new \"Here's Humphrey\" series for the first time since 2003.\nIn February 2012, Imagination Ventures, the philanthropic enterprise of media company Imagination Entertainment, purchased the assets of Banksia Productions that included all the rights to the \"Humphrey B. Bear\".\nIn May 2012 Humphrey was announced as the official \"Ambassabear\" for the Women &amp; Children's Hospital Foundation. His first major fundraising effort saw the release of a limited edition gift set featuring a Humphrey plush doll and DVD. All proceeds from that product went to the hospitals' Kids FUNd program. Humphrey then started reappearing across Australia, taking part in live shows such as school performances, community events, and birthday parties.\nIn July 2013 Humphrey returned to national TV screens on television stations in Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Adelaide, and Perth. Humphrey celebrated his 50th anniversary in 2015.\nOwnership.\nIn September 2016, OZPIX Entertainment facilitated the acquisition of all the assets and rights to Humphrey B. Bear from Imagination Ventures. Imagination Ventures continues to partner with the Humphrey B. Bear brand.\nVillage Roadshow Studios now play host to Humphrey B. Bear's new headquarters at their studios on the Gold Coast, Australia.\nHighlights &amp; Awards.\nOther Highlights\nHumphrey has been recognised as an icon of Australian television and is featured in the Australian National Museum.\nHe became the only bear in the world to become a cub when he was initiated into the Scouting Movement.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56577", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56577", "title": "The Absentee (novel)", "text": "1812 novel by Maria Edgeworth\nThe Absentee is a novel by Maria Edgeworth, published in 1812 in \"Tales of Fashionable Life\", that expresses the systemic evils of the absentee landlord class of Anglo-Irish and the desperate condition of the Irish peasantry. There are many turns of plot and much information about Ireland as well as Irish dialect and details of shallow London fashionable life, and the egregious results of the propertied classes treating their Irish lands as a resource to be exploited rather than as a relationship among classes and with the land. In this respect, it addresses similar themes to her first novel, Castle Rackrent.\nPlot summary.\nJust before coming of age, Lord Colambre, the sensitive hero of the novel, finds that his mother Lady Clonbrony's attempts to buy her way into the high society of London are only ridiculed, while his father, Lord Clonbrony, is in serious debt as a result of his wife's lifestyle and his own lack of responsibility. The moneylender Mordecai who threatens foreclosure on him is represented with a Jew-hatred typical of the period. Colambre's mother wishes him to marry an heiress, Miss Broadhurst, who is a friend of Grace Nugent. However, Colambre has already fallen in love with his cousin, Grace Nugent, who lives with the family as a companion to Lady Clonbrony. Worried that his mother will pressure him into a marriage with someone he does not love, Colambre decides to leave the London social scene and visit his ancestral home in County Wicklow in Ireland.\nUpon arriving in Dublin, Colambre becomes good friends with Sir James Brooke, who is a good influence on Colambre and warns him against the schemes of some new arrivals on the Dublin social scene: Lady Dashfort and her widowed daughter, Lady Isobel. It is generally known that Lady Dashfort is looking to ensnare a new, rich Irish peer for her equally unscrupulous daughter, and by any means necessary. Despite a pointed warning from Sir James, Colambre falls under the influence of the persuasive Lady Dashfort, who wishes to secure him as the next husband for Lady Isobel. Chance intelligence from a former maid in the Clonbrony household reveals to Lady Dashfort that Lord Colambre is, in fact, in love with his cousin, Grace Nugent. To discourage the match, Lady Dashfort slyly lets slip that Grace was born out of wedlock, and is therefore illegitimate. This is confirmed by letter by his mother, who while a social climber and generally frivolous, is very loving to Grace and has never told her about her parentage. Colambre is heartbroken and feels he can never love a woman with such a heritage.\nHe visits his family estate and discovers that his father's agents are oppressing the local peasantry and probably cheating his father as well. He reveals himself to the agents, and there is a race back to London, Colambre trying to stop his father from signing documents that would ruin some of the good peasants, (and would swindle Clonbrony and Colambre), the agents trying to get the papers signed.\nColambre makes it back just in time to stop his father from ruin, and he then assists his father in paying off his debts, on condition that the Clonbrony family returns to live in Ireland.\nThe final section concerns Colambre's love for Grace and how it is discovered that she is both legitimate and an heiress.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56578", "revid": "50696742", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56578", "title": "Frances Burney", "text": "English novelist, diarist and playwright (1752\u20131840)\nFrances Burney (13 June 1752 \u2013 6 January 1840), also known as Fanny Burney and later Madame d'Arblay, was an English novelist, diarist and playwright. In 1786\u20131790 she held the post of \"Keeper of the Robes\" to Charlotte of Mecklenburg-Strelitz, George III's queen. In 1793, aged 41, she married a French exile, General Alexandre d'Arblay. After a long writing career that gained her a reputation as one of England's foremost literary authors, and after wartime travels that stranded her in France for over a decade, she settled in Bath, England, where she died on 6 January 1840. The first of her four novels, \"Evelina\" (1778), was the most successful and remains her most highly regarded, followed by \"Cecilia\" (1782). She also wrote a number of plays. She wrote a memoir of her father (1832), and is perhaps best remembered as the author of letters and journals that have been gradually published since 1842, whose influence has overshadowed the reputation of her fiction, establishing her posthumously as a diarist more than as a novelist or playwright.\nOverview of career.\nFrances Burney was a novelist, diarist and playwright. In all, she wrote four novels, eight plays, one biography and twenty-five volumes of journals and letters. She has gained critical respect in her own right, but she foreshadowed such novelists of manners with a satirical bent as Jane Austen and William Makepeace Thackeray.\nShe published her first novel, \"Evelina\", anonymously in 1778. Burney feared that her father would find what she called her \"scribblings\", so she only told her siblings and two trusted aunts about the work. Her closest sister, Susanna, helped with the cover-up. Eventually, her father read the novel and guessed that she was its author. News of her identity spread. The novel brought Burney almost immediate fame with its unique narrative and comic strengths. She followed it with \"Cecilia\" in 1782, \"Camilla\" in 1796 and \"The Wanderer\" in 1814.\nAll Burney's novels explore the lives of English aristocrats and satirises their social pretensions and personal foibles, with an eye to larger questions such as the politics of female identity. With one exception, Burney never succeeded in having her plays performed, largely due to objections from her father, who thought that publicity from such an effort would be damaging to her reputation. The exception was \"Edwy and Elgiva\", which was not well received by the public and closed after the first night's performance despite having Sarah Siddons in the cast.\nAlthough her novels were hugely popular during her lifetime, Burney's reputation as a writer of fiction suffered after her death at the hands of biographers and critics, who felt that the extensive diaries, published posthumously in 1842\u20131846, offer a more interesting and accurate portrait of 18th-century life. Today, critics are returning to her novels and plays with renewed interest in her outlook on the social lives and struggles of women in a predominantly male-oriented culture. Scholars continue to value Burney's diaries as well, for their candid depictions of English society.\nThroughout her writing career, Burney's talent for satirical caricature was widely acknowledged: figures such as Dr Samuel Johnson, Edmund Burke, Hester Lynch Thrale, David Garrick and other members of the Blue Stockings Society to which she aligned herself were among her admirers. Her early novels were read and enjoyed by Jane Austen, whose own title \"Pride and Prejudice\" derives from the final pages of \"Cecilia\". Thackeray is said to have drawn on the first-person account of the Battle of Waterloo recorded in her diaries while writing his \"Vanity Fair\".\nBurney's early career was strongly affected by her relations with her father and the critical attentions of a family friend, Samuel Crisp. Both encouraged her writing, but used their influence to dissuade her from publishing or performing her dramatic comedies, as they saw the genre as inappropriate for a lady. Many feminist critics see her as an author whose natural talent for satire was stifled by the social pressures on female authors. Burney persisted despite the setbacks. When her comedies were poorly received, she returned to novel writing, and later tried her hand at tragedy. She supported both herself and her family on the proceeds of her later novels, \"Camilla\" and \"The Wanderer\".\nFamily life.\nBurney was born in Lynn Regis, now King's Lynn, England, on 13 June 1752, to the musician Dr Charles Burney (1726\u20131814) and his first wife, Esther Sleepe Burney (1725\u20131762), as the third of her mother's six children. Her elder siblings were Esther (Hetty, 1749\u20131832) and James (1750\u20131821); those younger were Susanna Elizabeth (1755\u20131800), Charles (1757\u20131817) and Charlotte Ann (1761\u20131838). Of her brothers, James became an admiral and sailed with Captain James Cook on his second and third voyages. The younger Charles Burney became a well-known classical scholar, after whom \"The Burney Collection of Newspapers\" is named.\nHer younger sister Susanna married, in 1781, Molesworth Phillips, an officer in the Royal Marines who had sailed in Captain Cook's last expedition; she left a journal that gives a principal eye-witness account of the Gordon Riots. Her younger half-sister Sarah Harriet Burney (1772\u20131844) also became a novelist, publishing seven works of fiction. Esther Sleepe Burney also bore two other boys, both named Charles, who died in infancy in 1752 and 1754.\nFrances Burney began composing small letters and stories almost as soon as she learnt the alphabet. She often joined with her brothers and sisters in writing and acting in plays. The Burney family had many close friends. \"Daddy Crisp\" was almost like a second father to Frances and a strong influence on her early writing years. Burney scholar Margaret Anne Doody has investigated conflicts within the Burney family that affected Burney's writing and her personal life. She alleged that one strain was an incestuous relationship between Burney's brother James and their half-sister Sarah in 1798\u20131803, but there is no direct evidence for this, and Burney was affectionate towards Sarah and provided her with financial assistance in later life.\nFrances Burney's mother, Esther Sleepe, described by historians as a woman of \"warmth and intelligence\", was the daughter of a French refugee named Dubois and had been brought up a Catholic. This French heritage influenced Frances Burney's self-perception in later life, possibly contributing to her attraction and subsequent marriage to Alexandre d'Arblay. Esther Burney died in 1762 when Frances was ten years old.\nFrances's father, Charles Burney, was noted for his personal charm, and for his talents as a musician, a musicologist, a composer and a man of letters. In 1760 he moved his family to London, a decision that improved their access to English high society and social standing. They lived amidst an artist social circle that gathered round Charles at their home in Poland Street, Soho.\nIn 1767, Charles Burney eloped to marry for a second time, to Elizabeth Allen, the wealthy widow of a King's Lynn wine merchant. Allen had three children of her own, and several years after the marriage the two families merged. This new domestic situation was fraught with tension. The Burney children found their new stepmother overbearing and quick to anger, and they made fun of her behind her back. However, their collective unhappiness may have also brought them closer to one another. In 1774 the family moved again, to what had been the house of Isaac Newton in St Martin's Street, Westminster.\nEducation.\nBurney's sisters Esther and Susanna were favoured by their father, for what he perceived as their superior attractiveness and intelligence. At the age of eight, Burney had yet to learn the alphabet; some scholars suggest she had a form of dyslexia. By the age of ten, however, she had begun to write for her own amusement. Esther and Susanna were sent by their father to be educated in Paris, while at home Burney educated herself by reading from the family collection, including Plutarch's \"Lives\", works by Shakespeare, histories, sermons, poetry, plays, novels and courtesy books. She drew on this material, along with her journals, when writing her first novels. Scholars who have looked into the extent of Burney's reading and self-education find a child who was unusually precocious and ambitious, working hard to overcome an early disability.\nFrom the age of fifteen, Burney lived in the midst of a brilliant social circle, gathered round her father in Poland Street, and later in St Martin's Street. David Garrick was a frequent visitor, often arriving before eight o'clock in the morning. Burney left detailed accounts of people they entertained, notably of Omai, a young man from Raiatea, and of Alexis Orlov, a favourite of Catherine the Great. She first met Dr Samuel Johnson at her father's home in March 1777.\nA critical aspect of Burney's literary education was her relationship with a family friend, the dramatist Samuel Crisp, who had met her father in about 1745 at the house of Charles Cavendish Fulke Greville. He encouraged Burney's writing by soliciting frequent journal-letters from her that recounted to him the goings-on in her family and social circle in London. Burney paid her first formal visit to Crisp at Chessington Hall in Surrey in 1766.\nJournal-diaries and \"Caroline Evelyn\".\nThe first entry in Frances Burney's journal was dated 27 March 1768 and addressed to \"Nobody\". The journal itself was to extend over 72 years. Burney kept the journal-diary as a form of correspondence with family and friends, recounting life events and her observations of them. The diary contains a record of her extensive reading in her father's library, as well as the visits and behaviour of notable people who visited their home. Burney and her sister Susanna were particularly close, and Burney continued to send journal-letters to Susanna throughout her adult life.\nBurney was 15 when her father married Elizabeth Allen in 1767. Her diary entries suggest that she had begun to feel pressure to abandon her writing as something \"unladylike\" that \"might vex Mrs. Allen.\" Feeling that she had transgressed, the same year she burnt her first manuscript, \"The History of Caroline Evelyn\", which she had written in secret. Frances recorded in her diary an account of the emotions that led up to that dramatic act and eventually used it as a foundation for her first novel, \"Evelina\", which follows the life of the fictional Caroline Evelyn's daughter.\nIn keeping with Burney's sense of propriety, in later life she heavily edited sections of her earlier diaries, destroying much of the material. Editors Lars Troide and Joyce Hemlow recovered some of this obscured material while researching their editions of Burney's journals and letters in the late twentieth century.\n\"Evelina\".\nBurney's \"Evelina or the History of a Young Lady's Entrance into the World\" was published anonymously in 1778 without her father's knowledge or permission, by Thomas Lowndes, who voiced an interest after reading its first volume and agreed to publish it upon receipt of the finished work. The novel had been rejected by a previous publisher, Robert Dodsley, who declined to print an anonymous work. Burney, who worked as her father's amanuensis, had copied the manuscript in a \"disguised hand\" to prevent any identification of the book with her family, thinking that her own handwriting might be recognised by a publisher. Burney's second attempt to publish \"Evelina\" involved the help of her eldest brother James, who posed as its author to Lowndes. Inexperienced at negotiating with a publisher, he only extracted twenty guineas (\u00a321) as payment for the manuscript.\nThe novel was a critical success, with praise from respected persons, including the statesman Edmund Burke and the literary critic Samuel Johnson. It was admired for its comic view of wealthy English society and realistic portrayal of working-class London dialects. It is known today as a satire. It was even discussed by characters in another epistolary novel of the time: Elizabeth Blower's \"George Bateman\" (1782). Burney's father read public reviews of \"Evelina\" before learning that the author was his daughter. Although the act of publication was radical for its time, he was impressed by the favourable reactions and largely supported her. He certainly saw social advantages in having a successful writer in the family.\nCritical reception.\nWritten in epistolary form just as this was reaching its height of popularity, \"Evelina\" portrays the English upper middle class through a 17-year-old woman who has reached marriageable age. It was a Bildungsroman ahead of its time. \"Evelina\" pushed boundaries, for female protagonists were still \"relatively rare\" in that genre. Comic and witty, it is ultimately a satire of the oppressive masculine values that shaped a young woman's life in the 18th century, and of other forms of social hypocrisy. \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" calls it a \"landmark in the development of the novel of manners\".\nIn choosing to narrate the novel through letters written by the protagonist, Burney made use of her own writing experience. This course has won praise from critics past and present, for the direct access it provides to events and characters, and the narrative sophistication it demonstrates in linking the roles of narrator and heroine. The authors of \"Women in World History\" argue that she identifies difficulties faced by women in the 18th century, especially those on questions of romance and marriage. She is seen as a \"shrewd observer of her times and a clever recorder of its charms and its follies\". What critics have consistently found interesting in her writing is the introduction and careful treatment of a female protagonist, complete with character flaws, \"who must make her way in a hostile world.\" These are recognisable also as features of Jane Austen's writing, and show Burney's influence on her work. Furthermore, she sought to put to use the epistolary form espoused periodically by Burney, as seen in \"Lady Susan\" and to a lesser extent \"Pride and Prejudice\".\nAs a testament to its popularity, the novel went through four immediate editions. In 1971, \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" stated of \"Evelina\": \"Addressed to the young, the novel has a quality perennially young.\"\nHester Thrale and Streatham.\n\"Evelina\" brought Burney to the attention of a patron of the arts, Hester Thrale, who invited Burney to visit her home in Streatham. The house was a centre for literary and political conversation. Though shy by nature, Burney reportedly impressed those she met, including Dr Johnson, who would remain a friend and correspondent throughout the period of her visits, from 1779 to 1783. Thrale wrote to Dr Burney on 22 July: \"Mr. Johnson returned home full of the Prayes of the Book I had lent him, and protesting that there were passages in it which might do honour to Richardson: we talk of it for ever, and he feels ardent after the d\u00e9nouement; he could not get rid of the Rogue, he said.\" Many of Johnson's compliments were transcribed into Burney's diary. Visits to Streatham occupied months at a time, and on several occasions the guests, including Frances Burney, made trips to Brighton and to Bath. Like other notable events, these were recorded in letters to her family.\n\"The Witlings\".\nIn 1779, encouraged by the public's warm reception of comic material in \"Evelina\", and with offers of help from Arthur Murphy and Richard Brinsley Sheridan, Burney began to write a dramatic comedy called \"The Witlings\". The play satirised a wide segment of London society, including the literary world and its pretensions. It was not published at the time because Burney's father and the family friend Samuel Crisp thought it would offend some of the public by seeming to mock the Bluestockings, and because they had reservations about the propriety of a woman writing comedy. The play tells the story of Celia and Beaufort, lovers kept apart by their families due to \"economic insufficiency\".\nBurney's plays were discovered in 1945 when her papers were acquired by the Berg Collection of the New York Public Library. A complete edition was published in 1995.\n\"Cecilia\".\nIn 1782 Burney published \"Cecilia, or Memoirs of an Heiress\", written partly at Chessington Hall and after much discussion with Crisp. The publishers, Thomas Payne and Thomas Cadell, paid Frances \u00a3250 for her novel, printed 2000 copies of the first edition, and reprinted it at least twice within a year.\nThe plot revolves around a heroine, Cecilia Beverley, whose inheritance from an uncle comes with the stipulation that she find a husband who will accept her name. Beset on all sides by suitors, the beautiful and intelligent Cecilia's heart is captivated by a man whose family's pride in its birth and ancestry would forbid such a change of name. He finally persuades Cecilia, against all her judgement, to marry him secretly, so that their union \u2013 and consequent change of name \u2013 can be presented to the family as an accomplished fact. The work received praise for the maturity of its ironic third-person narration, but was viewed as less spontaneous than her first work, and weighed by the author's self-conscious awareness of her audience. Some critics claim to have found the narration intrusive, while friends found the writing too closely modelled on Johnson's. Edmund Burke admired the novel, but moderated his praise with criticism of the array of characters and tangled, convoluted plots.\nJane Austen may have been inspired by a sentence in \"Cecilia\" to name her famous novel \"Pride and Prejudice\": \"'The whole of this unfortunate business,' said Dr Lyster, 'has been the result of pride and prejudice.'\"\nHer fellow Bluestocking, Anna Laetitia Barbauld wrote to Burney in 1813 encouraging her to publish her novel \"The Wanderer\" in the United States where her work, including \"Cecilia\", was popular.\nThe royal court.\nIn 1775 Burney turned down a marriage proposal from one Thomas Barlow, a man whom she had met only once. Her side of the Barlow courtship is amusingly told in her journal. During 1782\u20131785 she enjoyed the rewards of her successes as a novelist; she was received at fashionable literary gatherings throughout London. In 1781 Samuel Crisp died. In 1784 Dr Johnson died, and that year also brought her failure in a romance with a clergyman, George Owen Cambridge. She was 33 years old.\nIn 1785, an association with Mary Granville Delany, a woman known in both literary and royal circles, allowed Burney to travel to the court of King George III and Queen Charlotte, where the Queen offered her the post of \"Keeper of the Robes\", with a salary of \u00a3200 per annum. Burney hesitated to accept, not wishing to be separated from her family, and especially resistant to employment that would restrict free use of her time in writing. However, unmarried at 34, she felt pressure to accept and thought that improved social status and income might allow her greater freedom to write. Having accepted the post in 1786, she developed a warm relationship with the queen and princesses that lasted into her later years, yet her doubts proved accurate: the position exhausted her and left her little time for writing. Her sorrow was intensified by poor relations with her colleague Juliane Elisabeth von Schwellenburg, co-Keeper of the Robes, who has been described as \"a peevish old person of uncertain temper and impaired health, swaddled in the buckram of backstairs etiquette.\"\nBurney's continued to write journals during her years in the court. To her friends and to her sister Susanna, she recounted her life in court, along with major political events, including the public trial of Warren Hastings for \"official misconduct in India\". She recorded the speeches of Edmund Burke at the trial.\nBurney was courted by an official of the royal household, Colonel Stephen Digby, but he eventually married another woman of greater wealth. The disappointment, combined with the other frustrations of office, may have contributed to her health failing at this time. In 1790 she prevailed on her father (whose own career had taken a new turn when he was appointed organist at Chelsea Hospital in 1783) to request that she be released from the post, which she was. She returned to her father's house in Chelsea, but continued to receive a yearly pension of \u00a3100. She kept up a friendship with the royal family and received letters from the princesses from 1818 until 1840.\nThe court plays.\nFrom 1788, Burney's diaries record the composition of a small number of playtexts which were neither performed nor published in the author's lifetime, remaining in manuscript until 1995. These are the dramatic fragment conventionally known as \"Elberta\" and three completed plays copied out in handwriting in ordered booklets, suitable for private circulation, if not publication. These are \"Edwy and Elgiva\", \"Hubert de Vere\", and \"The Siege of Pevensey\". \"Edwy and Elgiva\" was the only one to be staged, although for one night only, on 21 March 1795, garnering unanimous negative reviews from the public and critics. The long-delayed publication of these plays has largely kept critics. Even for the handful of scholars who have dealt with them, these texts remain devoid of particular dramatic qualities, indeed 'wretched', as they are often called: in the form in which they have come to us they seem too long to be staged; characterizations are stereotyped; the endings are weak, and the plots convoluted and inconsistent. The style, rhetorical and emphatic, makes them sound clumsy and heavy to the modern ear. However, when properly contextualized and studied as theatrical texts, rather than as unfortunate second-order productions within the works of a successful novelist as Burney, the four Court plays suggest a distinct thematic-stylistic-discursive alignment, more in line with the dramatic production of the late 18th century than has been recognized thus far.\nMarriage.\nIn 1790\u20131791 Burney wrote four blank-verse tragedies: \"Hubert de Vere\", \"The Siege of Pevensey\", \"Elberta\" and \"Edwy and Elgiva\", only the last of which was performed. One of a profusion of paintings and literary works about the early English king Eadwig (\"Edwy\") and his wife \u00c6lfgifu (\"Elgiva\") to appear in the later 18th century, it met with public failure, playing in London for one night in March.\nWhen the French Revolution began in 1789, Burney was among the many literary figures in England who sympathized with its early ideals of equality and social justice. During this period Burney became acquainted with some French exiles known as \"Constitutionalists\", who fled to England in August 1791 and were living at Juniper Hall, near Mickleham, Surrey, where Burney's sister Susanna lived. She quickly became close to General Alexandre d'Arblay (1754-1818), an artillery officer who had been adjutant-general to Lafayette. D'Arblay taught her French and introduced her to the writer Germaine de Sta\u00ebl.\nBurney's father disapproved of d'Arblay's poverty, Catholicism, and ambiguous social status as an \u00e9migr\u00e9. Nonetheless, she and d'Arblay were married on 28 July 1793 at St Michaels and All Angels Church in Mickleham. The same year she produced her pamphlet \"Brief Reflections relative to the Emigrant French Clergy\". This short work resembled other pamphlets produced by French sympathisers in England, calling for financial support for the revolutionary cause. It is noteworthy for the way that Burney employed her rhetorical skills in the name of tolerance and human compassion. On 18 December 1794, Burney gave birth to a son, Alexander Charles Louis (died 19 January 1837), who took holy orders and became minister of Ely Chapel, London, and perpetual curate of Camden Town Chapel. Her sister Charlotte's remarriage in 1798 to the pamphleteer Ralph Broome caused her and her father further consternation, as did the move by her sister Susanna and penurious brother-in-law Molesworth Phillips and their family to Ireland in 1796.\n\"Camilla\".\nBurney and her new husband, General Alexandre d'Arblay, were saved from poverty in 1796 by the publication of Burney's \"courtesy novel\" \"Camilla, or a Picture of Youth\", a story of frustrated love and impoverishment. The first edition sold out; she made \u00a31000 on the novel and sold the copyright for another \u00a31000. This enabled them to build a house in Westhumble near Dorking in Surrey, which they called Camilla Cottage. Their life at this time was by all accounts happy, but the illness and death in 1800 of Burney's sister and close friend Susanna cast a shadow and ended a lifelong correspondence that had been the motive and basis for most of Burney's journal writing. However, she resumed her journal at the request of her husband, for the benefit of her son.\nComedies.\nIn the period 1797\u20131801 Burney wrote three comedies that remained unpublished in her lifetime: \"Love and Fashion\", \"A Busy Day\" and \"The Woman Hater\". The last is partly a reworking of subject-matter from \"The Witlings\", but with fewer satirical elements and more emphasis on reforming her characters' faults. First performed in December 2007 at the Orange Tree Theatre in Richmond, it retains one of the central characters, Lady Smatter \u2013 an absent-minded but inveterate quoter of poetry, perhaps meant as a comic rendering of a Bluestocking. All other characters in \"The Woman Hater\" differ from those in \"The Witlings\".\nLife in France: revolution and mastectomy.\nIn 1801 d'Arblay was offered service with the government of Napoleon Bonaparte in France, and in 1802 Burney and her son followed him to Paris, where they expected to remain for a year. The outbreak of war between France and England overtook their visit and they remained there in exile for ten years. Although isolated from her family while in France, Burney was supportive of her husband's decision to move to Passy, outside Paris.\nIn August 1810 Burney developed pains in her breast, which her husband suspected could be due to breast cancer. Through her royal network, she was eventually treated by several leading physicians, and a year later, on 30 September 1811, underwent a mastectomy performed by \"7 men in black, Dr. Larrey, M. Dubois, Dr. Moreau, Dr. Aumont, Dr. Ribe, &amp; a pupil of Dr. Larrey, &amp; another of M. Dubois\". The operation was performed like a battlefield operation under the command of M. Dubois, then \"accoucheur\" (midwife or obstetrician) to the Empress Marie Louise and considered the best doctor in France. Burney later described the operation in detail, since she was conscious through most of it, as it took place before the development of anaesthetics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I mounted, therefore, unbidden, the Bed stead \u2013 &amp; M. Dubois placed me upon the Mattress, &amp; spread a cambric handkerchief upon my face. It was transparent, however, &amp; I saw, through it, that the Bed stead was instantly surrounded by the 7 men &amp; my nurse. I refused to be held; but when, Bright through the cambric, I saw the glitter of polished Steel \u2013 I closed my Eyes. I would not trust to convulsive fear the sight of the terrible incision. Yet \u2013 when the dreadful steel was plunged into the breast \u2013 cutting through veins \u2013 arteries \u2013 flesh \u2013 nerves \u2013 I needed no injunctions not to restrain my cries. I began a scream that lasted unintermittingly during the whole time of the incision \u2013 &amp; I almost marvel that it rings not in my Ears still? so excruciating was the agony. When the wound was made, &amp; the instrument was withdrawn, the pain seemed undiminished, for the air that suddenly rushed into those delicate parts felt like a mass of minute but sharp &amp; forked poniards, that were tearing the edges of the wound. I concluded the operation was over \u2013 Oh no! presently the terrible cutting was renewed \u2013 &amp; worse than ever, to separate the bottom, the foundation of this dreadful gland from the parts to which it adhered \u2013 Again all description would be baffled \u2013 yet again all was not over, \u2013 Dr. Larry rested but his own hand, &amp; \u2013 Oh heaven! \u2013 I then felt the knife (rack)ling against the breast bone \u2013 scraping it!\nBurney sent her account of this experience months later to her sister Esther without rereading it. It is impossible to know today whether the breast removed was indeed cancerous. She survived, and returned to England with her son in 1812 to visit her ailing father and to avoid her son's conscription into the French army. Charles Burney died in 1814, and she returned to France later that year after the Treaty of Paris had been concluded, to be with her husband.\nIn 1815 Napoleon escaped from Elba, and returned to power in France. D'Arblay, who was serving with the King's Guard, remained loyal to King Louis XVIII and became involved in the military actions that followed. Burney fled to Belgium. When her husband was wounded she joined him at Tr\u00e8ves (Trier) and together they returned to Bath in England, to live at 23 Great Stanhope Street. Burney wrote an account of this experience and of her Paris years in her Waterloo Journal of 1818\u20131832. D'Arblay was promoted to lieutenant-general, but died shortly afterwards of cancer, in 1818.\n\"The Wanderer\" and \"Memoirs of Dr Burney\".\nBurney published her fourth novel, \"\", a few days before her father's death. \"A story of love and misalliance set in the French Revolution\", it criticises the English treatment of foreigners in the war years. It also criticizes the hypocritical social restriction put on women in general \u2013 as the heroine tries one means after another to earn an honest living \u2013 and the elaborate class criteria for social inclusion or exclusion. That strong social message sits uneasily within an unusual structure that might be called a melodramatic proto-mystery novel with elements of the picaresque. The heroine is no scallywag, but she is wilful and for obscure reasons refuses to reveal her name or origin. So as she darts about the South of England as a fugitive, she arouses suspicions.\nSome parallels of plot and attitude have been drawn between \"The Wanderer\" and the early novels of Helen Craik, which she could have read in the 1790s.\nBurney made \u00a31500 from the first run, but the work disappointed her followers and did not go into a second English printing, although it met her immediate financial needs. Critics felt it lacked the insight of her earlier novels. It was reprinted in 1988 with an introduction by the novelist Margaret Drabble in the \"Mothers of the Novel\" series.\nAfter her husband's death at 23 Great Stanhope Street, Bath, Burney moved to London to be nearer to her son, then a fellow at Christ's College. In homage to her father she gathered and in 1832 published in three volumes the \"Memoirs of Doctor Burney\". These were written in a panegyric style, praising her father's accomplishments and character, and she drew on many of her own personal writings from years before to produce them. Protective of her father and the family reputation, she destroyed evidence of facts that were painful or unflattering and was soundly criticised by contemporaries and later by historians for doing so.\nLater life.\nBurney's son died in 1837 and her sister Charlotte Broome in 1838. While in Bath, Burney received visits from younger members of the Burney family, who found her a fascinating storyteller with a talent for imitating the personalities that she described. She continued to write often to members of her family.\nFrances Burney died on 6 January 1840. She was buried with her son and her husband in Walcot cemetery in Bath. A gravestone was later erected in the churchyard of St Swithin's across the road, adjacent to that of Jane Austen's father, George Austen.\nPlaques and other memorials.\nIn addition to the gravestone erected in the churchyard of St Swithin, Bath, other memorials and plaques record Burney's life.\nA plaque on the wall at 84 High Street, King's Lynn, shows where she and her father lived in the 1750s.\nIn 1780, two years after the publication of Evelina, she stayed at 14 South Parade, Bath, with Mr and Mrs Thrale, who were great friends of Dr Johnson. A plaque on the wall of the house records her visit.\nAt 78 West Street, Brighton, Sussex a blue plaque records her visits to the Thrales' home there.\nAt Windsor Castle Wall, St Alban's Street, Windsor, a plaque records the residence of Mary Delaney between 1785 and 1788, where she was frequently visited by Burney.\nA blue plaque on a wall in Chapel Lane, Westhumble, Surrey records the d'Arblays' life there in their cottage, 'Camilla', which they built and in which they lived between 1797 and 1801.\nAt St Margaret's Vicarage, St Margaret's Place, King's Lynn a blue plaque records Burney's regular visits there, where she observed the social life of Lynn.\nElizabeth Goudge's four-act play, \"Fanny Burney\" (in \"Three Plays: Suomi, The Bront\u00ebs of Haworth, Fanny Burney\": Gerald Duckworth, London, 1939) has scenes from the life of Frances Burney from 1768 to 1840. Under the title \"Joy Will Come Back\", the play was performed in London, in the Arts Theatre in 1937. Under the published title, \"Fanny Burney\", it was performed at Oldham, Lancashire, in 1949.\nA Royal Society of Arts brown plaque records her period of residence at 11 Bolton Street, Mayfair.\nOn 13 June 2002 the Burney Society of North America and the Burney Society UK unveiled a memorial panel in the new Poets' Corner window in Westminster Abbey in memory of Frances Burney.\nIn 2013, a marble plaque was unveiled in the gallery of St Swithin's Church, Bath, to record Burney's life. This replaces two original plaques\u2014one to her and one to her half-sister Sarah Harriet\u2014that were lost. In 1958, the St Swithin's church authorities had sought to protect the plaques by removing them during renovations to the church organ, but they later disappeared.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56579", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56579", "title": "Achondroplasia", "text": "Genetic condition, the most common form of dwarfism\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nAchondroplasia is a genetic disorder whose primary feature is dwarfism. It is the most common cause of dwarfism and affects about 1 in 27,500 people. In those with the condition, the arms and legs are short, while the torso is typically of normal length. Those affected have an average adult height of for males and for females. Other features can include an enlarged head with prominent forehead (frontal bossing) and underdevelopment of the midface (midface hypoplasia). Complications can include sleep apnea or recurrent ear infections. Achondroplasia includes the extremely rare short-limb skeletal dysplasia with severe combined immunodeficiency.\nAchondroplasia is caused by a mutation in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (\"FGFR3\") gene (located in chromosome 4) that results in its protein being overactive. Achondroplasia results in impaired endochondral bone growth (bone growth within cartilage). The disorder has an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance, meaning only one mutated copy of the gene is required for the condition to occur. About 80% of cases occur in children of parents without the disease, and result from a new (\"de novo\", or sporadic) mutation, which most commonly originates as a spontaneous change during spermatogenesis. The rest are inherited from a parent with the condition. The risk of a new mutation increases with the age of the father. In families with two affected parents, children who inherit both affected genes (for which there is a 25% chance) typically die before birth or in early infancy from breathing difficulties. The condition is generally diagnosed based on the clinical features but may be confirmed by genetic testing. Mutations in FGFR3 also cause achondroplasia-related conditions including hypochondroplasia and SADDAN (severe achondroplasia with developmental delay and acanthosis nigricans), a rare disorder of bone growth characterized by skeletal, brain, and skin abnormalities resulting in severe short-limb skeletal dysplasia with severe combined immunodeficiency.\nTreatments include small molecule therapy with a C-natriuretic peptide analog (vosoritide), approved to improve growth velocity in children with achondroplasia based on results in Phase 3 human trials, although its long-term effects are unknown. Growth hormone therapy may also be used. Efforts to treat or prevent complications such as obesity, hydrocephalus, obstructive sleep apnea, middle ear infections or spinal stenosis may be required. Support groups exist for those with the condition, such as Little People of America (LPA). Nonprofit physician organizations also exist to disseminate information about treatment and management options, including development of patient resources.\nSigns and symptoms.\nComplications.\nChildren.\nChildren with achondroplasia often have less muscle tone; because of this it is common for them to have delayed walking and motor skills. It is also common for children to have bowed legs, scoliosis, lordosis, arthritis, issues with joint flexibility, breathing problems, ear infections, and crowded teeth. These issues can be treated with surgery, braces, or physical therapy.\nHydrocephalus is a severe effect associated with achondroplasia in children. This condition occurs when cerebrospinal fluid is not able to flow in and out of the skull because of how the spine narrows. This fluid build up is associated with an enlarged head, vomiting, lethargy, headaches, and irritability. A shunt surgery is commonly performed to treat this condition, but an endoscopic third ventriculostomy can also be done.\nAdults.\nAdults with achondroplasia often face issues with obesity and sleep apnea. It is also typical for adults to experience numbness or tingling in their legs because of nerve compression.\nSome research has found that adults with achondroplasia may also experience psychosocial complications, usually associated with short stature.\nPregnancy in women with achondroplasia is considered higher risk. Women with achondroplasia generally have their babies delivered through C-sections to prevent complications that could occur with a natural birth. Intelligence and life span are usually near normal, although craniocervical junction compression increases the risk of death in infancy.\nCauses.\nAchondroplasia is caused by a mutation in fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (\"FGFR3\") gene. This gene encodes a protein called fibroblast growth factor receptor 3, which contributes to the production of collagen and other structural components in tissues and bones. When the FGFR3 gene is mutated it interferes with how this protein interacts with growth factors leading to complications with bone production. Cartilage is not able to fully develop into bone, causing the individual to be disproportionately shorter in height.\nIn normal development, \"FGFR3\" has a negative regulatory effect on bone growth. In achondroplasia, the mutated form of the receptor is constitutively active, and this leads to severely shortened bones. This is an example of a gain of function mutation. The effect is genetically dominant, with one variant of the \"FGFR3\" gene being sufficient to cause achondroplasia, while two copies of the mutant gene are invariably fatal (recessive lethal) before or shortly after birth. This occurs due to respiratory failure from an underdeveloped ribcage. People with achondroplasia are often born to parents that do not have the condition due to spontaneous mutation.\nWhere achondroplasia is inherited, its pattern is autosomal dominant. In couples where one partner has achondroplasia there is a 50% chance of passing the disorder on to their child every pregnancy. In situations where both parents have achondroplasia there is a 50% chance the child will have achondroplasia, 25% chance the child will not, and a 25% chance that the child will inherit the gene from both parents resulting in \"double dominance\" and leading to lethal bone dysplasia.\nStudies have demonstrated that new gene mutations for achondroplasia are exclusively inherited from the father and occur during spermatogenesis; it has been theorized that sperm carrying the mutation in FGFR3 have a selective advantage over sperm with normal FGFR3. The frequency of mutations in sperm leading to achondroplasia increases in proportion to paternal age, as well as in proportion to exposure to ionizing radiation. The occurrence rate of achondroplasia in the children of fathers over 50\u00a0years of age is 1\u00a0in 1,875, compared to 1\u00a0in 15,000 in the general population. Research by urologist Harry Fisch of the Male Reproductive Center at Columbia Presbyterian Hospital in 2013 indicated that in humans this defect may be exclusively inherited from the father and becomes increasingly probable with paternal age, specifically males reproducing after 35.\nThere are two other syndromes with a genetic basis similar to achondroplasia: hypochondroplasia and thanatophoric dysplasia.\nDiagnosis.\nAchondroplasia can be detected before birth by prenatal ultrasound, although signs are often subtle and not apparent before the 24th week of pregnancy. A DNA test can be performed before birth to detect homozygosity, wherein two copies of the mutant gene are inherited, a lethal condition leading to stillbirths. Postnatal diagnosis of achondroplasia is typically uncomplicated, involving an assessment of physical and radiographic features. Clinical features include megalocephaly, short limbs, prominent forehead, thoracolumbar kyphosis and mid-face hypoplasia. Complications like dental malocclusion, hydrocephalus and repeated otitis media can be observed. The risk of death in infancy is increased due to the likelihood of compression of the spinal cord with or without upper airway obstruction.\nRadiologic findings.\nA skeletal survey is useful to confirm the diagnosis of achondroplasia. The skull is large, with a narrow foramen magnum, and relatively small skull base. The vertebral bodies are short and flattened with relatively large intervertebral disk height, and there is congenitally narrowed spinal canal. The iliac wings are small and squared, with a narrow sciatic notch and horizontal acetabular roof. The tubular bones are short and thick with metaphyseal cupping and flaring and irregular growth plates. Fibular overgrowth is present. The hand is broad with short metacarpals and phalanges, and a trident configuration. The ribs are short with cupped anterior ends. If the radiographic features are not classic, a search for a different diagnosis should be entertained. Because of the extremely deformed bone structure, people with achondroplasia are often \"double jointed\". The diagnosis can be made by fetal ultrasound by progressive discordance between the short femur length and biparietal diameter by age. The trident hand configuration can be seen if the fingers are fully extended.\nAnother common characteristic of the syndrome is thoracolumbar gibbus in infancy.\nTreatment.\nThere is no known cure for achondroplasia even though the cause of the mutation in the growth factor receptor has been found. Although used by those without achondroplasia to aid in growth, human growth hormone does not help people with achondroplasia, which involves a different hormonal pathway. Usually, the best results appear within the first and second year of therapy. After the second year of growth hormone therapy, beneficial bone growth decreases, so the therapy is not a satisfactory long-term treatment. As of December 2020, the treatment of achondroplasia with human growth hormone was approved only in Japan.\nA small-molecule drug vosoritide is used to improve growth velocity in children with achondroplasia, although its long-term effects are unknown. Vosoritide inhibits the activity of \"FGFR3\". It has been gradually made available in different countries starting from 2021.\nLimb-lengthening will increase the length of the legs and arms of someone with achondroplasia, but little medical consensus exists regarding this practice. The age of surgery can vary from early childhood to adulthood.\nResearch has also shown that introducing parents of children with achondroplasia to support and advocacy groups at the time of diagnosis can improve outcomes. Several patient advocacy groups exist to support people with achondroplasia and their families. https:// are available to support patients and their caregivers with information that they can distribute to their physicians, who may not be familiar with the unique medical requirements of managing achondroplasia. Physician-oriented best practice guidelines are also available to guide physicians managing the spinal disorders, foramen magnum stenosis, craniofacial implications, pregnancy, and peri-operative needs of people with achondroplasia.\nHomozygous achondroplasia is invariably considered terminal even with aggressive treatment.\nEpidemiology.\nAchondroplasia is one of several congenital conditions with similar presentations, such as osteogenesis imperfecta, multiple epiphyseal dysplasia tarda, achondrogenesis, osteopetrosis, and thanatophoric dysplasia. This makes estimates of prevalence difficult, with changing and subjective diagnostic criteria over time. One detailed and long-running study in the Netherlands found that the prevalence determined at birth was only 1.3 per 100,000 live births. Another study at the same time found a rate of 1 per 10,000. A 2020 review and meta-analysis estimated a worldwide prevalence of 4.6 per 100,000.\nPsychological and social aspects.\nIn addition to physical challenges, individuals with achondroplasia may also experience psychological challenges such as fear or negative perception of individuals with achondroplasia. Gollust et al. have indicated that adults with achondroplasia tend to have lower self-esteem, annual income, educational attainment, and overall quality of life (QOL) when compared to their unaffected siblings. Interestingly, the Golust study revealed that the subjects were as likely to cite disadvantages relating to social barriers as those relating to health issues and functioning.\nOn the other hand, other investigators, such as Ancona, state that for many individuals in immediate environments that have natural acceptance of the condition from the beginning, their main challenge lies in adapting to a world designed for those without the condition. However, when society rejects the condition from the start and associates it with destructive anxiety, it significantly damages the individual's self-image and leads to their social exclusion. Thus, the author hypothesizes, an accepting environment is crucial to prevent significant suffering for individuals with achondroplasia and to ensure the best outcomes for corrective interventions, rather than perpetuating rejection.\nSimilarly, a study conducted in Japan by Nishimura and Hanaki found that children with achondroplasia faced challenges related to their short stature, but there was no indication of psychosocial maladjustment. They hypothesized that focusing on coping strategies and self-efficacy may play a crucial role in promoting psychological well-being among children with achondroplasia.\nSocial support and peer connections can be important for individuals with achondroplasia. Support groups, online communities, and advocacy organizations can provide a sense of belonging and can help individuals with achondroplasia connect with others who understand their experiences. Additionally, these communities can serve as a resource for information and support for both individuals with achondroplasia and their families. In the United States, The Little People of America (LPA) is a national organization that provides support, resources, and advocacy for individuals with dwarfism, including achondroplasia.\nAnimals.\nBased on their disproportionate dwarfism, some dog breeds traditionally have been classified as \"achondroplastic\". This is the case for the dachshund, basset hound, corgi and bulldog breeds. Data from whole genome association studies in short-limbed dogs reveal a strong association of this trait with a retro-gene coding for fibroblast growth factor 4 (FGF4). Therefore, it seems unlikely that dogs and humans are achondroplastic for the same reasons. However, histological studies in some achondroplastic dog breeds have shown altered cell patterns in cartilage that are very similar to those observed in humans exhibiting achondroplasia.\nA similar form of achondroplasia was found in a litter of piglets from a phenotypically normal Danish sow. The dwarfism was inherited dominant in the offspring from this litter. The piglets were born phenotypically normal but became more and more symptomatic as they reached maturity. This involved a mutation of the protein collagen, type X, alpha 1, encoded by the COL10A1 gene. In humans a mutation (G595E) to the COL10A1 gene has been associated with Schmid metaphyseal chondrodysplasia (SMCD), a relatively mild skeletal disorder.\nThe now extinct Ancon sheep was created by humans through the selective breeding of common domestic sheep with achondroplasia. The average-sized torso combined with the relatively smaller legs produced by achondroplasia was valued for making affected sheep less likely to escape without affecting the amount of wool or meat each sheep produced.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56582", "revid": "7528757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56582", "title": "Khabarovsk", "text": "City in Khabarovsk Krai, Russia\nKhabarovsk ( ) is the largest city and the administrative centre of Khabarovsk Krai, Russia, located from the China\u2013Russia border, at the confluence of the Amur and Ussuri Rivers, about north of Vladivostok. As of the 2021 Russian census, it had a population of 617,441. It was known as \"Khabarovka\" until 1893.\nThe city was the administrative center of the Far Eastern Federal District of Russia from 2002 until December 2018, when the status was given to Vladivostok. As is typical of the interior of the Russian Far East, Khabarovsk has an extreme climate with strong seasonal swings resulting in strong, cold winters and relatively hot and humid summers.\nHistory.\nEarliest record.\nHistorical records indicate that a city was founded on the site in the eighth century. The Tungusic peoples are indigenous to the city's vicinity. The city was named () in Chinese when it was part of the Chinese empire. During the Tang dynasty, Boli was the capital of Heishui Protectorate, called Heishui Duhufu.\n In AD 722, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang (\u5510\u7384\u5b97) established Heishui Protectorate and gave self-rule to Heishui Mohe tribes. The seat of this administrative region was then established near today's Khabarovsk.\n17th-century Russian exploration.\nIn the mid-17th century, the Amur Valley became the scene of hostilities between the Russian Cossacks, who tried to expand into the region and collect tribute from the natives, and the rising Manchu Qing dynasty, who were intent on securing the region for themselves. \nKhabarov's Achansk.\nThe Russian explorers and raiders of the 1650s set up a number of more or less fortified camps (\"ostrogs\") on the Amur. Most of them were in use for only a few months and later destroyed. It is usually thought that the first such camp in the general area of today's Khabarovsk was the fortified winter camp named Achansk () or Achansky gorodok (), built by the Cossacks of Yerofey Khabarov in September 1651 after they had sailed to the area from the upper Amur. The fort was named after the local tribe whom Khabarov's people called \"Achans\". On October 8 the fort was unsuccessfully attacked by joint forces of Achans and Duchers (who had good reasons to hate the Cossacks, due to their rather heavy-handed tribute-extraction tactics), while many Russians were away fishing. In late November, Khabarov's people undertook a three-day campaign against the local chief Zhakshur (\u0416\u0430\u043a\u0448\u0443\u0440) (whose name is also known in a more Russian version, Zaksor (\u0417\u0430\u043a\u0441\u043e\u0440)), collecting a large amount of tribute and announcing that the locals were now subjects of the Russian Czar. A similar campaign was waged later in winter against the Ducher chief Nechiga (\u041d\u0435\u0447\u0438\u0433\u0430), farther away from Achansk.\nOn 24 or\u00a026 March 1652, Fort Achansk was attacked by Manchu cavalry, led by Ninguta's commander Haise, reinforced by Ducher auxiliaries, but the Cossacks stood their ground in a day-long battle and even managed to seize the attackers' supply train. Once the ice on the Amur broke in the spring of 1652, Khabarov's people destroyed their fort and sailed away.\nThe exact location of Khabarov's Achansk has long been a subject for debate among Russian historians and geographers. A number of locations, both upstream and downstream of today's Khabarovsk, have been proposed since Richard Maack, one of the first Russian scholars to visit the region, identified Achansk in 1859 with the ruins on Cape Kyrma, which is located on the southern (Chinese) shore of the Amur, upstream of Khabarovsk. The most widely accepted point of view is probably that of Boris Polevoy, who believed that Khabarov's Achansk was located in the Nanai village later known as Odzhal-Bolon (), located on the left bank of the Amur, closer to Amursk than to Khabarovsk. One of his arguments was that both Khabarov's Achan (sometimes also spelt by the explorer as Otshchan, \u041e\u0442\u0449\u0430\u043d), and Wuzhala (\u4e4c\u624e\u62c9) of the Chinese records of the 1652 engagement are based on the name of the Nanai clan \"Odzhal\" (\u041e\u0434\u0436\u0430\u043b), corresponding to the 20th-century name of the village as well. (The name of the clan was also written as \"Uzala\", as in the name of its best-known member, Dersu Uzala).\nPolevoy's view appeared to gain wide support among the Russian geographer community; petitioned by the Amur Branch of the Russian Geographical Society, the Russian Government renamed the village of Odzhal to Achan in 1977, to celebrate its connection with Khabarov's raid.\nAs to the Cape Kyrma ruins, thought by Maack to be the remains of Achansk, B.P. Polevoy identified them as the remains of another \"ostrog\" \u2013 namely, Kosogorsky Ostrog, where Onufriy Stepanov stayed a few years later.\nQing Empire.\nAfter the Treaty of Nerchinsk (1689) between the Tsardom of Russia and the Qing Empire, the area became an uncontested part of China for the next century and a half. Modern historical maps of the Qing period published in China mark the site of future Khabarovsk as B\u00f3l\u00ec (). All of the middle and lower Amur region was nominally part of the Jilin Province, run first out of Ninguta and later out of Jilin City.\nFrench Jesuits who sailed along the Ussuri and the Amur Rivers in 1709 prepared the first more or less precise map of the region. According to them, the indigenous Nanai people were living on the Ussuri and on the Amur down to the mouth of the Dondon River (i.e., in the region including the site of the future Khabarovsk). These people were known to the Chinese as \"Yupi Dazi\" (\"Fish skin Tartars\").\nFrom Khabarovka to Khabarovsk.\nIn 1858, the area was ceded to Russia under the Treaty of Aigun. The Russians founded the military outpost of Khabarovka (), named after Yerofey Khabarov. The post later became an important industrial center for the region. Town status was granted in 1880. In 1893, it was given its present name: Khabarovsk.\nIn 1894, a department of the Russian Geographical Society was formed in Khabarovsk and to found libraries, theatres and museums in the city. Since then, Khabarovsk's cultural life has flourished. Much of the local indigenous history has been well preserved in the Regional Lore Museum and Natural History Museum and in places like near the Nanai settlement of Sikachi-Alyan, where cliff drawings from more than 13,000 years ago can be found. The Khabarovsk Art Museum exhibits a rare collection of old Russian icons.\nIn 1916, the Khabarovsk Bridge across the Amur was completed, allowing Trans-Siberian trains to cross the river without using ferries (or temporary rail tracks over the frozen river in winter). During the Russian Civil War, Khabarovsk was occupied by Japan in September 1918.\nSoviet era.\nBy the Decree of the Council of Labor and Defense of December 11, 1933, the Directorate of Road Construction of Eastern Siberia and the Far East (Daldorstroy) was created in Khabarovsk, with the task of constructing strategic highways according to the list of the government of the USSR, in the regions of Eastern Siberia and the Soviet Far East. The construction plans were announced at the 17th Congress of the All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks), held in Moscow from January-February 1934, when the Second Five-Year Plan for the development of the Soviet Union was adopted. In accordance with it, it was planned to build a Vladivostok-Khabarovsk highway, with a hard (gravel) surface, 600 kilometers long.\nAfter the defeat of Japan in World War II, Khabarovsk was the site of the Khabarovsk war crimes trials, in which twelve former members of the Japanese Kwantung Army and Unit 731 were put on trial for the manufacture and use of biological weapons during World War II.\nChinese Emperor Puyi, captured by Soviet troops in Manchuria, was relocated to Khabarovsk and lived there from 1945 up to 1950, when he was returned to China.\nWhen Japan fell in September 1945 the United States reached an agreement with Stalin to build two U.S. Naval Advance Bases (Fleet Weather Centrals) in the USSR. The U.S. built one outside Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky on the Kamchatka Peninsula with the code name TAMA. The other was outside Khabarovsk in buildings provided by the Soviets, code-named MOKO. For mail Khabarovsk was assigned U.S.Navy number 1168, FPO San Francisco. The American use of these two bases was short-lived.\nOn 5 November 1956, the first phase of the city tram was commissioned. The Khabarovsk television studio began broadcasting in 1960. On 1 September 1967, the Khabarovsk Institute of Physical Education, now the Far Eastern State Academy of Physical Culture, opened. On 14 January 1971, Khabarovsk was awarded the Order of October Revolution. In 1975 the first stage of the urban trolley opened. In 1976 the city hosted an international ice hockey tournament with the ball for the prize of the newspaper \"Sovietskaya Rossia\". In 1981 the Bandy World Championship was played in the city.\nRussian Federation.\nBetween 1989 and 2003 a memorial complex dedicated to the thousands executed during the Great Terror -- a monument, a chapel and a wall of remembrance -- was erected in Khabarovsk.\nIn 1996, Khabarovsk held its first mayoral elections. Paul D. Filippov, whose candidacy was supported by Governor Viktor Ishayev, was defeated. In 1998, reconstruction of the central square of Khabarovsk was completed. In May 2000, President of Russia, Vladimir Putin, decreed that new federal districts be formed, and Khabarovsk became the center of the Far Eastern Federal District.\nIn 2006, the Center for Cardiovascular Surgery, a high-tech medical center, was constructed according to a Russian national health project. In 2008, the train station was completely renovated, and the adjacent square was reconstructed to include fountains and an underground passage. In 2009, Khabarovsk hosted the EU-Russia summit. In 2010, the city hosted a meeting of the Great Circle of Ussuri Cossacks. On 3 November 2012, Khabarovsk was awarded the honorary title of \"City of Military Glory\".\nOn 9 July 2020, the governor of the region, Sergei Furgal, was arrested and flown to Moscow. The 2020 Khabarovsk Krai protests began on 11 July 2020 in support of Furgal.\nFlag.\nThe flag of Khabarovsk displays a bear on the right (red side) and a Siberian tiger on the left (blue side), holding a yellow shield with a blue reversed pall and a red fish. The flag is a representation of the coat of arms of Khabarovsk. The flag was adopted on 30 October 2007 and is 2:3 in ratio.\nGeography.\nThe city is located 30 kilometers (19\u00a0mi) from the China\u2013Russia border, at the confluence of the Amur and Ussuri Rivers, about 800 kilometers (500\u00a0mi) north of Vladivostok.\nClimate.\nKhabarovsk experiences a monsoonal dry-winter humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Dwb\" borders on \"Dwa\", Trewartha climate classification \"Dcbc\" bordering on \"Dcac\"). Its climate is strongly continental, featuring very warm summers and bitterly cold winters.\nThe average annual precipitation is , mainly concentrated in the summer. In some years, from November to March hardly any precipitation falls. The driest year was 2001 with only of precipitation and the wettest was 1981 when of precipitation fell. The wettest month was August 1981 with a total precipitation of . Due to high summer humidity, overnight lows remain mild to warm during several months. Snowfall is common, though light, with an average maximum snow height of . During mid winter, highs above freezing are very rare.\nThe city's extreme climate sees daily average high and low temperatures vary by around over the course of the year. The average temperature in January is and the average for July is . Extremes have ranged from in June 2010 to in January 2011.\nAdministrative and municipal status.\nKhabarovsk is the administrative center of the krai and, within the framework of administrative divisions, it also serves as the administrative center of Khabarovsky District, even though it is not a part of it. As an administrative division, it is incorporated separately as the city of krai significance of Khabarovsk\u2014an administrative unit with the status equal to that of the districts. As a municipal division, the city of krai significance of Khabarovsk is incorporated as Khabarovsk Urban Okrug.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEthnic composition (2010):\nEconomy and infrastructure.\nPrimary industries include iron processing, steel milling, Khabarovsk shipyard, Daldizel, machinery, petroleum refining, flour milling, pharmaceutical industry, meatpacking and manufacturing of various types of heavy and light machinery.\nA high-speed international fiber-optic cable connects the city of Khabarovsk with the city of Fuyuan in China.\nTransportation.\nThe city is a principal railway center located along the Trans-Siberian Railway; the rail distance from Khabarovsk railway station to Moscow is .\nKhabarovsk is served by the Khabarovsk Novy Airport with international flights to East Asia, Southeast Asia, European Russia, and Central Asia.\nRoad links include the Trans-Siberian Highway (M58 and M60 Highways), and water transport links are provided by the Amur River and Ussuri River.\nPublic transport includes: trams (8 routes); trolleybus (4 routes); bus and fixed-route taxi (marshrutka, approximately 100 routes).\nTransborder travel to China, in winter on the ice road, in summer by boat on the Amur river to Fuyuan (and train to Harbin)\nIn 2021, the construction of a paid high-speed bypass of the city was completed.\nEducation.\nThere are the following institutions of higher education in Khabarovsk:\nTourism.\nA key street in Khabarovsk is the broad Amursky Boulevard with its many shops and a local market. The city's five districts stretch for along the Amur River. The similar boulevard \u2013 Ussuryisky is located between the two main streets Muravyov-Amursky and Lenin street and runs to the city's artificial lakes (Gorodskie Prudi) with the sport complex Platinum Arena. The lakes are famous for their fountains with the light show. The Military History Museum of the Far Eastern Military District is located in the city, the only such museum in the Russian Far East.\nThere is a walking tour from Lenin Square to Utyos on the Amur via Muravyov-Amursky Street, where visitors can find traditional Russian restaurants and shops with souvenirs. There are a number of night clubs and pubs in this area.\nIn winter, ice sculptures are on display in city squares and parks. Artists come from as far as Harbin in China.\nUnlike Vladivostok, the city has never been closed to foreigners, despite it being the headquarters of the Far East Military District, and retains its historically international flavor. Once the capital of the Soviet Far East (from 1926 to 1938). Since the demise of the Soviet Union, it has experienced an increased Asian presence. It is estimated that over one million Chinese travel to and through Khabarovsk yearly, and foreign investment by Japanese and Korean corporations have grown in recent years. The city has a multi-story shopping mall and about a dozen hotels.\nAleksandr Fedosov, the Khabarovsk Krai Minister of Culture, estimates that the city became more attractive to tourists following the 2015 Bandy World Championship.\nKhabarovsk is the closest major city to Birobidzhan, which is the administrative center of the Jewish Autonomous Oblast, Russia, located on the Trans-Siberian Railway, close to the border with China. The Jewish Autonomous Oblast is a federal subject of Russia in the Russian Far East, bordering Khabarovsk Krai and Amur Oblast in Russia and Heilongjiang province in China. Its administrative center is the town of Birobidzhan, and it is the only region in the world in which Yiddish is the official language. Khabarovsk provides the closest major airport to Birobidzhan, which is Khabarovsk Novy Airport (KHV / UHHH), 198\u00a0km from the center of Birobidzhan.\nMilitary.\nThe headquarters of the Russian Ground Forces's Eastern Military District is located at 15 Serysheva Street. The district was preceded by the Far Eastern Military District, which was located in the same location. The following component units of the district are stationed in the city:\nAll 5 of these units make up the Khabarovsk Garrison. The Russian Navy's Pacific Fleet maintains a presence in the city as well. There is also an airbase located to the east of the city. The main public relations asset for the military in the city is the Military History Museum of the Far Eastern Military District and the district military band.\nSports.\nInternational events.\nThe city was a host to the 1981 Bandy World Championship. It also hosted the 2015 Bandy World Championship, which was visited by Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev. Khabarovsk organised the 2018 tournament as well, but not Division B that time around, which was held in Chinese Harbin. The event was named by the Federal Agency for Tourism as one of the best 200 events of the year.\nA delegation from the 2022 Winter Olympics organising committee visited Khabarovsk to watch matches in the bandy league to study the plans if the sport was to be added to the Games program.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nKhabarovsk is twinned with:\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56585", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56585", "title": "Nebulae", "text": ""}
{"id": "56590", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56590", "title": "New General Catalogue", "text": "Astronomical catalogue of deep sky objects\nThe New General Catalogue of Nebulae and Clusters of Stars (abbreviated NGC) is an astronomical catalogue of deep-sky objects compiled by John Louis Emil Dreyer in 1888. The NGC contains 7,840 objects, including galaxies, star clusters and emission nebulae. Dreyer published two supplements to the NGC in 1895 and 1908, known as the Index Catalogues (abbreviated IC), describing a further 5,386 astronomical objects. Thousands of these objects are best known by their NGC or IC numbers, which remain in widespread use.\nThe NGC expanded and consolidated the cataloguing work of William and Caroline Herschel, and John Herschel's \"General Catalogue of Nebulae and Clusters of Stars\". Objects south of the celestial equator are catalogued somewhat less thoroughly, but many were included based on observation by John Herschel or James Dunlop.\nThe NGC contained multiple errors, but attempts to eliminate them were made by the \"Revised New General Catalogue\" (RNGC) by Jack W. Sulentic and William G. Tifft in 1973, \"NGC2000.0\" by Roger W. Sinnott in 1988, and the \"NGC/IC Project\" in 1993. A \"Revised New General Catalogue and Index Catalogue\" (abbreviated as RNGC/IC) was compiled in 2009 by Wolfgang Steinicke and updated in 2019 with 13,957 objects.\nOriginal catalogue.\nThe original \"New General Catalogue\" was compiled during the 1880s by John Louis Emil Dreyer using observations from William Herschel and his son John, among others. Dreyer had already published a supplement to Herschel's \"General Catalogue of Nebulae and Clusters\" (GC), containing about 1,000 new objects. In 1886, he suggested building a second supplement to the \"General Catalogue\", but the Royal Astronomical Society asked Dreyer to compile a new version instead. This led to the publication of the \"New General Catalogue\" in the \"Memoirs of the Royal Astronomical Society\" in 1888.\nAssembling the NGC was a challenge, as Dreyer had to deal with many contradictory and unclear reports made with a variety of telescopes with apertures ranging from 2 to 72 inches. While he did check some himself, the sheer number of objects meant Dreyer had to accept them as published by others for the purpose of his compilation. The catalogue contained several errors, mostly relating to position and descriptions, but Dreyer referenced the catalogue, which allowed later astronomers to review the original references and publish corrections to the original NGC.\n\"Index Catalogue\".\nThe first major update to the NGC is the \"Index Catalogue of Nebulae and Clusters of Stars\" (abbreviated as \"IC\"), published in two parts by Dreyer in 1895 (IC I, containing 1,520 objects) and 1908 (IC II, containing 3,866 objects). It serves as a supplement to the NGC, and contains an additional 5,386 objects, collectively known as the IC objects. It summarizes the discoveries of galaxies, clusters and nebulae between 1888 and 1907, most of them made possible by photography. A list of corrections to the IC was published in 1912.\n\"Revised New General Catalogue\".\nThe \"Revised New Catalogue of Nonstellar Astronomical Objects\" (abbreviated as \"RNGC\") was compiled by Sulentic and Tifft in the early 1970s, and was published in 1973, as an update to the NGC. The work did not incorporate several previously published corrections to the NGC data (including corrections published by Dreyer himself), and introduced some new errors. For example, the well-known compact galaxy group Copeland Septet in the Leo constellation appears as non-existent in the RNGC.\nNearly 800 objects are listed as \"non-existent\" in the RNGC. The designation is applied to objects which are duplicate catalogue entries, those which were not detected in subsequent observations, and a number of objects catalogued as star clusters which in subsequent studies were regarded as coincidental groupings. A 1993 monograph considered the 229 star clusters called non-existent in the RNGC. They had been \"misidentified or have not been located since their discovery in the 18th and 19th centuries\". It found that one of the 229\u2014NGC 1498\u2014was not actually in the sky. Five others were duplicates of other entries, 99 existed \"in some form\", and the other 124 required additional research to resolve.\nAs another example, reflection nebula NGC 2163 in Orion was classified \"non-existent\" due to a transcription error by Dreyer. Dreyer corrected his own mistake in the Index Catalogues, but the RNGC preserved the original error, and additionally reversed the sign of the declination, resulting in NGC 2163 being classified as non-existent.\n\"Revised New General Catalogue and Index Catalogue\".\nThe \"Revised New General Catalogue and Index Catalogue\" (abbreviated as \"RNGC/IC\") is a compilation made by Wolfgang Steinicke in 2009. It is a comprehensive and authoritative treatment of the NGC and IC catalogues. The number of objects with status of \"not found\" in this catalogue is 301 objects (2.3%). The brightest star in this catalogue is NGC 771 with magnitude of 4.0.\n\"NGC 2000.0\".\n\"NGC 2000.0\" (also known as the \"Complete New General Catalog and Index Catalog of Nebulae and Star Clusters\") is a 1988 compilation of the NGC and IC made by Roger W. Sinnott, using the J2000.0 coordinates. It incorporates several corrections and errata made by astronomers over the years.\nNGC/IC Project.\nThe NGC/IC Project was a collaboration among professional and amateur astronomers formed \nby Steve Gottlieb in 1990, although Steve Gottlieb already started to observe and record NGC objects as early as 1979. Other primary team members were Harold G. Corwin Jr., Malcolm Thomson, Robert E. Erdmann and Jeffrey Corder. The project was completed by 2017. This project identified all NGC and IC objects, corrected mistakes, collected images and basic astronomical data and checked all historical data related to the objects.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56596", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56596", "title": "Manharness knot", "text": ""}
{"id": "56597", "revid": "48576020", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56597", "title": "Antananarivo", "text": "Capital and largest city of Madagascar\nAntananarivo (Malagasy: ; French: \"Tananarive\", ), also known by its colonial shorthand form Tana (), is the capital and largest city of Madagascar. The administrative area of the city, known as Antananarivo-Renivohitra (\"Antananarivo-Mother Hill\" or \"Antananarivo-Capital\"), is the capital of Analamanga region. The city sits at above sea level in the center of the island, making it the highest national capital by elevation among the island countries. It has been the country's largest population center since at least the 18th century. The Presidency, National Assembly, Senate, and Supreme Court are located there, as are 21 diplomatic missions and the headquarters of many national and international businesses and non-governmental organizations. It has more universities, nightclubs, art venues, and medical services than any city on the island. Several national and local sports teams, including the championship-winning national rugby team, the Makis, are based here.\nAntananarivo was historically the capital of the Merina people, who continue to form the majority of the city's 1,274,225 (2018 census) inhabitants. The surrounding urban areas have a total metropolitan population approaching three million. All eighteen Malagasy ethnic groups, as well as residents of Chinese, Indian, European, and other origins, are represented in the city. It was founded circa 1610, when the Merina King Andrianjaka (1612\u20131630) expelled the Vazimba inhabitants of the village of Analamanga. Declaring it the site of his capital, Andrianjaka built a \"rova\" (fortified royal dwelling) that expanded to become the royal palaces of the Kingdom of Imerina. The city retained the name Analamanga until the reign of King Andriamasinavalona (1675\u20131710), who renamed it Antananarivo (\"City of the Thousand\") in honor of Andrianjaka's soldiers.\nThe city served as the capital of the Kingdom of Imerina until 1710 when Imerina split into four warring quadrants. Antananarivo became the capital of the southern quadrant until 1794, when King Andrianampoinimerina of Ambohimanga captured the province and restored it as the capital of a united Kingdom of Imerina, also bringing neighboring ethnic groups under Merina control. These conquests continued under his son, Radama I, who eventually controlled over two-thirds of the island, leading him to be considered the King of Madagascar by European diplomats. Antananarivo remained the island's capital after Madagascar was colonized by the French in 1897, and after independence in 1960.\nThe city is now managed by the \"Commune Urbaine d'Antananarivo\" (CUA) under the direction of its President of the Special Delegation, Ny Havana Andriamanjato, appointed in March 2014. Limited funds and mismanagement have hampered consecutive CUA efforts to manage overcrowding and traffic, waste management, pollution, security, public water and electricity, and other challenges linked to explosive population growth. Major historic landmarks and attractions in the city include the reconstructed royal palaces and the Andafiavaratra Palace, the tomb of Rainiharo, Tsimbazaza Zoo, Mahamasina Stadium, Lake Anosy, four 19th-century martyr churches, and the Museum of Art and Archaeology.\nPronunciation and etymology.\nThe English pronunciation of Antananarivo is or . The Malagasy pronunciation is , and the pronunciation of the old French name Tananarive is or in English and in French.\nAntananarivo was originally the site of a town called \"Analamanga\", meaning \"Blue Forest\" in the Central Highlands dialect of the Malagasy language. Analamanga was established by a community of Vazimba, the island's first occupants. Merina King Andrianjaka, who migrated to the region from the southeast coast, seized the location as the site of his capital city. According to oral history, he deployed a garrison of 1,000 soldiers to successfully capture and guard the site. The hill and its city retained the name Analamanga until the reign of King Andriamasinavalona, who renamed it \"Antananarivo\" (\"City of the Thousand\") in honor of Andrianjaka's soldiers.\nHistory.\nKingdom of Imerina.\nAntananarivo was already a major city before the colonial era. After expelling the Vazimba who inhabited the town at the peak of Analamanga hill, Andrianjaka chose the site for his \"rova\" (fortified royal compound), which expanded over time to enclose the royal palaces and the tombs of Merina royalty. The city was established in around 1610 or 1625 according to varying accounts. Early Merina kings used \"fanampoana\" (statute labor) to construct a massive system of irrigated paddy fields and dikes around the city to provide adequate rice for the growing population. These paddy fields, of which the largest is called the Betsimitatatra, continue to produce rice.\nSuccessive Merina sovereigns ruled over the Kingdom of Imerina from Analamanga through King Andriamasinavalona's reign. This sovereign gave the growing city its current name; he established the Andohalo town square outside the town gate, where all successive sovereigns delivered their royal speeches and announcements to the public, and assigned the names of numerous locations within the city based on the names of similar sites in the nearby village of Antananarivokely. Andriamasinavalona designated specific territories for the \"hova\" (commoners) and each \"andriana\" (noble) subcaste, both within the neighborhoods of Antananarivo and in the countryside surrounding the capital. These territorial divisions were strictly enforced; members of subcastes were required to live within their designated territories and were not authorized to stay for extended periods in the territories reserved for others. Numerous \"fady\" (taboos), including injunctions against the construction of wooden houses by non-nobles and the presence of swine within the city limits, were imposed.\nUpon Andriamasinavalona's death in 1710, Imerina split into four warring quadrants, and Antananarivo was made the capital of the southern district. During the 77-year civil war that followed, the eastern district's capital at Ambohimanga rose in prominence. The last king of Ambohimanga, Andrianampoinimerina, successfully conquered Antananarivo in 1793; he reunited the provinces of Imerina, ending the civil war. He moved the kingdom's political capital back to Antananarivo in 1794, and declared Ambohimanga the kingdom's spiritual capital, a role it still maintains. Andrianampoinimerina created a large marketplace in Analakely, establishing the city's economic center.\nKingdom of Madagascar.\nBy the time Andrianampoinimerina's son Radama I had ascended the throne upon his father's death in 1810, Antananarivo was the largest and most economically important city on the island, with a population of over 80,000 inhabitants. Radama opened the city to the first European settlers, artisan missionaries of the London Missionary Society (LMS) who arrived in 1820 and opened the city's first public schools. James Cameron introduced brickmaking to the island and created Lake Anosy to generate hydraulic power for industrial manufacturing. Radama established a military training ground on a flat plain called Mahamasina at the base of Analamanga near the lake. Radama's subjugation of other Malagasy ethnic groups brought nearly two-thirds of the island under his control. The British diplomats who concluded trade treaties with Radama recognized him as the \"ruler of Madagascar\", a position he and his successors claimed despite never managing to impose their authority over the larger portion of the island's south. Thereafter, Merina sovereigns declared Antananarivo the capital of the entire island.\nRadama's successor Ranavalona I invited a shipwrecked craftsman named Jean Laborde to construct the tomb of Prime Minister Rainiharo, and Manjakamiadana (built 1839\u20131841), the largest palace at the Rova. Laborde also produced a wide range of industrial products at factories in the highland village Mantasoa and a foundry in the Antananarivo neighborhood of Isoraka. Ranavalona oversaw improvements to the city's infrastructure, including the construction of the city's two largest staircases at Antaninarenina and Ambondrona, which connect \"la ville moyenne\" (\"the middle town\") to the central marketplace at Analakely. In 1867, following a series of fires in the capital, Queen Ranavalona II issued a royal decree that permitted the use of stone and brick construction in buildings other than tombs. LMS missionaries' first brick house was built in 1869; it bore a blend of English, Creole, and Malagasy design and served as a model for a new style of house that rapidly spread throughout the capital and across the highlands. Termed the \"trano gasy\" (\"Malagasy house\"), it is typically a two-story, brick building with four columns on the front that support a wooden veranda. In the latter third of the 19th century, these houses quickly replaced most of the traditional wooden houses of the city's aristocratic class. The growing number of Christians in Imerina prompted the construction of stone churches throughout the highlands, as well as four memorial churches on key sites of martyrdom among early Malagasy Christians under the reign of Ranavalona I.\nUntil the mid-19th century, the city remained largely concentrated around the Rova of Antananarivo on the highest peak, an area today referred to as \"la haute ville\" or \"la haute\" (\"upper town\"). As the population grew, the city expanded to the west; by the late 19th century it extended to the northern hilltop neighborhood of Andohalo, an area of low prestige until British missionaries made it their preferred residential district and built one of the city's memorial churches here from 1863 to 1872. From 1864 to 1894, Prime Minister Rainilaiarivony governed Madagascar alongside three successive queens, Rasoherina, Ranavalona II and Ranavalona III, effecting policies that further transformed the city. In 1881, he reinstated mandatory universal education first introduced in 1820 under Radama I, requiring the construction of numerous schools and colleges, including teacher training colleges staffed by missionaries and the nation's first pharmacy, medical college, and modern hospital. Rainilaiarivony built the Andafiavaratra Palace in 1873 as his residence and office at a site near the royal palace.\nFrench Madagascar.\nThe French military invaded Antananarivo in September 1894, prompting the queen's surrender after a cannon shell blasted a hole through a building at the Rova, causing major casualties. The damage was never repaired. Andohalo square was remodeled to feature a gazebo, walkways, and planted landscaping. Claiming the island as a colony, the French administration retained Antananarivo as its capital and transcribed its name as Tananarive. They chose Antaninarenina as the site for the French Governor General's Residency; upon independence, it was renamed Ambohitsorohitra Palace and converted into presidential offices. Under the French, tunnels were constructed through two of the city's largest hills, connecting disparate districts and facilitating the town's expansion. Streets were laid with cobblestones and later paved; sewer systems and electricity infrastructure was introduced. Water, previously obtained from springs at the foot of the hill, was brought from the Ikopa River.\nThis period saw a major expansion of \"la ville moyenne\", which spread along the lower hilltops and slopes of the city centered around the French residency. Modern urban planning was applied in \"la ville basse\" (\"lower town\"), which expanded from the base of the city's central hills into the surrounding rice fields. Major boulevards like \"Avenue de l'Ind\u00e9pendance\", planned commercial areas like the arcades lining either side of the avenue, large parks, city squares, and other landmark features were built. A railway system connecting Soarano station at one end of the \"Avenue de l'Ind\u00e9pendance\" in Antananarive with Toamasina and Fianarantsoa was established in 1897. Beyond these planned spaces, neighborhoods densely populated by working-class Malagasy expanded without state oversight or control.\nThe city expanded rapidly after World War II; by 1950 its population had grown to 175,000. Roads connecting Antananarivo to surrounding towns were expanded and paved. The first international airport was constructed at Arivonimamo, outside the city; this was replaced in 1967 with Ivato International Airport approximately from the city center. The University of Antananarivo was constructed in the Ankatso neighborhood and the Museum of Ethnology and Paleontology was also built. A city plan written in 1956 created suburban zones where large houses and gardens were established for the wealthy. In 1959, severe floods in \"la ville basse\" prompted the building of large-scale embankments along the edges of the Betsimitatatra rice fields and the establishment of new ministerial complexes on newly drained land in the Anosy neighborhood.\nPost-independence.\nAfter independence in 1960, the pace of growth increased further. The city's population reached 1.4\u00a0million by the end of the 20th century; in 2013, it was estimated at nearly 2.1\u00a0million. Uncontrolled urban sprawl has challenged the city's infrastructure, producing shortages of clean water and electricity, sanitation and public health problems, and heavy traffic congestion. There are more than 5,000 church buildings in the city and its suburbs, including an Anglican and a Roman Catholic cathedral. Antananarivo is the see city of Madagascar's Roman Catholic Archdiocese. The city has repeatedly been the site of large demonstrations and violent political clashes, including the 1972 \"rotaka\" that brought down President Philibert Tsiranana and the 2009 Malagasy political crisis, which resulted in Andry Rajoelina replacing Marc Ravalomanana as head of state.\nThe 2022 Antananarivo floods hit the city in January of that year, causing multiple deaths and significant damage to almost 7,000 houses.\nOn 26 August 2023, at least 12 people died during a crush incident at the Mahamasina Municipal Stadium, during the opening of Indian Ocean Island Games.\nGeography.\nAntananarivo is situated approximately above sea level in the Central Highlands region of Madagascar, at 18.55' South and 47.32' East. The city is located centrally along the north\u2013south axis of the country, and east of the center along the east\u2013west axis. It is from the east coast and from the west coast. The city occupies a commanding position on the summit and slopes of a long, narrow, rocky ridge extending north and south for about and rising to about above the extensive rice fields to the west.\nThe official boundaries of the city of Antananarivo encompass an urban area of approximately . It was founded above sea level at the apex of three hill ranges that converge in a Y form, above the surrounding Betsimitatatra paddy fields and the grassy plains beyond. The city gradually spread out from this central point to cover the hillsides; by the late 19th century it had expanded to the flat terrain at the base of the hills. These plains are susceptible to flooding during the rainy season; they are drained by the Ikopa River, which skirts the capital to the south and west. The western slopes and plains, being best protected from cyclone winds originating over the Indian Ocean, were settled before those to the east.\nGreater Antananarivo is a continuous, urbanized area spreading beyond the city's official boundaries for north to south between Ambohimanarina and Ankadimbahoaka, and west to east between the Ikopa River dike and Tsiadana. The population of the greater Antananarivo area was estimated at 3 million people in 2012; it is expected to rise to 6\u00a0million by 2030.\nClimate.\nUnder the K\u00f6ppen-Geiger climate classification system, Antananarivo has a humid subtropical climate with dry season defined (\"Cwa\", bordering on \"Cwb\"), characterized by mild, dry winters and warm, rainy summers. The city receives nearly all of its average annual rainfall between November and April. Frosts are rare in the city; they are more common at higher elevations. Daily mean temperatures range from in December to in July.\nCityscape.\nAntananarivo encompasses three ridges that intersect at their highest point. The Manjakamiadana royal palace is located at the summit of these hills and is visible from every part of the city and the surrounding hills. The Manjakamiadina was the largest structure within the rova of Antananarivo; its stone casing is the only remnant of the royal residences to survive a 1995 fire at the site. For 25 years, the roofless shell dominated the skyline; its west wall collapsed in 2004. In 2009, the stone casing had been fully restored and the building was re-roofed. It is illuminated at night. Conservation and reconstruction work at the site is ongoing. The city skyline is a jumble of colorful, historic houses and churches. More recent residential and commercial buildings and family rice fields occupy lower terrain throughout the capital. The Betsimitatatra and other rice fields surround the city.\nThe city's neighborhoods emerge from historic ethnic, religious, and caste divisions. The assignment of certain neighborhoods to particular noble sub-castes under the Kingdom of Imerina established divisions; the highest-ranking nobles were typically assigned to neighborhoods closest to the royal palace and were required to live in higher elevation portions of the city. During and after French colonization, the expansion of the city continued to reflect these divisions. Today, the \"haute ville\" is mainly residential and viewed as a prestigious area in which to live; many of the city's wealthiest and most influential Malagasy families live there. The part of \"la haute\" closest to the Rova contains much of the city's pre-colonial heritage and is considered it's historic part. It includes the royal palace, Andafiavaratra Palace\u2014the former residence of Prime Minister Rainilaiarivony, Andohalo\u2014the principal town square until 1897, a cathedral near Andohalo built to commemorate early Malagasy Christian martyrs, the city's most intact historic entrance gate and the 19th-century houses of Merina nobles.\nUnder the Kingdom of Madagascar, the commoner class (\"hova\") settled at the periphery of the noble districts, gradually spreading along the slopes of the lower hills during the late 19th century. This \"ville moyenne\" became increasingly populous under French colonial authority, which targeted them for redesign and development. Today, the neighborhoods in the \"ville moyenne\" are densely populated and lively, containing residences, historic sites, and businesses. The neighborhood of Antaninarenina contains the historic H\u00f4tel Colbert, numerous jewelers' shops and other luxury goods stores, and administrative offices. In addition to Antaninarenina, the principal neighborhoods of \"la ville moyenne\" are Ankadifotsy on the eastern hills and Ambatonakanga and Isoraka to the west, all of which are largely residential. Isoraka has developed lively nightlife, with houses converted to upscale restaurants and inns. Isoraka also houses the tomb of Prime Minister Rainiharo (1833\u20131852), whose sons and later Prime Ministers Rainivoninahitriniony and Rainilaiarivony are buried with him. Bordering these neighborhoods are the commercial areas of Besarety and Andravoahangy.\nThe commercial center of town, Analakely, is located on the valley floor between these two \"ville moyenne\" hill ranges. King Andrianampoinimerina established the city's first marketplace on the grounds today occupied by the market's tile-roofed pavilions, constructed in the 1930s. Andrianampoinimerina decreed Friday (\"Zoma\") as market day, when merchants would erect stalls shaded with white parasols, which extended throughout the valley forming what has been called the largest open-air marketplace in the world. The market caused traffic congestion and safety hazards prompting government officials to divide and relocate the Friday merchants to several other districts in 1997. The city's other main commercial and administrative neighborhoods, which spread out from Analakely and extend into the adjacent plain, were established by the French, who drained and filled in the extant rice fields and swampland to create much of the area's design and infrastructure. The \"Avenue de l'Ind\u00e9pendance\" runs from the gardens of Ambohijatovo south of the market pavilions, through Analakely to the city's railroad station at Soarano. To the west of Soarano lies the dense commercial district of Tsaralalana; it is the only district to be built on a grid and is the center of the city's South Asian community. Behoririka, to the east of Soarano, is built around a lake of the same name and abuts the sprawling Andravoahangy district at the eastern edge of the city. Antanimena borders Soarano and Behoririka to the north. A tunnel built by the French in the early 20th century cuts through the hillside; it connects Ambohijatovo with Ambanidia and other residential areas in the south of the city.\nSince pre-colonial times the lower classes, including those descended from the slave class (\"andevo\") and rural migrants, have occupied the flood-prone lower districts bordering the Betsimitatatra rice fields to the west of the city. This area is connected to Analakely by a tunnel constructed by the French in the early 20th century. The tunnel opens toward Lake Anosy and the national Supreme Court buildings and provides access to the residential neighborhood of Mahamasina and its stadium. The bordering neighborhood of Anosy was developed in the 1950s to house most of the national ministries and the Senate. Anosy, the planned residential district of \"Soixante-Sept Hectares\" (often abbreviated to \"67\") and the neighborhood of Isotry are among the city's most densely populated, crime-ridden and impoverished neighborhoods. Approximately 40 percent of inhabitants with electricity in their homes in the \"ville basse\" obtain it illegally by splicing into city power lines. In these areas, houses are more vulnerable to fires, flooding, and landslides, which are often triggered by the annual cyclone season.\nArchitecture.\nBefore the mid-19th century, all houses and marketplaces in Antananarivo, and throughout Madagascar, were constructed of woods, grasses, reeds, and other plant-based materials viewed as appropriate for structures used by the living. Only family tombs were built from stone, an inert material viewed as appropriate to use for the dead. British missionaries introduced brick-making to the island in the 1820s, and French industrialist Jean Laborde used stone and brick to build his factories over the next few decades. It was not until the royal edict on construction materials was lifted in the 1860s that stone was used to encase the royal palace. Many aristocrats, inspired by the royal palace and the two-story, brick houses with wrapped verandas and divided interior spaces built by British missionaries, copied the British model for their own large homes in the \"haute ville\". The model, known as \"trano gasy\" (\"Malagasy house\"), rapidly spread throughout the Central Highlands of Madagascar, where it remains the predominant house construction style.\nSince 1993, the \"Commune urbaine d'Antananarivo\" (CUA) has increasingly sought to protect and restore the city's architectural and cultural heritage. In 2005, CUA authorities partnered with the city planners of the \u00cele-de-France to develop the \"Plan Vert\u00a0\u2013 Plan Bleu\" strategy for creating a classification system for \"Zones de Protection du Patrimoine Architectural, Urbain et Paysager\", areas of the city benefiting from legal protection and financial support for their historic and cultural heritage. The plan, which is being implemented by the \"Institut des M\u00e9tiers de la Ville\", prevents the destruction of historic buildings and other structures, and establishes construction codes that ensure new structures follow historic aesthetics. It also provides for awareness-raising campaigns in favor of historic preservation and undertakes projects to restore dilapidated historic buildings and sites. Under this plan, 19th-century sites, like the Ambatondrafandrana tribunal and the second residence of Rainilaiarivony, have been renovated.\nDemographics.\nAntananarivo has been the largest city on the island since at least the late 18th century, when its population was estimated at 15,000. By 1810, the population had grown to 80,000, before declining dramatically between 1829 and 1842 during the reigns of Radama I and especially Ranavalona I. Because of a combination of war, forced labor, disease and harsh measures of justice, the population of Imerina fell from 750,000 to 130,000 during this period. In the final years of the Kingdom of Imerina, the population of Antananarivo had recovered to between 50,000 and 75,000; most of the population were slaves who were largely captured in provincial military campaigns. In 1950, Antananarivo's population was around 175,000. By the late 1990s the population of the metropolitan area had reached 1.4\u00a0million, and \u2013 while the city itself now has a population of 1,275,207 (at the 2018 Census) \u2013 with suburbs lying outside the city limits it had grown to almost 2.3\u00a0million in 2018. The metropolitan area is thus home to nearly 10 percent of the island's 25.68\u00a0million residents. Rural migration to the capital propels this growth; the city's population exceeds that of the other five provincial capitals combined.\nAs the historic capital of Imerina, Antananarivo is centrally located in the homeland of the Merina people, who comprise about 24 percent of the population and are the largest Malagasy ethnic group. The city's history as the island's major center for politics, culture, and trade has ensured a cosmopolitan mix of ethnic groups from across the island and overseas. Most Antananarivo residents have strong ties to their \"tanindrazana\" (ancestral village), where the extended family and typically a family tomb or burial place is located; many older residents leave the city upon retirement to return to their rural area of origin.\nCrime.\nDespite ongoing efforts by the Ministry of Domestic Security, crime has worsened in Antananarivo since 2009. Between 1994 and 1998, the city had an average of eight to twelve police officers for every 10,000 inhabitants; large cities typically have closer to fifteen. Under the mayorship of Marc Ravalomanana (1998\u20132001), street lights were installed or repaired throughout the city to improve night-time safety. He increased the number of police officers on the streets, leading to a drop in crime. As of 2012[ [update]], the city lacks a comprehensive strategy for reducing crime. The recent increase in crime and the inadequate response from the CUA has prompted the growth of private security firms in the city.\nThe Antanimora Prison is located in the Antanimora district of the city. The facility has a maximum capacity of 800 inmates and has been reported to be severely overcrowded, at times housing more than 4000 detainees.\nEconomy.\nAgriculture is the mainstay of the Malagasy economy. The land is used for the cultivation of rice and other crops, raising of zebu and other livestock, the fabrication of bricks, and other traditional livelihoods. Access to land is guaranteed and protected by law for every resident of the city. The CUA manages requests to lease or purchase land, but demand dramatically outstrips supply, and much of the unallocated land fails to meet the requisite criteria for parceling, such as land where floodwater runoff is diverted. Much of this marginal land has been illegally occupied and developed by land-seeking residents, creating shantytown slums in pockets throughout the lower portions of the city. This uncontrolled development poses sanitation and safety risks to residents in these areas.\nIndustry accounts for around 13 percent of Madagascar's gross domestic product (GDP) and is largely concentrated in Antananarivo. Key industries include soap production, food and tobacco processing, brewing, textiles, and leather manufacturing, employing around 5.5 percent of the workforce. The city's extensive infrastructure and its role as the economic center of the country make it a favorable location for large businesses. Business owners are drivers of growth for the city; in 2010, 60 percent of all new buildings in the country were located in Antananarivo, most of which were built for commercial purposes. Unemployment and poverty are also growing, fueled in part by an inadequately skilled and unprofessional workforce and the lack of a comprehensive national strategy for economic development since 2009. Formal sector job growth has not kept pace with population growth, and many residents earn their livelihood in the informal sector as street vendors and laborers. Under Ravalomanana, construction in the capital increased sharply; twelve new supermarkets were constructed in two years.\nThe residents of urban areas\u2014in particular Antananarivo\u2014have been hardest hit by economic downturns and economic policy shifts. The national economic crisis in the mid-1970s and early 1980s, and the World Bank's imposition of a structural adjustment program lowered living standards for the average resident of the city. The end of state subsidies, rapid inflation, higher taxes, widespread impoverishment, and the decline of the middle class was especially evident in Antananarivo, as was the growing wealth of a tiny political and economic elite in the city. In 2007, two-thirds of Antananarivo residents had access to electricity, while ten percent of households owned a scooter, car or another motor vehicle. Running water was installed in fewer than 25 percent of homes, small restaurants, and businesses in 2007, necessitating the collection of water from household wells or neighborhood pumps and the use of outdoor pit toilets detached from the main building. In 2007, 60 percent of households were using shared public latrines. Most homes use charcoal for daily cooking; stocks of charcoal and rice are kept in the kitchen. The average city household spends just under half of its budget on food. Owing to its increasingly high cost, consumption of meat by city residents has sharply declined since the 1970s; the urban poor eat meat on holidays only once or twice a year.\nCulture.\nIn Antananarivo and throughout the highlands, Merina and Betsileo families practice the \"famadihana\", an ancestor reburial ceremony. This ceremony typically occurs five to seven years after the death of a relative and is celebrated by removing the relative's \"lamba\"-wrapped remains from the family tomb, rewrapping it with fresh silk shrouds and returning it to the tomb. Relatives, friends, and neighbors are invited to take part in the music, dancing, and feasting that accompanies the event. The \"famadihana\" is costly; many families sacrifice higher living standards to set aside money for the ceremony.\nHistoric sites and museums.\nThe city has numerous monuments, historic buildings, sites of significance, and traditions related to the customs and history of the Central Highlands people. The city skyline is dominated by the Rova of Antananarivo. The nearby Andafiavaratra Palace was the home of 19th-century Prime Minister Rainilaiarivony and contains a museum featuring historic artifacts of the Kingdom of Imerina, including items saved from the fire at the Rova. Downhill from the palaces is Andohalo square, where Merina kings and queens delivered speeches to the public. Tsimbazaza Zoo displays many of the island's unique animal species and a complete skeleton of the extinct elephant bird. Other historic buildings include the Ambatondrafandrana tribunal where Ranavalona I dispensed judgment, the second residence of Rainilaiarivony with its indigenous medicinal plant garden, the recently renovated Soarano railroad station, four late 19th-century memorial churches built to commemorate early Malagasy Christian martyrs, the tomb of Prime Minister Rainiharo, and the early 20th century pavilions of the Analakely market. Open-air markets include Le Pochard and the artisan market at Andravoahangy. The Museum of Art and Archaeology in the Isoraka neighborhood features exhibits on the history and cultures of Madagascar's diverse ethnic groups. The Pirates Museum in Tsaralal\u00e0na explains the history of maritime pirates and the story of the pirates in Madagascar and their mysterious Republic of Libertalia. \nArts.\nThe arts scene in Antananarivo is the largest and most vibrant in the country. Madagascar's diverse music is reflected in the many concerts, cabarets, dance clubs, and other musical venues throughout Antananarivo. In the dry season, outdoor concerts are regularly held in venues including the Antsahamanitra amphitheater and Mahamasina Stadium. Concerts and nightclubs are attended mainly by young people of the middle to upper classes who can afford the entrance fees. More affordable are performances of traditional \"vakindrazana\" or Malagasy operettas at Isotry Theater and \"hira gasy\" at the city's outdoor \"cheminots\" theater or \"Alliance fran\u00e7aise\"; these performances are more popular with older and rural audiences than among urban youth. Nightlife is the most animated in the \"ville moyenne\" neighborhoods of Antaninarenina, Tsaralalana, Behoririka, Mahamasina, and Andohalo.\nThe \"Palais des Sports\" in the Mahamasina neighborhood is the country's only indoor performance space built to international standards. It was built in 1995 by the Government of China; it regularly hosts concerts, dance, and other arts performances, expositions, and novelty events like monster truck rallies. The city lacks a dedicated classical music performance space, and concerts by international artists are infrequent. Performances of classical, jazz, and other foreign musical genres, modern and contemporary dance, theater, and other arts occur at cultural arts centers funded by foreign governments or private entities. Among the best-known of these is the \"Centre Culturel Albert Camus\" and \"Alliance fran\u00e7aise d'Antananarivo\", both funded by the French government. the \"Cercle Germano-Malgache\", a branch of the Goethe-Institut funded by the German government; The American Center is funded by the United States government. Antananarivo has two dedicated cinemas, the Rex and the Ritz, both of which were built in the colonial era. These venues do not show international releases but occasionally screen Malagasy films or are used for private events and religious services.\nSports.\nRugby Union is considered the national sport of Madagascar. The national rugby team is nicknamed the Makis after the local word for the indigenous ring-tailed lemur. The team trains and plays domestic matches at Maki Stadium in Antananarivo. Constructed in 2012, the stadium has a capacity of 15,000 and houses a gym and administrative offices for the team.\nSeveral soccer teams are based in Antananarivo; AS Adema Analamanga and Ajesaia are associated with the Analamanga region; USCA Foot is associated with the CUA and the AS Saint Michel has been affiliated since 1948 with the historic secondary school of the same name. All four teams train and play local games in Mahamasina Municipal Stadium, the largest sporting venue in the country. The men's basketball teams Challenger and SOE (\"\u00c9quipe du Stade olympique de l'Emyrne\") are based in Antananarivo and play in the \"Palais des Sports\" at Mahamasina.\nThe sports facilities of the University of Antananarivo were used to host the official 2011 African Basketball Championship.\nPlaces of worship.\nAmong the places of worship, they are predominantly Christian churches and temples : Church of Jesus Christ in Madagascar (World Communion of Reformed Churches), Malagasy Lutheran Church (Lutheran World Federation), Assemblies of God, Association of Bible Baptist Churches in Madagascar (Baptist World Alliance), Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Antananarivo (Catholic Church). There are also Muslim mosques.\nGovernment.\nAntananarivo is the capital of Madagascar, and the federal governance structures, including the Senate, National Assembly, the Supreme Court, and the presidential office are housed there. The main presidential offices are located south of the city. The city hosts diplomatic missions of 21 countries.\nThe CUA is divided into six numbered \"arrondissements\" (administrative sub-districts); it has historically been administered by an elected mayor and associated staff. Since the 2009 political crisis, in which the Mayor of Antananarivo, Andry Rajoelina, unconstitutionally seized power as head of state, the CUA has been administered by a \"d\u00e9l\u00e9gation sp\u00e9ciale\" (special delegation) composed of a president and \"de facto\" mayor with the support of two vice presidents, all of whom are appointed by the president. The position of President of the Special Delegation has been held by Ny Hasina Andriamanjato since March 2014.\nThe mayoral administration of the CUA is empowered to govern the city with \"de jure\" autonomy; a wide range of mechanisms have been established to facilitate governance, although they are of limited effectiveness. An urban master plan guides major policies for city management but personnel within the mayoral office commonly lack the urban planning and management ability to effectively implement the plan in response to long-term and immediate needs. This challenge is compounded by the high turnover rate of mayors and staff that frequently disrupts initiatives begun by previous CUA administrations. A mayor under former President Didier Ratsiraka created \"red zones\"; areas where public gathering and protests were prohibited. On 28 June 2001, Ravalomanana abolished these areas, liberalizing freedom of assembly.\nAntananarivo has suffered from debt and mismanagement. The CUA estimated in 2012 that the cost of running the city to international standards would reach US$ annually, while annual revenues average around $12\u00a0million. In good years, the CUA can reserve $1\u20132\u00a0million to spend on city improvement projects. By 2008, the city's treasury had accumulated 8.2\u00a0billion Malagasy \"ariary\"\u2014approximately US$\u2014in debts under previous mayors. In 2008, water was cut off at public pumps, and there were regular brownouts of city street lights because of 3.3\u00a0million ariary of unpaid debts to the Jirama public utility company by the City of Antananarivo. In response, Mayor Rajoelina undertook an audit that identified and sought to address long-standing procedural irregularities and corruption in the city's administration. The CUA continues to be challenged by a shortage of revenues relative to its expenses caused by the high cost of retaining a large number of CUA personnel, weak structures for managing revenues from public rents and inadequate collection of tax revenues from city residents and businesses.\nTwin towns and sister cities.\nAntananarivo has established sister city agreements with four cities. The city was twinned with Yerevan, Armenia in 1981. The city is also twinned with Vorkuta, Russia; Suzhou, China; and Montreal, Quebec, Canada. A sister city relationship between Antananarivo and Nice, France, established in 1962, is not active. In 2019, the Mayor of the Commune Urbaine Antananarivo was inviting the City of Kota Kinabalu in Malaysia to enter into a sister relationship with the City of Antananarivo.\nEducation.\nMost of Madagascar's public and private universities are located in Antananarivo. This includes the country's oldest higher education institute, the College of Medicine established under the Merina monarchy and the University of Antananarivo, established under the French colonial administration. The Centre National de T\u00e9l\u00e9-Enseignement de Madagascar (CNETMAD) is located in Antananarivo. The city hosts many private pre-primary, primary and secondary schools and the national network of public schools. The city houses multiple French international schools, including Lyc\u00e9e Fran\u00e7ais de Tananarive, Lyc\u00e9e La Clairefontaine, Lyc\u00e9e Peter Pan, and \u00c9cole de l'Alliance fran\u00e7aise d'Antsahabe. It also houses an American school, American School of Antananarivo, and a Russian school, the Russian Embassy School in Antananarivo ().\nThe nation's most prestigious dance school, \"K'art Antanimena\", is located in Antananarivo. Other major dance schools based in the city include \"Le Club de Danse de l'Universit\u00e9 Catholique de Madagascar\", \"Club de danse Kera arts'space \u00e0 Antanimena\" and \"Le Club Mills\".\nHealth and sanitation.\nIn general, the availability and quality of health care are better in Antananarivo than elsewhere in Madagascar, although it remains inadequate across the country relative to that in more developed countries. One of Madagascar's two medical schools is located in Antananarivo; most medical technicians and specialists are trained there. Neonatal and antenatal care are significantly better in Antananarivo than elsewhere on the island. Despite the presence of facilities and trained personnel, the high cost of health care places it beyond the reach of most residents of Antananarivo. Pharmaceuticals are imported, making them particularly unaffordable; traditional herbal medicines remain popular and are readily available in local markets frequented by most of the population.\nThe large population in Antananarivo and the high density of its residential zones pose challenges to public health, sanitation, and access to clean drinking water. Processing and disposal of industrial and residential waste are inadequate. Wastewater is often discharged directly into the city's waterways. Air pollution from vehicle exhaust, residential coal-burning stoves, and other sources is worsening. While the city has set up clean water pumps, they remain inadequate and are not distributed according to population density, with poor access in the poorest and most populous parts of the city. Antananarivo is one of the two urban areas in Madagascar where bubonic plague is endemic.\nIn 2017, Antananarivo was ranked as the 7th worst city for particulate-matter air pollution in the world.\nThese problems were diminished but not eliminated under the mayoral administration of Marc Ravalomanana, who prioritized sanitation, security, and public administration. He obtained funds from international donors to establish garbage collection and disposal systems, restore dilapidated infrastructures such as roads and marketplaces, and replanted public gardens. To improve sanitation in the city, he constructed public latrines in densely populated and highly frequented areas.\nTransport.\nThe majority of the city's residents move about Antananarivo on foot. The CUA sets and enforces rules that govern a system of 2,400 franchised private minibuses running on 82 numbered routes throughout the city. An additional 2,000 minibuses managed by the Ministry of Transportation run along 8 lines into the neighboring suburbs. These interlinked bus systems served around 700,000 passengers each day. These minibuses often fail to meet safety standards or air quality requirements and are typically overcrowded with passengers and their cargo. Police and \"gendarmes\" assist in regulating traffic at peak periods in the morning and evening, or around special events and holidays. Private licensed and unlicensed taxis are common; most vehicles are older Renaults or Citroens. Newer vehicles congregate near hotels and other locales frequented by foreigners willing or able to pay higher prices for better services.\nThe city is encircled by a ring road and connected by direct \"routes nationales\" (national highways) to Mahajanga, Toliara, Antsirabe, Fianarantsoa and Toamasina. Branches and feeder roads from these major highways connect the city to the national road network. Antananarivo was connected by train to Toamasina to the east and Manakara to the southeast via Antsirabe and Fianarantsoa, but since 2019 passenger trains have not been operated anymore. The city's principal railway station is centrally located at Soarano at one end of the \"Avenue de l'Ind\u00e9pendance\". Ivato International Airport is located approximately from the center of the city, connecting Antananarivoto to all national airports. Ivato is the hub of the national airline Air Madagascar, and is the only airport on the island hosting long-haul carriers. Direct flights connect Antananarivo to cities in South Africa and Europe.\nMedia.\nGovernment television and radio broadcasting centers, and the headquarters of numerous private stations are located in Antananarivo. Eighty percent of households in Antananarivo own a radio; the medium is popular across social classes. Stations like \"Fenon'ny Merina\" appeal to Merina listeners of all ages by playing traditional and contemporary music of the highlands region. Youth-oriented stations play a blend of Western artists and Malagasy performers of Western genres, as well as fusion and coastal musical styles. Evangelical broadcasts and daily international and local news are available in Malagasy, French, and English. Forty percent of Antananarivo residents own a television receiver. All major Malagasy newspapers are printed in the city and are widely available. Communications services in Antananarivo are the best in the country. Internet and mobile telephone networks are readily available and affordable, although service disruptions occur periodically. The national postal service is headquartered in Antananarivo, and private international shipping companies like FedEx, DHL Express, and United Parcel Service provide services to the city.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56598", "revid": "30793817", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56598", "title": "Henry Bergh", "text": "American activist (1813\u20131888)\nHenry Bergh (August 29, 1813 \u2013 March 12, 1888) founded the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA) in April, 1866, three days after the first effective legislation against animal cruelty in the United States was passed into law by the New York State Legislature. \nOne of the tasks he undertook was to pass a law that would prohibit the use of dogs for the monotonous and hot task of turning grills in restaurants.\nLater, when Bergh went to visit restaurants to monitor law enforcement, he discovered that numerous restaurants had replaced dogs with black children.\nTherefore, Bergh also prompted the formation, in 1874, of the New York Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (NYSPCC).\nLife.\nHenry Bergh was born August 29, 1813, in New York City, to Christian Bergh III and Elizabeth Bergh. His father, an ethnic German, was a successful shipbuilder who had completed a series of contracts for the government. Henry Bergh joined his father in 1835 at the C. Bergh &amp; Co., shipbuilding business. Upon his death in 1843, he left a large estate to the benefit of the three Bergh children, including Henry.\nBergh attended Columbia College in New York City, but left before completing his degree, deciding instead to tour Europe, where he remained for five years.\nIn 1862 Bergh entered government service when President Abraham Lincoln appointed him secretary of the U.S. legation in Tsarist Russia. He served time in St. Petersburg as acting vice-consul. He resigned his position in 1864 owing to Russia's severe winter weather.\nAdvocacy.\nAnimal welfare.\nDuring his stay in Europe, Bergh witnessed various cruelties committed upon animals, which affected him greatly. In England Bergh met Lord Harrowby, president of the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, who impressed upon Bergh the importance of his mission, leading Bergh to dedicate the rest of his life to the cause of ending animal cruelty.\nOn April 10, 1866, an act of incorporation of the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA) was granted by the New York state legislature, with Bergh assuming the role of president of the new association, for which he received no financial compensation. Bergh and his wife provided initial funding for the private organization, but after some time Bergh was requested to meet an old man in a hospital, Louis Bonard, a rich Frenchman who had earned a fortune trading animal furs. Bonard was full of praise for Bergh's work. He wanted to leave a fortune of $100,000 to the society. He said to Bergh, \"I shall help you! Only if you promise that if ever you have the power, you will extend your protection to the wild things of forest and plain.\" Bergh promised and accepted the $100,000. Branches of the ASPCA were subsequently established throughout the United States and Canada.\nUnder Bergh's leadership, the early ASPCA involved itself in a wide variety of issues, including slaughterhouse practices, animal transportation, care of horses, elimination of vivisection, cock fighting, and dog fighting, and the abolition of use of live pigeons in shooting matches. Bergh and the ASPCA are particularly credited for the use of clay pigeons in trap shooting.\nDuring the 1872 outbreak of horse flu, Bergh stood wearing a top hat in the middle of New York City's streets and stopped horse-drawn trolleys and wagons being pulled by sick animals, sending them back to their stables. Although he was threatened with lawsuits by transit companies, his advocacy raised the profile of the cause.\nIn 1873, Bergh conducted a national lecture tour taking him across the American West. He was also able to speak on the animal welfare cause before the Evangelical Alliance and the Episcopal convention, with the latter passing a resolution giving its clergy express permission to preach an annual sermon against cruelty to animals.\nChild welfare.\nIn 1874, Bergh was approached by a Methodist missionary named Etta Agnell Wheeler, who sought help rescuing a child named Mary Ellen Wilson from her cruel abuser, Mary Connolly. After Mary Ellen's story was heard, and she was subsequently rescued through Bergh's efforts, other complaints came in to Bergh. In response, Bergh himself, along with Elbridge T. Gerry and John D. Wright, formed the New York Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (NYSPCC) in 1875. Over the coming years, other SPCC organizations were formed, such as the Massachusetts organization in 1888, the Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (MSPCC).\nDeath and legacy.\nBergh died on March 12, 1888, in New York City. Poet Henry Wadsworth Longfellow eulogized Bergh as \"among the noblest in the land, Though he may count himself the least, That man I honour and revere, Who without favour, without fear, In the great city dares to stand The friend to every friendless beast.\" Henry Bergh is interred at Green-Wood Cemetery in Brooklyn, New York.\nA 1982 children's book about Bergh, \"The Man Who Loved Animals\", was written by Syd Hoff.\nIn the spring of 2006 at Green-Wood Cemetery, while making preparations to honor Bergh, the ASPCA discovered that his wife was also in that mausoleum. On May 6, substantive ceremonies were held before a large audience which was allowed to bring their pets into the cemetery \u2013 including dogs, for the first time in over a century. The NYPD Emerald Society bagpipers and ASPCA HLE Agents were there also. After a walk to Bergh's tomb, the bas-relief statue was revealed that now rests in front. At the same time as these ceremonies, in the cemetery's large chapel building an exhibit was opened celebrating the history of the ASPCA and Henry Bergh. \nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56601", "revid": "50954951", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56601", "title": "Fuzzy set", "text": "Sets whose elements have degrees of membership\nIn mathematics, fuzzy sets (also known as uncertain sets) are sets whose elements have degrees of membership. Fuzzy sets were introduced independently by Lotfi A. Zadeh in 1965 as an extension of the classical notion of set.\nAt the same time, defined a more general kind of structure called an \"\"L\"-relation\", which he studied in an abstract algebraic context; \nfuzzy relations are special cases of \"L\"-relations when \"L\" is the unit interval [0,\u20091].\nThey are now used throughout fuzzy mathematics, having applications in areas such as linguistics , decision-making , and clustering .\nIn classical set theory, the membership of elements in a set is assessed in binary terms according to a bivalent condition\u2014an element either belongs or does not belong to the set. By contrast, fuzzy set theory permits the gradual assessment of the membership of elements in a set; this is described with the aid of a membership function valued in the real unit interval [0,\u20091]. Fuzzy sets generalize classical sets, since the indicator functions (aka characteristic functions) of classical sets are special cases of the membership functions of fuzzy sets, if the latter only takes values 0 or 1. In fuzzy set theory, classical bivalent sets are usually called \"crisp sets\". The fuzzy set theory can be used in a wide range of domains in which information is incomplete or imprecise, such as bioinformatics.\nDefinition.\nA fuzzy set is a pair formula_1 where formula_2 is a set (often required to be non-empty) and formula_3 a membership function. \nThe reference set formula_2 (sometimes denoted by formula_5 or formula_6) is called universe of discourse, and for each formula_7 the value formula_8 is called the grade of membership of formula_9 in formula_10. \nThe function formula_11 is called the membership function of the fuzzy set formula_12.\nFor a finite set formula_13 the fuzzy set formula_1 is often denoted by formula_15\nLet formula_16. Then formula_9 is called \nThe (crisp) set of all fuzzy sets on a universe formula_2 is denoted with formula_21 (or sometimes just formula_22).\nCrisp sets related to a fuzzy set.\nFor any fuzzy set formula_23 and formula_24 the following crisp sets are defined:\nNote that some authors understand \"kernel\" in a different way; see below.\nformula_32formula_33\nformula_37\nformula_41\nformula_44 \nis called a crossover point.\nformula_50formula_51formula_52\nformula_54\nwhere formula_55 denotes the supremum, which exists because formula_56 is non-empty and bounded above by 1. If \"U\" is finite, we can simply replace the supremum by the maximum.\nformula_58\nIn the finite case, where the supremum is a maximum, this means that at least one element of the fuzzy set has full membership. A non-empty fuzzy set formula_34 may be normalized with result formula_60 by dividing the membership function of the fuzzy set by its height:\nformula_61\nBesides similarities this differs from the usual normalization in that the normalizing constant is not a sum.\nformula_64\nIn the case when formula_65 is a finite set, or more generally a closed set, the width is just\nformula_66\nIn the \"n\"-dimensional case formula_67 the above can be replaced by the \"n\"-dimensional volume of formula_65. \nIn general, this can be defined given any measure on \"U\", for instance by integration (e.g. Lebesgue integration) of formula_65.\nformula_71.\n Without loss of generality, we may take \"x\" \u2264 \"y\", which gives the equivalent formulation\nformula_72.\n This definition can be extended to one for a general topological space \"U\": we say the fuzzy set formula_34 is convex when, for any subset \"Z\" of \"U\", the condition \nformula_74\n holds, where formula_75 denotes the boundary of \"Z\" and formula_76 denotes the image of a set \"X\" (here formula_75) under a function \"f\" (here formula_49).\nFuzzy set operations.\nAlthough the complement of a fuzzy set has a single most common definition, the other main operations, union and intersection, do have some ambiguity.\nformula_83.\nformula_86,\nand their union formula_87 is defined by:\nformula_88.\nBy the definition of the t-norm, we see that the union and intersection are commutative, monotonic, associative, and have both a null and an identity element. For the intersection, these are \u2205 and \"U\", respectively, while for the union, these are reversed. However, the union of a fuzzy set and its complement may not result in the full universe \"U\", and the intersection of them may not give the empty set \u2205. Since the intersection and union are associative, it is natural to define the intersection and union of a finite family of fuzzy sets recursively. It is noteworthy that the generally accepted standard operators for the union and intersection of fuzzy sets are the max and min operators:\nformula_92\nExamples for fuzzy intersection/union pairs with standard negator can be derived from samples provided in the article about t-norms.\nThe fuzzy intersection is not idempotent in general, because the standard t-norm min is the only one which has this property. Indeed, if the arithmetic multiplication is used as the t-norm, the resulting fuzzy intersection operation is not idempotent. That is, iteratively taking the intersection of a fuzzy set with itself is not trivial. It instead defines the \"m\"-th power of a fuzzy set, which can be canonically generalized for non-integer exponents in the following way:\nformula_96\nThe case of exponent two is special enough to be given a name.\nformula_99\nTaking formula_100, we have formula_101 and formula_102\nformula_106\nwhich means formula_107, e. g.:\nformula_108\nAnother proposal for a set difference could be: \nformula_109\nformula_110\nor by using a combination of just max, min, and standard negation, giving\nformula_111\nAxioms for definition of generalized symmetric differences analogous to those for t-norms, t-conorms, and negators have been proposed by Vemur et al. (2014) with predecessors by Alsina et al. (2005) and Bedregal et al. (2009).\nDisjoint fuzzy sets.\nIn contrast to the general ambiguity of intersection and union operations, there is clearness for disjoint fuzzy sets:\nTwo fuzzy sets formula_84 are disjoint iff\nformula_113\nwhich is equivalent to\nformula_114 formula_115\nand also equivalent to \nformula_116\nWe keep in mind that min/max is a t/s-norm pair, and any other will work here as well.\nFuzzy sets are disjoint if and only if their supports are disjoint according to the standard definition for crisp sets.\nFor disjoint fuzzy sets formula_84 any intersection will give \u2205, and any union will give the same result, which is denoted as\nformula_118 \nwith its membership function given by\nformula_119\nNote that only one of both summands is greater than zero.\nFor disjoint fuzzy sets formula_84 the following holds true:\nformula_121\nThis can be generalized to finite families of fuzzy sets as follows:\nGiven a family formula_122 of fuzzy sets with index set \"I\" (e.g. \"I\" = {1,2,3...,\"n\"}). This family is (pairwise) disjoint iff\nformula_123\nA family of fuzzy sets formula_122 is disjoint, iff the family of underlying supports formula_125 is disjoint in the standard sense for families of crisp sets.\nIndependent of the t/s-norm pair, intersection of a disjoint family of fuzzy sets will give \u2205 again, while the union has no ambiguity:\nformula_126 \nwith its membership function given by\nformula_127\nAgain only one of the summands is greater than zero.\nFor disjoint families of fuzzy sets formula_122 the following holds true:\nformula_129\nScalar cardinality.\nFor a fuzzy set formula_34 with finite support formula_65 (i.e. a \"finite fuzzy set\"), its cardinality (aka scalar cardinality or sigma-count) is given by\nformula_132.\nIn the case that \"U\" itself is a finite set, the relative cardinality is given by \nformula_133.\nThis can be generalized for the divisor to be a non-empty fuzzy set: For fuzzy sets formula_134 with \"G\" \u2260 \u2205, we can define the relative cardinality by:\nformula_135,\nwhich looks very similar to the expression for conditional probability.\nNote:\nDistance and similarity.\nFor any fuzzy set formula_34 the membership function formula_139 can be regarded as a family formula_140. The latter is a metric space with several metrics formula_141 known. A metric can be derived from a norm (vector norm) formula_142 via\nformula_143.\nFor instance, if formula_2 is finite, i.e. formula_145, such a metric may be defined by: \nformula_146 where formula_147 and formula_148 are sequences of real numbers between 0 and 1. \nFor infinite formula_2, the maximum can be replaced by a supremum.\nBecause fuzzy sets are unambiguously defined by their membership function, this metric can be used to measure distances between fuzzy sets on the same universe:\nformula_150,\nwhich becomes in the above sample:\nformula_151.\nAgain for infinite formula_2 the maximum must be replaced by a supremum. Other distances (like the canonical 2-norm) may diverge, if infinite fuzzy sets are too different, e.g., formula_153 and formula_2.\nSimilarity measures (here denoted by formula_155) may then be derived from the distance, e.g. after a proposal by Koczy:\nformula_156 if formula_157 is finite, formula_158 else, \nor after Williams and Steele:\nformula_159 if formula_157 is finite, formula_158 else\nwhere formula_162 is a steepness parameter and formula_163.\n\"L\"-fuzzy sets.\nSometimes, more general variants of the notion of fuzzy set are used, with membership functions taking values in a (fixed or variable) algebra or structure formula_164 of a given kind; usually it is required that formula_164 be at least a poset or lattice. These are usually called \"L\"-fuzzy sets, to distinguish them from those valued over the unit interval. The usual membership functions with values in [0,\u20091] are then called [0,\u20091]-valued membership functions. These kinds of generalizations were first considered in 1967 by Joseph Goguen, who was a student of Zadeh. A classical corollary may be indicating truth and membership values by {f,\u2009t} instead of {0,\u20091}.\nAn extension of fuzzy sets has been provided by Atanassov. An intuitionistic fuzzy set (IFS) formula_34 is characterized by two functions:\n1. formula_167 \u2013 degree of membership of \"x\"\n2. formula_168 \u2013 degree of non-membership of \"x\"\nwith functions formula_169 with formula_170.\nThis resembles a situation like some person denoted by formula_9 voting \nAfter all, we have a percentage of approvals, a percentage of denials, and a percentage of abstentions.\nFor this situation, special \"intuitive fuzzy\" negators, t- and s-norms can be defined. With formula_176 and by combining both functions to formula_177 this situation resembles a special kind of \"L\"-fuzzy sets.\nOnce more, this has been expanded by defining picture fuzzy sets (PFS) as follows: A PFS A is characterized by three functions mapping \"U\" to [0,\u20091]: formula_178, \"degree of positive membership\", \"degree of neutral membership\", and \"degree of negative membership\" respectively and additional condition formula_179\nThis expands the voting sample above by an additional possibility of \"refusal of voting\".\nWith formula_180 and special \"picture fuzzy\" negators, t- and s-norms this resembles just another type of \"L\"-fuzzy sets.\nPythagorean fuzzy sets.\nOne extension of IFS is what is known as Pythagorean fuzzy sets. Such sets satisfy the constraint formula_181, which is reminiscent of the Pythagorean theorem. Pythagorean fuzzy sets can be applicable to real life applications in which the previous condition of formula_182 is not valid. However, the less restrictive condition of formula_181 may be suitable in more domains.\nFuzzy logic.\nAs an extension of the case of multi-valued logic, valuations (formula_184) of propositional variables (formula_185) into a set of membership degrees (formula_186) can be thought of as membership functions mapping predicates into fuzzy sets (or more formally, into an ordered set of fuzzy pairs, called a fuzzy relation). With these valuations, many-valued logic can be extended to allow for fuzzy premises from which graded conclusions may be drawn.\nThis extension is sometimes called \"fuzzy logic in the narrow sense\" as opposed to \"fuzzy logic in the wider sense,\" which originated in the engineering fields of automated control and knowledge engineering, and which encompasses many topics involving fuzzy sets and \"approximated reasoning.\"\nIndustrial applications of fuzzy sets in the context of \"fuzzy logic in the wider sense\" can be found at fuzzy logic.\nFuzzy number.\nA fuzzy number is a fuzzy set that satisfies all the following conditions:\nIf these conditions are not satisfied, then A is not a fuzzy number. The core of this fuzzy number is a singleton; its location is:\n formula_189\nFuzzy numbers can be likened to the funfair game \"guess your weight,\" where someone guesses the contestant's weight, with closer guesses being more correct, and where the guesser \"wins\" if he or she guesses near enough to the contestant's weight, with the actual weight being completely correct (mapping to 1 by the membership function).\nThe kernel formula_190 of a fuzzy interval formula_34 is defined as the 'inner' part, without the 'outbound' parts where the membership value is constant ad infinitum. In other words, the smallest subset of formula_192 where formula_167 is constant outside of it, is defined as the kernel.\nHowever, there are other concepts of fuzzy numbers and intervals as some authors do not insist on convexity.\nFuzzy categories.\nThe use of set membership as a key component of category theory can be generalized to fuzzy sets. This approach, which began in 1968 shortly after the introduction of fuzzy set theory, led to the development of Goguen categories in the 21st century. In these categories, rather than using two valued set membership, more general intervals are used, and may be lattices as in \"L\"-fuzzy sets.\nThere are numerous mathematical extensions similar to or more general than fuzzy sets. Since fuzzy sets were introduced in 1965 by Zadeh, many new mathematical constructions and theories treating imprecision, inaccuracy, vagueness, uncertainty and vulnerability have been developed. Some of these constructions and theories are extensions of fuzzy set theory, while others attempt to mathematically model inaccuracy/vagueness and uncertainty in a different way. The diversity of such constructions and corresponding theories includes:\nFuzzy relation equation.\nThe fuzzy relation equation is an equation of the form \"A\" \u00b7 \"R\" = \"B\", where \"A\" and \"B\" are fuzzy sets, \"R\" is a fuzzy relation, and \"A\" \u00b7 \"R\" stands for the composition of \"A\" with\u00a0\"R\" .\nEntropy.\nA measure \"d\" of fuzziness for fuzzy sets of universe formula_2 should fulfill the following conditions for all formula_16:\nIn this case formula_199 is called the entropy of the fuzzy set \"A\".\nFor finite formula_145 the entropy of a fuzzy set formula_34 is given by\nformula_207,\nformula_208\nor just\nformula_209\nwhere formula_210 is Shannon's function (natural entropy function)\nformula_211\nand formula_212 is a constant depending on the measure unit and the logarithm base used (here we have used the natural base e).\nThe physical interpretation of \"k\" is the Boltzmann constant \"k\"\"B\".\nLet formula_34 be a fuzzy set with a continuous membership function (fuzzy variable). Then \nformula_214\nand its entropy is \nformula_215\nExtensions.\nThere are many mathematical constructions similar to or more general than fuzzy sets. Since fuzzy sets were introduced in 1965, many new mathematical constructions and theories treating imprecision, inexactness, ambiguity, and uncertainty have been developed. Some of these constructions and theories are extensions of fuzzy set theory, while others try to mathematically model imprecision and uncertainty in a different way.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56602", "revid": "125513", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56602", "title": "Astana", "text": "Capital of Kazakhstan\nAstana is the capital city of Kazakhstan. With a population of 1,423,726 within the city limits, it is the second-largest in the country after Almaty, which was the national capital until 1997. The city lies on the banks of the Ishim river in the north of Kazakhstan. It is located within the Akmola Region but administers itself. Initially founded as Aqmoly in 1830, the city was later renamed Akmolinsk, Tselinograd, and Aqmola before adopting the name \"Astana\" in 1998, which means \"capital city\" in Kazakh. In 2019, the city briefly adopted the name Nur-Sultan in honor of former president Nursultan Nazarbayev, but it reverted to the name \"Astana\" in 2022.\nAstana's history is marked by rapid growth, especially after becoming the capital. Its transformation into a modern and planned city was guided by a master plan designed by Japanese architect Kisho Kurokawa. Today, Astana is renowned for its futuristic architecture, housing key government institutions, including the Akorda Residence, the Parliament House, and the Supreme Court. It has become an important center for culture, education, and commerce in Kazakhstan and Central Asia.\nThe city is renowned for its modern landmarks, including the Baiterek, which symbolizes Kazakhstan's independence, the Khan Shatyr Entertainment Center, and the Hazrat Sultan Mosque, one of the largest in Central Asia. The Palace of Peace and Reconciliation, designed to host cultural and interfaith events, highlights the city's role as a hub for dialogue and cooperation. In 2021, Astana was recognized as one of Kazakhstan's 10 priority tourist destinations. Visitors can explore cultural venues such as the Astana Opera and the National Museum of the Republic of Kazakhstan, alongside parks like Presidential Park and Central Park, which offer recreational spaces along the Ishim.\nAstana gained international recognition when it hosted the 2011 Asian Winter Games, an event that showcased the city's ability to organize large-scale sporting events. The city also hosted Expo 2017, a major international exhibition focused on the theme of \"Future Energy,\" which brought global attention to its commitment to sustainability and innovation. Astana is also home to the Congress of Leaders of World and Traditional Religions, a prominent event that brings together religious leaders from around the world to foster mutual understanding and peace.\nThe city's transport infrastructure includes the Nursultan Nazarbayev International Airport, a key hub for both domestic and international flights. Astana is also well-connected by two railway stations, Astana-1 and Astana-Nurly Zhol, which provide services to major cities across Kazakhstan and beyond. The city's public transport system includes buses, and the planned Astana Light Metro system, currently under construction, is expected to significantly enhance the city's transport network, offering efficient and sustainable travel within the city.\nAstana is home to notable educational institutions, such as Nazarbayev University, L.N. Gumilyov Eurasian National University, and Astana IT University, contributing to its role as a hub for education and innovation. These institutions support the city's growth in technology, research, and higher learning, making Astana an increasingly important center for knowledge and progress in the region.\nNames.\nThe settlement of Akmoly was founded in 1830, possibly named after a local landmark. \"\u0410\u049b \u043c\u043e\u043b\u0430\" (Aqmola) literally means \"white grave\" or \"white tomb\" in Kazakh, although this theory is not universally accepted. In 1832, it was granted town status and renamed Akmolinsk. In 1961, under Nikita Khrushchev, it was renamed Tselinograd, Russian for \"City of Virgin Lands\". In 1991, following Kazakhstan's independence, the name was changed to Akmola.\nIn December 1997, the city replaced Almaty as the capital of Kazakhstan, and in May 1998, it was renamed Astana, which means \"capital city\" in Kazakh. In March 2019, the capital was renamed to Nur-Sultan (; ) in honor of the long-ruling President Nursultan Nazarbayev, shortly after his resignation. In September 2022, President Kassym-Jomart Tokayev signed a constitutional amendment to revert to the name Astana. As of 2022[ [update]], it holds the Guinness World Record for the capital city with the most name changes in modern times.\nHistory.\nMany centuries ago, the Bozok settlement was located on the territory of modern Astana. It was a military fortress of the Steppe section of the Silk Road. The etymology of the Turkic word \"Boz\" carries several meanings, such as 'untouched earth', 'virgin soil', and 'feather grass'. It was a large settlement of the 12th-14th centuries. At present, Astana is expanding into the territory of ancient Bozok.\nEarly years (1830\u20131918).\nThe settlement of Akmoly was established on the Ishim river in 183019 as the seat of an okrug. In 1832, the settlement was granted town status and named \"Akmolinsk\". The advantages of the town's strategic position were clear as early as 1863. It describes how picket roads and lines connected this geographic center to Kargaly in the East, Aktau Fort in the South, and through Atbasar to Kokshetau in the West. In 1838, at the height of the great national and liberation movement headed by Kenesary Khan, the Akmolinsk Fortress was burned. After the repression of the liberation movement, the fortress was rebuilt. On 16 July 1863, Akmolinsk was officially declared an uyezd town. During the rapid development of the Russian capitalist market, the huge Saryarka areas were actively exploited by the colonial administration. To draft a Regulation governing the Kazakh steppe, the Government of the Russian Empire formed the Steppe Commission in 1865.\nIn 1869, Akmolinsk's external district and department were canceled, and Akmolinsk became the center of the newly established Akmolinsk Oblast. In 1879, Major General Dubelt proposed to build a railway between Tyumen and Akmolinsk to the Ministry of Communications of Russia. In the course of the first 30 years of its existence, the population of Akmola numbered a trifle more than 2,000 people. Over the next 30 years, the city's population increased by three times according to the volosts and settlements of Akmolinsk Oblast. In 1893, Akmolinsk was an uyezd with a population of 6,428 residents, three churches, five schools and colleges, and three factories.\nSoviet era (1918\u20131991).\nDuring World War II, Akmolinsk served as a route for the transport of engineering tools and equipment from evacuated plants in the Ukrainian SSR, Byelorussian SSR, and Russian SFSR located in the oblasts of the Kazakh SSR. Local industries were appointed to respond to war needs, assisting the country to provide the battle and home fronts with all materials needed. In the post-war years, Akmolinsk became a beacon of economic revival in the west of the Soviet Union ruined by the war. Additionally, many Russian-Germans were resettled here after being deported under Joseph Stalin's rule.\nIn 1954, Northern Kazakh SSR oblasts became a territory of the Virgin Lands Campaign, in order to turn the region into a second grain producer for the Soviet Union. In December 1960, the Central Committee made a resolution to create the Tselinniy Krai, which comprised five regions of the Northern Kazakh SSR oblasts. Eventually, Akmolinsk Oblast ceased to exist as a separate administrative entity. Its districts were directly subordinated to the new krai administration, and Akmolinsk became the krai capital, as well as the administrative seat of the new Virgin Lands economic region. On 14 March 1961, Khrushchev suggested the city should have a name corresponding to its role in the Virgin Lands Campaign. On 20 March 1961, the Supreme Soviet of the Kazakh SSR renamed Akmolinsk to \"Tselinograd\". On 24 April 1961, the region was reconstituted as \"Tselinograd Oblast\". In the 1960s, Tselinograd was completely transformed. In 1963, work on the first three new high-rise housing districts began. In addition, the city received a number of new monumental public buildings, including the Virgin Lands Palace, a Palace of Youth, a House of Soviets, a new airport, and several sports venues. In 1971, the Tselinniy Krai was abolished and Tselinograd became the oblast's new capital.\nContemporary era (1991\u2013present).\nAfter the dissolution of the Soviet Union and the consequent independence of Kazakhstan, the city's original name was restored in the modified form \"Akmola\". On 6 July 1994, the Supreme Council of Kazakhstan adopted the decree \"On the transfer of the capital of Kazakhstan\". After the capital of Kazakhstan was moved from Almaty to Akmola on 10 December 1997, the city was consequently renamed Astana in 1998. On 10 June 1998, Astana was presented as the capital internationally. Due to several determined advantages, Astana was chosen as the capital: large urban areas, favorable geographical position, proximity to the major economic centers of the region, considerable demographic capacity, good transportation facilities, and a relatively favorable climate. On 16 July 1999, Astana was awarded the medal and title of the City of Peace by UNESCO.\nIn March 2019, the Kazakhstani government renamed the city Nur-Sultan to honour the country's outgoing long-term authoritarian president, Nursultan Nazarbayev. In September 2022, after a number of controversies and unrest resulting in Nazarbayev's resignation from the Security Council of Kazakhstan, the name of the capital was changed back to Astana.\nGeography.\nAstana is almost from the country's largest city and former capital, Almaty. The nearest big cities are Karaganda () and Omsk in Russia ().\nTopography.\nAstana is located in central Kazakhstan on the Ishim River in a very flat, semi-arid steppe region which covers most of the country's territory. It is at 51\u00b0 10' north latitude and 71\u00b0 26' east longitude. The city encompasses . The elevation of Astana is above sea level. Astana is in a spacious steppe landscape, in the transitional area between the north of Kazakhstan and the extremely thinly settled national centre, because of the Ishim River. The older boroughs lie north of the river, whilst the new boroughs are located south of the Ishim.\nTime.\nThe time offset from the UTC used by Astana is 5 hours ahead of UTC, or .\nClimate.\nAstana is the second-coldest national capital in the world after Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia, a position formerly held by the capital of Canada, Ottawa, until Astana attained capital city status in 1997. Astana has an extreme continental climate with warm summers (featuring occasional brief rain showers) and long, very cold, dry winters. Summer temperatures sometimes reach 35\u202f\u00b0C (95\u202f\u00b0F), while \u221230 to \u221235\u202f\u00b0C (\u221222 to \u221231\u202f\u00b0F) is common from mid-December to early March. Usually, the city's river remains frozen from the second week of November until early April. Astana has a well-earned reputation among Kazakhs for its frequent strong winds, which are especially noticeable in the rapidly growing but relatively open Left Bank part of the city.\nOverall, Astana has a humid continental climate classification in the K\u00f6ppen scheme (\"Dfb\"). The average annual temperature in Astana is . January is the coldest month with an average temperature of and record lowest is in January. 1893's cold wave reached temperatures down to . July is the hottest month with an average temperature of .\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of January 2025, the population of Astana is 1,528,703; more than triple the 2002 population of 493,000.\nAs of 2025, ethnic Kazakhs made up 82.3% of the city population, representing a significant increase from only 17% at the time of the country's independence.\nEthnic groups (2025):\nIn 1989, Tselinograd had a population of 281,000. The ethnic mix was about 17.7% Kazakh, 54.1% Russian, and 28.2% other ethnic groups.\nBy 2007, Astana's population had more than doubled since becoming the capital, to over 600,000, and it topped 1 million in 2017. Migrant workers\u2014legal and illegal\u2014have been attracted from across Kazakhstan and neighbouring states such as Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan, and Astana is a magnet for young professionals seeking to build a career. Most of the immigrants in Astana are Russian.\nReligion.\nIslam and Christianity (primarily Russian Orthodoxy, Roman Catholicism, and Protestantism) are the predominant religions of the city. Other religions practiced in the country are Judaism, Lutheranism, Buddhism, and Hinduism.\nAdditionally, Astana is home to the largest mosque in Kazakhstan and Central Asia, the Astana Grand Mosque.\nThe Palace of Peace and Reconciliation was specially constructed in 2006 to host the Congress of Leaders of World and Traditional Religions. It contains accommodations for different religions: Judaism, Islam, Christianity, Buddhism, Hinduism, Taoism, and other faiths. Central Asia's largest synagogue is found in Astana. The Catholic community is served by the Our Mother of Perpetual Help Cathedral.\nMoreover, Astana also serves as the headquarters for the Eastern Orthodox Church.\nMetropolitan area.\nThe metropolitan area centered upon Astana includes the Arshaly, Shortandy, Tselinograd, and (partially) Akkol districts of Akmola Region. The area contains 1.2 million people.\nEconomy.\nAstana's economy is based on trade, industrial production, transport, communication, and construction. The city's industrial production is mainly focused on producing building materials, foodstuff, and mechanical engineering.\nAstana is a major hub of the Belt and Road Initiative, including for financial services and legal services connected to BRI projects.44\nAstana is the leader in the CIS region on the Global Financial Centers Index rank in 2022.\nThe Astana International Financial Center (AIFC) opened in July 2018 to become a hub for financial services in Central Asia.\nAstana is the headquarters of state-owned corporations such as Samruk-Kazyna, Kazakhstan Temir Zholy, KazMunayGas, KazTransOil, Kazatomprom, KEGOC, Kazpost, and Kazakhtelecom.\nThe shift of the capital has given it a powerful boost to Astana's economic development. The high economic growth rate of the city has attracted numerous investors. In the 16 years since Astana became the capital, the volume of investments has increased by almost 30 times, the gross regional product has increased by 90 times, and industrial output has increased by 11 times. The city's Gross Regional Product makes up about 8.5 per cent of the republic's Gross domestic product.\nThe Astana \u2013 New City special economic zone was established in 2001 to help develop industry and increase the attractiveness of the city to investors. The SEZ plans to commission five projects worth 20 billion KZT (around $108 million) in the Industrial Park No. 1 in 2015. The projects include construction of a plant for the production of diesel engines, a fast food complex, temporary storage warehouses and a business center, a furniture factory, and the production of military and civil engineering machinery. The new Astana International Financial Centre opened in July 2018.\nAstana's administration is promoting the development of small and medium-sized businesses through the cooperation of the Sovereign Welfare Fund Samruk-Kazyna and the National Economic Chamber. Support is provided by a special program of crediting. As a result, the number of small and medium-sized businesses increased by 13.7% to over 96,000 compared to the previous year as of 1 July 2015. In addition, the number of people employed in small and medium-sized businesses increased by 17.8% to over 234,000 people as of 1 April 2015.\nAstana was included in the list of the top 21 intelligent communities of the world, according to the report released by the Intelligent Community Forum in October 2016. The rating list includes the cities, regions, and communities that utilize digital instruments for the construction of the local economy and society.\nIn 2018, Astana attracted more than three trillion tenge (US$7.91 billion) in foreign direct investment, a record amount for the city. The growth was achieved due to a large number of construction projects.\nTourism has become one of the factors that drives economic growth in the city. Astana is among the top ten most attractive tourist cities in the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS).\nDiplomacy platform.\nAstana has become a platform for high-profile diplomatic talks and summits on critical global issues. Astana has hosted multiple rounds of talks between the Syrian Arab Republic government, led by Bashar al-Assad, and the Syrian opposition. The 12th Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organization (WTO) was originally scheduled to take place in June 2020 in then-Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan, but was postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In May 2020, WTO members discussed Kazakhstan's offer to reschedule the conference to June 2021, but postponed taking a decision due to the ongoing pandemic. In April 2021, members agreed that MC12 would take place in Geneva from 30 November to 3 December. Since 2003, Astana has hosted the Congress on World and Traditional Religions, which is a diverse gathering of religious leaders to discuss religious harmony and ending terrorism and extremism.\nCityscape.\nAstana is subdivided into four districts. Almaty District was created on 6 May 1998 by presidential decree. The district's territory encompasses an area of with a population of 375,938 people. The district has five villages. Yesil District, which is also called left bank of the city, was created on 5 August 2008 by presidential decree. The district's territory encompasses an area of with a population of 119,929 people. Saryarka District was created on 6 May 1998 by presidential decree. The district's territory encompasses an area of with a population of 339,286 people. was created on 16 March 2018 by presidential decree. The district's territory encompasses an area of with a population of 233 351 people.\nIn April 1998, the Government of Kazakhstan asked architects and urban planners of international renown to participate in a design competition for the new capital. On 6 October 1998, Japanese architect Kisho Kurokawa was awarded the First Prize. Kurokawa's proposal aimed to preserve and redevelop the existing city, and create a new city at the south and the east sides of the Ishim River, enabling the Symbiosis of the History and the Future.\nNorth of the railway line, which crosses Astana in an east\u2013west direction, are industrial and poorer residential areas. Between the railway line and the Ishim river is the city centre, where at present intense building activity is occurring. To the west and east are more elevated residential areas with parks and the new area of government administration to the south of the Ishim River. Here many large building projects are under way; for example, the construction of a diplomatic quarter, and government buildings. By 2030, these quarters are to be completed. Astana's chief planner, Vladimir Laptev, wants to build a Berlin in a Eurasian style. He has stated that a purely administrative capital such as Canberra is not one of his goals.\nTwo of the most significant structures in Astana's developing urban landscape are the Palace of Peace and Reconciliation and the Khan Shatyr Entertainment Center.20 Their architectural styles are intended to echo features of the nomadic empires that shaped the history of the Eurasian steppes.20\nSport.\nThe city has a variety of sports teams. The major association football team is the FC Astana of the Kazakhstan Premier League. Founded in 2009, the FC Astana won six league titles, three Kazakh Cups and five Kazakh Super Cups. Their home stadium is the Astana Arena, which also serves as a home for the Kazakhstan national football team and the FC Bayterek. The FC Bayterek is a member of the Kazakhstan First Division. They were founded in 2012, to develop youth football. The FC Astana-1964 is based in the Kazhymukan Munaitpasov Stadium and plays in the Astana Municipal Football League. The club's most successful years were 2000s, when they won 3 league titles.\nAstana is home to several professional ice hockey teams. The Barys Astana, a founding member of the Kontinental Hockey League in 2008 and based in the Barys Arena. The Nomad Astana and HC Astana play in the Kazakhstan Hockey Championship. The Snezhnye Barsy of the Junior Hockey League is a junior team of the Barys Astana. Astana annually hosts the President of the Republic of Kazakhstan's Cup ice hockey tournament.\nThe Astana Pro Team, founded in 2007, participates in the UCI World Tour. The team is one of the most successful road cycling teams of recent years, winning several grand tours. The BC Astana of the VTB United League and the Kazakhstan Basketball League is the only professional basketball team in Astana. It is the most successful basketball team in Kazakhstan with three Kazakhstan Basketball League titles and four Kazakhstan Basketball Cups. Its home arena is the Saryarka Velodrome, which is mainly used for track cycling events. The Saryarka Velodrome hosted the UCI Track Cycling World Cup stage in 2011. The Astana Presidential Sports Club was founded in 2012, to combine the main sports teams in Astana. The organization is supported by Sovereign Wealth Fund Samruk-Kazyna. The 2011 Asian Winter Games were partly held in the capital. The Alau Ice Palace, hosted the 2015 World Sprint Speed Skating Championships. The President's Cup tennis tournament is annually held at the Daulet National Tennis Centre.\nThe martial art palace was opened on 6 July 2019. Sports facilities for five thousand spectators can take part in international competitions in boxing, wrestling, judo, weightlifting, and other Olympic and non-Olympic disciplines. The palace has a 25-meter pool, fitness and wrestling rooms, a football field, as well as a comfortable hotel. The object will be made available to the pupils of the sports school.\nEducation.\nAstana has numerous universities and junior colleges. In the 2013/2014 academic year, the city had a total of 53,561 students enrolled in its 14 higher education institutions, marking a 10% rise from the previous year. The L.N.Gumilyov Eurasian National University is the biggest university in Astana with 16,558 students and 1,678 academic staff. It was founded as the result of merging the Akmola Civil Engineering Institute with the Akmola Pedagogical Institute on 23 May 1996. The oldest university in Astana is the S. Seifullin Kazakh Agro Technical University founded in 1957. Nazarbayev University is an autonomous research university founded in 2010 in partnership with some of the world's top universities. The Kazakh University of Economics, Finance and International Trade is an economic institution in Astana. The Kazakh Humanities and Law Institute is a law university founded by initiative of Ministry of Justice in 1994. The Astana Medical University was the only medical school in Astana until the opening of the School of Medicine at Nazarbayev University in 2014. The Kazakh National University of Arts is the premier music school and has provided Astana with highly qualified professional specialists in the field of Arts.\nAstana schools enrolls about 103,000 students across 83 schools, including 71 state schools and 12 private schools. The Miras International School, established 1999, was the first private high school established in Astana. The Haileybury Astana school was established in 2011, as a branch of the Haileybury and Imperial Service College, an independent school in the United Kingdom. The Astana Kazakh-Turkish High Schools are run by the International KATEV foundation. There are Kazakh-Turkish High Boarding Schools for gifted boys and girls, separately and the Nurorda International School. Astana hosts two Nazarbayev Intellectual Schools (NIS), including the School of Physics and Mathematics and International Baccalaureate world school. The QSI International School of Astana is an international school that provides an American curriculum to its students. The school is a branch of the Quality Schools International that started in the Middle East.\nTransportation.\nCity transport.\nThe city transport in Astana consists of buses and taxis. Over 720,000 people use public transport daily. There are over 60 bus lines served by more than 1000 vehicles, with over 3000 people working in the public transport sector. Just like buses, share taxis have their own predefined routes and work on a shared basis. There are three share taxi routes in total.\nTrolleybus routes were opened in 1983. There were originally 3 routes, however, by 2006, only one route was left. In 2008, the only trolleybus fleet by the special state commission was declared unprofitable due to debts to the energy supply company and as a result, it was completely closed.\nIn 2011, the Akimat of Astana established a company to implement a series of changes and programmes in the metropolis known as the \"New transport system of Astana\". As part of these programmes, bus rapid transit (BRT) lines were opened. That same year, the construction of a light rail (LRT) was to begin. It was planned that the first stage of construction of a 16.4-kilometer line, which would've included nine stations, was planned to be completed by 1 December 2013. However, in November 2013, President Nursultan Nazarbayev condemned the construction of LRT because of the high cost. In exchange, there was a promise to launch high-speed buses. Despite the controversy, the construction of the LRT began in 2017 with the flyovers along to which the trains will pass. After a corruption scandal in 2019, the project stagnated, but in 2023, construction resumed and (as of November 2025) the first line of the Astana Light Metro is planned to start operation in the first quarter of 2026.\nThe bicycle-sharing program AstanaBike has been operating in Astana since 2014. In 2017, the system consisted of 40 stations with 1000 bicycles. The registration in the system for a season costs 5000 tenge ($28), plus a deposit for an RFID card ($5.50), the first half-hour of bike rental is free, the next hour is 100 tenge ($0.55). After more than 4 hours, the rent costs 1000 tenge.\nAir.\nNursultan Nazarbayev International Airport (), located south-east of the city center, is the main gateway for the city's domestic and international civilian air traffic. It is the second-busiest airport in Kazakhstan, with 8,315,108 passengers passing through it in 2024. The airport hosts 21 airlines operating regular passenger flights inside the country and internationally. Air Astana maintains its second-largest hub at the airport. An expected 50% increase in passenger traffic by 2017 has spurred the construction of a new terminal with an area of about .\nRailway and roads.\nAstana is located in the centre of the country, serving as a well-positioned transport node for rail and automotive networks.\nAstana railway station is the city's main railway station and serves approximately 7,000 people each day. A new railway station, Nurly Zhol was built during the Expo 2017 event with a customer capacity of 12,000. Tulpar Talgo is a daily express train to Almaty. Short-term plans include the construction of a new railway station in the industrial district; in the vicinity of CHPP-3 a new terminal will be erected for freight cars.\nM-36 Chelyabinsk-Almaty and A-343 Astana-Petropavlovsk highways are routed through the city. The strategic geographical positioning of Astana allows the city to serve as a transport and reload centre for cargoes formed at adjacent stations in the area.\nRiver transport.\nSince 2008, navigation on the Esil River has been organized within the city. The Akimat of the city in the framework of the implementation of the \"Shipping Esil\" program created a specialized enterprise GKKP \"Esil-Astana\".\nExpo 2017.\nOn 1 July 2010, at the 153rd General Assembly of Bureau International des Expositions held in Paris, representatives from then-Astana presented the city's bid to host the Specialised Expo 2017. The Kazakh concept for this exhibition relates to the impact of energy on society in the modern world. The theme of the Astana Expo was \"Future Energy\".\nExpo 2017 opened to much fanfare on 10 June 2017, with heads of state from 17 nations in attendance. It is the first world's fair to be held in Central Asia and its central pavilion, \"Nur Alem\", is the largest spherical building in the world. The two-millionth visitor was registered on 7 August. More than 4 million people attended the event.\nTheaters, concert halls, and museums.\nThere are 27 libraries in Astana, whose services in 2011 were used by 153 people for every thousand residents, 8 state museums, which were visited by 415,500 people in 2011 and which conducted 68,514 excursions, 10 recreation parks, in 2011 1492.2 thousand visitors were received and 99 events, 6 state museums and 6 cinemas were held.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nAstana is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFriendly cities.\nAstana also cooperates with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSmart city initiative.\nThe Smart Astana project is an initiative developed by the then-Astana city administration that incorporates technology-driven solutions in various sectors, like hospitals, schools, the ticket booking system and street lighting. These projects run on an interconnected application, the Smart Astana.\nAstana's smart city sector includes the annual Astana Innovations Challenge, designed to bring attention to the smart city concept. In addition, the world's first smart sustainable city acceleration hub is set to open in Astana. This hub was planned to integrate from 10 to 15 startup solutions into the infrastructure of Kazakhstan.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56605", "revid": "31831", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56605", "title": "Inuit throat singing", "text": "Form of musical performance uniquely found among the Inuit\nInuit throat singing, or katajjaq (), is a distinct type of throat singing uniquely found among the Inuit. It is a form of musical performance, traditionally consisting of two women who sing duets in a close face-to-face formation with no instrumental accompaniment, in an entertaining contest to see who can outlast the other; however, one of the genre's most famous practitioners, Tanya Tagaq, performs as a solo artist. Several groups, including Tudjaat, The Jerry Cans, Quantum Tangle and Silla + Rise, blend traditional throat singing with mainstream musical genres such as pop, folk, rock and dance music.\nAn analogous form called \"rekuhkara\" was once practiced among the Ainu of Hokkaid\u014d, Japan.\nNames.\nThe name for throat singing in Canada varies with the geography:\nHistory.\nOriginally, katajjaq was a form of entertainment among Inuit women while men were away on hunting trips, and it was regarded more as a type of vocal or breathing game in the Inuit culture rather than a form of music. Katajjiniq sound can create an impression of rhythmic and harmonious panting. Inuit throat singing can also imitate wind, water, animal sounds and other everyday sounds.\nThis playful practice testifies to a long oral tradition of the women of Nunavik, a territory located in the North Qu\u00e9bec region. From generation to generation, the Inuit have passed on knowledge of nature and the environment as well as the techniques associated with throat singing. Katajjaniq has rare, even unique, expressive characteristics. Even though Inuit throat singing is no longer performed to hasten the return of hunters, attract animals or influence the natural elements, they still retain some of their original functions, such as entertainment and group cohesion.\nVery much alive in the Inuit communities of Quebec, the katajjaniq still marks the high points of Nunavik people since it is present in calendar holidays, cultural celebrations and important political events. A source of great pride and a powerful symbol of identity, the katajjaniq is a distinctive expression of Nunavik culture. The Inuit recognize katajjaniq as part of their cultural heritage.\nPerformance.\nTwo women face each other usually in a standing position and holding each other's arms. Sometimes they will do some kind of dance movements while singing (e.g., balancing from right to left). One singer leads by setting a short rhythmic pattern, which she repeats leaving brief silent intervals between each repetition. The other singer fills in the gap with another rhythmic pattern. The sounds used include voiced sounds as well as unvoiced ones, both through inhalation or exhalation. The first to run out of breath or be unable to maintain the pace of the other singer will start to laugh or simply stop and will thus be eliminated from the game. It generally lasts between one and three minutes. The winner is the singer who beats the largest number of people.\nAt one time, the lips of the two women almost touched, so that one singer used the mouth cavity of the other as a resonator, but this is less common in present day. Often, the singing is accompanied by a shuffling in rhythm from one foot to the other. The sounds may be actual words or nonsense syllables or created during exhalation.\nThe old woman who teaches the children [throat singing songs] corrects sloppy intonation of contours, poorly meshed phase displacements, and vague rhythms exactly like a Western vocal coach.\nNotable performers.\nNotable performers include Tanya Tagaq, who performs in a contemporary style, and The Jerry Cans, who incorporate throat singing by band member Nancy Mike as a musical and rhythmic element in a conventional folk rock sound and style. Traditional performers include Qaunak Mikkigak, Kathleen Ivaluarjuk Merritt, as well as Alacie Tullaugaq and Lucy Amarualik who perform in the Katajjaq style.\nRecognition.\nIn 2014, Nunavik throat singing (\"katajjaniq\") became the first cultural item to be given the intangible cultural heritage designation by the government of the province of Quebec, Canada.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56606", "revid": "371566", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56606", "title": "Bamako", "text": "Capital and largest city of Mali\nBamako is the capital and largest city of Mali, West Africa, with a 2022 population of 4,227,569. It is located on the Niger River, near the rapids that divide the upper and middle Niger valleys in the southwestern part of the country. \nBamako is the nation's administrative centre. The city proper is a cercle in its own right. Bamako's river port is located in nearby Koulikoro, along with a major regional trade and conference centre. Bamako is the seventh-largest West African urban centre after Lagos, Abidjan, Kano, Ibadan, Dakar, and Accra. Locally manufactured goods include textiles, processed meat, and metal goods as well as mining. Commercial fishing occurs on the Niger River.\nIn recent years, Bamako has seen significant urban development, with the construction of modern buildings, shopping malls, and infrastructure projects aimed at improving the quality of life for its residents. The city is home to many notable institutions, such as the University of Bamako, the National Museum of Mali, the Mali National Zoo, and the Grand Mosque of Bamako. It is also the location for the Modibbo Keita International Airport. The buildings of Bamako have a unique architectural style.\nHistory.\nThe area of the city has evidence of settlements since the Palaeolithic era. The fertile lands of the Niger River Valley provided the people with an abundant food supply and early chiefdoms in the area grew wealthy as they established trade routes linking across west Africa, the Sahara, and leading to northern Africa and Europe as early as 600s BCE. The early inhabitants traded gold, ivory, kola nuts, and salt. By the 11th century, the Empire of Ghana became the first kingdom to dominate the area, later succeeded by the Mali Empire.\nThe \"kafu\" of Bamako was founded around 1650 by the Niare family, perhaps associated with a Soninke man named Bamba Sanogo. The Toure and Drave families, mostly clerics and merchants, were also prominent in early Bamako. It was a client state of the Segou Empire. The Scottish explorer Mungo Park visited Bamako in 1806 during his exploration of the Niger River. He estimated that the city at the time held 6000 inhabitants, similar to many other commercial settlements across West Africa at the time.\nIn February 1882, Samory Toure defeated the French at the Battle of Samaya outside Kinieran. Faced with Toure's expanding Wassoulou Empire, some of the leaders of the Dyula community in Bamako began making overtures to join the anti-French alliance. The French commander Gustave Borgnis-Desbordes, eager to possess this key strategic location on the Niger, rushed a force to establish a fort there on 1 February 1883. Kebe Brema, Samory's brother, led a force to Bamako to lure the French out of their defenses. They fought two battles at Woyo Wayanko creek in early April, with Kebe Brema winning the first but eventually being forced to retreat.\nIn 1904 a railroad was built connecting Bamako to Kayes, and the city began growing quickly upon being named the capital of French Sudan in 1908. The cercle of Mali at this time had around 160 000 inhabitants living in 4-500 villages. A railroad connecting Bamako to Dakar was completed in 1923. \nMali gained independence from France in April 1960, and the Republic of Mali was later established. At this time, Bamako had a population of around 160,000. During the 1960s, the country became socialist and Bamako was subject to Soviet investment and influence. However, the economy declined as state enterprises collapsed and unrest was widespread. Eventually, Moussa Traor\u00e9 led a successful coup and ruled Mali for 23 years. However his rule was characterised by severe droughts and poor government management and problems of food shortages.\nIn the late 1980s the people of Bamako and Mali campaigned for a free-market economy and multiparty democracy. In 1990, the National Congress for Democratic Initiative (\"Congr\u00e8s National d'Initiative d\u00e9mocratique\", CNID) was set up by the lawyer Mountaga Tall, and the Alliance for Democracy in Mali (\"Alliance pour la d\u00e9mocratie au Mali\", ADEMA) by Abdramane Baba and historian Alpha Oumar Konar\u00e9. These with the \"Association des \u00e9l\u00e8ves et \u00e9tudiants du Mali\" (AEEM) and the Association Malienne des Droits de l'Homme (AMDH) aimed to oust Moussa Traor\u00e9. Under the old constitution, all labor unions had to belong to one confederation, the National Union of Malian Workers (UNTM). When the leadership of the UNTM broke from the government in 1990, the opposition grew. Groups were driven by paycuts and layoffs in the government sector, and the Malian government acceding to pressure from international donors to privatise large swathes of the economy that had remained in public hands even after the overthrow of the socialist government in 1968. Students, even children, played an increasing role in the protest marches in Bamako, and homes and businesses of those associated with the regime were ransacked by crowds.\nOn 22 March 1991, a large-scale protest march in central Bamako was violently suppressed, with estimates of those killed reaching 300. Four days later, a military coup deposed Traor\u00e9. The \"Comit\u00e9 de Transition pour le Salut du Peuple\" was set up, headed by General Amadou Toumani Tour\u00e9. Alpha Oumar Konari officially became president on 26 April 1992.\nBamako had been the target of numerous jihadist terrorist attacks during the Islamist insurgency in the Sahel. On 20 November 2015, two gunmen took 170 people hostage in the Radisson Blu hotel. Twenty-one people were killed along with the two gunmen during the seven-hour siege. In a series of attacks on 17 September 2024, a group of gunmen from Jama'at Nasr al-Islam wal-Muslimin (JNIM), an al-Qaeda affiliate, attacked a military training school, killing many gendarme and trainees, and set aircraft ablaze at the international airport. At least 77 people were killed. This was the first jihadist attack on Bamako since 2016. JNIM is a successor to some of the organizations responsible for the 2015 attack. The 2024 attack was downplayed by the Malian military junta (led by Assimi Go\u00efta), which seized control over the country in a 2021 coup d'\u00e9tat.\nGeography.\nBamako is situated on the Niger River floodplain, which hampers development along the riverfront and the Niger's tributaries. Bamako is relatively flat, except to the immediate north where an escarpment is found, being what remains of an extinct volcano. The Presidential Palace and main hospital are located here.\nOriginally, the city developed on the northern side of the river, but as it grew, bridges were developed to connect the north with the south. The first of these was the Pont des Martyrs (2-lane with two pedestrian sections) and the King Fahd Bridge (four-lane with two motorcycle and two pedestrian sections). Additionally, a seasonal causeway between the eastern neighborhoods of Sotuba and Misabugu was inherited from colonial times (alternated traffic on one lane with five crossing sections). The Sotuba Causeway (\"Chauss\u00e9e submersible de Sotuba\" in French, and \"Babilikoroni\" in Bamanankan) is typically under water from July to January. A third bridge (1.4\u00a0km long, 24 m wide, four-lane with two motorcycle and two pedestrian sections) is being built at the same location to reduce downtown congestion, notably by trucks.\nClimate.\nUnder the K\u00f6ppen climate classification, Bamako features a tropical savanna climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Aw\"). Located in the Sudano-Sahelian zone, Bamako is very hot on average all year round with the hottest months being between March and May. The mildest months are between November and February. During the dry season, rainfall is scarce: virtually none falls between November and April due to the dominance of the Saharan anticyclone and the dry trade winds. The rainy season occurs in the summer with the peak occurring with a few storms beginning in May, then transitioning to the monsoon from June to October.\nEnvironment.\nWaste Management Controversy.\nIn 2015, the Bamako city government privatized waste collection in the city. Before the introduction of this program there was a long standing informal waste collection system carried out by \"Economic interest groups.\" Before the privatization these independent groups collected waste throughout the city. After privatization, not only did many waste collectors become unemployed but the corporation that they enlisted to do the job was collecting only 30% of Bamako's waste. The garbage build up creates toxic living conditions and it only worsens when it rains. Due to the prevalence of waste in Bamako's streets, including informal dumping sites near a school, citizens have taken to protesting, marching and it has even escalated to the point of property damage.\nAdministration.\nThe District of Bamako has been divided into six communes (distinguished by numbers, and not named) since Ordinance No. 78-34/CNLM of 18 August 1978, and amended by a law in February 1982 establishing the new boundaries of Communes III and IV. Each commune is administered by the municipal council and a mayor elected from among its members. The last elections were held on 26 April 2009 and the Alliance for Democracy in Mali hold the majority of representatives for the communes.\nCommunes and neighborhoods.\nCommune I has a population of 335,407 people (2009) and covers . It is bounded to the north by the rural commune of Djalakorodji (Kati Cercle), west by the Commune II, north-east by the rural commune of Sangarebougou (Kati Cercle), on the east by the rural commune of Gabakourou and south by the Niger River. Nine neighborhoods comprise this commune: Banconi, Boulkassombougou, Djelibougou, Doumanzana Fadjiguila, Sotuba Korofina North, and South Korofina Sikoroni.\nCommune II has a population of 159,805 people (2009) and covers . It is bounded to the east by the backwater of Korofina at the west foot of the Point G hill, and to the south by Niger River. The municipality has eleven neighborhoods: Niar\u00e9la (the oldest), Bagadadji, Medina-Coura, Bozola, Missira, Hippodrome, Quinzambougou, Bakaribougou, TSF, Industrial Area, and Bougouba. The new Cit\u00e9 du Niger island is also located in the Commune II. The area is the most important in the industry sector in Bamako.\nCommune III has a population of 128,872 people (2009) and covers . It is bounded on the north by the Kati, east by the Boulevard du Peuple, which separates it from the Commune II, south by the portion of the Niger River, between the Pont des Martyrs and the Motel de Bamako, and west by the Farako River and Avenue Cheick Zayed El Mahyan Ben Sultan with the neighborhood of ACI-2000. Commune III is the administrative and commercial center of Bamako. It accommodates in particular the two largest markets in the capital, the Grand Market and Dibida. Twenty neighborhoods make up this commune and the villages of Koulouninko and Sirakorodounfing were attached to the Commune III.\nCommune IV has a population of 300,085 people (2009) and covers . It is bounded to the east by Commune III, north, west by Kati Cercle and south by the left bank of the Niger River. Commune IV consists of eight neighborhoods: Taliko, Lassa, Sibiribougou, Djikoroni Para, S\u00e9b\u00e9nikoro, Hamdallaye, Lafiabougou and Kalabambougou.\nCommune V has a population of 414,668 people (2009) and covers . It is bounded to the north by the Niger River, south by the airport and the commune of Kalabancoro, and to the east by the Commune VI and Niger. It consists of eight neighborhoods: Badalabougou, Sema I, Quartier Mali, Torokorobougou, Baco-Djicoroni, Sabalibougou, Daoudabougou and Kalaban-Coura.\nCommune VI has a population of 470,269 people (2009) and covers . This is the largest of the communes that make up Bamako. It consists of ten neighborhoods: Banankabougou, Djan\u00e9k\u00e9la, Faladi\u00e9, Magnambougou, Missabougou, Niamakoro, S\u00e9nou, Sogoniko, Sokorodji and Yrimadio.\nBamako contains the following neighborhoods (quartiers): ACI-2000, Badalabugu, Bajalan I, Bajalan II, Bako Jikoroni, Bagadaji, Bamako Kura, Bankoni, Bolibana, Bozola, Bugudani, Bulkasumbugu, Dar Salam, N'tomikorobougou, Dawdabugu, Dravela, Fajigila, Falaje, Garantigibugu, Jalakoroji, Janekela, Janjigila, Jelibugu, Jikoroni Para, Jumanzana, Hamdallaye, Hippodrome, Kalaban Koro, Kalaban Kura, Korofina, Kuluba, Kulubleni, Lafiabugu, Madina Kura, Magnambugu (Magnambugu Faso Kanu), Misabugu, Misira, Niarela, Ntomikorobugu, Point G, Quartier du Fleuve, Quartier Mali, Quinzanbugu, Sabalibugu I, Sabalibugu II, Safo, Same, Sangarebugu, Saranbugu, Sebeninkoro, Sikoroni, Sirakoro, Senu, Sibiribugu, Sokoniko, Sokoroji, Sotuba, Titibugu, Torokorobugu, TSF-Sans Fil, Wolofobugu, Yirimanjo, Zone Industrielle\nEconomy.\nIndustry.\nThe District of Bamako concentrates 70% of industrial activity in the country.\n The service sector is the most developed, and the city thrives in crafts and trade.\nThe traditional commercial center of Bamako was located to the north of the river, and contained within a triangle bounded by Avenue du Fleuve, Rue Baba Diarra, and Boulevard du Peuple. This area contains the March\u00e9 Rose and Street Market.\nThe downtown area is highly congested, polluted, and expensive, and urbanization is sprawling at a rapid pace within a radius of . The largest urbanized area now lies on the southern bank of the Niger River. A modern central business district is rapidly developing immediately west of the downtown area in the ACI-2000 district, taking advantage of a well-designed geometric layout, legacy of the old airport runways and taxiways. A large administrative area is being developed at the junction between ACI-2000 and the King Fadh Bridge, containing most of the state departments (ministries) and administrative services in a central location. Bamako is also the headquarters of many large companies and administrative institutions. Air Mali (formerly Compagnie A\u00e9rienne du Mali) has its head office in Bamako. Bamako received much investment by Saudi Arabia for decades which saw a number of important structures being built. In recent years, China has become an important investor in Bamako, developing its infrastructure and facilities.\nAgriculture is active in Bamako, with the presence of Bozo fisherman, and it is common to see cattle crossing the streets.\nEnergy.\nMuch of the electricity is generated from the hydroelectric S\u00e9lingu\u00e9 Dam. The drinking water supply in Bamako and Kati is also ensured by a pumping station on the Niger River. However, the capacity of to provide drinking water per day is insufficient for the needs estimated at during the hot season between April and June. During this period, frequent water shortages are experienced. A new pumping station was to open in Kabala in 2009.\nArchitecture.\nThe BCEAO Tower at 20 stories is the tallest building in the West African nation. It sits on the north (\"left\") bank of the River Niger in the city centre. The BCEAO Tower is the Malian headquarters of the Central Bank of West African States, which provides development banking and government financial and currency services in several Francophone West African nations. Classified as Neo-Sudanic architecture, it is modeled on the Sudano-Sahelian architecture of the famous mosques of Djenne and Timbuktu. The building is located in the busy Commune III neighbourhood, where \"Avenue Moussa Tavele\" meets the waterside boulevard between the two main Bamako bridges: King Fahd Bridge a block west and Martyrs Bridge three blocks east. Just to the east of the BCEAO complex, a park and formal garden mark where the diagonally running \"Boulevard du Peuple\" reaches the river. By contrast, small market gardens and launching points or river canoes lie along the river front.\nThe Cit\u00e9 Administrative (Administrative City) is a complex of buildings located just west of the northern end of the King Fahd Bridge. The complex was begun in 2003 by then President Konar\u00e9 with the help of funding from the government of Libya. The Cit\u00e9 Administrative was completed in 2010 and houses many of the offices of the government.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBamako has experienced staggering population growth. In 1884, it had only 2,500 inhabitants, 8,000 in 1908, 37,000 in 1945, and 100,000 in 1960. Today, the population is over 42 times what it was in 1960, with a population of 4,227,569 recorded at the 2022 census, and continues to attract a rural population in search of work. This uncontrolled growth has caused significant difficulties in terms of traffic, sanitation (including access to safe water), and pollution. Bamako hosts a diverse population composed of different ethnic groups in Mali and from neighboring countries.\nCulture.\nThe National Library of Mali was first created by the Institut Fran\u00e7ais d'Afrique Noire, an arm of the French colonial government, in 1944. Following Mali's 1960 independence, this library became the Government Library; it would later be renamed again as the National Library of Mali. In 1968, the library was transferred from its initial home in Koulouba to Ouolofobougou, a section of Bamako. The library holds more than 60,000 works, including books, periodicals, audio documents, videos, and software. These materials are available free to the public, though a small subscription fee is required for borrowing privileges. The library also hosts some of the exhibits for African Photography Encounters, a biannual Bamako photography festival.\nThe National Museum of Mali is an archeological and anthropological museum, presenting permanent and temporary exhibits on the prehistory of Mali, as well as the musical instruments, dress, and ritual objects associated with Mali's various ethnic groups. The National Museum began under French rule as the Sudanese Museum, part of the Institut Fran\u00e7ais d'Afrique Noire (IFAN) under Th\u00e9odore Monod. It was opened on 14 February 1953, under the direction of Ukrainian archeologist Yuriy Shumovskyi. Shumovskyi had worked in the museum for nine years, gathering half (nearly 3,000) of today's finds. The museum also houses indoor and outdoor exhibitions of works by local artists.\nWith the independence of the Republic of Mali in 1960, the Sudanese Museum became the National Museum of Mali, with the new objectives of promoting national unity and celebrating Malian traditional culture. However, lack of financial means and absence of qualified personnel caused some deterioration in the museum's collections. On 30 March 1956, the National Museum moved into a new cemented structure, created by architect Jean-Loup Pivin from traditional Malian designs. Since the 1996 election of former archaeologist Alpha Oumar Konar\u00e9 to Mali's presidency, the museum's funding has increased considerably, becoming among the best in West Africa. The museum often hosts part of the biannual African Photography Encounters, photography festival held in Bamako since 1994.\nAlso of note is the Muso Kunda Museum, the Bamako Regional Museum, Bamako Zoo, the Bamako Botanical Gardens, the National Conference Center Tower (NCC), the Souvenir Pyramid, the Independence Monument, Al Quoods Monument, the triangular \"Monument de la paix\", the Hamdallaye obelisk, the Modibo Keita Memorial and many other monuments, the Palais de la Culture Amadou Hampat\u00e9 Ba and the Point G hill, containing caves with rock paintings.\nIn 1988, Bamako was the location of a WHO conference known as the Bamako Initiative that helped reshape health policy of sub-Saharan Africa. The yearly held Budapest-Bamako rally has the endpoint in Bamako, with the Dakar Rally often passing through Bamako.\nMusic.\nA music boom in Bamako took off in the 1990s, when vocalist Salif Keita and singer-guitarist Ali Farka Tour\u00e9 achieved international fame. It attracted a number of tourists, record producers, and aspiring musicians to the city to try to follow in their footsteps. It is common to see musicians in the streets with \"djembes\" and percussion bands playing traditional Bamana rhythms.\nEducation.\nIn 2011, four universities were founded; the University of Social Sciences and Management of Bamako (USSGB), the University of Humanities and Social Sciences of Bamako (ULSHB), the University of Science, Technology and Technologies of Bamako (USTTB) and the University of Legal and Political Sciences of Bamako (USJPB).\nIn 1972, the Union Malienne Des Aveugles, an integrated school and centre for the blind and partially sighted, was established.\nPlaces of worship.\nAmong the places of worship, they are predominantly Muslim mosques. There are also Christian churches and temples : Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Bamako (Catholic Church), \u00c9glise Chr\u00e9tienne \u00c9vang\u00e9lique du Mali (Alliance World Fellowship), Assemblies of God.\nTransport.\nThe Dakar-Niger Railway links Bamako to Dakar via Kati, N\u00e9gala, Kita, and Kayes.\nIn 2015, a rail link to San-P\u00e9dro in Ivory Coast is proposed.\nThe road network links Bamako to Koulikoro, Kati, Kolokani, S\u00e9gou, and Sikasso.\nThe Bamako-S\u00e9nou International Airport is from the city and opened to passengers in 1974. Passenger traffic steadily increased in the early 2000s. Government figures revealed 403,380 passengers in 1999, 423,506 in 2003, 486,526 in 2004, and 516,000 in 2005, and is predicted to reach over 900,000 by 2015 under a low (4%) yearly growth-rate scenario. To date this growth rate has been surpassed. Total air traffic the airport increased by 12.4% in 2007 and 14% in 2008. Most of this increase came in passenger transport, with the number of passengers served increasing by 20% in 2007 and 17% in 2008. Twenty-seven airline carriers operated weekly or better at Bamako-S\u00e9nou International Airport in the 2007\u20132008 period. This continued growth was offset by cargo flights' decline of 16.75% in 2007, and 3.93% in 2008. The highest frequency route is on the Bamako-Dakar sector with 29 weekly non-stop connections. Domestic flights also serve Mali's regional capitals Kayes, Mopti, Timbuktu, Sikasso, Gao, and Kidal. Bamako Senou International Airport is managed by A\u00e9roports du Mali (ADM). Its operations are overseen by the Malian Ministry of Equipment and Transports.\nToday, with the new administrative arrangement, the territory of Mali will henceforth comprise twenty (20) Regions instead of eight (08), plus the District of Bamako which will henceforth comprise ten (10) urban communes instead of six (06).\nMuch of the transportation is either by the Niger River, or by paved roads linking Bamako to other major urban areas. Navigating the river is possible from Koulikoro to Mopti and Gao. The bush taxi is one of the main modes of transport.\nBamako is situated on both sides of the Niger River and three bridges connect the two banks: the Bridge of Martyrs completed in 1960 and renamed in memory of protesters killed in March 1991 by the regime of Moussa Traor\u00e9, the King Fahd Bridge, named after the Saudi Arabian donor, and a third bridge, the \"Pont de l'amiti\u00e9 sino-malienne\" funded by the People's Republic of China. Located in Sotuba area, it has the objective to decongest traffic in the city.\nHealthcare.\nThe Point G hospital, built between 1906 and 1913, covers . A former military hospital, it became a civilian hospital shortly before the independence of Mali, and is situated on a hill overlooking Bamako.\nThe second hospital of Bamako is the Gabriel Tour\u00e9 Hospital named after a young doctor and humanist Gabriel Tour\u00e9 who was born in 1910 in Ouagadougou and died in 1935 after having been contaminated by a patient with the pneumonic plague. The hospital was established in 1959.\nThe contract for the building of a new hospital in Bamako, to relieve pressure on the other hospital resources was signed on 27 December 2008. Located in the district of Yirimadio, the department will include a pediatric and obstetrics-gynecology facilities, a department of internal medicine, medical imagery facilities and hospital care with 150 beds to support the emergency services and intensive care. This hospital, like many recent developments in Bamako is financed and equipped with Chinese investment.\nIn popular culture.\nBamako has provided the backdrop or been the subject of books and films such as \"Bamako\", directed by Abderrahmane Sissako. The film depicts a trial taking place in Bamako, amid the daily life that is going on in the city. In the midst of that trial, two sides argue whether the World Bank and International Monetary Fund, or perhaps corruption, are guilty of the financial state of many poverty-stricken African countries. The film was first released at the Cannes Film Festival on 21 May 2006 and in Manhattan by New Yorker Films on 14 February 2007 and was the recipient of the first Film Award of the Council of Europe given at the Istanbul International Film Festival in April 2007.\nBamako was one of the cities featured in \"Where in the World is Carmen Sandiego?\", an educational computer game staple of the 1980s.\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTwin towns and sister cities.\nBamako is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56609", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56609", "title": "Battle of Ad Decimium", "text": ""}
{"id": "56610", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56610", "title": "Diabetes, insulin dependent", "text": ""}
{"id": "56611", "revid": "50544779", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56611", "title": "Bandar Seri Begawan", "text": "Capital and largest city of Brunei\nBandar Seri Begawan (BSB) is the capital and largest city of Brunei. It is officially a municipal area () with an area of and an estimated population of 100,700 as of 2007. It is part of Brunei\u2013Muara District, the smallest yet most populous district which is home to over 70 percent of the country's population. It is the country's largest urban centre and nominally the country's only city. The capital is home to Brunei's seat of government, as well as a commercial and cultural centre. It was formerly known as Brunei Town until it was renamed in 1970 in honour of Omar Ali Saifuddien III, the 28th Sultan of Brunei and the father of Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah.\nThe history of Bandar Seri Begawan can be traced back to the establishment of a Malay stilt settlement on the waters of the Brunei River which became the predecessor of Kampong Ayer today. It became the capital of the Bruneian Sultanate from the 16th century onwards, as well as in the 19th century when it became a British protectorate. The establishment of a British Residency in the 20th century saw the establishment of modern-day administration on land, as well as the gradual resettlement of the riverine dwellers to the land. During World War II, the capital was occupied by the Japanese forces from 1941 and bombed in 1945 upon liberation by Allied forces. Brunei's independence from the British was declared on 1 January 1984 on a square in the city centre.\nBandar Seri Begawan is home to Istana Nurul Iman, the largest residential palace in the world by the Guinness World Records, and Omar Ali Saifuddien Mosque, Brunei's iconic landmark. It is also home to Kampong Ayer, the largest 'water village' in the world and nicknamed Venice of the East. It was the host city of the 20th Southeast Asian Games in 1999 and 8th APEC Summit in 2000.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology.\nBandar Seri Begawan was named after the title of the 28th Sultan of Brunei Omar Ali Saifuddien III, \"Seri Begawan\" (from , 'the shining and saintly') bestowed upon his abdication in favor of his son, Hassanal Bolkiah, in 1967. The city was renamed on 4 October 1970 to commemorate his contribution to the modernisation of the country during his reign in the 20th century. Prior to this, the city had been known as Brunei Town or in Malay.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe growth and development of Brunei's historic capital city unfolded in three main stages. The first stage began in the 17th century with the emergence of a water settlement near present-day Kota Batu. In the second stage the capital shifted to the area around what is now Kampong Ayer\u2014a collection of water villages. Today, Kampong Ayer, originally the ancient capital built over the Brunei River, serves as a suburb of the modern capital on adjacent land, having thrived particularly during Sultan Bolkiah's reign. This city was developed on land during the third phase, particularly after 1906.\nOver 300 years of intermittent conflict between the Malay Muslim tribes and Spanish conquistadors, known in Spanish chronicles as the Moro Wars, began in 1578 when Catholic Spaniards attacked Kampong Ayer during the Castilian War. Pirates, many of whom were Muslim sailors from the southern Philippines and Borneo, including destitute princes from the royal families of Sulu and Brunei, took advantage of the void left by Kampong Ayer's loss in authority throughout the 16th and 17th century. Along with other important sites like Endau and Jolo, the capital became a major hub for piracy and the trade in stolen goods and slaves as the sultan attempted to regulate or tax these pirate towns.Kampong Ayer was still humble and less affluent by the middle of the 19th century, and its look had not altered much since Antonio Pigafetta's time. It was dubbed a \"Venice of hovels\" by Rajah James Brooke in 1841. Houses were constructed on mudflats, encircled by mud at low tide and water at high tide, and a floating market was crowded with people peddling things from canoes. Despite its unattractive appearance, the town was renowned for its packed buildings and the spacious but uncomfortable palace, where Brooke was made to feel quite welcome by the sultan and his court despite the gloomy and basic lodgings.\nKnown as the \"Venice of Borneo,\" Kampong Ayer is distinguished by its position on a wide river that empties into a sizeable lake and by the fact that its homes are perched on piles that are around above the tide. The formerly thriving town has lost both size and significance, as seen by its dilapidated buildings and shortage of defences. Once enclosed by a sturdy brick wall and furnished with opulent furnishings, the sultan's palace looks like a cheap shed. The town's filthy state is exacerbated by offensive smells coming from uncovered mud, where waste builds up. In sharp contrast to the town's historical splendour, the majority of the population is made up of slaves and the Sultan's and nobility's dependents.\nColonial era.\nBrunei Town's development unfolded in three major phases, with the third beginning in 1906 under Malcolm McArthur's guidance, focusing on transitioning the settlement to land. His vision aimed to address the sanitation issues that were most severe in Kampong Ayer, a water village with 8,000\u201310,000 residents when the Residential system was introduced. McArthur prioritised constructing a land-based colony, starting with his own residence, Bubungan Dua Belas, even though the sultan's palace remained in Kampong Ayer. By 1910, Chinese immigrants had opened shops, further establishing the colony on land.\nIn 1911 the water village, largely populated by Malay Muslim and a small Kedayan community in nearby areas, was home to many houses built over water. The capital endured severe hardship after losing Limbang, which had provided essential resources to river villagers; this loss also undermined Sultan Hashim Jalilul Alam Aqamaddin's prestige and authority amid growing economic challenges. In 1920, the area was officially designated as Brunei's capital and municipal territory. Along the western riverbanks, government buildings and a mosque were constructed in the same year. Later on 1 January 1921, the Brunei Town Sanitary Board (BTSB) was established to oversee its development. In 1922, Sultan Muhammad Jamalul Alam II's decision to relocate his palace from Kampung Sultan Lama to the interior of Brunei Town renewed interest in Resident McArthur's proposal for relocating the Kampong Ayer community. His involvement inspired Kampong Ayer residents to consider mainland resettlement, and relocation efforts in the 1920s began expanding beyond the city centre to areas like Tungkadeh and Kumbang Pasang, marking a significant shift in Brunei's urban development.\nAfter the Japanese launched an assault starting in Kuala Belait, Brunei Town was overrun by them on 22 December 1941. To British officers they had seized, the Japanese declared their intention to free Asia from colonial rule. Due to an Allied embargo that hampered the local economy, Brunei Town experienced extreme economic duress during the Japanese occupation. On 22 December 1941, Sultan Ahmad Tajuddin, who was based in Kampong Sumbiling, surrendered to General Tawaguchi. By encouraging agriculture and requiring farmers to turn over a percentage of their harvests, Japan sought to integrate Brunei's culture and economy with its own, appointing Ibrahim Mohammad Jahfar as head of administration under Governor Takamura. The Japanese instituted stringent cultural initiatives, such as teaching Japanese language and values and establishing youth groups like the Brunei Malay Organisation, in an effort to exploit the oil riches. The town was brutally bombarded by Allied forces beginning in November 1944 and subjected to extreme brutality by the Japanese military police, the \"Kempeitai\".\nAfter three days of warfare, American and Australian forces captured Brunei on 10 June 1945, but Brunei Town suffered significant damage. Brunei Malays had a stronger sense of national identity at this time, and local partners went on to play important roles in the burgeoning nationalist movement. The town's wartime population of 16,000 was reduced to a small number of people who remained when the war came to a close due to Allied bombs and food shortages. Residents were forced to observe from neighboring hills or take cover in the bush after the bombers destroyed almost all of the town's homes and businesses. Bruneians started reconstructing their homes out of the debris left by the bombs after the Japanese withdrew into the forest in June 1945.\nThe town became a focal point for important institutional and religious transformation following the war. To further Islamic matters, a board of 19 notable individuals and not all of them were religious experts, was formed in 1948. To increase the sultan's legitimacy in the face of British scrutiny, this reform sought to standardise religious courts, codify Islamic law, and enhance the management of Islamic services under his direct control. Despite having little contact with Brunei's western regions, new groups like the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation contributed to the region's religious life in the 1950s, which witnessed a considerable increase in religious activity in the town. Despite the oil industry's fast growth in urban areas like Seria and Kuala Belait, no clear regional religious identity was able to emerge because of the close institutional ties between Brunei Town's religious establishment and the surrounding districts.In the post-war period, particularly throughout the 1950s and 1960s, Brunei focused on social and religious growth as well as urban reconstruction. Years of occupation during the Pacific War had left the city's infrastructure severely damaged, necessitating quick solutions like the rapid reconstruction of Brunei Town's stores and the temporary thatched-roof rebuild of Masjid Kajang. In 1953, the town saw significant investment through a five-year National Development Plan funded with M$100\u00a0million, primarily for infrastructure, following Sultan Omar Ali Saifuddien III's successful negotiation with the British for increased corporate taxes and expanded war reparations. In 1953, a major development plan was introduced, dedicating $100\u00a0million to the city's growth\u2014a significant investment for a community of just 54,000. That same year on 1 August, the BTSB was renamed the Brunei Town Municipal Board (BTMB) and administered by the British Resident until 1959. From then on, the Brunei\u2013Muara District Officer took on dual roles as head and chairman of the BTMB.\nBrunei's population tripled to 83,877 by 1960 as a result of immigration brought on by oilfield finds in Belait. The capital was now competing economically with the burgeoning cities of Seria and Kuala Belait. Although the majority did not hold Bruneian citizenship, the Chinese community, who were extensively involved in local commerce, increased to a quarter of the population by 1960. The Brunei revolt began on 8 December 1962, when the North Kalimantan National Army quickly captured Brunei Town, the oilfields at Seria, and portions of Sarawak and North Borneo. In response, British forces, including Gurkhas and Royal Marines, regained control of most key centres by 11 December, resulting in the capture or surrender of around 2,700.\nIndependence era.\nTogether with the expansion of the oil and gas industry, commercialisation began to transform Brunei's capital and a large number of public buildings were constructed, along with the development of a central business district in the 1970s and 1980s. Brunei Town was formally renamed Bandar Seri Begawan on 4 October 1970, in honour of the retired Sultan Omar Ali Saifuddien III, with the renaming ceremony held at the capital. On 1 January 1984, at midnight, Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah declared Brunei's independence at the Taman Haji Sir Muda Omar 'Ali Saifuddien. The Ministry of Home Affairs has been in charge of the Bandar Seri Begawan Municipal Board since the country's independence in 1984. The new town has grown along Jalan Berakas and Jalan Muara in the north and Jalan Tutong and Jalan Gadong in the west. A 1998 \"Asia Week\" study ranked Bandar Seri Begawan among Asia's top capital cities for 1999 and 2000, highlighting its cleanliness and security as key factors in its recognition.\nOn 1 August 2007, Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah gave consent for the expansion of the city from to .\nGovernment.\nThe city is administered by the Bandar Seri Begawan Municipal Board within Bandar Seri Begawan Municipal Department, a government department within the Ministry of Home Affairs. The Municipal Board was established in 1921, originally as a Sanitary Board (') which was, and is still, responsible for maintaining the cleanliness to the then Brunei Town. It achieved the status of ' (municipality) in 1935 with the conversion of the Sanitary Board into the current Municipal Board (\"\"). \nThe city is in the Brunei\u2013Muara District, the smallest yet the most populous district in the country, and as of 1 August 2007, the municipal area has been expanded from to . The Bandar Seri Begawan area encompasses several mukims and villages within the district, including Mukim Berakas 'A', Mukim Berakas 'B', Mukim Burong Pingai Ayer, Mukim Gadong 'A', Mukim Gadong 'B', Mukim Kianggeh, Mukim Kilanas, Mukim Kota Batu, Mukim Peramu, Mukim Saba, Mukim Sungai Kebun, Mukim Sungai Kedayan, and Mukim Tamoi.\nGeography.\nThe Brunei\u2013Muara District, encompassing , is the smallest of Brunei's western districts and is home to Bandar Seri Begawan. The area contrasts sharply with the mountainous Temburong District to the east, featuring low hills, marshy coastal plains, and narrow alluvial valleys along key rivers. Between Tutong and the capital, hills approach the coast, while the coastal plains around Bandar Seri Begawan remain low and marshy, particularly to the south. Brunei's territory is divided by the Limbang region of Sarawak, which historically served as the capital's natural hinterland until its cession to Sarawak in 1890. The city is easily accessible from Bukit Kota, a 133-meter (436 ft) hill near the eastern boundary of Brunei's western area, while TV broadcasts were transmitted from nearby Subok Hill.\nThe Brunei River, which flows into Brunei Bay, is one of several waterways converging near Bandar Seri Begawan. Key subcatchments\u2014Kedayan River, Sungai Damuan, and Sungai Imang\u2014enter the low-lying, swampy Brunei River basin at various points, with Kedayan River joining close to the city. The area is bordered by ridges and estuarine plains, experiencing significant urban development. The neighboring Tutong and Belait rivers add to the region's complex estuarine and floodplain systems. A strip of thick coal seams runs along the coastline between Bandar Seri Begawan and Muara.\nClimate.\nBrunei has an equatorial, tropical rainforest climate more subject to the Intertropical Convergence Zone than to the trade winds and rare cyclones. The climate is hot and wet. The city sees heavy precipitation throughout the year, with the northeast monsoon blowing from December to March and the southeast monsoon from around June to October. The wettest day on record is 9 July 2020, when of rainfall was reported at the airport.\nDemographics.\nThe Bruneian Census 2011 Report estimated the population of Bandar Seri Begawan to be approximately 20,000, while the metropolitan area has around 279,924. The majority of Bruneians are Malays, with Chinese being the most significant minority group. Aboriginal groups such as the Bisaya, Belait, Dusun, Kedayan, Lun Bawang, Murut, and Tutong also exist. They are classified as part of the Malay ethnic groups and have been given the Bumiputera privileges. Large numbers of foreign workers are also found within Brunei and the capital city, with the majority being from Malaysia, Thailand, the Philippines, Indonesia (mostly Betawi, Batak, Ambon, Minahasa, Aceh, Malay and Minangkabau), and the Indian subcontinent.\nMain sights and tourism.\nNumerous important historical and religious sites may be found in Bandar Seri Begawan. The Ash-Shaliheen Mosque, Jame' Asr Hassanil Bolkiah Mosque, and Omar Ali Saifuddien Mosque are notable mosques. Another noteworthy house of worship is the Pro-Cathedral of Our Lady of the Assumption. The tombs of Bolkiah and Sharif Ali in Kota Batu are key historical attractions, symbolising Brunei's rich legacy. The Lapau, traditionally used for royal ceremonies, and the Old Lapau, now a gallery in the Brunei History Centre, add to the city's cultural significance. The city also hosts several museums. The Brunei Museum, situated in the Kota Batu Archaeological Park, is the country's largest archaeological site. Other notable museums include the Brunei Darussalam Maritime Museum, Brunei Energy Hub, Kampong Ayer Cultural and Tourism Gallery, Malay Technology Museum, Royal Regalia Museum, and Bubungan Dua Belas. Istana Darussalam and Istana Darul Hana are former royal residences of Sultan Omar Ali Saifuddien III, while the Istana Nurul Iman palace currently serves as the residence of Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah. The Secretariat Building, the oldest government structure, holds the seat of government known as \"State Secretary.\" The Raja Ayang Mausoleum, dating back to the 15th century, is believed to honor a royal who was punished for incest, and it has since become a cultural site where visitors often seek blessings, despite some damage caused by offerings. Royal Mausoleum is the main burial ground for several sultans and royal family members of Brunei, adding to the country's historical significance.\nThe city's suburb incorporates nearby Kampong Ayer, in which houses were built on stilts. It stretches about along the Brunei River. Founded 1,000 years ago, the village is considered the largest stilt settlement in the world, with approximately 30,000 residents and 2,000 houses. The term \"Venice of the East\" was coined by Pigafetta in honour of the water village that he encountered at Kota Batu. Pigafetta was on Ferdinand Magellan's last voyages when he visited Brunei in 1521.\nSeveral parks and trails in the city serve as landmarks of historical and cultural significance. Taman Haji Sir Muda Omar 'Ali Saifuddien, for example, was where Brunei's declaration of independence was read on 1 January 1984. Taman Mahkota Jubli Emas, inaugurated on 22 October 2017, commemorates the Golden Jubilee of Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah's rule, while the Sultan Haji Hassanal Bolkiah Silver Jubilee Park, opened in 2004, celebrates the Silver Jubilee of his reign. Tasek Lama Recreational Park is one of the oldest recognised parks in the country. Additionally, Pusat Belia, Brunei's youth centre, was established on 20 December 1969 after being commissioned by then-Crown Prince Hassanal Bolkiah in 1967. The centre, costing B$2\u00a0million, includes extensive facilities such as a hall for 1,000 people, a gymnastics hall, an Olympic-sized pool, and a gender-separated hostel, and it celebrated its golden jubilee in 2020.\nTransportation.\nLand.\nThe capital is accessible by bus from Bandar Seri Begawan to the western regions of the country via road. Connectivity to the exclave of Temburong is provided by the Sultan Haji Omar Ali Saifuddien Bridge, which opened in 2020\u2014before its construction, travellers had to pass through Sarawak, Malaysia, via the town of Limbang. Additionally, Edinburgh Bridge links the city centre to the rest of the capital by spanning the Kedayan River. \nThe main bus station in the capital is located in Jalan Cator underneath a multi-story car park. There are six bus routes servicing Bandar Seri Begawan area; the Central Line, Circle Line, Eastern Line, Southern Line, Western Line and Northern Line. Buses operate from 6.30\u00a0am until 6.00\u00a0pm except for bus No. 1 and 20 for which services extend into the night. All bus routes begin and terminate their journey at the main bus terminal. Buses heading to other towns in Brunei such as Tutong, Seria and Kuala Belait also depart from the main bus terminal and taxicab.\nAir.\nBrunei International Airport serves the whole country. It is located from the town centre and can be reached in 10 minutes via the Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah Highway. Royal Brunei Airlines, the national airline, has its head office in the RBA Plaza in the city.\nWater.\nShips up to long may dock in the former port of Dermaga Diraja Bandar Seri Begawan, which is located 17 miles upstream from the mouth of the Brunei River. A 124-foot passenger pier, a 730-foot reinforced concrete wharf, and an electrically powered ramp are among the port's amenities. Ships may purchase purified fresh water in the capital for $2.00 per 1,000 gallons. The Marine Department keeps track of use and bills the ship's agent. The Bandar Seri Begawan Municipal Board is credited with the money received from these water sales. Between the city and Victoria Harbour, a passenger boat that also transports mail runs every day (except for Sundays). On Mondays, Wednesdays, and Saturdays, an outboard motorboat service also carries mail and people between Bandar Seri Begawan to Bangar in Temburong District.\nA water taxi service known as 'penambang' is used for transportation between downtown Bandar Seri Begawan and Kampong Ayer. Water taxis are the most common means of negotiating the waterways of Kampong Ayer. They can be hailed from the numerous \"docking parts\" along the banks of the Brunei River. Fares are negotiable. Regular water taxi and boat services depart for Temburong between 7:45\u00a0am and 4\u00a0pm daily, and also serve the Malaysian towns of Limbang, Lawas, Sundar and Labuan. A speedboat is used for passengers travelling to Penambang from Bangar and Limbang.\nEconomy.\nThe economy of Bandar Seri Begawan includes the production of furniture, textiles, handicrafts, and timber. For shopping, the Gadong commercial area is popular, offering a range of shops, restaurants, and cafes. The traditional Kianggeh Market, believed to be Brunei's oldest market, mainly sells local cuisine, seafood, and fruit. Gadong Night Market is known for its diverse food offerings, from local specialties like roti john, ambuyat, and satay to exotic fruits such as durian and jackfruit.\nEducation.\nBandar Seri Begawan is home to several notable schools across various educational levels. Primary and secondary institutions include the historic Raja Isteri Girls High School, established in 1957 as the country's first all-girls secondary school, along with private schools such as Jerudong International School and International School Brunei. The city also has government sixth form centers: Duli Pengiran Muda Al-Muhtadee Billah College for general studies and Hassanal Bolkiah Boys' Arabic Secondary School for students from Arabic secondary religious schools.\nIn higher education, Bandar Seri Begawan hosts two national universities: Sultan Sharif Ali Islamic University, focused on Islamic studies, and Seri Begawan Religious Teachers University College, which specialises in training teachers for religious education. Technical and vocational education is available at two campuses of the Institute of Brunei Technical Education and the Brunei Polytechnic. Additionally, two private colleges, Cosmopolitan College of Commerce and Technology and Laksamana College of Business, offer bachelor programs.\nInternational relations.\nSeveral countries have set up their embassies, commissions or consulates in Bandar Seri Begawan, including Australia, Bangladesh, Belgium, Benin, Burkina Faso, Burma (Myanmar), Cambodia, Canada, Chile, China, Finland, France, Germany, India, Indonesia, Japan, Laos, Malaysia, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Korea, Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Poland, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, Taiwan, Thailand, United Kingdom, United States and Vietnam.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56612", "revid": "8005368", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56612", "title": "Stopper", "text": "Stopper may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "56614", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56614", "title": "Dwarves", "text": ""}
{"id": "56615", "revid": "51028733", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56615", "title": "Bangkok", "text": "Capital and largest city of Thailand\nBangkok, officially known in Thai as Krung Thep Maha Nakhon and colloquially as Krung Thep, is the capital and most populous city of Thailand. The city occupies in the Chao Phraya River delta in central Thailand and has an estimated population of 11.4 million people as of 2024, 15.9% of the country's population. Over 17.4\u00a0million people (25% of Thailand's population) live within the surrounding Bangkok Metropolitan Region as of the 2021 estimate, making Bangkok a megacity and an extreme primate city, dwarfing Thailand's other urban centres in both size and importance to the national economy.\nBangkok traces its roots to a small trading post during the Ayutthaya era in the 15th century, which eventually grew and became the site of two capital cities, Thonburi in 1767 and Rattanakosin in 1782. Bangkok was at the heart of the modernization of Siam during the late 19th century, as the country faced pressures from the West. The city was at the centre of the country's political struggles throughout the 20th century, as Siam\u2014later renamed Thailand\u2014abolished absolute monarchy, adopted constitutional rule, and underwent numerous coups and several uprisings. The city, incorporated as a special administrative area under the Bangkok Metropolitan Administration in 1972, grew rapidly during the 1960s through the 1980s and now exerts a significant impact on Thailand's politics, economy, education, media, and modern society.\nThe Asian investment boom in the 1980s and 1990s led many multinational corporations to locate their regional headquarters in Bangkok. The city is now a regional force in finance, business, and pop culture. It is an international hub for transport and health care, and has emerged as a centre for the arts, fashion, and entertainment. The city is known for its street life and cultural landmarks, as well as its red-light districts. The Grand Palace and Buddhist temples, including Wat Arun and Wat Pho, stand in contrast with other tourist attractions such as the nightlife scenes of Khaosan Road and Patpong. Bangkok is among the world's top tourist destinations and has been named the world's most visited city in several international rankings.\nBangkok's rapid growth, coupled with little urban planning, has resulted in a haphazard cityscape and inadequate infrastructure. Despite an extensive expressway network, an inadequate road network and substantial private car usage have led to chronic and crippling traffic congestion, which caused severe air pollution in the 1990s. The city has since turned to public transport in an attempt to solve the problem, operating 10 urban rail lines and building other public transit; however, congestion remains a prevalent issue.\nHistory.\nThe history of Bangkok dates at least back to the early 15th century, to when it was a village on the west bank of the Chao Phraya River, under the rule of Ayutthaya. Because of its strategic location near the mouth of the river, the town gradually increased in importance. Bangkok initially served as a customs outpost with forts on both sides of the river, and was the site of a siege in 1688, in which the French were expelled from Siam. After the fall of Ayutthaya to the Burmese in 1767, the newly crowned King Taksin established his capital at the town, which became the base of the Thonburi Kingdom. In 1782, King Phutthayotfa Chulalok (Rama I) succeeded Taksin, moved the capital to the eastern bank's Rattanakosin Island, thus founding the Rattanakosin Kingdom. The City Pillar was erected on 21 April 1782, which is regarded as the date of the foundation of Bangkok as the capital.\nBangkok's economy gradually expanded through international trade, first with China, then with Western merchants returning in the early to mid-19th century. As the capital, Bangkok was the centre of Siam's modernization as it faced pressure from Western powers in the late 19th century. The reigns of Kings Mongkut (Rama IV, r. 1851\u201368) and Chulalongkorn (Rama V, r. 1868\u20131910) saw the introduction of the steam engine, printing press, rail transport and utilities infrastructure in the city, as well as formal education and healthcare. Bangkok became the centre stage for power struggles between the military and political elite as the country abolished absolute monarchy in 1932.\nAs Thailand allied with Japan in World War II, Bangkok was subjected to Allied bombing, but rapidly grew in the post-war period as a result of US aid and government-sponsored investment. Bangkok's role as a US military R&amp;R destination boosted its tourism industry, as well as firmly establishing it as a sex tourism destination. Disproportionate urban development led to increasing income inequalities and migration from rural areas into Bangkok; its population surged from 1.8\u00a0million to 3\u00a0million in the 1960s.\nFollowing the US withdrawal from Vietnam in 1973, Japanese businesses took over as leaders in investment, and the expansion of export-oriented manufacturing led to the growth of the financial market in Bangkok. Rapid growth of the city continued through the 1980s and early 1990s, until it was stalled by the 1997 Asian financial crisis. By then, many public and social issues had emerged, among them the strain on infrastructure reflected in the city's notorious traffic jams. Bangkok's role as the nation's political stage continues to be seen in strings of popular protests, from the student uprisings in 1973 and 1976, anti-military demonstrations in 1992, and frequent street protests since 2006, including those by groups opposing and supporting former prime minister Thaksin Shinawatra from 2006 to 2013, and a renewed student-led movement in 2020.\nAdministration of the city was first formalized by King Chulalongkorn in 1906, with the establishment of Monthon Krung Thep Phra Maha Nakhon () as a national subdivision. In 1915, the \"monthon\" was split into several provinces, the administrative boundaries of which have since further changed. The city in its current form was created in 1972 with the formation of the Bangkok Metropolitan Administration (BMA), following the merger of Phra Nakhon province on the eastern bank of the Chao Phraya and Thonburi province on the west during the previous year.\nName.\nThe origin of the name \"Bangkok\" (, pronounced in Thai as ) is unclear. is a Thai word meaning 'a village on a stream', and the name might have been derived from (), meaning 'island', stemming from the city's watery landscape, this make the city well known as Venice of the East. Another theory suggests that it is shortened from (), being the name of \"Elaeocarpus hygrophilus\", a plant bearing olive-like fruit. This is supported by the former name of Wat Arun, a historic temple in the area, that used to be called \"Wat Makok\".\nOfficially, the town was known as (, from Pali and Sanskrit, literally 'city of treasures gracing the ocean') or , according to the \"Ayutthaya Chronicles\". \"Bangkok\" was likely a colloquial name, albeit one widely adopted by foreign visitors, who continued to use it to refer to the city even after the new capital's establishment.\nWhen King Rama I established his new capital on the river's eastern bank, the city inherited Ayutthaya's ceremonial name, of which there were many variants, including () and (). Edmund Roberts, visiting the city as envoy of the United States in 1833, noted that the city, since becoming capital, was known as , and this is the name used in international treaties of the period.\nThe city's ceremonial name came into use during the reign of King Mongkut. The full name reads as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Krungthepmahanakhon Amonrattanakosin Mahintharayutthaya Mahadilokphop Noppharatratchathaniburirom Udomratchaniwetmahasathan Amonphimanawatansathit Sakkathattiyawitsanukamprasit\nThe name, composed of Pali and Sanskrit root words, translates as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The city of angels, great city of immortals, magnificent city of the Nine Gems, seat of the King, city of royal palaces, home of gods incarnate, erected by Vishvakarman at Indra's behest.\nThe name is listed in \"Guinness World Records\" as the world's longest place name at 168 letters. Many Thais who recall the full name do so because of its use in the 1989 song \"Krung Thep Maha Nakhon\" by Thai rock band Asanee\u2013Wasan, the lyrics of which consist entirely of the city's full name, repeated throughout the song.\nToday, the city is officially known in Thai by a shortened form of the full ceremonial name, (), which is colloquially further shortened to () or the initialism (). is a Thai word of Khmer origin, meaning 'capital, king', while , is from Pali/Sanskrit \"deva\", meaning 'deity' or 'god'. The name is more commonly translated as 'City of Angels', which is also used to draw comparisons with Los Angeles in the United States, a comparably sized city with similar traffic issues. Another nickname sometimes used to refer to the city is The Big Mango, a tongue-in-cheek comparison to The Big Apple for New York City.\nGovernment.\nThe city of Bangkok is locally governed by the Bangkok Metropolitan Administration (BMA). Although its boundaries are at the provincial (\"changwat\") level, unlike the other 76 provinces, Bangkok is a special administrative area whose governor is directly elected to serve a four-year term. The governor, together with four appointed deputies, forms the executive body, who implement policies through the BMA civil service headed by the Permanent Secretary for the BMA. In separate elections, each district elects one or more city councillors, who form the Bangkok Metropolitan Council. The council is the BMA's legislative body and has power over municipal ordinances and the city's budget. The latest gubernatorial election took place on 22 May 2022 after an extended lapse following the 2014 Thai coup d'\u00e9tat, and was won by Chadchart Sittipunt.\nBangkok is divided into fifty districts (\"khet\", equivalent to \"amphoe\" in the other provinces), which are further subdivided into 180 sub-districts (\"khwaeng\", equivalent to \"tambon\"). Each district is managed by a district director appointed by the governor. District councils, elected to four-year terms, serve as advisory bodies to their respective district directors.\nThe BMA is divided into sixteen departments, each overseeing different aspects of the administration's responsibilities. Most of these responsibilities concern the city's infrastructure, and include city planning, building control, transportation, drainage, waste management, and city beautification, as well as education, medical, and rescue services. Many of these services are provided jointly with other agencies. The BMA has the authority to implement local ordinances, although civil law enforcement falls under the jurisdiction of the Metropolitan Police Bureau.\nAs the capital of Thailand, Bangkok is the seat of all branches of the national government. The Government House, Parliament House, and Supreme, Administrative, and Constitutional Courts are all in the city. Bangkok is the site of the Grand Palace and Dusit Palace, respectively the official and \"de facto\" residence of the king. Most government ministries also have headquarters and offices in the capital.\nSymbols.\nThe city seal shows Hindu god Indra riding in the clouds on Airavata, a divine white elephant known in Thai as Erawan. In his hand Indra holds his weapon, the \"vajra\". The seal is based on a painting done by Prince Naris, a brother of King Chulalongkorn. The tree symbol of Bangkok is \"Ficus benjamina\". Giant barb (\"Catlocarpio siamensis\") has been chosen as the aquatic animal of Bangkok. The official city slogan, adopted in 2012, reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As built by deities, the administrative centre, dazzling palaces and temples, the capital of Thailand \u0e01\u0e23\u0e38\u0e07\u0e40\u0e17\u0e1e\u0e2f \u0e14\u0e38\u0e08\u0e40\u0e17\u0e1e\u0e2a\u0e23\u0e49\u0e32\u0e07 \u0e40\u0e21\u0e37\u0e2d\u0e07\u0e28\u0e39\u0e19\u0e22\u0e4c\u0e01\u0e25\u0e32\u0e07\u0e01\u0e32\u0e23\u0e1b\u0e01\u0e04\u0e23\u0e2d\u0e07 \u0e27\u0e31\u0e14\u0e27\u0e31\u0e07\u0e07\u0e32\u0e21\u0e40\u0e23\u0e37\u0e2d\u0e07\u0e23\u0e2d\u0e07 \u0e40\u0e21\u0e37\u0e2d\u0e07\u0e2b\u0e25\u0e27\u0e07\u0e02\u0e2d\u0e07\u0e1b\u0e23\u0e30\u0e40\u0e17\u0e28\u0e44\u0e17\u0e22\nGeography.\nBangkok covers an area of , ranking 69th among the other 76 provinces of Thailand. Of this, about forms the built-up urban area. It is ranked 73rd in the world in terms of land area. The city's urban sprawl reaches into parts of the six other provinces that it borders, namely, in clockwise order from northwest: Nonthaburi, Pathum Thani, Chachoengsao, Samut Prakan, Samut Sakhon, and Nakhon Pathom. Except for Chachoengsao, these provinces, together with Bangkok, form the greater Bangkok Metropolitan Region.\nTopography.\nBangkok is situated in the Chao Phraya River delta in Thailand's central plain. The river meanders through the city in a southerly direction, emptying into the Gulf of Thailand approximately south of the city centre. The area is flat and low-lying, with an average elevation of above sea level. Most of the area was originally swampland, which was gradually drained and irrigated for agriculture by the construction of canals (\"khlong\") which took place from the 16th to 19th centuries. The course of the river as it flows through Bangkok has been modified by the construction of several shortcut canals.\nThe city's waterway network served as the primary means of transport until the late 19th century, when modern roads began to be built. Up until then, most people lived near or on the water, leading the city to be known during the 19th century as the \"Venice of the East\". Many of these canals have since been filled in or paved over, but others still crisscross the city, serving as major drainage channels and transport routes. Most canals are now badly polluted, although the BMA has committed to the treatment and cleaning up of several canals.\nThe geology of the Bangkok area is characterised by a top layer of soft marine clay, known as \"Bangkok clay\", averaging in thickness, which overlies an aquifer system consisting of eight known units. This feature has contributed to the effects of subsidence caused by extensive groundwater pumping. First discovered in the 1970s, subsidence soon became a critical issue, reaching a rate of per year in 1981. Ground water management and mitigation measures have since lessened the severity of the situation, and the rate of subsidence decreased to per year in the early 2000s, though parts of the city are now below sea level.\nSubsidence has resulted in increased flood risk, as Bangkok is already prone to flooding due to its low elevation and an inadequate drainage infrastructure, often compounded by blockage from rubbish pollution (especially plastic waste). The city now relies on flood barriers and augmenting drainage from canals by pumping and building drain tunnels, but parts of Bangkok and its suburbs are still regularly inundated. Heavy downpours resulting in urban runoff overwhelming drainage systems, and runoff discharge from upstream areas, are major triggering factors. Severe flooding affecting much of the city occurred in 1995 and 2011. In 2011, most of Bangkok's northern, eastern, and western districts were flooded, in some places for over two months.\nBangkok's geology also makes its tall buildings vulnerable to powerful earthquakes from far away, despite not being in a seismically active area, as the clay layer has an amplifying effect on long-period ground motion, which tends to match the resonant frequency of high-rises. Occupants of skyscrapers in Bangkok have often felt effects from earthquakes centred hundreds of kilometres away in northern Thailand and Myanmar. Seismic considerations were only added to the building code in 2007, making older structures particularly at risk.\nIts coastal location makes Bangkok particularly vulnerable to rising sea levels due to global warming and climate change. A study by the OECD has estimated that 5.138\u00a0million people in Bangkok may be exposed to coastal flooding by 2070, the seventh highest figure among the world's port cities. There are fears that the city may be submerged by 2030. A study published in October 2019 in \"Nature Communications\" corrected earlier models of coastal elevations and concluded that up to 12\u00a0million Thais\u2014mostly in the greater Bangkok metropolitan area\u2014face the prospect of annual flooding events. This is compounded by coastal erosion, which is an issue in the gulf coastal area, a small length of which lies within Bangkok's Bang Khun Thian District. Tidal flat ecosystems existed on the coast; however, many have been reclaimed for agriculture, aquaculture, and salt works.\nThe closest mountain range to Bangkok is the Khao Khiao Massif, about southeast of the city. Phu Khao Thong, the only hill in the metropolitan area, originated with a very large chedi that King Rama III (1787\u20131851) built at Wat Saket. The chedi collapsed during construction because the soft soil could not support its weight. Over the next few decades, the abandoned mud-and-brick structure acquired the shape of a natural hill and became overgrown with weeds. The locals called it \"phu khao\" (), as if it were a natural feature. In the 1940s, enclosing concrete walls were added to stop the hill from eroding.\nClimate.\nLike most of Thailand, Bangkok has a tropical savanna climate (Aw) under the K\u00f6ppen climate classification and is under the influence of the Asian monsoon system. The city experiences three seasons: hot, rainy, and cool, although temperatures are fairly hot year-round, ranging from an average low of in December to an average high of in April. The annual average temperature is . The rainy season begins with the arrival of the southwest monsoon around mid-May. September is the wettest month, with an average rainfall of . The rainy season lasts until October, when the dry and cool northeast monsoon takes over until February. The hot season is generally dry, but it also sees occasional summer storms. The surface magnitude of Bangkok's urban heat island has been measured at during the day and at night. The highest recorded temperature of Bangkok metropolis was on 7 May 2023, and the lowest recorded temperature was in January 1955.\nThe Climate Impact Group at NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies projected severe weather impacts on Bangkok caused by climate change. It found that Bangkok in 1960 had 193 days at or above 32\u00a0\u00b0C. In 2018, Bangkok can expect 276 days at or above 32\u00a0\u00b0C. The group forecasts a rise by 2100 to, on average, 297 to 344 days at or above 32\u00a0\u00b0C.\nDistricts.\nBangkok's fifty districts serve as administrative subdivisions under the authority of the BMA. Thirty-five of these districts lie to the east of the Chao Phraya, while fifteen are on the western bank, known as the Thonburi side of the city. The fifty districts, arranged by district code, are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCityscape.\nBangkok's districts often do not accurately represent the functional divisions of its neighbourhoods or land usage. Although urban planning policies date back to the commission of the Litchfield Plan in 1960, which set out strategies for land use, transportation, and general infrastructure improvements, zoning regulations were not fully implemented until 1992. As a result, the city grew organically throughout its rapid expansion, both horizontally as ribbon developments extended along newly built roads, and vertically, with increasing numbers of high rises and skyscrapers being built in commercial areas.\nThe city has grown from its original centre along the river into a sprawling metropolis surrounded by swaths of suburban residential development extending north and south into neighbouring provinces. The highly populated and growing cities of Nonthaburi, Pak Kret, Rangsit, and Samut Prakan are effectively now suburbs of Bangkok. Nevertheless, large agricultural areas remain within the city proper at its eastern and western fringes, and a small number of forest area is found within the city limits: , amounting to 0.4 per cent of the city area. Land use in the city consists of 23 percent residential use, 24 percent agriculture, and 30 percent used for commerce, industry, and government. The BMA's City Planning Department (CPD) is responsible for planning and shaping further development. It published master plan updates in 1999 and 2006, and a third revision is undergoing public hearings in 2012.\nBangkok's historic centre remains the Rattanakosin Island in Phra Nakhon District. It is the site of the Grand Palace and the City Pillar Shrine, primary symbols of the city's founding, as well as important Buddhist temples. Phra Nakhon, along with the neighbouring Pom Prap Sattru Phai and Samphanthawong Districts, formed what was the city proper in the late 19th century. Many traditional neighbourhoods and markets are found here, including the Chinese settlement of Sampheng. The city was expanded toward Dusit District in the early 19th century, following King Chulalongkorn's relocation of the royal household to the new Dusit Palace. The buildings of the palace, including the neoclassical Ananta Samakhom Throne Hall, as well as the Royal Plaza and Ratchadamnoen Avenue, which leads to it from the Grand Palace, reflect the heavy influence of European architecture at the time. Major government offices line the avenue, as does the Democracy Monument. The area is the site of the country's seat of power as well as the city's most popular tourist landmarks.\nIn contrast with the low-rise historic areas, the business district on Si Lom and Sathon Roads in Bang Rak and Sathon Districts teems with skyscrapers. It is the site of many of the country's major corporate headquarters, but also of some of the city's red-light districts. The Siam and Ratchaprasong areas in Pathum Wan are home to some of the largest shopping malls in Southeast Asia. Numerous retail outlets and hotels also stretch along Sukhumvit Road leading southeast through Watthana and Khlong Toei Districts. More office towers line the streets branching off Sukhumvit, especially Asok Montri, while upmarket housing is found in many of its \"soi\"s ('alley' or 'lane').\nBangkok lacks a single distinct central business district. Instead, the areas of Siam and Ratchaprasong serve as a \"central shopping district\" containing many of the bigger malls and commercial areas in the city, as well as Siam Station, formerly the only transfer point between the city's then-two elevated train lines (the Sukhumvit and Silom BTS lines). The Victory Monument in Ratchathewi District is among its most important road junctions, serving over 100 bus lines as well as an elevated train station. From the monument, Phahonyothin and Ratchawithi\u00a0/ Din Daeng Roads respectively run north and east, linking to major residential areas. Most of the high-density development areas are within the area encircled by the Ratchadaphisek inner ring road. Ratchadaphisek is lined with businesses and retail outlets, and office buildings also cluster around Ratchayothin Intersection in Chatuchak District to the north. Further from the city centre, most areas are primarily mid- or low-density residential. The Thonburi side of the city is less developed, with fewer high rises. Except for a few secondary urban centres, Thonburi, in the same manner as the outlying eastern districts, consists mostly of residential and rural areas.\nWhile most of Bangkok's streets are fronted by vernacular shophouses, the largely unrestricted building euphoria of the 1980s has transformed the city into an urban area of skyscrapers and high rises of contrasting and clashing styles. There are 581 skyscrapers over tall in the city. Bangkok was ranked as the world's eighth-tallest city in 2016. As a result of persistent economic disparity, many slums have emerged in the city. In 2000, over one million people were living in about 800 informal settlements. Some settlements are squatted such as the large slums in Khlong Toei District. In total, there were 125 squatted areas.\nParks and green zones.\nBangkok has several parks, although these amount to a per capita total park area of only in the city proper. Total green space for the entire city is moderate, at per person. In the more densely built-up areas of the city, these numbers are as low as per person. More recent numbers claim that there is of green space per person, compared to an average of in other cities across Asia. Bangkokians thus have 10 times less green space than is standard in the region's urban areas. Green belt areas include about of rice paddies and orchards on the eastern and western edges of the city, although their primary purpose is to serve as flood detention basins rather than to limit urban expansion. Bang Kachao, a conservation area on an oxbow of the Chao Phraya, lies just across the southern riverbank districts, in Samut Prakan province. A master development plan has been proposed to increase the total park area to per person.\nOne of Bangkok's largest parks is the centrally located Lumphini Park near the Silom\u2013Sathon business district with an area of . It is connected by a 1.3\u00a0km elevated pedestrian and bicycle walkway to the Benjakitti Park, which includes a recently completed expansion including wetlands, skywalks, and rare plants. Other parks include the Suanluang Rama IX in the east of the city, and the Chatuchak\u2013Queen Sirikit\u2013Wachirabenchathat park complex in northern Bangkok, which has a combined area of . More parks are expected to be created through the Green Bangkok 2030 project, which aims to leave the city with of green space per person, including 30% of the city having tree cover.\nDemography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe city of Bangkok has a population of 8,305,218 according to the 2010 census, or 12.6 per cent of the national population, while 2020 estimates place the figure at 10.539\u00a0million (15.3 per cent). Roughly half are internal migrants from other Thai provinces; population registry statistics recorded 5,676,648 residents belonging to 2,959,524 households in 2018. Much of Bangkok's daytime population commutes from surrounding provinces in the Bangkok Metropolitan Region, the total population of which is 14,626,225 (2010 census). Bangkok is a cosmopolitan city; the census showed that it is home to 567,120 expatriates from Asian countries (including 71,024 Chinese and 63,069 Japanese nationals), 88,177 from Europe, 32,241 from the Americas, 5,856 from Oceania, and 5,758 from Africa. Migrants from neighbouring countries include 216,528 Burmese, 72,934 Cambodians and 52,498 Lao. In 2018, numbers show that there are 370,000 international migrants registered with the Department of Employment, more than half of them migrants from Cambodia, Laos, and Myanmar.\nFollowing its establishment as the capital city in 1782, Bangkok grew only slightly throughout the 18th and early 19th centuries. British diplomat John Crawfurd, visiting in 1822, estimated its population at no more than 50,000. As a result of Western medicine brought by missionaries as well as increased immigration from both within Siam and overseas, Bangkok's population gradually increased as the city modernized in the late 19th century. This growth became even more pronounced in the 1930s, following the discovery of antibiotics. Although family planning and birth control were introduced in the 1960s, the lowered birth rate was more than offset by increased migration from the provinces as economic expansion accelerated. Only in the 1990s did Bangkok's population growth rates decrease, following the national rate; Thailand had long since become highly centralized around the capital. In 1980, Bangkok's population was fifty-one times that of Hat Yai and Songkhla, the second-largest urban centre at the time, making it the world's most prominent primate city.\nThe majority of Bangkok's population identifies as Thai, although details on the city's ethnic make-up are unavailable, as the national census does not document race. Bangkok's cultural pluralism dates back to the early days of its founding: several ethnic communities were formed by immigrants and forced settlers including the Khmer, northern Thai, Lao, Vietnamese, Mon and Malay. Most prominent were the Chinese, who played major roles in the city's trade and became the majority of Bangkok's population\u2014estimates include up to three-fourths in 1828 and almost half in the 1950s. Chinese immigration was restricted from the 1930s and effectively ceased after the Chinese Communist Revolution in 1949. Their prominence subsequently declined as younger generations of Thai Chinese integrated and adopted a Thai identity. Bangkok is still, nevertheless, home to a large Chinese community, with the greatest concentration in Yaowarat, Bangkok's Chinatown.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe majority (93 per cent) of the city's population is Buddhist, according to the 2010 census. Other religions include Islam (4.6 per cent), Christianity (1.9 per cent), Hinduism (0.3 per cent), Sikhism (0.1 per cent), and Confucianism (0.1 per cent).\nApart from Yaowarat, Bangkok also has several other distinct ethnic neighbourhoods. The Indian community is centred in Phahurat, where the Gurdwara Siri Guru Singh Sabha, founded in 1933, is located. Ban Khrua on Saen Saep Canal is home to descendants of the Cham who settled in the late 18th century. Although the Portuguese who settled during the Thonburi period have ceased to exist as a distinct community, their past is reflected in Santa Cruz Church, on the west bank of the river. Likewise, Assumption Cathedral on Charoen Krung Road is among many European-style buildings in the Old Farang Quarter, where European diplomats and merchants lived in the late 19th to early 20th centuries. Nearby, the Haroon Mosque is the centre of a Muslim community. Newer expatriate communities exist along Sukhumvit Road, including the Japanese community near Soi Phrom Phong and Soi Thong Lo, and the Arab and North African neighbourhood along Soi Nana. Sukhumvit Plaza, a mall on Soi Sukhumvit 12, is popularly known as Koreatown.\nEconomy.\nBangkok is the economic centre of Thailand, and the heart of the country's investment and development. In 2022, the city had an economic output of 5.747\u00a0trillion baht (US$164\u00a0billion). This amounted to a per-capita GDP value of 634,109 baht ($18,100), more than twice the national average. The Bangkok Metropolitan Region had a combined output of 8.096\u00a0trillion baht ($232\u00a0billion).\nWholesale and retail trade is the largest sector in the city's economy, contributing 24 per cent of Bangkok's gross provincial product. It is followed by manufacturing (14.3 per cent); real estate, renting and business activities (12.4 per cent); transport and communications (11.6 per cent); and financial intermediation (11.1 per cent). Bangkok alone accounts for 48.4 per cent of Thailand's service sector, which in turn constitutes 49 per cent of GDP. When the Bangkok Metropolitan Region is considered, manufacturing is the most significant contributor at 28.2 per cent of the gross regional product, reflecting the density of industry in Bangkok's neighbouring provinces. The automotive industry, based around Greater Bangkok, is the largest production hub in Southeast Asia. Tourism is also a significant contributor to Bangkok's economy, generating 427.5\u00a0billion baht ($13.38\u00a0billion) in revenue in 2010.\nThe Stock Exchange of Thailand (SET) is on Ratchadaphisek Road in inner Bangkok. The SET, together with the Market for Alternative Investment (MAI), has 648 listed companies as of the end of 2011, with a combined market capitalization of 8.485\u00a0trillion baht ($267.64\u00a0billion). Due to the large amount of foreign representation, Thailand has for several years been a mainstay of the Southeast Asian economy and a centre of Asian business. The Globalization and World Cities Research Network ranks Bangkok as an \"Alpha -\" world city, and it is ranked 59th in Z/Yen's \"Global Financial Centres Index 11\".\nBangkok is home to the headquarters of all of Thailand's major commercial banks and financial institutions, as well as the country's largest companies. Many multinational corporations base their regional headquarters in Bangkok due to the lower cost of labour and operations relative to other major Asian business centres. Seventeen Thai companies are listed on the Forbes 2000, all of which are based in the capital, including PTT, the only Fortune Global 500 company in Thailand.\nIncome inequality is a major issue in Bangkok, especially between relatively unskilled lower-income immigrants from rural provinces and neighbouring countries, and middle-class professionals and business elites. Although absolute poverty rates are low\u2014only 0.64 per cent of Bangkok's registered residents were living under the poverty line in 2010, compared to a national average of 7.75 per cent\u2014economic disparity is still substantial. The city has a Gini coefficient of 0.48, indicating a high level of inequality.\nTourism.\nBangkok is one of the world's top tourist destinations. Of 162 cities worldwide, MasterCard ranked Bangkok as the top destination city by international visitor arrivals in its \"Global Destination Cities Index 2018\", ahead of London, with just over 20\u00a0million overnight visitors in 2017. This was a repeat of its 2017 ranking (for 2016). Euromonitor International ranked Bangkok fourth in its Top City Destinations Ranking for 2016. Bangkok was also named \"World's Best City\" by \"Travel + Leisure\" magazine's survey of its readers for four consecutive years, from 2010 to 2013.\nAs the main gateway through which visitors arrive in Thailand, Bangkok is visited by the majority of international tourists to the country. Domestic tourism is also prominent. The Department of Tourism recorded 26,861,095 Thai and 11,361,808 foreign visitors to Bangkok in 2010. Lodgings were made by 15,031,244 guests, who occupied 49.9 per cent of the city's 86,687 hotel rooms. Bangkok also topped the list as the world's most popular tourist destination in 2017 rankings. In 2024, Euromonitor International ranks Bangkok the top tourism city in the world, welcoming a record 32.4\u00a0million visitors.\nAmong Bangkok's well-known sights are the Grand Palace and major Buddhist temples, including Wat Phra Kaew, Wat Pho, and Wat Arun. The Giant Swing and Erawan Shrine demonstrate Hinduism's deep-rooted influence in Thai culture. Vimanmek Mansion in Dusit Palace is famous as the world's largest teak building, while the Jim Thompson House provides an example of traditional Thai architecture. Other major museums include the Bangkok National Museum and the Royal Barge National Museum. Cruises and boat trips on the Chao Phraya and the canals of Thonburi offer views of some of the city's traditional architecture and ways of life on the waterfront.\nShopping venues, many of which are popular with both tourists and locals, range from the shopping centres and department stores concentrated in Siam and Ratchaprasong to the sprawling Chatuchak Weekend Market. Taling Chan Floating Market is among the few such markets in Bangkok. Yaowarat is known for its shops as well as street-side food stalls and restaurants, which are also found throughout the city. Khao San Road has long been famous as a destination for backpacker tourism, with its budget accommodation, shops, and bars attracting visitors from all over the world.\nBangkok has a reputation overseas as a major destination in the sex industry. Although prostitution is technically illegal and is rarely openly discussed in Thailand, it commonly takes place among massage parlours, saunas, and hourly hotels, serving foreign tourists as well as locals. Bangkok has acquired the nickname \"Sin City of Asia\" for its level of sex tourism.\nIssues often encountered by foreign tourists include scams, overcharging, and dual pricing. In a survey of 616 tourists visiting Thailand, 7.79 per cent reported encountering a scam, the most common of which was the gem scam, in which tourists are tricked into buying overpriced jewellery.\nCulture.\nThe culture of Bangkok reflects its position as Thailand's centre of wealth and modernisation. The city has long been the portal of entry of Western concepts and material goods, which have been adopted and blended with Thai values to various degrees by its residents. This is most evident in the lifestyles of the expanding middle class. Conspicuous consumption serves as a display of economic and social status, and shopping centres are popular weekend hangouts.\nA distinct feature of Bangkok is the ubiquity of street vendors selling goods ranging from food items to clothing and accessories. It has been estimated that the city may have over 100,000 hawkers. While the BMA has authorised the practice in 287 sites, the majority of activity in another 407 sites takes place illegally. Although they take up pavement space and block pedestrian traffic, many of the city's residents depend on these vendors for their meals, and the BMA's efforts to curb their numbers have largely been unsuccessful.\nIn 2015, however, the BMA, with support from the National Council for Peace and Order (Thailand's ruling military junta), began cracking down on street vendors in a bid to reclaim public space. Many famous market neighbourhoods were affected, including Khlong Thom, Saphan Lek, and the flower market at Pak Khlong Talat. Nearly 15,000 vendors were evicted from 39 public areas in 2016. While some applauded the efforts to focus on pedestrian rights, others have expressed concern that gentrification would lead to the loss of the city's character and adverse changes to people's way of life.\nFestivals and events.\nThe residents of Bangkok celebrate many of Thailand's annual festivals. During Songkran on 13\u201315 April, traditional rituals as well as water fights take place throughout the city. Loi Krathong, usually in November, is accompanied by the Golden Mount Fair. New Year celebrations take place at many venues, the most prominent being the plaza in front of CentralWorld. Observances related to the royal family are held primarily in Bangkok. Wreaths are laid at King Chulalongkorn's equestrian statue in the Royal Plaza on 23 October, which is King Chulalongkorn Memorial Day. The previous king's and queen's birthdays, respectively on 5 December and 12 August, are marked as Thailand's national Father's Day and national Mother's Day. These national holidays are celebrated by royal audiences on the day's eve, in which the king or queen gives a speech, and public gatherings on the day of the observance. The king's birthday is also marked by the Royal Guards' parade.\nSanam Luang is the site of the Thai Kite, Sport and Music Festival, usually held in March, and the Royal Ploughing Ceremony, which takes place in May. The Red Cross Fair at the beginning of April is held at Suan Amporn and the Royal Plaza, and features numerous booths offering goods, games, and exhibits. The Chinese New Year (January\u2013February) and Vegetarian Festival (September\u2013October) are celebrated widely by the Chinese community, especially in Yaowarat.\nBangkok was designated as the World Book Capital for the year 2013 by UNESCO.\nBangkok's first Thai International Gay Pride Festival took place on October 31, 1999. Pride Parades have also been held in Bangkok, with the first official parade held in 2022 under the name \"Bangkok Naruemit Pride Parade\". Pride Parades were announced to be a part of Bangkok's \"12 monthly festivals\" in 2022.\nBangkok also hosts major international exhibitions, including the annual Bangkok International Motor Show, one of the largest automotive events in Southeast Asia.\nMedia.\nBangkok is the centre of Thailand's media industry. All national newspapers, broadcast media, and major publishers are based in the capital. Its 21 national newspapers had a combined daily circulation of about two million in 2002. These include the mass-oriented \"Thairath\", \"Khao Sod\" and \"Daily News\", the first of which currently prints a million copies per day, as well as the less sensational \"Matichon\" and \"Krungthep Thurakij\". The \"Bangkok Post\" and \"The Nation\" are the two national English-language dailies. Foreign publications including \"The Asian Wall Street Journal\", \"Financial Times\", \"The Straits Times\" and the \"Yomiuri Shimbun\" also have operations in Bangkok. The large majority of Thailand's more than 200 magazines are published in the capital, and include news magazines as well as lifestyle, entertainment, gossip and fashion-related publications.\nBangkok is also the hub of Thailand's broadcast television. Most free-to-air national terrestrial channels, including six original Channels 3, 5, and 7, MCOT, NBT and Thai PBS, have headquarters and main studios in the capital. GMM Grammy is Thailand's largest mass-media conglomerate is also headquartered in Bangkok. Except for local news segments broadcast by the NBT, all programming is done in Bangkok and repeated throughout the provinces. However, this centralised model is weakening with the rise of cable television, which has many local providers. There are numerous cable and satellite channels based in Bangkok. TrueVisions is the major subscription television provider in Bangkok and Thailand, and it also carries international programming. Bangkok was home to 40 of Thailand's 311 FM radio stations and 38 of its 212 AM stations in 2002. Broadcast media reform stipulated by the 1997 constitution has been progressing slowly, although many community radio stations have emerged in the city.\nLikewise, Bangkok has dominated the Thai film industry since its inception. Although film settings normally feature locations throughout the country, the city is home to all major film studios in Thailand, such as GDH 559 (GMM Grammy's film production subsidiary), Sahamongkol Film International, and Five Star Production. Bangkok has dozens of cinemas and multiplexes, and the city hosts two major film festivals annually, the Bangkok International Film Festival and the World Film Festival of Bangkok.\nArt.\nTraditional Thai art, long developed within religious and royal contexts, continues to be sponsored by various government agencies in Bangkok, including the Department of Fine Arts' Office of Traditional Arts. The SUPPORT Foundation in Chitralada Palace sponsors traditional and folk handicrafts. Various communities throughout the city still practice their traditional crafts, including the production of \"khon\" masks, alms bowls, and classical musical instruments. The National Gallery hosts a permanent collection of traditional and modern art, with temporary contemporary exhibits. Bangkok's contemporary art scene has slowly grown from relative obscurity into the public sphere over the past two decades. Private galleries gradually emerged to provide exposure for new artists, including the Patravadi Theatre and H Gallery. The centrally located Bangkok Art and Culture Centre, opened in 2008 following a fifteen-year lobbying campaign, is now the largest public exhibition space in the city. There are also many other art galleries and museums, including the privately owned Museum of Contemporary Art.\nThe city's performing arts scene features traditional theatre and dance as well as Western-style plays. \"Khon\" and other traditional dances are regularly performed at the National Theatre and Salachalermkrung Royal Theatre, while the Thailand Cultural Centre is a newer multi-purpose venue which also hosts musicals, orchestras, and other events. Numerous venues regularly feature a variety of performances throughout the city.\nBangkok is recognized as a \"Design City\" by UNESCO's Creative Cities Network.\nSport.\nAs is the national trend, association football and Muay Thai dominate Bangkok's spectator sport scene. Muangthong United, Bangkok United, BG Pathum United, Port and Police Tero are major Thai League clubs based in the Bangkok Metropolitan Region, while the Rajadamnern and Lumpini stadiums are the main kickboxing venues.\nWhile sepak takraw can be seen played in open spaces throughout the city, football and other modern sports are now the norm. Western sports introduced during the reign of King Chulalongkorn were originally only available to the privileged, and such status is still associated with certain sports. Golf is popular among the upwardly mobile, and there are several courses in Bangkok. Horse racing, highly popular at the mid-20th century, still takes place at the Royal Bangkok Sports Club.\nThere are many public sporting facilities located throughout Bangkok. The two main centres are the National Stadium complex, which dates to 1938, and the newer Hua Mak Sports Complex, which was built for the 1998 Asian Games. Bangkok had also hosted the games in 1966, 1970 and 1978; the most of any city. The city was the host of the inaugural Southeast Asian Games in 1959, the 2007 Summer Universiade, and the 2012 FIFA Futsal World Cup.\nTransport.\nAlthough Bangkok's canals historically served as a major mode of transport, they have long since been surpassed in importance by land traffic. Charoen Krung Road, the first to be built by Western techniques, was completed in 1864. Since then, the road network has vastly expanded to accommodate the sprawling city. A complex elevated expressway network and Don Mueang Tollway helps bring traffic into and out of the city centre, but Bangkok's rapid growth has put a large strain on infrastructure, and traffic jams have plagued the city since the 1990s. Although rail transport was introduced in 1893 and trams served the city from 1888 to 1968, it was only in 1999 that Bangkok's first rapid transit system began operation. Older public transport systems include an extensive bus network and boat services, which still operate on the Chao Phraya and two canals. Taxis appear in the form of cars, motorcycles, and \"tuk-tuk\" auto rickshaws.\nBangkok is connected to the rest of the country through the national highway and rail networks, as well as by domestic flights to and from the city's two international airports (Suvarnabhumi and Don Mueang). Its centuries-old maritime transport of goods is still conducted through Khlong Toei Port.\nThe BMA is largely responsible for overseeing the construction and maintenance of the road network and transport systems through its Public Works Department and Traffic and Transportation Department. However, many separate government agencies are also in charge of the individual systems, and much of transport-related policy planning and funding is contributed to by the national government.\nAir.\nBangkok is one of Asia's busiest air transport hubs. Two commercial airports serve Bangkok, the older Don Mueang International Airport and the newer Suvarnabhumi Airport. Suvarnabhumi, which replaced Don Mueang as Bangkok's main airport after its opening in 2006, served 52,808,013 passengers in 2015, making it the world's 20th busiest airport by passenger volume. This volume exceeded its designed capacity of 45\u00a0million passengers. Don Mueang reopened for domestic flights in 2007, and resumed international service focusing on low-cost carriers in October 2012. As of 2023, a new SAT-1 terminal has been opened at Suvarnabhumi to handle the increasing passenger count. Plans for further expansion are already being commenced. Meanwhile, Don Mueang is currently considering renovation.\nRail.\nKrung Thep Aphiwat Central Terminal is the main terminus of the national rail network operated by the State Railway of Thailand (SRT). The older terminus, Bangkok (Hua Lamphong) railway station, was the main station for Bangkok for over a century and remains in use. The SRT operates long-distance intercity services from Krung Thep Aphiwat, while commuter trains running to and from the outskirts of the city during the rush hour continue to operate at Bangkok (Hua Lamphong).\nBangkok is primarily served by three rapid transit systems: the BTS (Skytrain), the MRT (Metro), and the SRT (State Railway of Thailand).\nAlthough proposals for the development of rapid transit in Bangkok had been made since 1975, it was only in 1999 that the BTS finally began operation. The BTS consists of three lines: the Light Green (Sukhumvit) Line, the Dark Green (Silom) Line and the Gold Line. The MRT consists of two metro lines: the Blue Line and the Purple Line, and two monorail lines: the Yellow Line which opened in July 2023, and the Pink Line which opened in January 2024. The SRT Airport Rail Link Line opened in August 2010 and connects the city centre to Suvarnabhumi Airport to the east. The SRT Dark Red Line and SRT Light Red Line opened in 2021.\nAlthough initial passenger numbers were low and their service area was limited to the inner city until the 2016 opening of the Purple Line, these systems have become indispensable to many commuters. The BTS reported an average of 600,000 daily trips in 2012, while the MRT had 240,000 passenger trips per day.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], construction work is ongoing to extend the city-wide transit system's reach according to the Mass Rapid Transit Master Plan in Bangkok Metropolitan Region, which consists of eight main lines and four feeder lines totaling to be completed by 2029.\nRoad.\nRoad-based transport is the primary mode of travel in Bangkok. Due to the city's organic development, its streets do not follow an organized grid structure. Forty-eight major roads link the different areas of the city, branching into smaller streets and lanes (\"soi\") which serve local neighbourhoods. Eleven bridges over the Chao Phraya link the two sides of the city, while several expressway and motorway routes bring traffic into and out of the city centre and link with nearby provinces. The first expressway in Bangkok is Chaloem Maha Nakhon Expressway, which opened in 1981.\nBangkok's rapid growth in the 1980s resulted in sharp increases in vehicle ownership and traffic demand, which have since continued. In 2006, there were 3,943,211 in-use vehicles in Bangkok, of which 37.6 per cent were private cars and 32.9 per cent were motorcycles. These increases, in the face of limited carrying capacity, caused severe traffic congestion evident by the early 1990s. The extent of the problem is such that the Thai Traffic Police has a unit of officers trained in basic midwifery to assist deliveries that do not reach the hospital in time. While Bangkok's limited road surface area (8 per cent, compared to 20\u201330 per cent in most Western cities) is often cited as a major cause of its traffic jams, other factors, including high vehicle ownership rate relative to income level, inadequate public transport systems, and lack of transportation demand management, also play a role. Efforts to alleviate the problem have included the construction of intersection bypasses and an extensive system of elevated highways, as well as the creation of several new rapid transit systems. Plans to implement congestion pricing were announced in 2024. The city's overall traffic conditions, however, remain poor.\nTraffic has been the main source of air pollution in Bangkok, which reached serious levels in the 1990s. But efforts to improve air quality by improving fuel quality and enforcing emission standards, among others, had visibly ameliorated the problem by the 2000s. Atmospheric particulate matter levels dropped from 81 micrograms per cubic metre in 1997 to 43 in 2007. However, increasing vehicle numbers and a lack of continued pollution-control efforts threaten a reversal of the past success. In January\u2013February 2018, weather conditions caused bouts of haze to cover the city, with particulate matter under 2.5 micrometres (PM2.5) rising to unhealthy levels for several days on end.\nAlthough the BMA has created thirty signed bicycle routes along several roads totalling , cycling is still largely impractical, especially in the city centre. Most of these bicycle lanes share the pavement with pedestrians. Poor surface maintenance, encroachment by hawkers and street vendors, and a hostile environment for cyclists and pedestrians make cycling and walking unpopular methods of getting around in Bangkok.\nIn September 2025, there was a road collapse when the Dusit district experienced a major sinkhole on Samsen Road, located between the Samsen Police Station and Vajira Hospital.\nBangkok has an extensive bus network providing local transit services within the Greater Bangkok area. The Bangkok Mass Transit Authority (BMTA) operates a monopoly on bus services, with substantial concessions granted to private operators. Buses, minibus vans, and song thaeo operate on a total of 470 routes throughout the region. A separate bus rapid transit system owned by the BMA has been in operation since 2010. Known simply as the BRT, the system currently consists of a single line running from the business district at Sathon to Ratchaphruek on the western side of the city. The Transport Co., Ltd. is the BMTA's long-distance counterpart, with services to all provinces operating out of Bangkok.\nTaxis are ubiquitous in Bangkok and are a popular form of transport. As of August\u00a02012[ [update]], there are 106,050 cars, 58,276 motorcycles and 8,996 tuk-tuk motorized tricycles cumulatively registered for use as taxis. Meters have been required for car taxis since 1992, while tuk-tuk fares are usually negotiated. Motorcycle taxis operate from regulated ranks, with either fixed or negotiable fares, and are usually employed for relatively short journeys.\nDespite their popularity, taxis have gained a bad reputation for often refusing passengers when the requested route is not to the driver. Motorcycle taxis were previously unregulated and subject to extortion by organized crime gangs. Since 2003, registration has been required for motorcycle taxi ranks, and drivers now wear distinctive numbered vests designating their district of registration and where they are allowed to accept passengers.\nSeveral ride hailing super-apps operate within the city, including Grab (offering car and motorbike options), and AirAsia in 2022. The Estonian company Bolt launched airport transfer and ride hailing services in 2020. Ride sharing startup MuvMi launched in 2018, and operates an electric tuk-tuk service in 9 areas across the city.\nWater.\nAlthough much diminished from its past prominence, water-based transport still plays an important role in Bangkok and the immediate upstream and downstream provinces. Several water buses serve commuters daily. The Chao Phraya Express Boat serves thirty-four stops along the river, carrying an average of 35,586 passengers per day in 2010, while the smaller Khlong Saen Saep boat service serves twenty-seven stops on Saen Saep Canal with 57,557 daily passengers. Khlong Phasi Charoen boat service serves twenty stops on the Phasi Charoen Canal. Long-tail boats operate on fifteen regular routes on the Chao Phraya, and passenger ferries at thirty-two river crossings served an average of 136,927 daily passengers in 2010.\nBangkok Port, popularly known by its location as Khlong Toei Port, was Thailand's main international port from its opening in 1947 until it was superseded by the deep-sea Laem Chabang Port in 1991. It is primarily a cargo port, though its inland location limits access to ships of 12,000 deadweight tons or less. The port handled of cargo in the first eight months of the 2010 fiscal year, about 22 per cent of the total of the country's international ports.\nHealth and education.\nEducation.\nBangkok has long been the centre of modern education in Thailand. The first schools in the country were established here in the late 19th century, and there are now 1,351 schools in the city. The city is home to the country's five oldest universities, Chulalongkorn, Thammasat, Kasetsart, Mahidol and Silpakorn, founded between 1917 and 1943. The city has since continued its dominance, especially in higher education; the majority of the country's universities, both public and private, are located in Bangkok or the Metropolitan Region. Chulalongkorn and Mahidol are the only Thai universities to appear in the top 500 of the \"QS World University Rankings\". King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi, also located in Bangkok, is the only Thai university in the top 400 of the 2012\u201313 \"Times Higher Education World University Rankings\".\nOver the past few decades, the general trend of pursuing a university degree has prompted the founding of new universities to meet the needs of Thai students. Bangkok became not only a place where immigrants and provincial Thais go for job opportunities, but also for a chance to receive a university degree. Ramkhamhaeng University emerged in 1971 as Thailand's first open university; it now has the highest enrolment in the country. The demand for higher education has led to the founding of many other universities and colleges, both public and private. While many universities have been established in major provinces, the Greater Bangkok region remains home to the greater majority of institutions, and the city's tertiary education scene remains overpopulated with non-Bangkokians. The situation is not limited to higher education, either. In the 1960s, 60 to 70 per cent of 10- to 19-year-olds who were in school had migrated to Bangkok for secondary education. This was due to both a lack of secondary schools in the provinces and perceived higher standards of education in the capital. Although this discrepancy has since largely abated, tens of thousands of students still compete for places in Bangkok's leading schools. Education has long been a prime factor in the centralization of Bangkok and will play a vital role in the government's efforts to decentralize the country.\nHealthcare.\nMuch of Thailand's medical resources are disproportionately concentrated in the capital. In 2000, Bangkok had 39.6 per cent of the country's doctors and a physician-to-population ratio of 1:794, compared to a median of 1:5,667 among all provinces. The city is home to 42 public hospitals, five of which are university hospitals, as well as 98 private hospitals and 4,063 registered clinics. The BMA operates nine public hospitals through its Medical Service Department, and its Health Department provides primary care through sixty-eight community health centres. Thailand's universal healthcare system is implemented through public hospitals and health centres as well as participating private providers.\nResearch-oriented medical school affiliates such as Siriraj, King Chulalongkorn Memorial, and Ramathibodi Hospitals are among the largest in the country, and act as tertiary care centres, receiving referrals from distant parts of the country. Lately, especially in the private sector, there has been much growth in medical tourism, with hospitals such as Bumrungrad and Bangkok Hospital, among others, providing services specifically catering to foreigners. An estimated 200,000 medical tourists visited Thailand in 2011, making Bangkok the most popular global destination for medical tourism.\nCrime and safety.\nBangkok has a relatively moderate crime rate when compared to urban counterparts around the world. Traffic accidents are a major hazard while natural disasters are rare. Intermittent episodes of political unrest and occasional terrorist attacks have resulted in losses of life.\nAlthough the crime threat in Bangkok is relatively low, non-confrontational crimes of opportunity, such as pick-pocketing, purse-snatching, and credit card fraud, occur with frequency. Bangkok's growth since the 1960s has been followed by increasing crime rates partly driven by urbanisation, migration, unemployment and poverty. By the late 1980s, Bangkok's crime rates were about four times that of the rest of the country. The police have long been preoccupied with street crimes ranging from housebreaking to assault and murder. The 1990s saw the emergence of vehicle theft and organized crime, particularly by foreign gangs. Drug trafficking, especially that of \"ya ba\" methamphetamine pills, is also chronic.\nAccording to police statistics, the most common complaint received by the Metropolitan Police Bureau in 2010 was housebreaking, with 12,347 cases. This was followed by 5,504 cases of motorcycle thefts, 3,694 cases of assault, and 2,836 cases of embezzlement. Serious offences included 183 murders, 81 gang robberies, 265 robberies, 1 kidnapping, and 9 arson cases. Offences against the state were by far more common, and included 54,068 drug-related cases, 17,239 cases involving prostitution, and 8,634 related to gambling. The Thailand Crime Victim Survey conducted by the Office of Justice Affairs of the Ministry of Justice found that 2.7 per cent of surveyed households reported a member being victim of a crime in 2007. Of these, 96.1 per cent were crimes against property, 2.6 per cent were crimes against life and body, and 1.4 per cent were information-related crimes.\nPolitical demonstrations and protests are common in Bangkok. The historic uprisings of 1973, 1976, and 1992 are infamously known for the deaths from military suppression. Most events since then have been peaceful, but the series of major protests since 2006 has often turned violent. Demonstrations during March\u2013May 2010 ended in a crackdown in which 92 were killed, including armed and unarmed protesters, security forces, civilians, and journalists. Terrorist incidents have also occurred in Bangkok, most notably the bombing in 2015 at the Erawan shrine, which killed 20, and also a series of bombings on the 2006\u201307 New Year's Eve.\nTraffic accidents are a major hazard in Bangkok. There were 37,985 accidents in the city in 2010, resulting in 16,602 injuries and 456 deaths, as well as 426.42\u00a0million baht in damages. However, the rate of fatal accidents is much lower than in the rest of Thailand. While accidents in Bangkok amounted to 50.9 per cent of the entire country, only 6.2 per cent of fatalities occurred in the city. Another serious public health hazard comes from Bangkok's stray dogs. Up to 300,000 strays are estimated to roam the city's streets, and dog bites are among the most common injuries treated in the emergency departments of the city's hospitals. Rabies is prevalent among the dog population, and treatment for bites poses a heavy public burden.\nOn July 27, 2025, a gunman shot and killed 5 security guards and wounded 2 others inside a Bangkok market before killing himself.\nCalls to move the capital.\nBangkok is faced with multiple problems, including congestion, and especially subsidence and flooding, which have raised the issue of moving the nation's capital elsewhere. The idea is not new: during World War II, Prime Minister Plaek Phibunsongkhram planned unsuccessfully to relocate the capital to Phetchabun. In the 2000s, the Thaksin Shinawatra administration assigned the Office of the National Economic and Social Development Council (NESDC) to formulate a plan to move the capital to Nakhon Nayok. The 2011 floods revived the idea of moving government functions from Bangkok. In 2017, the military government assigned NESDC to study the possibility of moving government offices from Bangkok to Chachoengsao in the east.\nInternational relations.\nThe city's formal international relations are managed by the International Affairs Division of the BMA. Its missions include partnering with other major cities through sister city or friendship agreements, participation and membership in international organizations, and pursuing cooperative activities with the many foreign diplomatic missions based in the city.\nInternational participation.\nBangkok is a member of several international organizations and regional city government networks, including the Asian Network of Major Cities 21, the Japan-led Asian-Pacific City Summit, the C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group, the ESCAP-sponsored Regional Network of Local Authorities for Management of Human Settlements in Asia and Pacific (CITYNET), Japan's Council of Local Authorities for International Relations, the World Association of the Major Metropolises and Local Governments for Sustainability, among others.\nWith its location at the heart of mainland Southeast Asia and as one of Asia's hubs of transportation, Bangkok is home to many international and regional organizations. Among others, Bangkok is the seat of the Secretariat of the UN Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP), as well as the Asia-Pacific regional offices of the Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO), the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), the International Labour Organization (ILO), the International Organization for Migration (IOM), the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), the UN High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR), and the UN Children's Fund (UNICEF).\nCity partnerships.\nBangkok has made sister city or friendship agreements with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56617", "revid": "43185150", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56617", "title": "Bangui", "text": "Capital and largest city of the Central African Republic\nBangui (; or Bang\u00ee in Sango, formerly written Bangi in English) is the capital and largest city of the Central African Republic. It was established as a French outpost in 1889 and named after its location on the northern bank of the Ubangi River (); the Ubangi itself was named from the Bobangi word for the \"rapids\" located beside the settlement, which marked the end of navigable water north from Brazzaville. The majority of the population of the Central African Republic lives in the western parts of the country, in Bangui and the surrounding area.\nThe city has been part of Bangui Prefecture since December 2020. As of 2020[ [update]] it had an estimated population of 889,231.\nThe city consists of eight urban districts (\"arrondissements\"), 16 groups (\"groupements\") and 205 neighbourhoods (\"quartiers\"). As the capital of the Central African Republic, Bangui acts as an administrative, trade, and commercial centre. The National Assembly, government buildings, banks, foreign enterprises and embassies, hospitals, hotels, main markets and the Ngaragba Central Prison are all located here. Bangui manufactures textiles, food products, beer, shoes and soap. Its Notre-Dame Cathedral is the seat of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Bangui. The city is also home to the University of Bangui, inaugurated in 1970. It is served by the Bangui M'Poko International Airport.\nHistory.\nArchaeological studies in and around Bangui have yielded at least 26 ancient Iron Age sites that contain many metallurgical tools and objects, illuminating the pre-European history of the city and surrounding area. The archaeological sites were added to the UNESCO World Heritage Tentative List on 11 April 2006 in the Cultural category. The site closest to Bangui is Pendere-Sengue, from Independence Avenue, where archaeologists and conservation agencies have carried out studies. It is a paleo-metallurgical site where several thousand shards of ceramics, iron tools, pottery, and an iron spatula weighing have been unearthed. Its dating, compared with similar sites in Nigeria and Sudan, could be close to the ninth century BC.\nThe modern settlement of Bangui was founded by Michel Dolisie and Alfred Uzac on 26 June 1889 on the direction of Brazzaville administrator Albert Dolisie. It was located in what was then the upper reaches of the French Congo, the present-day Congo. The original site was south of the Ubangi rapids. Its territory was organized first into the territory of the Upper Ubangi (\"\") and then as the separate colony of Ubangi-Shari. The initial capitals of these areas were at les Abiras and Fort de Possel further upstream, but the rapids at Bangui blocked them from direct communication along the river and caused the settlement there to grow in importance until, in 1906, it was chosen as the new headquarters for the French administration. Bangui retained its importance as a military and administrative centre when the colony was folded into French Equatorial Africa and under both Vichy and Free French control during World War II. The French operated a radio transmitter in Bangui, which was described in 1932 as \"the most remote radio station in Africa\".\nThe colony of Ubangi-Shari received its autonomy in 1958 as the Central African Republic and became independent from France in 1960. In 1970, President Jean-B\u00e9del Bokassa inaugurated the University of Bangui. He established the national airline Air Centrafrique the following year and ordered the construction of two new luxury hotels in Bangui. With tensions mounting between Bangui and Paris as a result of Bokassa's uncontrollable expenditures, western banks refused to lend him any more money. Relations with the French worsened still further in April 1974, when the body of Brigette Miroux was discovered in a hotel room in Bangui. Miroux was a native of northern France who in 1973 came to the Central African Republic to become a \"hostess\" in Bokassa's Caravelle aircraft. It was reported in the French media that she had been Bokassa's mistress and that he was responsible for her murder. As a result, Bokassa banned import of French newspapers and assumed control of the Agence France-Presse office in Bangui. By 1975, Bangui had a population of 300,723.\nIn March 1981, widespread violence took place in Bangui following elections, after Operation Caban led the French to drop Bokassa (who had begun to call himself Emperor Bokassa I) and to replace him with David Dacko. Opponents of the President met in Bangui and were forced to flee the country. After returning voluntarily to Bangui in the autumn of 1986, Bokassa went on trial. Initially faced with the death penalty, in February 1988 he was instead sentenced to life imprisonment. His successor was General Andr\u00e9 Kolingba, army chief of staff of Dacko's army, who took over control from the local French military on 1 September 1981 under the pretext that the country was heading towards civil war. Although he attempted to combat corruption and control the national economy, he was unable to achieve his reforms. By the middle of the 1980s the country's economic situation had deteriorated as 80% of the revenue went towards meeting the salaries of the staff.\nUnder pressure from a donor group called GIBAFOR (France, USA, Japan, Germany, EU, World Bank and the UN) Kolingba made moves to restore a degree of democracy in the country in 1991 with a multiparty government. Elections were held in 1993 and 1994. The first round was sabotaged by the government when it was clear they would lose. Under continued donor pressure elections were held again in 1994 as before with help from the UN Electoral Assistance Division. During these elections, Ange-F\u00e9lix Patass\u00e9 was elected to the post of president. Since he was from northern CAR, the southern group of Kolingba started a rebellion during 1996.\nIn May 1996, about 200 soldiers of the Central African Republic mutinied in Bangui, demanding salary increases and the abdication of Ange-F\u00e9lix Patass\u00e9. In the aftermath, the renegades plundered and killed more than 50 people. Following this, the French troops stationed in the country suppressed the rebellion and restored the dictatorial power. After being elected, President Patass\u00e9 announced a national unity government in early 1997. The Patass\u00e9 government, the opposition parties, and religious groups signed the Bangui Agreements in January 1997 which were a series of measures designed to reconcile competing political factions, reform and strengthen the economy. The same year, the rebel troops refused a military base in Bangui and in June a new revolt broke out.\nIn view of frequent political unrest the city was named in 1996 as one of the most dangerous cities in the world. On 25 October 2002, several towns in the country and later Bangui itself were attacked by the forces of General Fran\u00e7ois Boziz\u00e9, backed with international support. Boziz\u00e9 refused to accept an arrest warrant and \"defected with about a hundred troops, engaged in street battles in the northern neighborhoods of Bangui (traditionally supporting Patass\u00e9)\" and went north. Boziz\u00e9 went into exile in Chad but his troops returned to Bangui and fighting continued. Peace-keeping forces were ineffective, leaving Patass\u00e9 isolated, and with support from Chad, Boziz\u00e9's troops were successful in removing Patass\u00e9's government. Patass\u00e9, who was returning from Niger after attending a conference, was not permitted to land in Bangui and he took asylum in Togo, and Boziz\u00e9 seized power and suspended the constitution. An all-party National Transitional Government was set up which functioned as an interim legislative body. However, the \"climate of distrust continued\".\n2013 rebellion.\nIn late 2012, the S\u00e9l\u00e9ka coalition rebelled against the autocratic rule of Fran\u00e7ois Boziz\u00e9 and entered the city. After capturing Bria, Sibut, and other important towns, they were on the verge of capturing Damara, the last strategic town before Bangui. France and the US refused to support the president and neighbouring countries reinforced the Central African Multinational Force (Fomac).\nIn January 2013, the rebels terminated their operations, hoping for a negotiated settlement. Following a ceasefire and a power-sharing agreement, S\u00e9l\u00e9ka and Boziz\u00e9 agreed to honour the rebel's demands for the release of rebel prisoners and the expulsion of foreign troops from the country. The agreement allowed Boziz\u00e9 to complete his term in office and to include members of S\u00e9l\u00e9ka in a new government. It was also agreed that fresh elections would be held in 2016. The agreement was not honoured and the rebels captured Bangui on 23 March 2013, forcing Boziz\u00e9 to flee the capital.\nAs of early January 2014, \"around 500,000 have fled their homes\" in Bangui, \"almost half the city's population.\"\nOn 13 January 2021 around 200 rebels attacked Bangui, killing one peacekeeper before being repelled.\nGeography and climate.\nBangui, close to the country's southern border, lies on the northern banks of the Ubangi River just below a series of rapids that limit major commercial shipping upriver. The only major city located on the river, it covers an area of . The navigable Ubangi River, with the backdrop of lush green hills, turns sharply south below Bangui and connects to the Congo River just south of the equator near Brazzaville as its chief northern tributary. The Ubangi river marks the border between the Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Congolese town of Zongo is situated across the river from Bangui. The river flows to the east of downtown Bangui. During the rainy season the discharge in the river is three times higher than during the rest of the year. The city was also known as \"La Coquette\" (the beautiful city) in the 1970s.\nClose to the river, the city centre features a large arch dedicated to Bokassa as well as the presidential palace and the central market. Lying further north, the heart of the residential area has the largest market and most of the nightlife. Many of those in the suburbs live in houses known as Kodros, built of mud bricks with a thatched roof.\nThe Bangui Magnetic Anomaly, one of the earth's largest crustal anomalies and the largest in Africa, has its centre in Bangui.\" It takes the form of a huge ellipse of x , with its central point at 6 degrees north and 18 degrees east. It consists of three parts or segments, which comprise the northern, the southern and the central anomalies. The magnetic equator passes through the feature's centre. Although it is well documented, the feature's origins are not fully understood.\nThe Central African Republic is situated just north of the Equator with daily temperatures normally reaching at least 30\u00a0\u00b0C. Bangui, close to the Equator in the south of the country, it is slightly hotter and wetter than the northern regions. It has a tropical savanna climate (K\u00f6ppen: Aw) with dry winters. While the warm season is from 23 January to 18 March, the cold season lasts from 20 June to 27 August, when rainfall is frequently accompanied by thunderstorms. The city is bordered by thick tropical rainforests along the river banks. Several of its neighbourhoods are in low-lying areas prone to recurrent flooding with severe rains in June and July 2009 leaving 11,000 people homeless.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;After the Central African Republic attained independence in 1960, developmental activities began, and the urbanization of Bangui ensued. This is evidenced by the population growth from 279,800 in 1975 to 427,435 in 1988 to 524,000 by 1994, and to 652,000 in 2001. Apart from the ethnic people of the country, the city is also home for a minority group of Greek, Portuguese and Yemeni traders, and also has a small community of French people. The Bangui resident community includes diamond traders from western Africa and Chad, traders from many African countries, and refugees from the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Nigeria.\nThe official languages of the country are French and Sango; the latter (originally a language from the Ubangi River region) is spoken by 90% of the population. Some of the other languages spoken are Baya (Gbaya), Banda, Ngbaka, Sara, Mbum, Kare, and Mandjia. Sango was simplified by Christian missionaries and is widely used to this day.\nEconomy.\nBangui serves as an administrative, trade, and commercial centre. During the Second World War the country became wealthier as exports of rubber, cotton, coffee, uranium and diamonds increased. After the war, the employment of local people in mainstream administration led to the development of the country's infrastructure, which increased trade while slowing the national movement for independence.\nDuring David Dacko's presidency from 1960 to 1966, there was a significant increase in the production of diamonds. This occurred when the monopoly of the French concessionary companies was ended with a law allowing local citizens to dig for diamonds. After Dacko set up a diamond cutting factory at Bangui, diamonds became the country's leading export. But by the end of his five-year tenure, rampant corruption and financial indiscipline had resulted in workers being left unpaid and civil unrest ensued. Bokassa then seized power in a military coup in 1966.\nConcurrently, Bangui also became the key centre for social and cultural activity in the region, when new institutions were established in the city. However, political turmoil in the country, rampant corruption, and the dictatorial rule of President Bokassa centred in the city, brought in economic recession in the 1970s exacerbated by a fall in international prices for its major exports. This caused impoverishment of the people and severe conflict, further compounded by refugees migrating from troubled neighbouring countries.\nBangui received its first bank in 1946 when a branch of the Paris-based Banque de l'Afrique Occidentale was established there. Arab sellers dominated the city, and it was historically an important centre for ivory trading. Bangui manufactures include textiles, food products, beer, shoes, and soap. The main exports are cotton, rubber, timber, coffee, and sisal. Because of the ongoing strife, unemployment hovered near 23% in the city as of 2001[ [update]]. Ngaragba Central Prison, the national prison for men, is located in Bangui. As of 2007[ [update]], it had 476 inmates; prison conditions are reported to be poor.\nLandmarks.\nThe old town of Bangui has retained its colonial town planning, with wide boulevards leading towards a central market square. Attractions in Bangui include Boganda Museum, Bangui Zoo, and the Presidential Palace, formerly the Bokassa Palace. Notre-Dame Cathedral is the seat of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Bangui. Boganda Museum (\"Mus\u00e9e de Boganda\") has displays of traditional musical instruments, weapons, rural architectural features, ancient hunting tools, pottery, and also many religious antiques. It has a collection of bark cloth, the material used to cover Bokassa's bed.\nThere are several hotels up to international standards. The Ledger Plaza Bangui on the outskirts has an outdoor swimming pool, tennis court, and comfortable amenities. The National Hotel was established in 1970 with 30 rooms. Also of note are the Golf Palace Hotel, the Hotel du Centre with 72 rooms, JM Residence, the Oubangui Hotel, established in 1985, and Hotel Somba with 23 rooms.\nCulture.\nCustoms.\nPolygamy is an accepted practice among men.\nWhen someone dies in Bangui a representative from his or her village attends the funeral. \"This person is charged with indicating to the deceased the way back home so that the deceased may avenge himself and herself and demonstrate the power of the family\". The representative who attends the funeral also carries a little dust from the grave to the village, and gives it to the village's medicine man so that he can ascertain the reasons for his death.\nMost of the holidays in Bangui are festivals related to the Christian and Muslim faiths and are the same as those observed in other parts of the world. National holidays include Independence Day and the birthdays of Boganda and several other national heroes.\nCuisine.\nThe cuisine of CAR is referred to as Centrafrican and the staple diet in Bangui includes cassava, rice, squash, pumpkins and plantains served with a sauce and grilled meat. Okra or \"gombo\" is a popular vegetable. Peanuts and peanut butter are widely used. Game is popular, as are the fish-based dishes \"mabok\u00e9\" and \"soussou\". Manioc flour is used for preparing fufu.\nAlcoholic beverages served are locally brewed beer, palm wine and banana wine. Non-alcoholic beverages include ginger beer.\nArt.\nBangui's artisans' market has traditional wares representing the art products from different regions of the country. Handicrafts include woven mats and baskets, wooden utensils of simple design, carved stools, pottery, musical instruments, tanned skins, and wood products. The balafon, similar to a xylophone, is made out of the horns of animals. Innovative designs include butterfly wings stuck with gum on paper, and ebony and hardwood carvings of wood from the tropical region. Artwork also covers carved animals and human figures. The crafts center in Bangui provides training to about 100 students in artistic crafting in leather, ivory and ebony wares.\nMusic.\nBangui has a rich music tradition and showcases the country's music. Its musicians also perform in many countries abroad. The Bangui band groups were influenced by Zokela in the 1980s. The innovative music is based on dance bands who have adopted the Congolese music with electronic support. The music is rhythmic and blends with the Congolese rumba (soukous), which was influenced by son cubano, cha-cha-cha, and merengue. Popular Central African music groups or dance bands who perform in the city are Musiki, Zokela, Makembe, Cool Stars, Cannon Stars, and Super Stars. Bokassa, during his tenure as president, established a music recording studio in Bangui and employed musicians to sing his praise with songs extolling his qualities as an emperor and to develop his cult image among his people.\nSports.\nThe most popular sport is basketball. Bangui hosted the FIBA Africa Championship 1974, where the Central African Republic's national basketball team won one of its two continental titles. \nFootball (soccer) is also popular. Both men and women from Bangui and throughout the country have participated in the Olympic Games since 1968 as well as in many international events. The locals also organize boat races with hundreds of participants on the Ubangi River, which is a significant attraction.\nEducation.\nThe French system of education is the norm and French is the language of teaching, although the Sango language is promoted in schools. A substantial percentage of the population is literate. Schooling is compulsory for children ages 6 to 14.\nBangui is home to the University of Bangui, founded in 1969 by President Jean-B\u00e9del Bokassa who named it after himself; it started functioning in 1970. A public institution, the university provides non-agricultural education in the Central African Republic. Since 1981, the University Library has been in a separate building that houses its science, literature, and law collections. The medical school of the university has its own library.\nThe other educational institutions are the National School of Arts and the Central School of Agriculture, in addition to many religious and technical schools.\nA school in the eastern part of the city, Lyc\u00e9e Charles de Gaulle, was established by the French and is named after President of France Charles de Gaulle. Several notable Africans, including writers such as Calixthe Beyala, have studied in the city. Beyala studied at the Lyc\u00e9e des Rapides.\nPlaces of worship.\nAmong the places of worship, they are predominantly Christian churches and temples: Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Bangui (Catholic Church), Evangelical Lutheran Church of the Central African Republic (Lutheran World Federation), Evangelical Baptist Church of the Central African Republic (Baptist World Alliance). There are also Muslim mosques.\nTransport.\nBangui is the transport hub of the Central African Republic. As of 1999, eight roads connected the city to other main towns in the country, Cameroon, Chad and South Sudan; of these, only the toll roads are paved. During the rainy season from March to November, some roads are impassable. The road network in the city emanates from the Palace de la Republique.\nRiver ferries sail from the river port at Bangui to Brazzaville and Zongo. The river can be navigated most of the year between Bangui and Brazzaville. From Brazzaville, goods are transported by rail to Pointe-Noire, Congo's Atlantic port. The river port handles the overwhelming majority of the country's international trade and has a cargo handling capacity of 350,000 tons; it has length of wharfs and of warehousing space.\nThe first airstrip in Bangui was built between 1920 and 1925. Bangui M'Poko International Airport is located on of deforested land off the Avenue of Martyrs to the north of the old town, between the Koudoukou Avenue and the University of Bangui.\nHealthcare.\nA general hospital is located in the eastern side of the city. Modern healthcare facilities exist in Bangui (unlike the rest of the country) but are poor, providing only minimal care. Wealthier citizens make use of private clinics. The prevalence of HIV in Bangui is twice the national average. In late 2019, MSF started providing free medical care to HIV patients in the city; in the first year of the project, 1851 patients were admitted for HIV treatment, 558 of whom were newly diagnosed. The risk of catching malaria in Bangui and pygmy camps is also much higher than in the rest of the country.\nA conference of public health officials including representatives of the Centers for Disease Control and the World Health Organization was held in Bangui in October 1985. The conference evolved a diagnostic definition of AIDS which came to be known as the Bangui definition for AIDS. The conference defined symptoms of AIDS in Africa as \"prolonged fever for a month or more, weight loss of over 10% and prolonged diarrhea\". The Bangui definition proved problematic as immune suppression can also be caused by malnutrition.\nMedia.\nSeveral periodicals and three daily newspapers are published in Bangui: \"E le Songo\", the country's first newspaper, began publication in 1982. The other main newspapers are \"Le Novateur\", \"Le Citoyen\" and \"L'Echo de Centrafrique\". Most of the country's institutions have offices in Bangui, including French ones such as \u00c9lectricit\u00e9 de France (EDF).\nRadio stations operating in Bangui include \"Radio Centrafrique\", Radio Nehemie, Radio Notre-Dame, Radio Voix de la paix, Radio Ndeke Luka, RFI, Radio Voik de la grace, Radio Linga FM, Africa no.1, and Tropic FM. BBC World Service is the only English broadcasting station that is heard in the city on 90.2 FM, as all other local channels broadcast in either French and/or Sango. For reliable news, the UN runs channel Radio Ndeke Luka is on 100.8 FM.\nNotable people.\n \nTwin towns/Sister cities.\nBangui is twinned with:\nDodoma, Tanzania\nLinz, Austria\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56619", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56619", "title": "Bamako, Mali", "text": ""}
{"id": "56621", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56621", "title": "Astronomical distances", "text": ""}
{"id": "56622", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56622", "title": "Basseterre", "text": "Capital of Saint Kitts and Nevis\nBasseterre (; Saint Kitts Creole: \"Basterre\") is the capital and largest city of Saint Kitts and Nevis with an estimated population of 14,000 in 2018. Geographically, the Basseterre port is located at , on the south-western coast of Saint Kitts Island, and it is one of the chief commercial depots of the Leeward Islands. The city lies within Saint George Basseterre Parish.\nBasseterre is one of the oldest towns in the Eastern Caribbean.\nHistory.\nBasseterre was founded in 1627 by the French, under Sieur Pierre Belain d'Esnambuc. It served as the capital of the French colony of Saint-Christophe, which consisted of the northern and southern extremities of the island of St. Kitts (the centre was yielded to Britain). When Phillippe de Longvilliers de Poincy was made the French governor of St. Kitts in 1639, the town turned into a large, successful port, commanding Eastern Caribbean trade and colonisation.\nDe Poincy then quickly made Basseterre capital of the entire French West Indies colony, which included the islands of Guadeloupe and Martinique, and remained so until his death in 1660. The city was made capital of the island of St. Kitts in 1727, following the expulsion of the French from the island and the establishment of full British control.\nThe city of Basseterre has one of the most tragic histories of any Caribbean capital, destroyed many times by colonial wars, fire, earthquakes, floods, riots, and hurricanes. Despite all of this, a considerable number of well-restored buildings still exist in the centre of Basseterre.\nMost of the city structures were built after the great fire of 1867. The Circus was modelled after Piccadilly Circus, and the fountain in the centre was built in 1883, and dedicated to The Honourable Thomas Berkeley Hardtman Berkeley, the father of Henry Spencer Berkeley.\nGeography and climate.\nGeography.\nThe city of Basseterre skirts a bay on the southwestern shore of St. Kitts, Basseterre Bay. The city lies within the large Basseterre Valley, almost completely surrounded by lush green hills and mountains. It is primarily low-lying, which is one explanation for the name which the French gave it, as Basseterre translates to \"low land\" in English. However, the name Basseterre is also because the island is on the lee of winds of the island, and is thus a safe anchorage.\nThe name Capesterre, given to the region to the north, was dubbed so as it was facing the wind. Basseterre is surrounded by the Olivees Mountains to the north and the Conaree-Morne peaks to the east. The city is drained by the College River and the Westbourne River, which are locally known as \"ghauts\" and are dry most of the year. They even form streets in downtown Basseterre. This engineering folly has proven quite disastrous though, as College River has been the scene of many disastrous http:// in Basseterre history. Port Zante, located in the centre of the bay, lies on of land reclaimed from the sea in 1995.\nClimate.\nBasseterre has a semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification BSh), characterized by consistently warm temperatures and moderate rainfall. The dry season extends from December to April, while the wet season lasts from May to November, although even during the wet months, rainfall is typically brief and scattered, usually just below 10 days. The city averages about 900 millimetres (35 inches) of precipitation per year, making it drier than many other Caribbean destinations. \nAverage daytime highs remain around 29\u201331\u00a0\u00b0C (84\u201388\u00a0\u00b0F) year-round, with nighttime temperatures generally between 23\u201325\u00a0\u00b0C (73\u201377\u00a0\u00b0F). Sunshine is abundant throughout the year, often exceeding 3,000 hours annually. The city\u2019s low elevation and coastal exposure provide steady trade winds, keeping conditions comfortable, while reducing excessive heat and humidity.\nAround town.\nBasseterre is a small city that is laid out in a grid pattern. It has four main streets running west to east, and they are listed here in sequence from south to north: Bay Road, Liverpool Row, Central Street, and Cayon Street. The main street running north to south is Fort Street/Bank Street, which is home to the bulk of the island's main shops and banks. The city has two centres, at The Circus, which is geared towards tourism, and the Independence Square, which contains the cathedral, courthouse, and most of the older buildings.\nBasseterre is the main commercial and industrial centre of St. Kitts. It is also the country's main port of entry for both sea and air travel, as well as the road and rail transport hub. It houses the administration buildings for the federal government (those for the island of Nevis are in Charlestown). It also houses the headquarters of the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank, as well as the headquarters for many other regional financial institutions.\nDespite its small size, Basseterre played host to Carifesta VII (the Caribbean Festival of Arts) in 2000, outbidding rivals many times its size. The city was able to outbid the United States of America to host matches for the 2007 World Cricket Cup. The Warner Park Sporting Complex was the site of the allocated first round matches of the tournament. This made St. Kitts and Nevis the smallest country in the world ever to host a World Cup event.\nBasseterre is home to two private, for-profit medical institutions founded by Robert Ross: Ross University School of Veterinary Medicine and the International University of Nursing. The city has four secondary schools, two of which are government-owned, and two are private schools.\nReligion.\nThere are a large number of Christian churches in the city for its size. Most are Protestant, due to British colonization, but the cathedral in Basseterre is Catholic. The Anglican, also called the \"Church of England\", has the largest number of members, followed by the Methodist. Other Protestant denominations include Moravian, Church of God, Baptist, Seventh-day Adventist, Jehovah's Witness, Rivers of Living Water and Pentecostal. Afro-Christian syncretic sects are also widespread.\nEconomy.\nThe city of Basseterre has established itself as a financial centre in the Eastern Caribbean. It is home to the headquarters of the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank, as well as the Eastern Caribbean Securities Exchange, which lists securities for companies and corporations in the region. The city is also headquarters for the St Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla National Bank, the largest bank in the Eastern Caribbean, in terms of assets.\nThe city is also a major Eastern Caribbean industrial centre; its main exports being bass, electronics, beverages, apparel, and salt. The once dominating sugar industry closed in 2005. This was due to overwhelming debts and further predicted hardships from major price cuts planned by the EU. There are specified industrial estates which carry out sub-sonic technology, food processing, light engineering, bass engineering, and rum distilling.\nTransport.\nBasseterre is a hub for all major roads on the island of St. Kitts. Driving is done on the left. The speed limit in the city is everywhere, with special caution to be taken around school zones.\nPublic buses.\nPublic buses have a green license plate starting with the letter \"H\".\nThere are 5 main bus routes on St. Kitts:\nAll bus fees are $2.50 for a trip and under, $3.00 for a trip 5 to , and $3.75 for a trip over . (EC dollars. 1 US = 2.7 EC)\nNo public buses travel southwards to the main resort areas in Frigate Bay and the South East Peninsula.\nTaxis.\nTaxis have yellow license plates starting with the letter \"T\" or \"TA\". The taxi station in Basseterre is located at the Circus (466 6999). The taxis will take you just about anywhere for a pre-calculated price.\nHarbour.\nThe Deep Water Harbour in Basseterre is capable of both hosting and berthing of cruise ships or the handling of cargo. It is located to the extreme East of Basseterre Bay.\nPort Zante, in the centre of the Bay, is for cruise ships only. The port can accommodate the largest cruise ships in the world. It also has a marina.\nThe bay is also home to the bustling ferry operation which takes place between Basseterre and Charlestown, the capital of Nevis. There are numerous trips daily, served by as many as six different ferry boats. Ferry service also exists between Basseterre and Oranjestad, Statia as well as to St. Maarten, but the trips are irregular and infrequent.\nLocal airports.\nThe Robert L. Bradshaw International Airport serves the city of Basseterre and is located in the city's most North Eastern area. It has direct flights to London, New York, and Miami and seasonal flights to Charlotte, North Carolina, Atlanta, and Philadelphia in addition to other major cities in the United States and Canada during tourist season. The also nearby Vance W. Amory International Airport is located on the neighboring island of Nevis. The airport serves regional destinations, primarily in the Caribbean.\nRailway.\nSt. Kitts' 58\u00a0km of narrow (0.762m)-gauge railway terminates in Basseterre, and encompasses the island in a circular pattern. The railway lines, originally built to transport sugar cane to the central sugar factory in Basseterre, are now used to transport tourists via the St. Kitts Scenic Railway, which currently runs from Sandy Point to Basseterre.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nBasseterre is twinned with:\nProminent people.\nFamous people born in Basseterre include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56624", "revid": "10938973", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56624", "title": "Calamansi", "text": "Hybrid species of citrus\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCalamansi (Citrus\" \u00d7 \"microcarpa), also known as calamondin, Philippine lime, or Philippine lemon, is a citrus hybrid cultivated predominantly in the Philippines. It is native to the Philippines, parts of Indonesia (Borneo, Sumatra, and Sulawesi), Malaysia, and Brunei, as well as Taiwan, and parts of southern China.\nCalamansi is ubiquitous in traditional Philippine cuisine. It is naturally very sour, and is used in various condiments, beverages, dishes, marinades, and preserves. Calamansi is also used as an ingredient in Malaysian and Indonesian cuisines.\nCalamansi is a hybrid between kumquat (formerly considered as belonging to a separate genus \"Fortunella\") and another species of \"Citrus\" (in this case probably the mandarin orange).\nName.\nCalamansi is the Philippine English spelling of Tagalog (), and is the name by which it is most widely known in the Philippines. In parts of the United States, notably Florida and Hawaii, calamansi is also known as \"calamondin\", an old name from the American period of the Philippines. It is an anglicized form of the alternate Tagalog name \"kalamunding\".\nOther English common names of calamansi include: lemonsito (or limoncito, Spanish for \"little lemon\"), Philippine lime, calamonding, calamondin orange, calamandarin, golden lime, Philippine lemon, Panama orange (also used for kumquats), musk orange, bitter-sweets and acid orange.\nCalamansi was formerly identified as \"Citrus mitis\" Blanco, \"C. microcarpa\" Bunge or \"C. madurensis\" Lour. All those referred to it as a citrus. Swingle's system of citrus classification put kumquats into a separate genus, \"Fortunella\", making the calamansi an intergeneric hybrid in that older system. In 1975 it was therefore given the hybrid name \u00d7 \"Citrofortunella mitis\" by John Ingram and Harold E. Moore based on Blanco's species name. In 1984, pointed out that Bunge's species name, \"C. microcarpa\" (1832), predated Blanco's \"Citrus mitis\" (1837), making \u00d7 \"Citrofortunella microcarpa\" the proper name. Phylogenetic analysis now places the kumquat within the same genus as other citrus, meaning that its hybrids with other \"Citrus\", including those formerly named as \u00d7 \"Citrofortunella\", likewise belong in \"Citrus\".\n\"Citrus \u00d7 depressa\" (shikwasa), a similar citrus native to Taiwan and Okinawa, is sometimes called \"calamansi\" in English.\nDescription.\nCalamansi, \"Citrus x microcarpa\", is a shrub or small tree growing to . The plant is characterized by wing-like appendages on the leaf petioles and white or purplish flowers. The fruit of the calamansi resembles a small, round lime, usually in diameter, but sometimes up to . The center pulp and juice is the orange color of a tangerine with a very thin orange peel when ripe. Each fruit contains 8 to 12 seeds.\nVariegated mutation.\nThere is also a variegated mutation of the regular calamansi, showing green stripes on yellow fruit.\nUses.\nCulinary arts.\nThe fruits are sour and are often used for preserves or cooking. The calamansi bears a small citrus fruit that is used to flavor foods and drinks. Despite its outer appearance and its aroma, the taste of the fruit itself is quite sour, although the peel is sweet. Calamansi marmalade can be made in the same way as orange marmalade. The fruit is a source of vitamin C.\nThe fruit can be frozen whole and used as ice cubes in beverages such as tea, soft drinks, water, and cocktails. The juice can be used in place of that of the common Persian lime (also called \"Bearss lime\"). The juice is extracted by crushing the whole fruit, and makes a flavorful drink similar to lemonade. A liqueur can be made from the whole fruits, in combination with vodka and sugar.\nPhilippines.\nIn Filipino cuisines, the juice is used to marinate and season fish, fowl and pork. It is also used as an ingredient in dishes like \"sinigang\" (a sour meat or seafood broth) and \"kinilaw\" (raw fish marinated in vinegar and/or citrus juices). It is very commonly used as a condiment in dishes like \"lugaw\" (rice porridge), or in the basic \"sawsawan\" (dip) of calamansi juice, soy sauce (\"toyomansi\") and fish sauce (\"patismansi\"), used for fish, spring rolls, dumplings and various savoury dishes. It is used in various beverages, notably as calamansi juice, a Filipino drink similar to lemonade. It is also a common ingredient in salad dressings of Filipino ensalada dishes.\nCalamansi is also characteristically used as a condiment in almost all \"pancit\" dishes (Filipino noodles), which adds a citrusy sour flavor profile. They aren't usually cooked with the dishes but are provided as condiments, sliced into halves upon serving. They are meant to be squeezed over the noodles if desired.\nCalamansi is also a traditional ingredient in kesong puti, a native soft, unaged, white cheese made from carabao milk. It is added, along with cane vinegar, to help with the curdling, while also adding a citrusy flavor.\nIn other regions.\nIndonesia.\nThe fruit is used in local recipes in northern Indonesia, especially around the North Sulawesi region. Fish are spritzed and marinated with the juice prior to cooking to eliminate the \"fishy\" smell. \"Kuah asam\" (\"sour soup\") is a regional clear fish broth made with calamansi juice.\nMalaysia and Singapore.\nIn Malaysia and Singapore the fruit, known in Malay as \"limau kasturi\" and in Malaysian and Singaporean English as \"small lime\", can be found paired with dishes at hawker centers and restaurants. It serves as a way to balance, often rich, dishes like noodles and stews. The plant is also sold as an ornamental.\nFlorida.\nIn Florida, the fruit is used in its fully ripe form with a more mature flavor profile than the unripe version. Tasters note elements of apricot, tangerine, lemon, pineapple, and guava. The peel is so thin that each fruit must be hand snipped from the tree to avoid tearing. The entire fruit minus the stems and seeds can be used. It is hand processed and pureed or juiced and used in various products such as calamondin cake, coulis, marmalade, and jam. The peels can be dehydrated and used as a gourmet flavoring with salt and sugar. The fruit was popular with Florida cooks in cake form from the 1920s to the 1950s.\nFloridians who have a calamansi in the yard often use the juice in a summer variation of lemonade or limeade, as mentioned above, and, left a bit sour, it cuts thirst with the distinctive flavor; also it can be used on fish and seafood, or wherever any other sour citrus would be used.\nSri Lanka.\nThe fruit is cultivated in home gardens in Sri Lanka, and is known as (\"nas narang\") in Sinhala. It is used in Ayurveda medicine as treatment for Vitamin C deficiency, hyperlipidemia, and upper respiratory tract infections.\nCultivation.\nThe Philippines is the only major producer of calamansi. It ranks as the fourth most widely-grown fruit crop in the Philippines, after banana, mango, and pineapple. It is primarily grown for its juice extracts which are exported to the United States, Japan, South Korea, Canada, and Hong Kong, among others.\nThe Philippines exports between 160,000 and 190,000 metric tons of calamansi juice each year. Major production centers include the Southwestern Tagalog Region, Central Luzon, and the Zamboanga Peninsula. Its cultivation has spread from the Philippines throughout Southeast Asia, India, Hawaii, the West Indies, and Central and North America, though only on a small scale.\nIn sub-tropical and parts of warm temperate North America, \u00d7 \"Citrofortunella microcarpa\" is grown primarily as an ornamental plant in gardens, and in pots and container gardens on terraces and patios. The plant is especially attractive when the fruits are present.\nThe plant is sensitive to prolonged and/or extreme cold and is therefore limited outdoors to tropical, sub-tropical and the warmer parts of warm temperate climates, such as the coastal plain of the southeastern United States (USDA zones 8b - 11), parts of California, southern Arizona, southern Texas, and Hawaii. Potted plants are brought into a greenhouse, conservatory, or indoors as a houseplant during the winter periods in regions with cooler climates.\nIn cultivation within the United Kingdom, this plant has gained the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit in 2017.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56625", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56625", "title": "Hanna-Barbera Production", "text": ""}
{"id": "56626", "revid": "27341005", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56626", "title": "Belmopan", "text": "Capital city of Belize\nBelmopan () is the capital city of Belize. Its population in 2022 was 20,754. Belmopan is the smallest capital city in the continental Americas (by population) and the second-largest settlement in Belize, behind the former capital Belize City. Founded as a planned community in 1970, it is one of the newest national capital cities in the world. Since 2000, Belmopan has been one of two settlements in Belize to hold official city status, along with Belize City.\nBelmopan is located in Cayo District at an altitude of above sea level. Belmopan was constructed just to the east of the Belize River, inland from the former capital, the port of Belize City, after that city's near destruction by Hurricane Hattie in 1961. The government was moved to Belmopan in 1970. Its National Assembly Building is designed to resemble a Pre-Columbian Maya temple.\nHistory.\nAfter Hurricane Hattie in 1961 destroyed approximately 75% of the houses and business places in low-lying and coastal Belize City, the government proposed to encourage and promote the building of a new capital city. This new capital would be on better terrain, would entail no costly reclamation of land, and would provide for an industrial area. In 1962, a committee chose the site now known as Belmopan, southwest of the old capital of Belize City.\nSince Belize was a British colony (known as British Honduras) in 1964, Premier George Cadle Price led a delegation to London to seek funds to finance the new capital. Although they were not ready to commit to funding such a large project, the British government showed interest due to the logic of locating the capital on high ground safe from storm surges. To encourage financial commitment from the British government, Premier Price and the People's United Party government invited Anthony Greenwood, Secretary of State for the Commonwealth and Colonies, to visit Belize. One of the highlights of this visit was the unveiling of a monument at mile 49 on the Western Highway. The monument records that Lord Greenwood dedicated the site for the new capital on 9 October 1965. \nThe name chosen for the new capital, Belmopan, is derived from the union of two words: \"Belize\", the name of the longest river in the country, and \"Mopan\", one of the rivers in this area, which empties into the Belize River. The initial estimated cost for building this new city was 40 million Belize dollars (US$20.5 million). Only 20 million Belize dollars (US$10 million) were available, but the momentum was not to be lost.\nIn 1967, work began; the first phase of the new city was completed in 1970 at a cost of 24 million Belize dollars (US$12 million). From 1970 to 2000 the administration of Belmopan was managed by the Reconstruction and Development Corporation, known as \"Recondev.\" Recondev was vested with the power and authority to provide, or cause to be provided, the municipal functions necessary for the smooth running of the city's business and infrastructure.\nThere was a reluctance initially amongst foreign governments to relocate their embassies to Belmopan as there was some doubt as to whether the new inland city would truly become the functioning capital. The British High Commission opened in 1981 when Belize achieved independence, moving to its current location in 1984. In February 2005, the United States government began construction of its embassy's chancery in Belmopan, officially opening on 11 December 2006. Mexico, Brazil, Costa Rica, El Salvador, and Venezuela also have embassies in Belmopan, while Ecuador, Chile, and the Dominican Republic are represented by consulates. However, with four embassies and 29 consulates the former capital of Belize City still has most of the country's foreign diplomatic community.\nDesign.\nThe city layout centers around the Ring Road which is just under 4\u00a0km (2.5 miles) in circumference. The majority of government buildings are situated either within or around the Ring Road, and a large area within the Ring Road is also given to parkland.\nThe National Assembly Building is the focal point of the city's design, with the grey stone architecture and broad steps designed to resemble a Mayan temple, reflecting the nation's cultural heritage.\nThe original buildings were designed with extensive ventilation to accommodate the tropical climate leading to a pock-marked effect on the buildings' walls.\nGeography.\nBelmopan is inland from the Caribbean Sea and above sea level, located near the Belize River Valley with a view of the Mountain Pine Ridge foothills. The city is off the Hummingbird Highway. Two and a half hours south of Belmopan by road is the Cockscomb Basin Wildlife Sanctuary.\nClimate.\nBelmopan features a tropical monsoon climate (\"Am\") under the K\u00f6ppen climate classification. The city has a lengthy wet season that runs from May through January and a short dry season covering the remaining three months. As is the characteristic of many cities with a tropical monsoon climate, Belmopan sees some rainfall during its dry season. March and April are Belmopan's driest months with roughly of rainfall observed on average during those months. As with Belize City, these are somewhat unusual months for a city with a tropical monsoon climate to have its driest months of the year. Typically the driest month for a city with this climate type is the month after the winter solstice, which in Belmopan would be January. Average monthly temperatures are somewhat constant throughout the course of the year, ranging from .\nEducational institutions.\nThe city of Belmopan has three pre-schools, four primary schools and four secondary schools as well as a modern Regional Language Centre (RLC) on the central campus of the University of Belize, where students from neighbouring Spanish-speaking countries come to study English. University of Belize's campus in Belmopan has the following colleges: Education and Arts, Management and Social Sciences, Science and Technology, and Nursing and Allied Health. The church/state system prevails in Belizean education, especially where pre-school, primary and secondary school education is concerned, and nearly all schools in Belmopan are sustained by churches.\nInternational schools:\nSecondary schools:\nLocal missionaries and non-profit organizations also provide practical educational opportunities for Belizeans.\nDemographics.\nThe population of Belmopan proper (20,754 people as of 2022) is of various ethnicities, including Kriols, Garifuna, Mestizo, Maya, and recent immigrants from Asian countries such as China and Taiwan.\nThere are five zones around Belmopan proper:\nCulture.\nLocal and regional events.\nSome of Belmopan's noteworthy events include presentations by the Belmopan Choral Society, the Festival of Arts for school children, and National Day activities.\nThe University of Belize's Black Jaguars squad has won two national championships playing out of Belmopan. Nearby communities including Roaring Creek, Camalote, Esperanza, and Georgeville play a softball tournament in the early part of the year.\nSocial and community activities.\nThe City Council promotes Belmopan as \"The Garden City.\" A Crime prevention Initiative has recently been introduced by the council in conjunction with the Belize Police Department, which introduced a Special Constable/Community Policing Programme. The council cooperates with social organizations like the Lions Club, the Belize Scout Association, Rotary International, and other NGOs. Social and cultural events and meetings of community groups are frequently held at the George Price Centre.\nMuseums.\nMuseums and galleries in the city include the planned Belmopan Museum. Similar institutions include the National Archives of Belize and the National Heritage Library.\nEconomy.\nGovernment.\nAt its inception and afterward, Belmopan was governed by the corporation RECONDEV (Reconstruction and Development Corporation), which answered to the government.\nResidents of Belmopan voted in a referendum in 1999 to switch to direct election of a city council. In 2000, Belmopan was incorporated as a city and held its first City Council election. Anthony Chanona of the People's United Party was elected mayor with a six-man slate, and reelected in 2003. Following the People's Party municipal victory of 2020, the mayor of Belmopan is https://.\nAs Belmopan is the seat of government, many of its inhabitants work for the national government in administrative or technical roles. Many are based in the large cluster of government buildings around the National Assembly building.\nCommercial.\nBelmopan has approximately 589 business establishments (the 1997 census revealed the presence of 373). Five international banks are in the city, as are several local financial institutions. A bus terminal and market complex were constructed in 2003.\nIndustrial.\nWithin the zoning regulations, Belmopan has set aside approximately of land made up mostly of one-acre (4,000\u00a0m2) parcels in city limits. While there is very little industrial activity at present, the council has embarked on a scheme to attract local and foreign investment to the city. Plans are underway to create a industrial park close to the municipal airstrip, a paved 1,100-metre strip with no control tower or hangars.\nTransportation.\nRail.\nBelmopan will have a light rail system that is currently undergoing a feasibility study conducted by the Japan International Cooperation Agency.\nAir.\nBelmopan is served by Hector Silva Airstrip, a domestic airport located in the northwest of the city. Currently (April 2024), there are, however, no scheduled services to Belmopan anymore. The closest city served by scheduled flights is Belize City, 79km away, harbouring both Philip S. W. Goldson International Airport, the country's only international airport, and the domestic Sir Barry Bowen Municipal Airport.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56627", "revid": "18953656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56627", "title": "EDS", "text": "EDS or Eds may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "56629", "revid": "9719271", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56629", "title": "Bissau", "text": "Capital and largest city of Guinea-Bissau\nBissau (; ) is the capital and largest city of Guinea-Bissau. As of 2015,[ [update]] it had a population of 492,004. Bissau is located on the Geba River estuary, off the Atlantic Ocean, and is Guinea-Bissau's largest city, major port, its administrative and military center.\nEtymology.\nThe term Bissau may have come from the name of a clan N'nssassun, in its plural form B\u00f4ssassun. Intchassu (B\u00f4ssassu) was the name given to the nephew of King Mecau\u2014the first sovereign of the Bissau\u2014son of his sister Pungenhum. B\u00f4ssassu formed a clan of the Papel peoples.\nHistory.\nFrom well before the arrival of Europeans to the early 20th century, the island of Bissau was governed as a kingdom inhabited by the Papel people. According to oral tradition, the kingdom was founded by Mecau, the son of the king of Quinara (Guinala), who moved to the area with his pregnant sister, six wives, and subjects of his father's kingdom. The kingdom was composed of seven clans, descended from the sister and six wives. The Bossassun clan, which descends from the sister, inherited the throne. The Kingdom of Bissau was highly stratified. The king's coronation involved the practice of binding and beating the king, as the king should know what punishment felt like before administering it, as well as the presentation of a spear, the royal badge of office. When the Portuguese began to trade there in the 16th century, the king of Bissau was among the most supportive monarchs of the region. In 1680 Bissau even helped the Portuguese in a conflict with the Papels of Cacheu.\nThe city was founded in 1687 as a Portuguese trading post. During this same period French activities in the area were increasing. Although the king of Bissau Bacompolco refused them permission to build a fort, he did grant them a trading factory, from which they shipped thousands of slaves, among other things. In response the Portuguese Conselho Ultramarino established the captaincy-general of Bissau, and by 1696 the town had a fort, a church, and a hospital. It was the main emporium for trade on and south of the Geba river, and was rivaling if not eclipsing Cacheu in importance.\nBacompulco died in 1696. King Incinhate emerged from the ensuing succession dispute despite tacit Portuguese opposition, and relations rapidly deteriorated. When Captain-General Pinheiro tried to enforce Portugal's monopoly in defiance of the Papel policy of free trade, Incinhate surrounded the incomplete fort and threatened to massacre the inhabitants. Pinheiro later died in Papel custody. Unable to enforce a trading monopoly or collect duties from foreign shipping, the Portuguese soon abandoned the fort. They returned in 1753 but, faced with determined Papel resistance, were unable to build a new fort and left two years later.\nThe fort was rebuilt by the Gr\u00e3o Par\u00e1 and Maranh\u00e3o Company in 1775 to better project Portuguese power and store more slaves for shipment to Brazil. Real control of the area, however, remained in the hands of the Papel kings. In 1869, as part of an effort to more efficiently govern the territory, Bissau was raised to the status of commune.\nThe decades on either side of the turn of the 20th century saw fierce resistance on the part of the Papels to colonial 'pacification campaigns.' In 1915, after 30 years of war, the Portuguese under the command of Officer Teixeira Pinto and warlord Abdul Injai defeated the Kingdom of Bissau and permanently incorporated it into Portuguese Guinea. In 1941 the capital was transferred from Bolama to Bissau. 1959 saw the bloody repression of a dockworkers' strike, a key event that pushed the nationalists towards armed resistance.\nAfter the declaration of independence by the anti-colonial guerrillas of PAIGC in 1973, the capital of the rebel territories was declared to be Madina do Boe, while Bissau remained the colonial capital. The city was attacked in 1968 and 1971 by nationalist forces. When Portugal granted independence, following the military coup of 25 April in Lisbon, Bissau became the capital of the newly independent state.\nBissau was the scene of intense fighting during the beginning and end of the Guinea-Bissau Civil War in 1998 and 1999. Much of the infrastructure was destroyed and most of the population fled. The city rebounded after peace returned, holding more than 25% of the country's population during the 2009 census and witnessing the erection of many new and rehabilitated buildings.\nIn 2023, the Turkish electric company Karpowership cut power to the city, due to an unpaid bill exceeding $15 million. Power delivery stopped early on the morning of 17 October, and was resumed late the following day, after Guinea-Bissau had made a payment of $6 million.\nGeography and climate.\nBissau is located on the Geba River estuary, off the Atlantic Ocean. The land surrounding the city is extremely low-lying, and the river is accessible to ocean-going vessels despite its modest discharge for about beyond the city.\nBissau has a tropical savanna climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Aw\"), not quite wet enough to qualify as a tropical monsoon climate (\"Am\") but much wetter than most climates of its type.\nAlmost no rain falls from November to May, but during the remaining five months of the year, the city receives around of rain.\nDemographics.\nAt the 1979 census, Bissau had a population of 109,214. By the 2015 census, Bissau had a population of 492,004.\nEconomy.\nBissau is the country's largest city, major port, and educational, administrative, industrial and military center. Peanuts, hardwoods, copra, palm oil, milk products, and rubber are the chief products. Bissau is also the main city of the fishing and agricultural industry in the country.\nTransportation.\nAir.\nBissau is served by Osvaldo Vieira International Airport, the country's sole international airport, which currently offers flights from six different airlines.\nHighways.\nThe main highway connecting Bissau to the rest of the nation and the continent is the Trans\u2013West African Coastal Highway. There are also many smaller national highways that connect to other big cities such as Bafat\u00e1 and Gabu.\nEducation.\nThe main secondary school institutions in Bissau are the National Lyceum Kwame N'Krumah and the Bethel-Bissau Adventist School. The main higher education institutions in the city are the Am\u00edlcar Cabral University, the Catholic University of Guinea Bissau, and the Jean Piaget University of Guinea-Bissau.\nThe city of Bissau still has two international schools:\nCulture.\nAttractions include the Portuguese-built Fortaleza de S\u00e3o Jos\u00e9 da Amura barracks from the 18th century, containing Am\u00edlcar Cabral's mausoleum, the Pidjiguiti Memorial to the dockers killed in the Bissau dockers' strike on 3 August 1959, the Guinea-Bissau National Arts Institute, Bissau New Stadium and local beaches.\nMany buildings in the city were ruined during the Guinea-Bissau Civil War (1998\u20131999), including the Guinea-Bissau Presidential Palace and the Bissau French Cultural Centre (now rebuilt), and the city center is still underdeveloped. Because of the large population of Muslims in Bissau, Ramadan is also an important celebration.\nSports.\nFootball is the most popular sport in the country, as well as in the city. Many teams are based in the city, such as: UD Internacional, SC de Bissau, SC Portos de Bissau, Sport Bissau e Benfica, and FC Cuntum. Stadiums that are located in the city are Est\u00e1dio Lino Correia and Est\u00e1dio 24 de Setembro.\nReligion.\nThe main religions are Muslim (50%), then Christian (34%) and animist (7.9%).\nPlaces of worship.\nAmong the places of worship, Muslim mosques are predominant. There are also some Christian churches and temples such as the Roman Catholic Diocese of Bissau (Catholic Church), Evangelical Churches, and the Universal Church of the Kingdom of God.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 Sister cities.\nBissau is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
