{"id": "49796", "revid": "50655340", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49796", "title": "Brighton", "text": "Seaside resort on the south coast of England\nBrighton ( ) is a seaside resort in the unitary authority area of Brighton and Hove, in East Sussex, England, south of London. Archaeological evidence of settlement in the area dates back to the Bronze Age, Roman and Anglo-Saxon periods. The ancient settlement of \"Brighthelmstone\" was documented in the \"Domesday Book\" (1086). The town's importance grew in the Middle Ages as the Old Town developed, but it languished in the early modern period, affected by foreign attacks, storms, a suffering economy and a declining population. Brighton began to attract more visitors following improved road transport to London and becoming a boarding point for boats travelling to France. The town also developed in popularity as a health resort for sea bathing as a purported cure for illnesses.\nIn the Georgian era, Brighton developed as a highly fashionable seaside resort, encouraged by the patronage of the Prince Regent, later King George IV, who spent much time in the town and constructed the Royal Pavilion in the Regency era. Brighton continued to grow as a major centre of tourism following the arrival of the railways in 1841, becoming a popular destination for day-trippers from London. Many of the major attractions were built in the Victorian era, including the Grand Hotel, the Hilton Brighton Metropole, the Palace Pier and the West Pier. The town continued to grow into the 20th century, expanding to incorporate more areas into the town's boundaries before joining Hove to form the unitary authority of Brighton and Hove in 1997, which was granted city status in 2000. Today, Brighton and Hove district has a resident population of about 283,870 and the wider Brighton and Hove conurbation has a population of 474,485 (2011 census).\nBrighton's location has made it a popular destination for tourists, renowned for its diverse communities, shopping areas, large and vibrant cultural, music and arts scene, and its large LGBT population, leading to its recognition as the \"unofficial gay capital of the UK\". As of the 2021 census, 10.7% of the population of Brighton and Hove over the age of 18 identify as gay, lesbian or bisexual, the highest percentage in the entire UK. Brighton has been called the UK's \"hippest city\", as well as \"the happiest place to live in the UK\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nToponymy.\nThe earliest attestation of Brighton's name is \"Bristelmestune\", recorded in the \"Domesday Book\". Although more than 40 variations have been documented, \"Brighthelmstone\" (or \"Brighthelmston\") was the standard rendering between the 14th and 18th centuries.\n\"Brighton\" was originally an informal shortened form, first seen in 1660; it gradually supplanted the longer name and was in general use from the late 18th century, although \"Brighthelmstone\" remained the town's official name until 1810. The name is of Anglo-Saxon origin. Most scholars believe that it derives from \"Beorthelm\" + \u2014the homestead of Beorthelm, a common Old English name associated with villages elsewhere in England. The element is common in Sussex, especially on the coast, although it occurs infrequently in combination with a personal name. An alternative etymology taken from the Old English words for 'stony valley' is sometimes given but has less acceptance. \"Brighthelm\" gives its name to, among other things, a church, a pub in Brighton, some halls of residence at the University of Sussex. Writing in 1950, historian Antony Dale noted that unnamed antiquaries had suggested an Old English word or , meaning 'divided', could have contributed the first part of the historic name Brighthelmstone. The town was originally split in half by the Wellesbourne, a winterbourne which was culverted and buried in the 18th century.\nBrighton has several nicknames. Poet Horace Smith called it \"The Queen of Watering Places\", and \"Old Ocean's Bauble\". Novelist William Makepeace Thackeray referred to \"Doctor Brighton\", calling the town \"one of the best of Physicians\". \"London-by-the-Sea\" is well-known, reflecting Brighton's popularity with Londoners as a day-trip resort, a commuter dormitory and a desirable destination for those wanting to move out of the metropolis. \"The Queen of Slaughtering Places\", a pun on Smith's description, became popular when the Brighton trunk murders came to the public's attention in the 1930s. The mid-19th-century nickname \"School Town\" referred to the remarkable number of boarding, charity and church schools in the town at the time.\nHistory.\nThe first settlement in the Brighton area was Whitehawk Camp, a Neolithic encampment on Whitehawk Hill which has been dated to between 3500 BC and 2700 BC. It is one of six causewayed enclosures in Sussex. Archaeologists have only partially explored it, but have found numerous burial mounds, tools and bones, suggesting it was a place of some importance. There was also a Bronze Age settlement at Coldean. Brythonic Celts arrived in Britain in the 7th century BC, and an important Brythonic settlement existed at Hollingbury Castle on Hollingbury Hill. This Celtic Iron Age encampment dates from the 3rd or 2nd century BC and is circumscribed by substantial earthwork outer walls with a diameter of c. . Cissbury Ring, roughly from Hollingbury, is suggested to have been the tribal \"capital\".\nLater, there was a Roman villa at Preston Village, a Roman road from London ran nearby, and much physical evidence of Roman occupation has been discovered locally. From the 1st century AD, the Romans built a number of villas in Brighton and Romano-British Brythonic Celts formed farming settlements in the area. After the Romans left in the early 4th century AD, the Brighton area returned to the control of the native Celts. Anglo-Saxons then invaded in the late 5th century AD, and the region became part of the Kingdom of Sussex, founded in 477 AD by king \u00c6lle.\nAnthony Seldon identified five phases of development in pre-20th century Brighton. The village of \"Bristelmestune\" was founded by these Anglo-Saxon invaders, probably in the early Saxon period. They were attracted by the easy access for boats, sheltered areas of raised land for building and better conditions compared to the damp, cold and misty Weald to the north. By the time of the Domesday survey in 1086 it was a fishing and agricultural settlement, a rent of 4,000 herring was established, and its population was about 400. By the 14th century there was a parish church, a market and rudimentary law enforcement (the first town constable was elected in 1285). Sacked and burnt by French invaders in the early 16th century\u2014the earliest depiction of Brighton, a painting of c. 1520, shows Admiral Pregent de Bidoux's attack of June 1514\u2014the town recovered strongly based on a thriving mackerel-fishing industry. The grid of streets in the Old Town (the present Lanes area) were well developed and the town grew quickly: the population rose from c. 1,500 in 1600 to c. 4,000 in the 1640s. By that time Brighton was Sussex's most populous and important town.\nOver the next few decades, though, events severely affected its local and national standing, such that by 1730 \"it was a forlorn town decidedly down on its luck\". More foreign attacks, storms (especially the devastating Great Storm of 1703), a declining fishing industry, and the emergence of nearby Shoreham as a significant port caused its economy to suffer. By 1708 other parishes in Sussex were charged rates to alleviate poverty in Brighton, and Daniel Defoe wrote that the expected \u00a38,000 cost of providing sea defences was \"more than the whole town was worth\". The population declined to 2,000 in the early 18th century.\nFrom the 1730s, Brighton entered its second phase of development\u2014one which brought a rapid improvement in its fortunes. The contemporary fad for drinking and bathing in seawater as a purported cure for illnesses was enthusiastically encouraged by Richard Russell from nearby Lewes. He sent many patients to \"take the cure\" in the sea at Brighton, published a popular treatise on the subject, and moved to the town soon afterwards (the Royal Albion, one of Brighton's early hotels, occupies the site of his house). Others were already visiting the town for recreational purposes before Russell became famous, and his actions coincided with other developments which made Brighton more attractive to visitors. From the 1760s it was a boarding point for boats travelling to France; road transport to London was improved when the main road via Crawley was turnpiked in 1770; and spas and indoor baths were opened by other entrepreneurial physicians such as Sake Dean Mahomed and Anthony Relhan (who also wrote the town's first guidebook).\nFrom 1780, the development of the Georgian terraces had started, and the fishing village developed as the fashionable resort of Brighton. The growth of the town was further encouraged by the patronage of the Prince Regent (later King George IV) after his first visit in 1783. He spent much of his leisure time in the town and constructed the Royal Pavilion during the early part of his Regency. In this period the modern form of the name Brighton came into common use. A permanent military presence was established in the city with the completion of Preston Barracks in 1793. It was rebuilt in 1830.\nThe population increased rapidly throughout the 19th century from 7,339 in 1801 to 46,661 in 1841, and by 1901 the population had reached more than 120,000. The arrival of the London and Brighton Railway in 1841 brought Brighton within the reach of day-trippers from London. Many of the major attractions were built during the Victorian era, such as the Grand Hotel (1864), the West Pier (1866), and the Palace Pier (1899). Prior to either of these structures, the famous Royal Suspension Chain Pier was built, to the designs of Captain Samuel Brown. It lasted from 1823 to 1896 and is featured in paintings by both Turner and Constable.\nDue to the boundary changes, the land area of Brighton expanded from 1,640\u00a0acres\u00a0(7\u00a0km2) in 1854 to 14,347\u00a0acres\u00a0(58\u00a0km2) in 1952. New housing estates were established in the acquired areas, including Moulsecoomb, Bevendean, Coldean and Whitehawk. The major expansion of 1928 also incorporated the villages of Patcham, Ovingdean and Rottingdean, and much council housing was built in parts of Woodingdean after the Second World War. By the 1970s, the town had acquired a reputation as a retirement destination, with an elderly population. However, this was reversed in the 1990s, as Brighton regained the fashionable status it held in the 18th and 19th centuries.\nIn 1997, the town of Brighton and its neighbouring town Hove were joined to form the unitary authority of Brighton and Hove, which was granted city status by Queen Elizabeth II as part of the millennium celebrations in 2000.\nDemography.\nAs of 2017[ [update]], the Brighton and Hove district, of which Brighton is the largest area, has an estimated resident population of 283,870 residents. It is ranked the 60th most populous district in England. Compared to the national average, Brighton has fewer children and old residents but a large proportion of adults aged 20\u201344.\nBrighton has long had an LGBT-friendly history. In a 2014 estimate, 11\u201315 per\u00a0cent of the city's population aged 16 or over is thought to be lesbian, gay or bisexual. The city also had the highest percentage of same-sex households in the UK in 2004 and the largest number of civil partnership registrations outside London in 2013. The 2021 census, which was the first to measure sexual orientation, recorded that 11% of people identified as lesbian, gay, or bisexual; higher than the national and regional averages which were 3%.\nReligion.\nBrighton is identified as one of the least religious places in the UK, based upon analysis of the 2011 census which revealed that 42 per cent of the population profess no religion, far higher than the national average of 25 per\u00a0cent. Brighton has been described as the UK's most \"Godless\" city. The largest religion is Christianity, with 43 per\u00a0cent reporting an affiliation. The second-largest religion is Islam, with 2.2 per\u00a0cent, which is lower than the national average.\nAs part of the Jedi census phenomenon in 2001, 2.6 per\u00a0cent claimed their religion was 'Jedi Knight', the largest percentage in the country.\nHomelessness.\nIn December 2021, new data released by Shelter, revealed that \"one in 78 people in Brighton and Hove are homeless\". The report also records the city as having the third highest rate of homelessness in England, with London claiming the top spot followed by Luton. \nIn a previous charity report issued in November 2016, three areas in Brighton &amp; Hove, East Brighton, Queen's Park, and Moulsecoomb &amp; Bevendean ranked in the top ten per cent nationally for deprivation.\nAlthough deprivation in Brighton is distributed across the city, it is more concentrated in some areas. The highest concentration is in the Whitehawk, Moulsecoomb, and Hollingbury areas but is also found around the St. James's Street and Eastern Road areas. A 2015 government statistic showed that the area around Brighton's Palace Pier roundabout and to the east towards St James's Street in Kemptown is the seventh-worst living environment in England. On 19 January 2017, Brighton council announced they were looking at certain initiatives to try to alleviate some of the increasing homelessness seen on Brighton's streets and were hoping to open the first in-house temporary housing for homeless people in the city. \nHomelessness figures released by Crisis in December 2018 reported a record high in the UK, with figures in Sussex, including Brighton and Hove, reported as being \"high\".\nAt a meeting of the full B&amp;H Council on 25 March 2021, Brighton and Hove became the first UK City to adopt the Homeless Bill of Rights.\nThe bill was passed by 31 votes to 11, with 7 abstentions.\nGeography.\nBrighton lies between the South Downs and the English Channel to the north and south, respectively. The Sussex coast forms a wide, shallow bay between the headlands of Selsey Bill and Beachy Head; Brighton developed near the centre of this bay around a seasonal river, the Wellesbourne (or Whalesbone), which flowed from the South Downs above Patcham. This emptied into the English Channel at the beach near the East Cliff, forming \"the natural drainage point for Brighton\".\nBehind the estuary was a stagnant pond called the Pool or Poole, so named since the medieval era. This was built over with houses and shops from 1793, when the Wellesbourne was culverted to prevent flooding, and only the name of the road (Pool Valley, originally Pool Lane) marks its site. One original house survives from the time of the pool's enclosure. Behind Pool Valley is Old Steine (historically \"The Steyne\"), originally a flat and marshy area where fishermen dried their nets. The Wellesbourne occasionally reappears during times of prolonged heavy rain; author Mark Antony Lower referred to an early 19th-century drawing of the Royal Pavilion showing \"quite a pool of water across the Steyne\".\nDespite 16th-century writer Andrew Boorde's claim that \"Bryght-Hempston [is] among the noble ports and havens of the realm\", Brighton never developed as a significant port: rather, it was considered as part of Shoreham. Nevertheless, the descriptions \"Port of Brighthelmston\" or \"Port of Brighton\" were sometimes used between the 14th and 19th centuries, as for example in 1766 when its notional limits were defined for customs purposes.\nThe East Cliff runs for several miles from Pool Valley towards Rottingdean and Saltdean, reaching above sea level. The soil beneath it, a mixture of alluvium and clay with some flint and chalk rubble, has experienced erosion for many years. The cliff itself, like the rest of Brighton's soil, is chalk. Below this are thin layers of Upper and Lower Greensand separated by a thicker band of Gault clay. The land slopes upwards gradually from south to north towards the top of the Downs.\nMain transport links developed along the floor of the Wellesbourne valley, from which the land climbs steeply\u2014particularly on the east side. The earliest settlement was by the beach at the bottom of the valley, which was partly protected from erosion by an underwater sandbar. Changes in sea level affected the foreshore several times: disappeared in the first half of the 14th century, and the Great Storm of 1703 caused widespread destruction. The first sea defences were erected in 1723, and a century later a long sea wall was built.\nClimate.\nBrighton has a temperate climate: its is \"Cfb\". It is characterised by cool summers and cool winters with frequent cloudy and rainy periods. Average rainfall levels increase as the land rises: the 1958\u20131990 mean was on the seafront and about at the top of the South Downs above Brighton. Storms caused serious damage in 1703, 1806, 1824, 1836, 1848, 1850, 1896, 1910 and 1987. Heavy snow is rare, but particularly severe falls were recorded in 1881 and 1967.\nBoundaries and areas.\nAt the time of the Domesday survey in 1086, Brighton was in the Rape of Lewes and the Hundred of Welesmere. The new Hundred of Whalesbone, which covered the parishes of Brighton, West Blatchington, Preston and Hove, was formed in 1296. Parishes moved in and out several times, and by 1801 only Brighton and West Blatchington were included in the Hundred.\nIn its original form, Brighton parish covered about between the English Channel, Hove, Preston, Ovingdean and Rottingdean. The borough (but not the civil parish) was first extended from 31 October 1873, when was annexed from Preston civil parish. In 1894 the part outside the borough became Preston Rural civil parish and Preston civil parish continued in the borough. On 1 April 1889 Brighton became a county borough.\nOn 1 October 1923, were added to Brighton borough and to Preston civil parish from Patcham parish: Brighton Corporation was developing the Moulsecoomb estate there at the time. On 1 April 1928, Brighton civil parish was extended to include Preston civil parish. On the same date the borough grew by nearly five times by adding Ovingdean and Rottingdean parishes in their entirety and parts of Falmer, Patcham and West Blatchington; it also exchanged small parts with Hove municipal borough. All the areas added to the borough became part of Brighton civil parish. From 1 April 1952, more of Falmer and part of the adjacent Stanmer parish were added; 20 years later, land and marine territory associated with the new Brighton Marina development also became part of Brighton. Except for a small addition of rural land in 1993 (from Pyecombe parish), Brighton Borough's boundaries remained the same until it was joined to Hove Borough in 1997 to form the unitary authority of Brighton and Hove.\nThe old boundary between Brighton and Hove is most clearly seen on the seafront, where the King Edward Peace Statue (1912) straddles the border, and in a twitten called Boundary Passage which runs northwards from Western Road to Montpelier Place. There is a Grade II-listed parish boundary marker stone in this passageway. Between Western Road and the seafront, the boundary runs up Little Western Street (pavement on eastern side, in Brighton), but it is not visible. Northwards from Western Road, it runs to the west of Norfolk Road, Norfolk Terrace, Windlesham Road and Windlesham Gardens in the Montpelier area, then along the south side of Davigdor Road to Seven Dials. From there it runs along the west side of Dyke Road as far as Withdean Road in Withdean, at which point it crosses Dyke Road so that the section north of that is part of Hove parish. The boundary continues to follow Dyke Road towards Devil's Dyke on the South Downs.\nGovernance and politics.\nBrighton is covered by two constituencies in the Parliament of the United Kingdom: Brighton Kemptown and Peacehaven and Brighton Pavilion. In the 2024 general election, Brighton Kemptown elected Chris Ward, Labour; Brighton Pavilion elected Si\u00e2n Berry, Green Party.\nThere are 21 wards in the city of Brighton and Hove, of which 12 are in Brighton. Regency, St Peter's &amp; North Laine, Preston Park, Withdean, Patcham, Hollingdean &amp; Stanmer and Hanover &amp; Elm Grove are part of the Brighton Pavilion constituency; Moulsecoomb &amp; Bevendean, Queen's Park, East Brighton, Woodingdean and Rottingdean Coastal are covered by the Brighton Kemptown constituency.\nThe newly created Borough of Brighton consisted of six wards in 1854: St Nicholas, St Peter, Pier, Park, Pavilion and West. When the territory was extended to include part of Preston parish in 1873, the new area became a seventh ward named Preston. The seven were split into 14 in 1894: Hanover, Kemp Town (renamed King's Cliff in 1908), Lewes Road, Montpelier, Pavilion, Pier, Preston, Preston Park, Queen's Park, Regency, St John, St Nicholas, St Peter, and West. Preston ward was extended in 1923 to incorporate the area taken into the borough from Patcham parish in 1923 for the construction of the Moulsecoomb estate, and in 1928 the ward was divided into four: Hollingbury, Moulsecoomb, Preston and Preston Park. Elm Grove and Patcham wards were created at the same time, bringing the total to 19. There were further changes in 1952, 1955 and 1983, at which time there were 16 wards. This situation continued until 1 April 1997, when Hove and its wards became part of the new unitary authority of Brighton and Hove.\nBrighton Town Hall occupies a large site in the Lanes. Medieval Brighthelmston had a town hall, although it was called the Townhouse and functioned more like a market hall. A later building (1727) known as the Town Hall was principally used as a workhouse. Work on the first purpose-built town hall began in 1830; Thomas Read Kemp laid the first stone, and Thomas Cooper designed it on behalf of the Brighton Town Commissioners (of which he was a member). Brighton Corporation spent \u00a340,000 to extend it in 1897\u201399 to the Classical design of Brighton Borough Surveyor Francis May. Despite this, the building was too small for municipal requirements by the mid-20th century, and extra council buildings were built in locations throughout Brighton Borough Council's existence: the most recent, Bartholomew House and Priory House next to the town hall, were finished in 1987. The town hall ceased to be responsible solely for Brighton's affairs when Brighton and Hove were united in 1997, but it is still used by Brighton &amp; Hove City Council\u2014particularly for weddings and civil partnerships.\nThe presence of a British subsidiary of the United States arms company EDO Corporation on the Home Farm Industrial Estate in Moulsecoomb has been the cause of protests since 2004. The premises were significantly damaged in January 2009 when protesters broke in.\nEconomy.\nIn 1985, the Borough Council described three \"myths\" about Brighton's economy. Common beliefs were that most of the working population commuted to London every day; that tourism provided most of Brighton's jobs and income; or that the borough's residents were \"composed entirely of wealthy theatricals and retired business people\" rather than workers. Brighton has been an important centre for commerce and employment since the 18th century. It is home to several major companies, some of which employ thousands of people locally; as a retail centre it is of regional importance; creative, digital and new media businesses are increasingly significant; and, although Brighton was never a major industrial centre, its railway works contributed to Britain's rail industry in the 19th and 20th centuries, particularly in the manufacture of steam locomotives.\nSince the amalgamation of Brighton and Hove, economic and retail data has been produced at a citywide level only. Examples of statistics include: Brighton and Hove's tourism industry contributes \u00a3380m to the economy and employs 20,000 people directly or indirectly; the city has 9,600 registered companies; and a 2001 report identified it as one of five \"supercities for the future\". In the past couple of years tourists to Brighton and Hove have fallen in numbers. Over 2016, day visitors to Brighton and Hove dropped by an average of 2,400 per day. In August 2017, new figures for the year showed Brighton's tourism had fallen by a further 1 per cent on the previous year.\nCommerce and industry.\nBrighton's largest private sector employer is American Express, whose European headquarters are at John Street. As of 2012, about 3,000 people work there. Planning permission to demolish the old Amex offices and build a replacement was granted in 2009, and work started in March 2010. Other major employers include Lloyds Bank, Legal &amp; General, Asda (which has hypermarkets at Hollingbury and Brighton Marina), Brighton &amp; Hove Bus and Coach Company and call-centre operator Inkfish. In 2012, it was reported that about 1,500 of Gatwick Airport's 21,000 workers lived in the city of Brighton and Hove.\nBrighton is a popular destination for conferences, exhibitions and trade fairs, and has had a purpose-built conference centre\u2014the Brighton Centre\u2014since 1977. Direct income from the Brighton Centre's 160 events per year is \u00a38\u00a0million, and a further \u00a350\u00a0million is generated indirectly by visitors spending money during their stay. Events range from political party conferences to concerts.\nThe Hollingbury Industrial Estate is one of the largest such facilities in Brighton; in its early days about 6,000 people were employed, principally in industrial jobs, but in the late 20th and early 21st centuries its focus has switched to commercial and retail development, limiting Brighton's potential for industrial growth. Brighton Corporation laid out the estate on of land around Crowhurst Road in 1950. By 1956, large-scale employment was provided at a bakery, a typewriter factory and a machine tools manufacturer among others. Most of the large factories closed during the recessions of the 1980s and 1990s, employment fell to 1,000, and structural changes started in the mid-1980s with a move towards small-scale industrial units (the Enterprise Estate was finished in October 1985) and then retail warehouses. Asda's superstore opened in November 1987, MFI followed two years later, and other retail units were built in the 1990s. Two large headquarters buildings were vacated in quick succession when British Bookshops left in March 2011 and \"The Argus\" newspaper moved out of its headquarters in 2012\u2014although the Brighton &amp; Hove Bus and Coach Company signed a contract to move its 1,250 employees into the latter building.\nBrighton has a high density of businesses involved in the media sector, particularly digital or \"new media\", and since the 1990s has been referred to as \"Silicon Beach\". By 2007, over 250 new media business had been founded in Brighton. Brandwatch is a social media monitoring company based in offices near Brighton station. Computer game design company Black Rock Studio was founded in 1998 and was taken over by Disney Interactive Studios, who closed it down in 2011. The Gamer Network, whose portfolio of websites relating to computer gaming (including Eurogamer) and creative industries was founded in 1999, is based in Brighton.\nBy the early 21st century, the market for office accommodation in the city was characterised by fluctuating demand and a lack of supply of high-quality buildings. As an example, the Trafalgar Place development (c. 1990), \"now considered a prime office location\", stood partly empty for a decade. Exion 27 (built in 2001), a high-tech, energy-efficient office development at Hollingbury, remained empty for several years and is still not in commercial use: it houses some administrative departments of the University of Brighton. It was Brighton's first ultramodern commercial property and was intended for mixed commercial and industrial use, but its completion coincided with a slump in demand for high-tech premises.\nRetail and shopping.\nBrighton is well known for its high number of independent shops, which add to the character of the city.\nWalking from Brighton station towards the seafront, first, is the North Laine area, stretching from Trafalgar Street, Kensington Gardens, Sydney Street, Gardner Street and Bond Street and is mostly pedestrianised. It is a retail, leisure and the residential area immediately north of the Lanes. Its name derives from the Anglo-Saxon \"Laine\" meaning \"fields\", although the misnomer \"North Lanes\" is often used to describe the area. The North Laine contains a mix of businesses dominated by caf\u00e9s, bars, theatres, and over 400 shops independent and avant-garde shops including an erotic shop and indoor flea markets.\nThe Lanes which is characterised by a labyrinth of narrow alleyways form a retail, leisure and residential area near the seafront, following the street pattern of the original fishing village. The Lanes contain predominantly clothing stores, jewellers, antique shops, restaurants and pubs.\nChurchill Square is a shopping centre with a floor space of and over 80 shops, several restaurants and 1,600 car-parking spaces. It was built in the 1960s as an open-air, multi-level pedestrianised shopping centre, but was rebuilt and enlarged in 1998 and is no longer open-air. Further retail areas include Western Road and London Road, the latter of which is undergoing extensive regeneration in the form of new housing and commercial properties.\nThere are two weekly flea market / bootfairs in Brighton on Sunday mornings, one at Brighton Marina on the top open-air level of the carpark, and another at Brighton Racecourse.\nLandmarks.\nThe Royal Pavilion, a Grade I listed building, is a former royal palace built as a home for the Prince Regent during the early 19th century, under the direction of the architect John Nash. It is notable for its Indo-Saracenic architecture and Oriental interior. Other Indo-Saracenic buildings in Brighton include the Sassoon Mausoleum, now, with the bodies reburied elsewhere, in use as a chic supper club.\nThe first of Brighton's three piers was the Chain Pier, which was destroyed in a storm in 1896. All that remains of the pier are small lumps of wood and stone, which are only visible at low tide. It was primarily intended as a landing stage for packet boats to Dieppe, France, but it also featured a small number of attractions including a camera obscura.\nBrighton Marine Palace and Pier (long known as the Palace Pier) opened in 1899, it was meant to be a replacement for the Chain Pier, but became a pleasure pier instead. It features a funfair, restaurants and arcade halls. The West Pier was built in 1866 and is one of only two Grade I listed piers in the United Kingdom; it has been closed since 1975. For some time it was under consideration for restoration, but two fires in 2003, and other setbacks, led to these plans being abandoned. Nevertheless, publicity material presented in question-and-answer form during the building of the Brighton i360 observation tower (see below) maintained that the building of the tower would not prove prejudicial to the eventual restoration of the pier.\nThe Brighton i360, an observation tower located at the shore end of the West Pier, opened on 4 August 2016. At high, with a spacious glass viewing pod rising to , it is Britain's highest observation tower outside London \u2013 taller even than the London Eye. With a diameter of , it is also the thinnest tower in the world, with a height-to-width ratio of 41.15 to one.\nBrighton Clock Tower, built in 1888 for Queen Victoria's jubilee, stands at the intersection of Brighton's busiest thoroughfares.\nVolk's Electric Railway runs along the inland edge of the beach from Palace Pier to Black Rock and Brighton Marina. It was created in 1883 and is the world's oldest operating electric railway.\nThe Grand Hotel was built in 1864. The Brighton hotel bombing occurred there. Its nighttime blue lighting is particularly prominent along the foreshore.\nChurches and other places of worship.\nSt Nicholas Church may be the oldest building in Brighton (the Domesday Book records the presence of an Anglo-Saxon church, valued at \u00a312) and is commonly known as \"The Mother Church\". Other notable Anglican churches include the very tall (the highest church interior in Britain) brick-built St Bartholomew's (1874) designed by the architect Edmund Scott; St Peter's (1828); and St Martin's (1875), noted for its ornate interior. Brighton's Quakers run the Friends Meeting House in the Lanes. There is an active Unitarian community based in a Grade II listed building in New Road. Brighton has six listed Roman Catholic churches; St John the Baptist's Church (1835) in Kemptown is the earliest surviving Roman Catholic church in the city.\nBrighton and Hove has five synagogues: New Church Road Synagogue; Holland Road Synagogue; Brighton and Hove Progressive Synagogue; Brighton and Hove Reform Synagogue; and Middle Street Synagogue. The Middle Street Synagogue is a Grade II listed building built in 1874\u201375; it is being gradually restored by English Heritage. There are also several mosques and Buddhist centres.\nBeaches.\nBrighton has a expanse of shingle beach, part of the unbroken section within the city limits. A flat sandy foreshore is exposed at low tide. The seafront is home to many restaurants, sports facilities, amusement arcades, nightclubs and bars. At Black Rock, to the east of Brighton, a vegetated shingle wildlife habitat has been created. A 600m long boardwalk runs through the wildlife site. The Palace Pier section of the beach has been awarded blue flag status.\nThe city council owns all the beaches, which are divided into named sections by groynes\u2014the first of which were completed in 1724. Eastwards from the Hove boundary, the names are Boundary, Norfolk, Bedford, Metropole, Grand (referring to the four hotels with those names), Centre, King's, Old Ship, Volk's, Albion, Palace Pier, Aquarium, Athina (where the MS \"Athina B\" ran aground), Paston, Banjo, Duke's, Cliff, Crescent and Black Rock. Cliff Beach is a nudist beach. Beyond Black Rock, the cliffs (part of the Brighton to Newhaven Cliffs Site of Special Scientific Interest) rise to more than and there are three small beaches at Ovingdean Gap, Rottingdean Gap and Saltdean Gap. All are connected by the Undercliff Walk, which has been affected by several cliff falls since 2000.\nPart of the beach adjoining Madeira Drive, to the east of the city centre, was redeveloped opened to the public in March 2007, with a playground, mini-golf, beach saunas and beach volleyball courts.\nOn the sea wall of Madeira Drive is Madeira Terrace, a Grade 2* listed, 865-metre-long stretch of seafront arches. The Terrace structure has degraded, deemed unsafe, and been closed to the public since 2014. The Terrace is being\u202frestored, with a number of plans submitted. In front of the Terrace has been built a new national outdoor swimming centre, including a 50m swimming pool with an adjoining complex of shops, and bars.\nSince the demolition in 1978 of the Black Rock open-air lido at the eastern end of Brighton's seafront, the area has been developed and now features one of Europe's largest marinas. However, the site of the pool itself remains empty except for a skate park and graffiti wall. Since 2003 a series of developments have been proposed including housing, a five-star hotel with a winter garden, and an 11,000-seat sports arena.\nLiz Williams Butterfly Haven.\nThe Liz Williams Butterfly haven () is a purpose-built area that has been created to attract and provide a habitat for butterflies. It is situated between Dorothy Stringer and Varndean College, north of Stringer Way. It was the brainchild of Dan Danahar with funding from the BBC, in conjunction with the National Lottery, through the Breathing Places scheme. This site was created between 2006 and 2007, and by September 2008 the late Liz Williams, botanist, had recorded 97 wildflower species and 10 species of grass. This was an order of magnitude increase in the floral diversity of the site within one year. As a tribute to her work, the site has been renamed the Liz Williams Butterfly Haven in 2011. Since its creation up to 2021 twenty-seven species of butterfly have been recorded here including Adonis blue, chalkhill blue, green hairstreak, dingy and chequered skipper.\nThe Woodvale Cemeteries.\nWoodvale () is actually five linked cemeteries that cover the western side of Race Hill. The cemeteries are east of Lewes Road and either side of Bear Road. Their cultural significance and importance to wildlife to the city were described evocatively by the Sussex field naturalist, David Bangs (p.\u00a0303).\"They are a profoundly peaceful place of little woods and glades, sunny banks and shady paths. They have become, in the last 150 years, reservoirs for much of the wildlife of the surrounding countryside. Some of the big beech trees down in Woodvale are as old as the cemeteries. The marbles, limestones, and granites of the memorials are a detective story for geologists. Yaffles call across the trees. The rare greater horseshoe bat has hibernated in the funerary buildings. Badgers pit the mossy turf in their search for earthworms, and violet and celandine cheer the turf in early spring.\"\nOther landmarks.\nBrighton is the home of the UK's first Walk of Fame, which celebrates the many rich and famous people associated with the city.\nCulture.\nCafes and restaurants.\nBrighton is characterised by small dining establishments and independent coffeehouses. Brighton has about 250 restaurants. It is known for having many vegan and vegetarian restaurants, and a 2022 analysis found the city has the highest density of vegan restaurants in the UK.\nMedia.\nBrighton has a local television channel, Latest TV, which broadcasts local news and entertainment.\nLocal radio stations are BBC Radio Sussex, Heart South, Capital Brighton, Radio Reverb and Gaydio \u2013 a radio station for the city's LGTBQ+ community.\nThe local newspaper that serves the city is \"The Argus\".\nCinema.\nBrighton featured in a number of popular movies including \"Carry on at Your Convenience\" (1971), \"Quadrophenia\" (1979), \"The End of the Affair\" (1999), \"Wimbledon\" (2004), \"MirrorMask\" (2005), \"Angus, Thongs and Perfect Snogging\" (2008), \"The Young Victoria\" (2009), \"Brighton Rock\" (2010 and 1947), and \"The Boat that Rocked\" (2009).\nThe Duke of York's Picturehouse, dating from 1910, was opened by Violet Melnotte-Wyatt. It is the country's oldest purpose-built cinema and was Brighton's first Electric Bioscope, which still operates as an arthouse cinema. The Duke of York's Picturehouse expanded in 2012, adding two additional screens in a different location. The company now occupies the upstairs of Komedia, situated on Gardner Street, central Brighton. There are two multiplex cinemas, the Odeon on North Street and Cineworld in the Marina.\nFestivals and rallies.\nPast.\nOn 6 April 1974, Brighton was host to the 19th Eurovision Song Contest, where ABBA won in the Brighton Dome with their song Waterloo. The DJ and producer Fatboy Slim, who lives in Brighton, has held several concerts on Brighton beach, including in 2002, 2006 and 2008. The 2002 event, Big Beach Boutique II, is the largest outdoor party ever held in the UK, attended by 250,000 people.\nAn inaugural White Nights (Nuit Blanche) all-night arts festival took place in October 2008 and continued for four years until it was postponed in 2012 due to a lack of European funding. The Brighton Zine Fest, celebrating zine and DIY culture within the city, took place in 2009.\nPresent.\nEach May the city hosts the Brighton Festival, the second largest arts festival in the UK (after Edinburgh). This includes processions such as the Children's Parade, outdoor spectaculars often involving pyrotechnics, and theatre, music and visual arts in venues throughout the city, some brought into this use exclusively for the festival. The earliest feature of the festival, the Artists' Open Houses, are homes of artists and craftspeople opened to the public as galleries, and usually selling the work of the occupants. Since 2002, these have been organised independently of the official Festival and Fringe.\nBrighton Fringe runs alongside Brighton Festival, and has grown to be one of the largest fringe festivals in the world. Together with the street performers from Brighton Festival's \"Streets of Brighton\" events, and the Royal Mile-esque outdoor performances that make up \"Fringe City\", outdoor spectacles and events more than double during May.\nBrighton has two major film festivals and several other smaller ones:\nIn addition, films are also showcased in the Brighton and Brighton Pride festivals.\nBrighton Pride is the first of its kind in the UK, attracting 450,000 to the city over the Pride weekend in 2018.\nDisability Pride Brighton promotes acceptance and visibility for area residents who are disabled.\nThe Brighton Comedy Festival, also known as the Brighton Dome Comedy Festival, takes place in October each year at the Brighton Dome, which includes the Pavilion / Studio Theatre and the Corn Exchange. The festival was incorporated in 2001, and the inaugural festival was held in 2002. Other venues for live comedy include Komedia and the Brighton Comedy Garden.\nThe annual Brighton Digital Festival explores digital technology and culture. There were versions of such a festival in the late 1990s, but its current iteration came into being in 2011. Other festivals include: The Great Escape, featuring three nights of live music in venues across the city; the Soundwaves Festival in June, which shows classical music composed in the 21st Century; Paddle Round the Pier; Brighton Live; Burning the Clocks, a winter solstice celebration;\nThe Kemptown area has its own small annual street festival, the Kemptown Carnival, and the Hanover area similarly has a \"Hanover Day\".\nBrighton is the terminus of a number of London to Brighton events, such as the veteran car run and bike ride. Transport rallies are also hosted on the seafront. Groups of mods and rockers still bring their scooters and motorbikes to the city, but their gatherings are now much more sedate than the violent 1960s confrontations depicted in \"Quadrophenia\".\nFood- and drink-related festivals include the traditional Blessing of the Fisheries, where barbecued mackerel are eaten on the beach, and the more recent Fiery Foods Chilli Festival. There is also a twice-yearly general food festival. The main Sussex beer festival is held in nearby Hove, and there is a smaller beer festival in the Hanover area. The Vegfest (UK) festival was first held in Brighton in 2009. In 2023 it returned for its 15th year, after the COVID-19 pandemic. It takes place annually in March at the Hove Centre.\nLGBT community.\nThe lesbian, gay, bisexual and trans (LGBT) community in Brighton is one of the largest and most prominent in the UK, and Brighton has been named the \"gay capital of the UK\". There is record of LGBT history in the city dating to the 19th century. Many LGBT pubs, clubs, bars and shops are located around Brighton and in particular around St James's Street in Kemptown, including Club Revenge. Several LGBT charities, publishers, social and support groups are also based in the city. Brighton Pride is usually celebrated at the start of August.\nMuseums and galleries.\nBrighton museums include Brighton Museum &amp; Art Gallery, which forms part of the pavilion Preston Manor, Booth Museum of Natural History, Brighton Toy and Model Museum, and Brighton Fishing Museum, which includes artefacts from the West Pier. The Royal Pavilion is also open to the public, serving as a museum to the British Regency.\nBrighton has many galleries, including the Brighton Centre for Contemporary Arts (Brighton CCA) based at the University of Brighton, Phoenix Art Space, and ONCA.\nNight-life and popular music.\nBrighton has many night-life hotspots and is associated with popular musicians including Fatboy Slim, Omar, Kirk Brandon, Tim Booth, Nick Cave, Lovejoy, David Van Day from Dollar, James Marriott, Adam Freeland, Orbital, and Robert Smith. Live music venues include Concorde 2, the Brighton Centre and the Brighton Dome, where ABBA received a substantial boost to their career when they won the Eurovision Song Contest 1974. Many events and performance companies operate in the city. Brighton also has the most electronic music events in the UK.\nBrighton hosts the Great Escape music festival every May. Brighton has produced successful musical acts including Beats International, Norman Cook, Carl Cox, Dave Clarke, Krafty Kuts, Ed Solo, Evil Nine, Electrelane, James Marriott, Frazier Chorus, Peter and the Test Tube Babies, the Levellers, The Maccabees, Electric Soft Parade, British Sea Power, the Eighties Matchbox B-Line Disaster, the Xcerts, Architects, the Go! Team, Royal Blood, the Kooks, Freemasons, Blood Red Shoes, Lovejoy, Birdeatsbaby, and Rizzle Kicks. Brighton is also home to several independent record labels. The second half of 1973 rock opera Quadrophenia by the Who takes place at Brighton Beach.\nTheatre.\nTheatres include the Brighton Dome and associated Pavilion Theatre, the expanded Komedia (primarily a comedy and music venue but also a theatre), the Old Market, which was renovated and re-opened in 2010, and the Theatre Royal, which celebrated its 200th anniversary in 2007. The Attenborough Centre for the Creative Arts is nearby, part of the University of Sussex campus. There are also smaller theatres such as the Marlborough Theatre, the New Venture, and the Brighton Little Theatre. The city has the purpose built Brighton Open Air Theatre, or B\u2022O\u2022A\u2022T, which opened for the Brighton Festival in May 2015.\nParks.\nStanmer Park sits on the northern edge of Brighton and extends into the South Downs. The largest urban park in the city is Preston Park and The Level was recently developed. Other parks include East Brighton Park, Queen's Park and Wild Park.\nEducation.\nThe University of Brighton has been part of Brighton since 1859, starting as a school of art in the kitchens of the Royal Pavilion. It was granted university status in 1992, and now has a student population of around 18,000 of which 79 per cent are undergraduates. The university is based on four campuses \u2013 City campus in the heart of Brighton; Falmer campus set in the South Downs; Moulsecoomb campus on Lewes Road and Eastbourne campus.\nThe University of Sussex, established in 1961 as the first of the plate-glass universities, is a campus research intensive university between Stanmer Park and Falmer, four miles (6\u00a0km) from the city centre. The university is home to the Institute of Development Studies and the Science Policy Research Unit, amongst over 40 other established research centres, and has been ranked first in the world for Development studies by the World University Rankings. Served by trains (to Falmer railway station) and 24-hour buses, it has a student population of around 20,000 students of which about a quarter are postgraduates. The university has been ranked 41st in the UK by the Complete University Guide in its 2022 rankings and 246th in the world by the World University Rankings of 2021.\nIn 2001 the music college BIMM (British and Irish Modern Music Institute) opened in Brighton under the name The Brighton Institute of Modern Music. The college has approximately 1500 students across Brighton, its degree courses at BIMM are validated by the University of Sussex and diploma courses are taught at the Brighton Aldridge Community Academy. Notable alumni have included James Bay, The Kooks and Tom Odell. Since the college opened it has expanded to become Europe's largest music college with 6500 students studying at eight campuses across Europe including Bristol, London, Manchester, Berlin, Dublin, Hamburg, and Birmingham.\nIn 2003, the universities of Brighton and Sussex formed a medical school, known as Brighton and Sussex Medical School. The school was one of four new medical schools to be created as part of a government programme to increase the number of NHS doctors. The school is based at the University of Sussex campus and works closely with the Brighton and Sussex University Hospitals NHS Trust.\nBrighton &amp; Hove City Council is responsible for 80 schools, of which 54 are in Brighton.\nA range of non-university courses for students over 16, mainly in vocational education subjects, are provided at the further education college, Greater Brighton Metropolitan College (previously City College and before that Brighton Technical College). More academic subjects can be studied by 16- to 19-year-olds at Brighton Hove &amp; Sussex Sixth Form College (BHASVIC) in the Seven Dials area. Varndean College in North Brighton occupies a commanding position. The 1920s building is celebrated for its fa\u00e7ade and internal quads. The college offers academic A levels, the International Baccalaureate and vocational courses, including BTECs.\nAs Brighton is home to public universities and colleges, it also home to private colleges such as Hove College located near the County Cricket Ground. The college was established in 1977 and offers higher educational courses such as vocational, certificate, professional, diploma and Advanced Diploma qualifications and has a close partnership with the University of Brighton.\nThere are state schools and some faith schools. Notable secondary state schools include Longhill High School, Varndean School, Patcham High School, Dorothy Stringer School, Blatchington Mill School, Hove Park School, Brighton Aldridge Community Academy, and King's School.\nSpecial Education Schools include Downs View and Downs View Link College for people over 16. There are also Pupil Referral Units (PRUs).\nThere are a number of independent schools, including Brighton College, Roedean School, Steiner School, Brighton Girls (formerly known as Brighton and Hove High School (BHHS)), and a Montessori school. As with the state schools, some independents are faith-based; Torah Academy, the last Jewish primary school, became a Nursery School at the end of 2007. The Brighton Institute of Modern Music, a fully accredited music college, opened in 2001 and has since expanded to five locations throughout Britain.\nBrighton has been ranked a top 10 student city in the UK by QS rankings.\nSport.\nFootball.\nBrighton &amp; Hove Albion Football Club is the city's professional association football team. After playing at the Goldstone Ground for 95 years, the club spent 2 years ground-sharing 70 miles away at Gillingham F.C. before returning to the town as tenants of the Withdean Stadium. At the start of the 2011\u201312 season the club moved permanently to Falmer Stadium, a Premier League level stadium colloquially known as 'the Amex'. Notable achievements include winning promotion to the Football League First Division in 1979 and staying there for four seasons. They reached the 1983 FA Cup Final drawing 2\u20132 with Manchester United before losing in the replay 5 days later. The 2017\u201318 football season saw Brighton's debut in the Premier League after a win against Wigan Athletic guaranteed automatic promotion to the top flight.\nWhitehawk Football Club is a semi-professional association football club based in a suburb in east Brighton. They play in the Isthmian League Premier Division. Games are played at The Enclosed Ground, which is set into the South Downs close to Brighton Marina.\nRugby.\nBrighton Football Club (RFU) is one of the oldest rugby clubs in England, founded in 1868 before the RFU. They currently play in the Premier division of London and South-East RFU League.\nBrighton was chosen as one of the 13 Rugby World Cup 2015 host cities, with two games being played at the 30,750 capacity Falmer Stadium (although it was named the \"Brighton Community Stadium\" throughout the tournament for sponsorship reasons). One of the two games played was one of the biggest shocks in the history of Rugby Union, with Japan defeating South Africa 34 points to 32, with a try in the dying minutes of the game. The other game was between Samoa and the United States.\nHockey.\nBrighton &amp; Hove Hockey Club is a large hockey club that train and play their matches at Blatchington Mill School. The men's 1XI gained promotion in 2013 to the England Hockey League system, Conference East.\nCricket.\nSussex County Cricket Club play at County Cricket Ground in Hove. The ground has hosted one men's One Day International; the match was part of the 1999 Cricket World Cup, and was a Group A match between South Africa and India, which South Africa won by 4 wickets. The County Ground has also hosted 2 Test matches in The Women's Ashes in 1987 and 2005; in addition, the ground hosted two One Day Internationals in the 2013 Women's Ashes and, as of 2017, 5 Women's ODIs and 4 Women's T20Is have been hosted at the ground.\nOther sports.\nMotoring events take place on Madeira Drive, a piece of roadway on Brighton's seafront, throughout the year. It was originally constructed to host what is commonly held to be the world's oldest motor race, the Brighton Speed Trials, which ran from 1905 to 2023. The event was organised by the Brighton and Hove Motor Club.\nBrighton has a horse racing course, Brighton Racecourse, with the unusual feature that when the full length of the course is to be used, some of the grass turf of the track has to be laid over the tarmac at the top of Wilson Avenue, a public road, which therefore has to be closed for the races. A greyhound racing circuit \u2013 the Brighton &amp; Hove Greyhound Stadium \u2013 in Hove is run by Coral.\nBrighton Sailing Club has been operating since the 1870s.\nThe Brighton and Hove P\u00e9tanque Club runs an annual triples, doubles and singles competition, informal KOs, winter and summer league, plus Open competitions with other clubs. The club is affiliated to Sussex P\u00e9tanque, the local region of the English P\u00e9tanque Association, so they can also play at a Regional and National level. The Peace Statue terrain is the official p\u00e9tanque terrain situated on the seafront near the West Pier.\nBrighton has two competitive swimming clubs: Brighton SC, formed in 1860, claims to be the oldest swimming club in England; and Brighton Dolphin SC was formed in 1891 as Brighton Ladies Swimming. Casual sea swimming is also a popular activity in Brighton, rising in popularity since the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic.\nAmateur track cycling is held at the Preston Park Velodrome, the oldest velodrome in the UK, built in 1877.\nThere are three recognised surfing breaks close to Brighton, including East of the Marina, by the West Pier and at Shoreham harbour.\nTransport.\nBrighton has several railway stations, many bus routes, coach services and taxis. A Rapid Transport System has been under consideration for some years. Trolleybuses, trams, ferries and hydrofoil services have operated in the past.\nRoads.\nBrighton is connected to the trunk road network by the A23 (London Road) northwards, and by two east\u2013west routes: the A259 along the coast and the A27 trunk route inland which joins the M27 motorway near Portsmouth. The A23 joins the M23 motorway at Pease Pottage near Gatwick Airport. The A27 originally ran through the urban area along Old Shoreham Road and Lewes Road, but it now follows the route of the Brighton Bypass (final section opened in 1992) and the old alignment has become the A270. A bypass was first proposed in 1932, six routes were submitted for approval in 1973, and the Department of the Environment published its recommended route in 1980. Public inquiries took place in 1983 and 1987, construction started in 1989 and the first section\u2014between London Road at Patcham and the road to Devil's Dyke\u2014opened in summer 1991.\nBy 1985, there were about 5,000 parking spaces in central Brighton. The largest car parks are at London Road, King Street and the Churchill Square/Regency Road/Russell Road complex. In 1969, a 520-space multi-storey car park was built beneath the central gardens of Regency Square.\nRailway.\nFrequent trains operate from Brighton railway station. Many Brighton residents commute to work in London and destinations include London Victoria, London Bridge and St Pancras. Most trains serve Gatwick Airport and those operated by Thameslink continue to St Albans City, Luton, Luton Airport Parkway, Bedford and Cambridge. The fastest service from London Victoria takes 51 minutes. The West Coastway Line serves stations to Portsmouth, and Southampton; the East Coastway Line runs via Lewes to Newhaven, Eastbourne, and Hastings, crossing the landmark London Road viaduct en route and providing \"a dramatic high-level view\" of Brighton. A wider range of long-distance destinations was served until 2007\u201308 when rationalisation caused the ending of InterCity services via Kensington Olympia and Reading to Birmingham, Manchester and Edinburgh.\nBuses.\nUntil deregulation in 1986, bus services in Brighton were provided by Southdown Motor Services and Brighton Borough Transport under a joint arrangement called \"Brighton Area Transport Services\". Southdown were part of the nationalised NBC group and were based at Freshfield Road in the Kemptown area; Brighton Borough Transport were owned by the council and used the former tram depot at Lewes Road as their headquarters. Joint tickets were available and revenue was shared. The Brighton &amp; Hove Bus Company, owned by the Go-Ahead Group since 1993, now runs most bus services in Brighton. It has a fleet of about 280 buses. Compass Travel, The Big Lemon, Metrobus, Stagecoach South operate services to central Brighton. The city had 1,184 bus stops in 2012, 456 of which had a shelter. Real-time travel information displays are provided at many stops.\nThe only park and ride facility in Brighton is based at the Withdean Stadium. It does not offer a dedicated shuttle bus service: intending passengers must join the Brighton &amp; Hove Bus Company's route 27 service to Saltdean\u2014which travels via Brighton railway station, the Clock Tower and Old Steine\u2014and pay standard fares. The 20-year City Plan released in January 2013 ruled out an official park-and-ride facility, stating it would be an \"inefficient use of public money, particularly in an era of declining car use\". Councillors and residents in Woodingdean and Rottingdean have claimed that streets and car parks in those areas have become unofficial park-and-ride sites: drivers park for free and take buses into the city centre.\nAir.\nShoreham Airport, which offers chartered and scheduled flights using light aircraft, is west of Brighton near the town of Shoreham-by-Sea. In 1971, the borough councils of Worthing, Hove and Brighton bought it and operated it jointly as a municipal airport, but since 2006 it has been privately owned. Gatwick Airport, one of Britain's major international airports, is north on the A23; regular coach and rail services operate from Brighton.\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49797", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49797", "title": "Emil Nolde", "text": "German painter\nEmil Nolde (born Hans Emil Hansen; 7 August 1867 \u2013 13 April 1956) was a German painter and printmaker. He was one of the first Expressionists, a member of Die Br\u00fccke, and was one of the first oil painting and watercolor painters of the early 20th century to explore color. He is known for his brushwork and expressive choice of colors. Golden yellows and deep reds appear frequently in his work, giving a luminous quality to otherwise somber tones. His watercolors include vivid, brooding storm-scapes and brilliant florals.\nNolde's intense preoccupation with the subject of flowers reflected his interest in the art of Vincent van Gogh.\nEven though his art was included in the \"Entartete Kunst\" exhibition of 1937, Nolde was a member of the Nazi Party, with racist and antisemitic views, and a staunch supporter of Nazi Germany.\nEarly life.\nEmil Nolde was born as Hans Emil Hansen, near the village of Nolde (since 1920 part of the municipality of Burkal in Southern Jutland, Denmark), in the Prussian Duchy of Schleswig. He grew up on a farm. His parents, devout Protestants, were Danish and Frisian peasants. He realized his unsuitability for farm life, and that he and his three brothers were not at all alike. \nBetween 1884 and 1891, he studied to become a woodcarver and illustrator in Flensburg, and worked in furniture factories as a young adult. He spent his years of travel in Munich, Karlsruhe and Berlin. In 1889, he gained entrance into the School of Applied Arts in Karlsruhe. He was a drawing instructor at the school of the Museum of Industrial and Applied Arts (\"Industrie- und Gewerbemuseum\"; today the \"Textilmuseum\", or Textile Museum) in St. Gallen, Switzerland, from 1892 to 1898. He eventually left this job to finally pursue his dream of becoming an independent artist. \nCareer.\nAs a child, he had loved to paint and draw; however, he was already 31 by the time he pursued this new career. When he was rejected by the Munich Academy of Fine Arts in 1898, he spent the next three years taking private painting classes, visiting Paris, and becoming familiar with the contemporary impressionist scene that was popular at this time. He married Danish actress Ada Vilstrup in 1902, and moved to Berlin, where he would meet collector Gustav Schiefler and artist Karl Schmidt-Rottluff, both of whom would advocate his work later in life. From that year, he named himself after his birthplace.\nHe became a member of the revolutionary expressionist group Die Br\u00fccke (The Bridge), of Dresden, in 1906, upon the group's invitation. This association lasted only until the end of the following year. He was a member of the Berlin Secession from 1908 to 1910, but was then excluded owing to a disagreement with the leadership. In Berlin, Nolde was strongly influenced by the collections of the V\u00f6lkerkundemuseum in what was then K\u00f6niggr\u00e4tzer Stra\u00dfe, which he visited repeatedly and where he made over 120 drawings of exhibits from the Global South. His studies resulted in works such as \"Man, Woman and Cat\" (1912), in which Nolde depicted King Njoya's throne \u201cMandu Yenu\u201d, which came to Germany from Cameroon under controversial circumstances, only slightly altered. He exhibited with Wassily Kandinsky's Munich-based group Der Blaue Reiter (The Blue Rider) in 1912; by this time he had achieved some fame, and was able to support himself through his art.\nPolitics.\nNolde was a supporter of the National Socialist German Workers' Party from the early 1920s, having become a member of its Danish section. He expressed anti-semitic, negative opinions about Jewish artists, and considered Expressionism to be a distinctively Germanic style. This view was shared by some other members of the Nazi party, notably Joseph Goebbels and Fritz Hippler.\nDegenerate art.\nHowever, Adolf Hitler rejected all forms of modernism as \"degenerate art\"; the Nazi regime officially condemned Nolde's work. Until that time, he had been held in great esteem in Germany. A total of 1,052 of his works were removed from museums, more than those of any other artist. Some were included in the \"Entartete Kunst\" exhibition of 1937, despite his protests, including (later) a personal appeal to Nazi \"Gauleiter\" Baldur von Schirach in Vienna. He was not allowed to paint\u2014even in private\u2014after 1941. Nevertheless, during this period he created hundreds of watercolors, which he hid. He called them the \"Unpainted Pictures\".\nIn 1942, Nolde wrote:\nThere is silver blue, sky blue and thunder blue. Every color holds within it a soul, which makes me happy or repels me, and which acts as a stimulus. To a person who has no art in him, colors are colors, tones tones...and that is all. All their consequences for the human spirit, which range between heaven to hell, just go unnoticed.\nPost war.\nAfter World War II, Nolde was once again honoured, receiving the Pour le M\u00e9rite.\nWhile acknowledging his success as a brilliant colourist, greater awareness of Nolde's commitment to Nazism and a discussion of the relationship between his politics, denunciation of non-Jewish adversaries as Jews, and his art is considered in more recent scholarship. A recent exhibition (\"Emile Nolde: A German Legend, The Artist during the Nazi Regime,\" Berlin National Gallery, 2019) examined Nolde's self-professed Nazi leanings, and the tendency of postwar art historians to downplay them.\nDeath.\nHe died in Seeb\u00fcll, now part of Neukirchen, in 1956. The Nolde Stiftung Seeb\u00fcll (The Nolde Foundation at Seebull) was created the same year and opened a museum dedicated to his life and work in 1957.\nBody of work.\nApart from paintings, Nolde's work includes many prints, often in color, and watercolor paintings of varied subjects (landscapes, religious images, flowers, stormy seas and scenes from Berlin nightlife). A famous series of paintings covers the German New Guinea Expedition, visiting the South Seas, Moscow, Siberia, Korea, Japan, and China. The Schiefler \"catalogue raisonn\u00e9\" of his prints describes 231 etchings, 197 woodcuts, 83 lithographs, and four hectographs. He named a wartime series of 1300 works in watercolor on Japanese paper \"Unpainted Paintings\", made in the shadow of Hitler's decree.\nReligious motifs.\nAlthough religious images make up a relatively small part of Nolde's artistic oeuvre, he considered some to be \"milestones\" with respect to his progression as an artist.\nNolde, who grew up a farmer's son in a small, religious community near the German-Danish border, was left with lasting impressions of Judeo-Christian stories after reading the Bible in its entirety. In his early religious works (1900\u20131904), he was unable to solidify his own style and distinguish himself from several role models, Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Millet and Honor\u00e9 Daumier.\nNolde experienced a turning point in 1906; in that year, he shifted from an impressionistic style to a depiction of religious themes that emphasized the emotion of the moment,\u00a0use of bright colors and only two dimensions of representation. This new devotion to religious artwork was hastened by a near death experience in 1909 after drinking poisoned water at the age of 42.\nAfter 1911 Nolde's religious treatments\u2014now including etchings\u2014became darker and more ominous in tone than his previous works. Even his wife, Ada, was unnerved by his bold vision. In response to his nine-part \"The Life of Christ\", she wrote in a letter: \"For the first few days I was only able to take a furtive peek now and then, so strong was the effect.\"\nMajor works.\nNolde's work is exhibited at major museums around the world, including \"Portrait of a Young Woman and a Child\", \"Portrait of a Man\" (c. 1926), and \"Portrait of a Young Girl\" (1913\u20131914) at the Hermitage Museum, Saint Petersburg, Russia; and \"Prophet\" (1921) and \"Young Couple\" (1913) at the Museum of Modern Art, New York City. His most important print, \"The Prophet\" (1912), is an icon of 20th-century art.\nAmong his most important oils are \"Lesende junge Frau\" (1906), \"Blumengarten (ohne Figur)\" (1908), and \"Blumen und Wolken\" (1933).\nOther important works:\nIn recent years, Nolde's paintings have achieved prices of several million US dollars, in auctions conducted by the leading international auction houses. On 8 February 2012, \"Blumengarten (ohne Figur)\" was sold by Sotheby's in London for US$3,272,673.\nNazi-looted art.\nNolde's work has become the focus of renewed attention after a painting entitled \"Blumengarten (Utenwarf)\" from 1917, which now hangs in the art museum Moderna Museet, Stockholm, Sweden, and has been valued at US$4 million, was discovered to have been looted from Otto Nathan Deutsch, a German-Jewish refugee whose heirs, including a Holocaust survivor, are asking for its return. The Swedish government decided in 2007 that the museum must settle with the heirs. Deutsch was forced to flee Germany before World War II and left for Amsterdam in late 1938 or early 1939. The painting was sold to the Swedish museum at an auction in Switzerland, where it had resurfaced in 1967.\nIn 2015, Nolde's \"Maiwiese (Maienwiese) [Meadow in May\"], 1915, (Inv. Nr. 94) was restituted by the Lentos Art Museum in Linz to the heirs of Dr. Otto Siegfried Julius.\nIn 2017 the Wilhelm Lehmbruck Museum Foundation restituted the painting \u201cWomen in a Flower Garden\u201d by Emil Nolde to the heirs of Eduard M\u00fcller who was murdered in a Nazi concentration camp in 1942.\nIn 2019 the city of D\u00fcsseldorf agreed to restitute Nolde's The Actress to the heirs of Curt Schueler. The painting had been acquired for D\u00fcsseldorf by Conrad Doebbeke.\nIn 2000 the Wilhelm Lehmbruck Museum Foundation, Duisburg rejected a restitution request from the family of the Breslau (Wroclaw) collector Dr. Ismar Littmann for Nolde's painting \"Buchsbaumgarten (Boxtree Garden\").\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49798", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49798", "title": "Beat", "text": "Beat, beats, or beating may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "49799", "revid": "47198456", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49799", "title": "Clement of Rome", "text": "Bishop of Rome from 88 to 99\nClement of Rome (; ; died c.\u2009100), also known as Pope Clement I, was the Bishop of Rome in the late first century. He is considered to be the first of the Apostolic Fathers of the Church.\nLittle is known about Clement's life. Tertullian claimed that Clement was ordained by Saint Peter. Early church lists place him as the second or third bishop of Rome. Eusebius, in his book \"Church History\" mentioned Clement as the third bishop of Rome and as the \"co-laborer\" of Paul. In Against Heresies, Irenaeus described Clement as the successor to Anacletus, who was the third bishop of Rome, and as a personal acquaintance of the Apostles. According to the \"Annuario Pontificio\", Clement was the fourth bishop of Rome, holding office at the very end of the 1st century. It is likely that Clement died in exile, and was possibly martyred. According to apocryphal stories dating back to the 4th century by authors such as Rufinus, Clement was imprisoned by Roman Emperor Trajan, and was executed by being tied to an anchor and thrown into the sea. The \"Liber Pontificalis\" states that Clement died in Greece in the third year of Trajan's reign, or 100.\nThe only known genuine extant writing of Clement is his letter to the church at Corinth (1 Clement) in response to a dispute in which certain presbyters of the Corinthian church had been deposed. He asserted the authority of the presbyters as rulers of the church because they had been appointed by the Apostles. His letter, which is one of the oldest extant Christian documents outside the New Testament, was read in the church at Corinth, along with other epistles, some of which later became part of the Christian canon. This letter is considered to be the earliest affirmation of the principle of apostolic succession. A second epistle, 2 Clement, was once controversially attributed to Clement, although recent scholarship suggests it to be a homily by another author. In the pseudo-Clementine Writings, Clement is the intermediary through whom the apostles teach the church.\nClement is recognized as a saint in many Christian churches and a patron saint of mariners. He is commemorated on 23 November in the Catholic Church, the Anglican Communion, and the Lutheran Church. In Eastern Orthodox Christianity his feast is kept on 25 November.\nLife.\nThe \"Liber Pontificalis\" presents a list that makes Linus the second in the line of bishops of Rome, with Peter as first; but at the same time it states that Peter ordained two bishops, Linus and Anacletus, for the priestly service of the community, devoting himself instead to prayer and preaching, and that it was to Clement that he entrusted the Church as a whole, appointing him as his successor. Tertullian considered Clement to be the immediate successor of Peter. In one of his works, Jerome listed Clement as \"the fourth bishop of Rome after Peter, if indeed the second was Linus and the third Anacletus, although most of the Latins think that Clement was second after the apostle.\" Clement is put after Linus and Cletus/Anacletus in the earliest (c.\u00a0180) account, that of Irenaeus, who is followed by Eusebius of Caesarea.\nEarly succession lists name Clement as the first, second, or third successor of Peter. However, the meaning of his inclusion in these lists has been very controversial. Some believe there were presbyter-bishops as early as the 1st century, but that there is no evidence for a monarchical episcopacy in Rome at such an early date. There is also, however, no evidence of a change occurring in ecclesiastical organization in the latter half of the 2nd century, which would indicate that a new or newly-monarchical episcopacy was establishing itself.\nA tradition that began in the 3rd and 4th century, has identified him as the Clement that Paul mentioned in Philippians , a fellow laborer in Christ. While in the mid-19th century it was customary to identify him as a freedman of Titus Flavius Clemens, who was consul with his cousin, the Emperor Domitian, this identification, which no ancient sources suggest, afterwards lost support. The 2nd-century \"Shepherd of Hermas\" mentions a Clement whose office it was to communicate with other churches; most likely, this is a reference to Clement I.\nA large congregation existed in Rome c.\u00a058, when Paul wrote his Epistle to the Romans. Paul arrived in Rome c.\u00a060 (Acts). Paul and Peter were said to have been martyred there. Nero persecuted Roman Christians after Rome burned in 64, and the congregation may have suffered further persecution under Domitian (81\u201396). Clement was the first of early Rome's most notable bishops. The \"Liber Pontificalis\", which documents the reigns of popes, states that Clement had known Peter.\nClement is known for his epistle to the church in Corinth (c.\u00a096), in which he asserts the apostolic authority of the bishops/presbyters as rulers of the church. The epistle mentions \"episkopoi\" (overseers, bishops) or \"presbyteroi\" (elders, presbyters) as the upper class of minister, served by the deacons, but, since it does not mention himself, it gives no indication of the title or titles used for Clement in Rome.\nDeath and legends of final days.\nAccording to apocryphal \"acta\" dating to the 4th century at earliest, Clement was banished from Rome to the Chersonesus during the reign of the Emperor Trajan and was set to work in a stone quarry. Finding on his arrival that the prisoners were suffering from lack of water, he knelt down in prayer. Looking up, he saw a lamb on a hill, went to where the lamb had stood and struck the ground with his pickaxe, releasing a gushing stream of clear water. This miracle resulted in the conversion of large numbers of the local pagans and his fellow prisoners to Christianity. As punishment, Clement was martyred by being tied to an anchor and thrown from a boat into the Black Sea. The legend recounts that every year a miraculous ebbing of the sea revealed a divinely built shrine containing his bones. However, the oldest sources on Clement's life, Eusebius and Jerome, note nothing of his martyrdom.\nThe Inkerman Cave Monastery marks the supposed place of Clement's burial in Crimea. A year or two before his own death in 869, Cyril brought to Rome what he believed to be the relics of Clement, bones he found in Crimea buried with an anchor on dry land. They are now enshrined in the Basilica di San Clemente. But there are also other traditions about an ancient veneration of the relics in Chersonesus and the translation of the head to Kyiv. Other relics of Clement, including his head, are claimed by the Kyiv Monastery of the Caves in Ukraine.\nWritings.\nThe \"Liber Pontificalis\" states that Clement wrote two letters (though the second letter, 2 Clement, is no longer ascribed to him by many modern scholars).\nEpistle of Clement.\nClement's only extant, uncontested text is a letter to the Christian congregation in Corinth, often called the First Epistle of Clement or 1 Clement. The history of 1 Clement clearly and continuously shows Clement as the author of this letter. It is considered the earliest authentic Christian document outside the New Testament.\nClement writes to the troubled congregation in Corinth, where certain \"presbyters\" or \"bishops\" have been deposed (the class of clergy above that of deacons is argued by certain historians to be designated indifferently by the two terms). Clement calls for repentance and reinstatement of those who have been deposed, in line with maintenance of order and obedience to church authority, since the apostles established the ministry of \"bishops and deacons.\" He mentions \"offering the gifts\" as one of the functions of the higher class of clergy. The epistle offers valuable insight into Church ministry at that time and into the history of the Roman Church. It was highly regarded, and was read in church at Corinth along with the Scriptures c.\u00a0170.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We should be obedient unto God, rather than follow those who in arrogance and unruliness have set themselves up as leaders in abominable jealousy... For Christ is with them that are lowly of mind, not with them that exalt themselves over the flock.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Do we then think it to be a great and marvelous thing, if the Creator of the universe shall bring about the resurrection of them that have served Him with holiness in the assurance of a good faith, seeing that He showeth to us even by a bird the magnificence of His promise?\nIn the epistle, it is argued by some that Clement uses the terms \"bishop\" and \"presbyter\" interchangeably for the higher order of ministers above deacons. In some congregations, particularly in Egypt, the distinction between bishops and presbyters seems to have become established only later. But by the middle of the second century all the leading Christian centres had bishops. Scholars such as Bart Ehrman treat as significant the fact that, of the seven letters written by Ignatius of Antioch to seven Christian churches shortly after the time of Clement, the only one that does not present the church as headed by a single bishop is that addressed to the church in Rome, although this letter did not refer to a collective priesthood either.\nClement's letter also contains historical references, it mentions persecutions of Christians, records the martyrdom of the Apostle Peter and suggests that the apostle Paul traveled to Spain.\nTheology.\nClement's view on justification has had much scholarly discussion, as he is sometimes argued to have believed sola fide, though others believe him as having synergist views. Debate exists, because Clement directly stated that \"we are not justified by ourselves but by faith\", however in other places of the letter, he stresses judgement on sin. The Protestant scholar Tom Schreiner argued that Clement of Rome believed in a grace oriented justification by faith, which will cause the believer to do works as a result, Philip Schaff also said that Clement probably taught a faith alone doctrine while \"Catholic Encyclopedia\" wrote that Clement believed works to be part of justification. Rudolf Knopf and Rudolf Bultmann also believed that Clement believed in synergism, and that the believer needs to cooperate with the grace of God to be saved. Rudolf Knopf in his commentary on the letter of Clement to the Corinthians stated that: \"Pre-Christian sins are wiped out by baptism. For those sins that follow, a person must have faith in divine mercy and, at the same time, that person must exhibit his or her own good deeds, apart from which the person cannot be saved\" David Downs argued against the view that Clement of Rome holds synergist views, he argued that Clement did not write a letter about deep soteriology, but instead to provide moral guidance to the Corinthians, David Downs stated \"According to the soteriological economy of Clement everything rests on the goodness, mercy, and election of the Creator, which have befitted the 'chosen portion' through Jesus\".\nThomas Schreiner argued that Clement taught that faith was enough to be saved because of 1 Clement 32:4 where he stated:And so we, having been called through His will in Christ Jesus, are not justified through ourselves or through our own wisdom or understanding or piety or works which we wrought in holiness of heart, but through faith, whereby the Almighty God justified all men that have been from the beginning; to whom be the glory for ever and ever. Amen. (1 Clement 32:4)The epistle has been cited as the first work to establish Roman primacy, because he wrote to settle a problem in the church, but most scholars see the epistle as more fraternal than authoritative, and Orthodox scholar John Meyendorff sees it as connected with the Roman church's awareness of its \"priority\" (rather than \"primacy\") among local churches. It has also been argued by Dave Armstrong, that Clement supported Papal Infallibility in Letter to the Corinthians 1, 63. Because of him speaking of the Corinthians to \"being obedient\" to the things he has \"written through the Holy Spirit\" in order to correct and \"root out the wicked passion of jealousy\".\nIt has also been argued that the epistle may contain early evidence for belief in universal salvation.\nAccording to \"Catholic Encyclopedia\", the letter of Clement has Trinitarian theology and Christ is frequently called as the high priest by him.\nWritings formerly attributed to Clement.\nSecond Epistle of Clement.\nThe Second Epistle of Clement is a homily, or sermon, likely written in Corinth or Rome, although it is doubtful it was written by Clement. Early Christian congregations often shared homilies to be read. The homily describes Christian character and repentance. It is possible that the Church from which Clement sent his epistle had included a festal homily to share in one economical post, thus the homily became known as the Second Epistle of Clement.\nWhile 2 Clement has been traditionally ascribed to Clement, most scholars believe that 2 Clement was written in the 2nd century based on the doctrinal themes of the text and a near match between words in 2 Clement and in the Greek Gospel of the Egyptians. Doubts about the authorship were already expressed in antiquity by Eusebius and Jerome.\nEpistles on Virginity.\nTwo \"Epistles on Virginity\" were traditionally attributed to Clement, but now there exists almost universal consensus that Clement was not the author of those two epistles.\nFalse Decretals.\nA 9th-century collection of church legislation known as the False Decretals, which was once attributed to Isidore of Seville, is largely composed of forgeries. All of what it presents as letters of pre-Nicene popes, beginning with Clement, are forgeries, as are some of the documents that it attributes to councils; and more than forty falsifications are found in the decretals that it gives as those of post-Nicene popes from Sylvester I (314\u2013335) to Gregory II (715\u2013731). The False Decretals were part of a series of falsifications of past legislation by a party in the Carolingian Empire whose principal aim was to free the church and the bishops from interference by the state and the metropolitan archbishops respectively.\nClement is included among other early Christian popes as authors of the Pseudo-Isidoran (or False) Decretals, a 9th-century forgery. These decrees and letters portray even the early popes as claiming absolute and universal authority. Clement is the earliest pope to whom a Pseudo-Isidoran text is attributed.\nClementine literature.\nClement is also the hero of an early Christian romance or novel that has survived in at least two different versions, known as the Clementine literature, where he is identified with Emperor Domitian's cousin Titus Flavius Clemens. Clementine literature portrays Clement as the Apostles' means of disseminating their teachings to the Church.\nSainthood.\nClement's name is in the Roman Canon of the Mass. He is commemorated on 23 November as a pope and martyr in the Catholic Church as well as within the Anglican Communion and the Lutheran Church. The Syriac Orthodox Church, the Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church, the Macedonian Orthodox Church and the Greek Orthodox Church, as well as the Syriac Catholic Church, the Syro-Malankara Catholic Church and all Byzantine Rite Eastern Catholic Churches commemorate Clement of Rome (called in Syriac \"Mor Clemis\") on 24 November; the Russian Orthodox Church commemorates Clement on 25 November. Clement is honored in the Church of England and in the Episcopal Church on 23 November.\nThe St Clement's Church in Moscow is renowned for its glittering Baroque interior and iconostasis, as well as a set of gilded 18th-century railings. The parish was disbanded in 1934 and the original free-standing gate was demolished. The Lenin State Library stored its books in the building throughout the Soviet period. It was not until 2008 that the building reverted to the Russian Orthodox Church.\nClement of Rome is commemorated in the Synaxarium of the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria on the 29th of the month of Hatour [25 November (Julian) \u2013 equivalent to 8 December (Gregorian) due to the current 13-day Julian\u2013Gregorian Calendar offset]. According to the Coptic Church Synaxarium, he suffered martyrdom in 100 during the reign of Emperor Trajan (98\u2013117). He was martyred by tying his neck to an anchor and casting him into the sea. The record of the 29th of the Coptic month of Hatour states that this saint was born in Rome to an honorable father whose name was Fostinus and also states that he was a member of the Roman senate and that his father educated him and taught him Greek literature.\nRelics.\nBesides relics venerated in Rome and Kyiv (see above), \nin the city of Santa Cruz de Tenerife in Spain, the shinbone of Clement is kept. It was a gift of Sidotti, Patriarch of Antioch, to the Church of the Immaculate Conception. Historically, this was a highly revered relic in the city.\nSymbolism.\nIn workings of art, Clement can be recognized by having an anchor at his side or tied to his neck. He is most often depicted wearing papal vestments, including the pallium, and sometimes with a papal tiara but more often with a mitre. He is also sometimes shown with papal symbols such as the papal cross and the Keys of Heaven. In reference to his martyrdom, he often holds the palm of martyrdom.\nClement can be seen depicted near a fountain or spring, relating to the incident from his hagiography, or lying in a temple in the sea. The Anchored Cross or Mariner's Cross is also referred to as St. Clement's Cross, in reference to the way he was martyred.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49801", "revid": "23196228", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49801", "title": "Action", "text": "Action may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "49802", "revid": "1117341", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49802", "title": "Pope Zephyrinus", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 199 to 217\nPope Zephyrinus was the bishop of Rome from the year 199 until his death on 20 December 217. He was born in Rome, and succeeded Victor I. Upon his death on 20 December 217, he was succeeded by his principal advisor, Callixtus I. He is known for combating heresies and defending the divinity of Christ.\nPapacy.\nDuring the 18-year pontificate of Zephyrinus, the young Church endured persecution under the Emperor Septimius Severus until his death in the year 211. To quote Alban Butler, \"this holy pastor was the support and comfort of the distressed flock\". According to St. Optatus, Zephyrinus also combated new heresies and apostasies, chief of which were Marcion, Praxeas, Valentinus and the Montanists. Eusebius insists that Zephyrinus fought vigorously against the blasphemies of the two Theodotuses, who in response treated him with contempt, but later called him the greatest defender of the divinity of Christ. Although he was not physically martyred for the faith, his suffering \u2013 both mental and spiritual \u2013 during his pontificate have earned him the title of martyr, a title that was repealed 132 years after his death. He was accused of being seduced by Monarchian views.\nConflicts.\nDuring the reign of Emperor Septimius Severus (193\u2013211), relations with the young Christian Church deteriorated, and in 202 or 203, the edict of persecution appeared, which forbade conversion to Christianity under the severest penalties.\nZephyrinus's predecessor, Pope Victor I, had excommunicated Theodotus the Tanner for reviving a heresy that Christ became God only after the Resurrection. Theodotus' followers formed a separate heretical community at Rome, ruled by another Theodotus, the Money Changer, and Asclepiodotus. Natalius, who was tortured for his faith during the persecution, was persuaded by Asclepiodotus to become a bishop in their sect in exchange for a monthly stipend of 150 denarii. Natalius then reportedly experienced several visions warning him to abandon these heretics. According to an anonymous work entitled \"The Little Labyrinth\" quoted by Eusebius, Natalius was whipped a whole night by an angel, and the next day, he donned sackcloth and ashes and weeping bitterly threw himself at the feet of Zephyrinus.\nFeast day.\nA feast of St Zephyrinus, Pope and Martyr, held on 26 August, was inserted in the General Roman Calendar in the 13th century, but was removed in the 1969 revision, since he was not a martyr and 26 August is not the anniversary of his death, which is 20 December, the day under which he is now mentioned in the Roman Martyrology. His feast is also currently celebrated on 20 December in the Maronite Church and in Orthodox Churches. Where the preconciliar rites of the Latin Church are used, his feast continues to be celebrated on 26 August and under the title \"Pope and Martyr.\" \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "49803", "revid": "1126265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49803", "title": "IBM PC compatible", "text": "Computers similar to the IBM PC and its derivatives\nAn IBM PC compatible is any personal computer that is hardware- and software-compatible with the IBM Personal Computer (IBM PC) and its subsequent models. Like the original IBM PC, an IBM PC\u2013compatible computer uses an x86-based central processing unit, sourced either from Intel or a second source like AMD, Cyrix or other vendors such as Texas Instruments, Fujitsu, OKI, Mitsubishi or NEC and is capable of using interchangeable commodity hardware such as expansion cards. Initially such computers were referred to as PC clones, IBM clones or IBM PC clones, but the term \"IBM PC compatible\" is now a historical description only, as the vast majority of microcomputers produced since the 1990s are IBM compatible. IBM itself no longer sells personal computers, having sold its division to Lenovo in 2005. \"Wintel\" is a similar description that is more commonly used for modern computers.\nThe designation \"PC\", as used in much of personal computer history, has not meant \"personal computer\" generally, but rather an x86 computer capable of running the same software that a contemporary IBM or Lenovo PC could. The term was initially in contrast to the variety of home computer systems available in the early 1980s, such as the Apple II, TRS-80, and Commodore 64. Later, the term was primarily used in contrast to Commodore's Amiga and Apple's Macintosh computers.\nOverview.\nThese \"clones\" duplicated almost all the significant features of the original IBM PC architectures. This was facilitated by IBM's choice of commodity hardware components, which were cheap, and by various manufacturers' ability to reverse-engineer the BIOS firmware using a \"clean room design\" technique. Columbia Data Products built the first clone of the IBM personal computer, the MPC 1600 by a clean-room reverse-engineered implementation of its BIOS. Other rival companies, Corona Data Systems, Eagle Computer, and the Handwell Corporation were threatened with legal action by IBM, who settled with them. Soon after in 1982, Compaq released the very successful Compaq Portable, also with a clean-room reverse-engineered BIOS, and also not challenged legally by IBM.\nEarly IBM PC compatibles used the same computer buses as their IBM counterparts, switching from the 8-bit IBM PC and XT bus to the 16-bit IBM AT bus with the release of the AT. IBM's introduction of the proprietary Micro Channel architecture (MCA) in its Personal System/2 (PS/2) series resulted in the establishment of the Extended Industry Standard Architecture bus open standard by a consortium of IBM PC compatible vendors, redefining the 16-bit IBM AT bus as the Industry Standard Architecture (ISA) bus. Additional bus standards were subsequently adopted to improve compatibility between IBM PC compatibles, including the VESA Local Bus (VLB), Peripheral Component Interconnect (PCI), and the Accelerated Graphics Port (AGP).\nDescendants of the x86 IBM PC compatibles, namely 64-bit computers based on \"x86-64/AMD64\" chips comprise the majority of desktop computers on the market as of 2021, with the dominant operating system being Microsoft Windows. Interoperability with the bus structure and peripherals of the original PC architecture may be limited or non-existent. Many modern computers are unable to use old software or hardware that depends on portions of the IBM PC compatible architecture which are missing or do not have equivalents in modern computers. For example, computers which boot using Unified Extensible Firmware Interface-based firmware that lack a Compatibility Support Module, or CSM, required to emulate the old BIOS-based firmware interface, or have their CSMs disabled, cannot natively run MS-DOS since MS-DOS depends on a BIOS interface to boot.\nOnly the Macintosh had kept significant market share without having compatibility with the IBM PC, except in the period between the transition to Intel processors and transition to Apple silicon, when Macs used standard PC components and were capable of dual-booting Windows with Boot Camp.\nOrigins.\nIBM decided in 1980 to market a low-cost single-user computer as quickly as possible. On August 12, 1981, the first IBM PC went on sale. There were three operating systems (OS) available for it. The least expensive and most popular was PC DOS made by Microsoft. In a crucial concession, IBM's agreement allowed Microsoft to sell its own version, MS-DOS, for non-IBM computers. The only component of the original PC architecture exclusive to IBM was the BIOS (Basic Input/Output System).\nIBM at first asked developers to avoid writing software that addressed the computer's hardware directly and to instead make standard calls to BIOS functions that carried out hardware-dependent operations. This software would run on any machine using MS-DOS or PC DOS. Software that directly addressed the hardware instead of making standard calls was faster, however; this was particularly relevant to games. Software addressing IBM PC hardware in this way would not run on MS-DOS machines with different hardware (for example, the PC-98). The IBM PC was sold in high enough volumes to justify writing software specifically for it, and this encouraged other manufacturers to produce machines that could use the same programs, expansion cards, and peripherals as the PC. The x86 computer marketplace rapidly excluded all machines which were not hardware-compatible or software-compatible with the PC. The 640\u00a0KB barrier on \"conventional\" system memory available to MS-DOS is a legacy of that period; other non-clone machines, while subject to a limit, could exceed 640\u00a0KB.\nRumors of \"lookalike,\" compatible computers, created without IBM's approval, began almost immediately after the IBM PC's release. \"InfoWorld\" wrote on the first anniversary of the IBM PC that\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The dark side of an open system is its imitators. If the specs are clear enough for you to design peripherals, they are clear enough for you to design imitations. Apple ... has patents on two important components of its systems ... IBM, which reportedly has no special patents on the PC, is even more vulnerable. Numerous PC-compatible machines\u2014the grapevine says \"60\" or more\u2014have begun to appear in the marketplace.\nBy June 1983 \"PC Magazine\" defined \"PC 'clone'\" as \"a computer [that can] accommodate the user who takes a disk home from an IBM PC, walks across the room, and plugs it into the 'foreign' machine\". Demand for the PC by then was so strong that dealers received 60% or less of the inventory they wanted, and many customers purchased clones instead. Columbia Data Products produced the first computer more or less compatible with the IBM PC standard during June 1982, soon followed by Eagle Computer. Compaq announced its first product, an IBM PC compatible in November 1982, the Compaq Portable. The Compaq was the first sewing machine-sized portable computer that was essentially 100% PC-compatible. The court decision in \"Apple v. Franklin\", was that BIOS code was protected by copyright law, but it could reverse-engineer the IBM BIOS and then write its own BIOS using clean room design. Note this was over a year after Compaq released the Portable. The money and research put into reverse-engineering the BIOS was a calculated risk.\nCompatibility issues.\nNon-compatible MS-DOS computers: Workalikes.\nAt the same time, many manufacturers such as Tandy/RadioShack, Xerox, Hewlett-Packard, Digital Equipment Corporation, Sanyo, Texas Instruments, Tulip, Wang and Olivetti introduced personal computers that supported MS-DOS, but were not completely software- or hardware-compatible with the IBM PC.\nTandy described the Tandy 2000, for example, as having a \"'next generation' true 16-bit CPU\", and with \"More speed. More disk storage. More expansion\" than the IBM PC or \"other MS-DOS computers\". While admitting in 1984 that many PC DOS programs did not work on the computer, the company stated that \"the most popular, sophisticated software on the market\" was available, either immediately or \"over the next six months\".\nLike IBM, Microsoft's apparent intention was that application writers would write to the application programming interfaces in MS-DOS or the firmware BIOS, and that this would form what would now be termed a hardware abstraction layer. Each computer would have its own Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) version of MS-DOS, customized to its hardware. Any software written for MS-DOS would operate on any MS-DOS computer, despite variations in hardware design.\nThis expectation seemed reasonable in the computer marketplace of the time. Until then Microsoft's business was based primarily on computer languages such as BASIC. The established small system operating software was CP/M from Digital Research which was in use both at the hobbyist level and by the more professional of those using microcomputers. To achieve such widespread use, and thus make the product viable economically, the OS had to operate across a range of machines from different vendors that had widely varying hardware. Those customers who needed other applications than the starter programs could reasonably expect publishers to offer their products for a variety of computers, on suitable media for each.\nMicrosoft's competing OS was intended initially to operate on a similar varied spectrum of hardware, although all based on the 8086 processor. Thus, MS-DOS was for several years sold only as an OEM product. There was no Microsoft-branded MS-DOS: MS-DOS could not be purchased directly from Microsoft, and each OEM release was packaged with the trade dress of the given PC vendor. Malfunctions were to be reported to the OEM, not to Microsoft. However, as machines that were compatible with IBM hardware\u2014thus supporting direct calls to the hardware\u2014became widespread, it soon became clear that the OEM versions of MS-DOS were virtually identical, except perhaps for the provision of a few utility programs.\nMS-DOS provided adequate functionality for character-oriented applications such as those that could have been implemented on a text-only terminal. Had the bulk of commercially important software been of this nature, low-level hardware compatibility might not have mattered. However, in order to provide maximum performance and leverage hardware features (or work around hardware bugs), PC applications quickly developed beyond the simple terminal applications that MS-DOS supported directly. Spreadsheets, WYSIWYG word processors, presentation software and remote communication software established new markets that exploited the PC's strengths, but required capabilities beyond what MS-DOS provided. Thus, from very early in the development of the MS-DOS software environment, many significant commercial software products were written directly to the hardware, for a variety of reasons:\nFirst-generation PC workalikes by IBM competitors.\n\"Operationally Compatible\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The first thing to think about when considering an IBM-compatible computer is, \"How compatible is it?\"\u2014\u200a\nIn May 1983, Future Computing defined four levels of compatibility:\nDuring development, Compaq engineers found that \"Microsoft Flight Simulator\" would not run because of what subLOGIC's Bruce Artwick described as \"a bug in one of Intel's chips\", forcing them to make their new computer bug compatible with the IBM PC. At first, few clones other than Compaq's offered truly full compatibility. Compaq developed its own MS-DOS variant, COMPAQ-DOS, slightly more compatible with PC DOS than MS-DOS itself; Microsoft later discontinued MS-DOS development and resold COMPAQ-DOS as MS-DOS.\nJerry Pournelle purchased an IBM PC in mid-1983, \"rotten keyboard and all\", because he had \"four cubic feet of unevaluated software, much of which won't run on anything but an IBM PC. Although a lot of machines claim to be 100 percent IBM PC compatible, I've yet to have one arrive ... Alas, a lot of stuff doesn't run with Eagle, Z-100, Compupro, or anything else we have around here\". Columbia Data Products's November 1983 sales brochure stated that during tests with retail-purchased computers in October 1983, its own and Compaq's products were compatible with all tested PC software, while Corona and Eagle's were less compatible. Columbia University reported in January 1984 that Kermit ran without modification on Compaq and Columbia Data Products clones, but not on those from Eagle or Seequa. Other MS-DOS computers also required custom code.\nBy December 1983 Future Computing stated that companies like Compaq, Columbia Data Products, and Corona that emphasized IBM PC compatibility had been successful, while non-compatible computers had hurt the reputations of others like TI and DEC despite superior technology. At a San Francisco meeting it warned 200 attendees, from many American and foreign computer companies as well as IBM itself, to \"Jump on the IBM PC-compatible bandwagon\u2014quickly, and as compatibly as possible\". Future Computing said in February 1984 that some computers were \"press-release compatible\", exaggerating their actual compatibility with the IBM PC. Many companies were reluctant to have their products' PC compatibility tested. When \"PC Magazine\" requested samples from computer manufacturers that claimed to produce compatibles for an April 1984 review, 14 of 31 declined. Corona specified that \"Our systems run all software that conforms to IBM PC programming standards. And the most popular software does.\" When a \"BYTE\" journalist asked to test Peachtext at the Spring 1983 COMDEX, Corona representatives \"hemmed and hawed a bit, but they finally led me ... off in the corner where no one would see it should it fail\". The magazine reported that \"Their hesitancy was unnecessary. The disk booted up without a problem\". Zenith Data Systems was bolder, bragging that its Z-150 ran all applications people brought to test with at the 1984 West Coast Computer Faire.\n\"Creative Computing\" in 1985 stated, \"we reiterate our standard line regarding the IBM PC compatibles: try the package you want to use before you buy the computer.\" Companies modified their computers' BIOS to work with newly discovered incompatible applications, and reviewers and users developed stress tests to measure compatibility; by 1984 the ability to operate Lotus 1-2-3 and \"Flight Simulator\" became the standard, with compatibles specifically designed to run them and prominently advertising their compatibility.\nIBM believed that some companies such as Eagle, Corona, and Handwell infringed on its copyright, and after \"Apple Computer, Inc. v. Franklin Computer Corp.\" successfully forced the clone makers to stop using the BIOS. The Phoenix BIOS in 1984, however, and similar products such as AMI BIOS, permitted computer makers to legally build essentially 100%-compatible clones without having to reverse-engineer the PC BIOS themselves. A September 1985 \"InfoWorld\" chart listed seven compatibles with RAM, two disk drives, and monochrome monitors for $ to $, while the equivalent IBM PC cost $. The Zenith Z-150 and inexpensive Leading Edge Model D are even compatible with IBM proprietary diagnostic software, unlike the Compaq Portable. By 1986 \"Compute!\" stated that \"clones are generally reliable and about 99 percent compatible\", and a 1987 survey in the magazine of the clone industry did not mention software compatibility, stating that \"PC by now has come to stand for a computer capable of running programs that are managed by MS-DOS\".\nThe decreasing influence of IBM.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The main reason why an IBM standard is not worrying is that it can help competition to flourish. IBM will soon be as much a prisoner of its standards as its competitors are. Once enough IBM machines have been bought, IBM cannot make sudden changes in their basic design; what might be useful for shedding competitors would shake off even more customers.\u2014\u200a\nIn February 1984 \"Byte\" wrote that \"IBM's burgeoning influence in the PC community is stifling innovation because so many other companies are mimicking Big Blue\", but \"The Economist\" stated in November 1983, \"The main reason why an IBM standard is not worrying is that it can help competition to flourish\".\nBy 1983, IBM had about 25% of sales of personal computers between $ and $, and computers with some PC compatibility were another 25%. The president of a company that sold compatibles for $2000 wholesale told \"PC\" that they could still be profitable at $1000 wholesale. As the market and competition grew IBM's influence diminished. Writing that even \"IBM has to continue to be IBM compatible\", in November 1985 \"PC Magazine\" stated \"Now that it has created the [PC] market, the market doesn't necessarily need IBM for the machines. It may depend on IBM to set standards and to develop higher-performance machines, but IBM had better conform to existing standards so as to not hurt users\". Observers noted IBM's silence when the industry that year quickly adopted the expanded memory standard, created by Lotus and Intel without IBM's participation. In January 1987, Bruce Webster wrote in \"Byte\" of rumors that IBM would introduce proprietary personal computers with a proprietary operating system: \"Who cares? If IBM does it, they will most likely just isolate themselves from the largest marketplace, in which they really can't compete anymore anyway\". He predicted that in 1987 the market \"will complete its transition from an IBM standard to an Intel/MS-DOS/expansion bus standard ... Folks aren't so much concerned about IBM compatibility as they are about Lotus 1-2-3 compatibility\". By 1992, \"Macworld\" stated that because of clones, \"IBM lost control of its own market and became a minor player with its own technology\".\n\"The Economist\" predicted in 1983 that \"IBM will soon be as much a prisoner of its standards as its competitors are\", because \"Once enough IBM machines have been bought, IBM cannot make sudden changes in their basic design; what might be useful for shedding competitors would shake off even more customers\". After the Compaq Deskpro 386 became the first 80386-based PC, \"PC\" wrote that owners of the new computer did not need to fear that future IBM products would be incompatible with the Compaq, because such changes would also affect millions of real IBM PCs: \"In sticking it to the competition, IBM would be doing the same to its own people\". After IBM announced the OS/2-oriented PS/2 line in early 1987, sales of existing DOS-compatible PC compatibles rose, in part because the proprietary operating system was not available. In 1988, Gartner Group estimated that the public purchased 1.5 clones for every IBM PC. By 1989 Compaq was so influential that industry executives spoke of \"Compaq compatible\", with observers stating that customers saw the company as IBM's equal or superior. A 1990 American Institute of Certified Public Accountants member survey found that 23% of respondents used IBM computer hardware, and 16% used Compaq.\nAfter 1987, IBM PC compatibles dominated both the home and business markets of commodity computers, with other notable alternative architectures being used in niche markets, like the Macintosh computers offered by Apple Inc. and used mainly for desktop publishing at the time, the aging 8-bit Commodore 64 which was selling for $150 by this time and became the world's bestselling computer, the 16-bit Commodore Amiga line used for television and video production and the 16-bit Atari ST used by the music industry. However, IBM itself lost the main role in the market for IBM PC compatibles by 1990. A few events in retrospect are important:\nDespite popularity of its ThinkPad set of laptop PC's, IBM finally relinquished its role as a consumer PC manufacturer during April 2005, when it sold its laptop and desktop PC divisions (ThinkPad/ThinkCentre) to Lenovo for US$.\nAs of October 2007, Hewlett-Packard and Dell had the largest shares of the PC market in North America. They were also successful overseas, with Acer, Lenovo, and Toshiba also notable. Worldwide, a huge number of PCs are \"white box\" systems assembled by myriad local systems builders. Despite advances of computer technology, the IBM PC compatibles remained very much compatible with the original IBM PC computers, although most of the components implement the compatibility in special backward compatibility modes used only during a system boot. It was often more practical to run old software on a modern system using an emulator rather than relying on these features.\nIn 2014 Lenovo acquired IBM's x86-based server (System x) business for US$.\nExpandability.\nOne of the strengths of the PC-compatible design is its modular hardware design. End-users could readily upgrade peripherals and, to some degree, processor and memory without modifying the computer's motherboard or replacing the whole computer, as was the case with many of the microcomputers of the time. However, as processor speed and memory width increased, the limits of the original XT/AT bus design were soon reached, particularly when driving graphics video cards. IBM did introduce an upgraded bus in the IBM PS/2 computer that overcame many of the technical limits of the XT/AT bus, but this was rarely used as the basis for IBM-compatible computers since it required license payments to IBM both for the PS/2 bus and any prior AT-bus designs produced by the company seeking a license. This was unpopular with hardware manufacturers and several competing bus standards were developed by consortiums, with more agreeable license terms. Various attempts to standardize the interfaces were made, but in practice, many of these attempts were either flawed or ignored. Even so, there were many expansion options, and despite the confusion of its users, the PC compatible design advanced much faster than other competing designs of the time, even if only because of its market dominance.\n\"IBM PC compatible\" becomes \"Wintel\".\nDuring the 1990s, IBM's influence on PC architecture started to decline. \"IBM PC compatible\" becomes \"Standard PC\" in 1990s, and later \"ACPI PC\" in 2000s. An IBM-brand PC became the exception rather than the rule. Instead of placing importance on compatibility with the IBM PC, vendors began to emphasize compatibility with Windows. In 1993, a version of Windows NT was released that could operate on processors other than the x86 set. While it required that applications be recompiled, which most developers did not do, its hardware independence was used for Silicon Graphics (SGI) x86 workstations\u2013thanks to NT's Hardware abstraction layer (HAL), they could operate NT (and its vast application library).\nNo mass-market personal computer hardware vendor dared to be incompatible with the latest version of Windows, and Microsoft's annual WinHEC conferences provided a setting in which Microsoft could lobby for\u2014and in some cases dictate\u2014the pace and direction of the hardware of the PC industry. Microsoft and Intel had become so important to the ongoing development of PC hardware that industry writers began using the word Wintel to refer to the combined hardware-software system.\nThis terminology itself is becoming a misnomer, as Intel has lost absolute control over the direction of x86 hardware development with AMD's AMD64. Additionally, non-Windows operating systems like macOS and Linux have established a presence on the x86 architecture.\nDesign limitations and more compatibility issues.\nAlthough the IBM PC was designed for expandability, the designers could not anticipate the hardware developments of the 1980s, nor the size of the industry they would engender. To make things worse, IBM's choice of the Intel 8088 for the CPU introduced several limitations for developing software for the PC compatible platform. For example, the 8088 processor only had a 20-bit memory addressing space. To expand \"PC\"s beyond one megabyte, Lotus, Intel, and Microsoft jointly created expanded memory (EMS), a bank-switching scheme to allow more memory provided by add-in hardware, and accessed by a set of four 16-kilobyte \"windows\" inside the 20-bit addressing. Later, Intel CPUs had larger address spaces and could directly address 16 MB (80286) or more, causing Microsoft to develop extended memory (XMS) which did not require additional hardware.\n\"Expanded\" and \"extended\" memory have incompatible interfaces, so anyone writing software that used more than one megabyte had to provide for both systems for the greatest compatibility until MS-DOS began including EMM386, which simulated EMS memory using XMS memory. A protected mode OS can also be written for the 80286, but DOS application compatibility was more difficult than expected, not only because most DOS applications accessed the hardware directly, bypassing BIOS routines intended to ensure compatibility, but also that most BIOS requests were made by the first 32 interrupt vectors, which were marked as \"reserved\" for protected mode processor exceptions by Intel.\nVideo cards suffered from their own incompatibilities. There was no standard interface for using higher-resolution SVGA graphics modes supported by later video cards. Each manufacturer developed their own methods of accessing the screen memory, including different mode numberings and different bank switching arrangements. The latter were used to address large images within a single 64 KB segment of memory. Previously, the VGA standard had used planar video memory arrangements to the same effect, but this did not easily extend to the greater color depths and higher resolutions offered by SVGA adapters. An attempt at creating a standard named VESA BIOS Extensions (VBE) was made, but not all manufacturers used it.\nWhen the 386 was introduced, again a protected mode OS could be written for it. This time, DOS compatibility was much easier because of virtual 8086 mode. Unfortunately programs could not switch directly between them, so eventually, some new memory-model APIs were developed, VCPI and DPMI, the latter becoming the most popular.\nBecause of the great number of third-party adapters and no standard for them, programming the PC could be difficult. Professional developers would operate a large test-suite of various known-to-be-popular hardware combinations.\nTo give consumers some idea of what sort of PC they would need to operate their software, the Multimedia PC (MPC) standard was set during 1990. A PC that met the minimum MPC standard could be marketed with the MPC logo, giving consumers an easy-to-understand specification to look for. Software that could operate on the most minimally MPC-compliant PC would be guaranteed to operate on any MPC. The MPC level 2 and MPC level 3 standards were set later, but the term \"MPC compliant\" never became popular. After MPC level 3 during 1996, no further MPC standards were established.\nChallenges to Wintel domination.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nBy the late 1990s, the success of Microsoft Windows had driven rival commercial operating systems into near-extinction, and had ensured that the \"IBM PC compatible\" computer was the dominant computing platform. This meant that if a developer made their software only for the Wintel platform, they would still be able to reach the vast majority of computer users. The only major competitor to Windows with more than a few percentage points of market share was Apple Inc.'s Macintosh. The Mac started out billed as \"the computer for the rest of us\", but high prices and closed architecture drove the Macintosh into an education and desktop publishing niche, from which it only emerged in the mid-2000s. By the mid-1990s the Mac's market share had dwindled to around 5% and introducing a new rival operating system had become too risky a commercial venture. Experience had shown that even if an operating system was technically superior to Windows, it would be a failure in the market (BeOS and OS/2 for example). In 1989, Steve Jobs said of his new NeXT system, \"It will either be the last new hardware platform to succeed, or the first to fail.\" Four years later in 1993, NeXT announced it was ending production of the NeXTcube and porting NeXTSTEP to Intel processors.\nVery early on in PC history, some companies introduced their own XT-compatible chipsets. For example, Chips and Technologies introduced their 82C100 XT Controller which integrated and replaced six of the original XT circuits: one 8237 DMA controller, one 8253 interrupt timer, one 8255 parallel interface controller, one 8259 interrupt controller, one 8284 clock generator, and one 8288 bus controller. Similar non-Intel chipsets appeared for the AT-compatibles, for example OPTi's 82C206 or 82C495XLC which were found in many 486 and early Pentium systems. The x86 chipset market was very volatile though. In 1993, VLSI Technology had become the dominant market player only to be virtually wiped out by Intel a year later. Intel has been the uncontested leader ever since. As the \"Wintel\" platform gained dominance Intel gradually abandoned the practice of licensing its technologies to other chipset makers; in 2010 Intel was involved in litigation related to their refusal to license their processor bus and related technologies to other companies like Nvidia.\nCompanies such as AMD and Cyrix developed alternative x86 CPUs that were functionally compatible with Intel's. Towards the end of the 1990s, AMD was taking an increasing share of the CPU market for PCs. AMD even ended up playing a significant role in directing the development of the x86 platform when its Athlon line of processors continued to develop the classic x86 architecture as Intel deviated with its NetBurst architecture for the Pentium 4 CPUs and the IA-64 architecture for the Itanium set of server CPUs. AMD developed AMD64, the first major extension not created by Intel, which Intel later adopted as x86-64. During 2006 Intel began abandoning NetBurst with the release of their set of \"Core\" processors that represented a development of the earlier Pentium III.\nA major alternative to Wintel domination is the rise of alternative operating systems since the early 2000s, which marked as the start of the post-PC era. This would include both the rapid growth of the smartphones (using Android or iOS) as an alternative to the personal computer; and the increasing prevalence of Linux and Unix-like operating systems in the server farms of large corporations such as Google or Amazon.\nThe IBM PC compatible today.\nThe term \"IBM PC compatible\" is not commonly used presently because many current mainstream desktop and laptop computers are based on the PC architecture, and IBM no longer makes PCs. The competing hardware architectures have either been discontinued or, like the Amiga, have been relegated to niche, enthusiast markets. The most successful exception is Apple's Macintosh platform, which has used non-Intel processors for the majority of its existence. Macintosh was initially based on the Motorola 68000 series, then transitioned to the PowerPC architecture in 1994 before transitioning to Intel processors beginning in 2006. Until the transition to the internally developed ARM-based Apple silicon in 2020, Macs shared the same system architecture as their Wintel counterparts and could boot Microsoft Windows without a DOS Compatibility Card.\nThe processor speed and memory capacity of modern PCs are many orders of magnitude greater than they were for the original IBM PC and yet backwards compatibility has been largely maintained\u00a0\u2013 a 32-bit operating system released during the 2000s[ [update]] can still operate many of the simpler programs written for the OS of the early 1980s without needing an emulator, though an emulator like DOSBox now has near-native functionality at full speed (and is necessary for certain games which may run too fast on modern processors). Additionally, many modern PCs can still run DOS directly, although special options such as USB legacy mode and SATA-to-PATA emulation may need to be set in the BIOS setup utility. Computers using the UEFI might need to be set at legacy BIOS mode to be able to boot DOS. However, the BIOS/UEFI options in most mass-produced consumer-grade computers are very limited and cannot be configured to truly handle OSes such as the original variants of DOS.\nThe spread of the x86-64 architecture has further distanced current computers' and operating systems' internal similarity with the original IBM PC by introducing yet another processor mode with an instruction set modified for 64-bit addressing, but x86-64 capable processors also retain standard x86 compatibility.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49804", "revid": "9755426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49804", "title": "Gary Becker", "text": "American economist (1930\u20132014)\nGary Stanley Becker (; December 2, 1930 \u2013 May 3, 2014) was an American economist who received the 1992 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences. He was a professor of economics and sociology at the University of Chicago, and was a leader of the third generation of the Chicago school of economics.\nBecker was awarded the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences in 1992 and received the United States Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2007. A 2011 survey of economics professors named Becker their favorite living economist over the age of 60, followed by Kenneth Arrow and Robert Solow. Economist Justin Wolfers called him \"the most important social scientist in the past 50 years.\"\nBecker was one of the first economists to analyze topics that had been researched in sociology, including racial discrimination, crime, family organization, and rational addiction. He argued that many different types of human behavior can be seen as rational and utility-maximizing, including those that are often regarded as self-destructive or irrational. His approach also extended to altruistic aspects of human behavior, which he showed to sometimes have self-serving ends (when individuals' utility is properly defined and measured, that is). He was also among the foremost exponents of the study of human capital. According to Milton Friedman, he was \"the greatest social scientist who has lived and worked\" in the second part of the twentieth century.\nEarly life and education.\nBecker was born to a Jewish family in Pottsville, Pennsylvania. He received a BA from Princeton University in 1951, completing a senior thesis titled \"The Theory of Multi-Country Trade\". He then earned a PhD from the University of Chicago in 1955 with a thesis entitled \"The Economics of Discrimination\". At Chicago, Becker was influenced by Milton Friedman, whom Becker called \"by far the greatest living teacher I have ever had\". Becker credits Friedman's course on microeconomics for helping to renew his interest in economics. Becker also noted that during his time at Chicago, there were several other economists that greatly influenced his future work, namely Gregg Lewis, T. W. Schultz, Aaron Director, and L. J. Savage.\nCareer.\nFor a few years, Becker worked as an assistant professor at Chicago and conducted research there. Before turning 30, he moved to teach at Columbia University in 1957 while also conducting research at the National Bureau of Economic Research. In 1970 Becker returned to the University of Chicago, and in 1983 was offered a joint appointment by the Sociology Department of Chicago. In 1965 he was elected as a Fellow of the American Statistical Association.\nBecker was a founding partner of TGG Group, a business and philanthropy consulting company. Becker won the John Bates Clark Medal in 1967. He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1972, a member of the National Academy of Sciences in 1975, and a member of the American Philosophical Society in 1986. Becker was a member, and later the president of, the Mont Pelerin Society in 1990. Becker received the Nobel Prize in 1992 \"for having extended the domain of microeconomic analysis to a wide range of human behavior and interaction, including nonmarket behavior\". Becker also received the National Medal of Science in 2000. Becker received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement in 2001, presented by Awards Council member and Nobel Prize laureate Leon M. Lederman. Becker's work has over 200,000 citations on Google Scholar.\nA political conservative, he wrote a monthly column for \"Business Week\" from 1985 to 2004, alternating with liberal Princeton economist Alan Blinder. In 1996 Becker was a senior adviser to Republican presidential candidate Robert Dole. In December 2004, Becker started a joint weblog with Judge Richard Posner entitled \"The Becker-Posner Blog\".\nEconomic analysis.\nBecker's work has been influential not only in economics but also other disciplines including sociology and demography. His most famous work is \"Human Capital\", and he wrote on sociological topics as diverse as marriage, the family, criminal behavior, and racial discrimination.\nDiscrimination.\nBecker recognized that people (employers, customers, and employees) sometimes do not want to work with minorities because they have bias against the disadvantaged groups. He went on to say that discrimination increases a firm's cost because in discriminating against certain workers, the employer would have to pay more to other workers so that work can proceed without the biased ones. If the employer employs the minority, low wages can be provided, but more people can be employed, and productivity can be increased.\nPolitics.\nBecker's contributions to politics have come to be known as \"Chicago political economy\" of which he is considered one of the founding fathers.\nBecker's insight was to recognize that deadweight losses put a brake on predation. He took the well-known insight that deadweight losses are proportional to the square of the tax, and used it to argue that a linear increase in takings by a predatory interest group will provoke a non-linear increase in the deadweight losses its victim suffers. These rapidly increasing losses will prod victims to invest equivalent sums in resisting attempts on their wealth. The advance of predators, fueled by linear incentives, slows before the stiffening resistance of prey outraged by non-linear damages.\nCrime and punishment.\nJurist Richard Posner has stressed the enormous influence of Becker's work which \"has turned out to be a fount of economic writing on crime and its control\", as well as the analytics of crime and punishment.\nWhile Becker acknowledged that many people operate under a high moral and ethical constraint, criminals rationally see that the benefits of their crime outweigh the cost which depends upon the probability of apprehension, conviction, and punishment, and their current set of opportunities. From a public policy perspective, since the cost of increasing a fine is trivial in comparison to the cost of increasing surveillance, one can conclude that the best policy is to maximize the fine and minimize surveillance.\nHuman capital.\nIn his 1964 book \"Human Capital Theories\" Becker introduced the economic concept of human capital. This book is now a classic in economic research and Becker went on to become a defining proponent of the Chicago school of economics. The book was republished in 1975 and 1993. Becker considered labor economics to be part of capital theory. He mused that \"economists and plan-makers have fully agreed with the concept of investing on human beings\".\nBecker\u2019s work on human capital changed how economists think about education and skills. He argued that people gain economic value when they invest in things like schooling, training, and health, similar to how companies invest in machines or technology. This idea helped explain why workers with more education often earn higher wages and why countries benefit when they support learning and skill development. Becker\u2019s approach also shaped later research on how people choose to improve their skills and how governments can design programs that strengthen the workforce. His theory became important in discussions about income differences, showing that part of the wage gap comes from differences in investment in knowledge and abilities. While some scholars say human capital theory does not fully address social and structural barriers, Becker\u2019s ideas remain highly influential and continue to guide research on education, labor markets, and economic growth. \nModern household economics.\nTogether, Becker and Jacob Mincer founded Modern Household Economics, sometimes called the New Home Economics (NHE), in the 1960s at the labor workshop at Columbia University that they both directed. Shoshana Grossbard, who was a student of Becker at the University of Chicago, first published a history of the NHE at Columbia and Chicago in 2001. After receiving feedback from the NHE founders she revised her account.\nAmong the first publications in Modern Household Economics were Becker (1960) on fertility, Mincer (1962) on women's labor supply, and Becker (1965) on the allocation of time. Students and faculty who attended the Becker-Mincer workshop at Columbia in the 1960s and have published in the NHE tradition include Andrea Beller, Barry Chiswick, Carmel Chiswick, Victor Fuchs, Michael Grossman, Robert Michael, June E. O'Neill, Sol Polachek, and Robert Willis. James Heckman was also influenced by the NHE tradition and attended the labor workshop at Columbia from 1969 until his move to the University of Chicago. The NHE may be seen as a subfield of family economics.\nIn 2013, responding to a lack of women in top positions in the United States, Becker told the \"Wall Street Journal\" reporter David Wessel, \"A lot of barriers [to women and blacks] have been broken down. That's all for the good. It's much less clear what we see today is the result of such artificial barriers. Going home to take care of the kids when the man doesn't: Is that a waste of a woman's time? There's no evidence that it is.\" This view was criticized by Charles Jones, stating that, \"Productivity could be 9 percent to 15 percent higher, potentially, if all barriers were eliminated.\"\nHome production.\nIn the mid-1960s, Becker and Kelvin Lancaster developed the economic concept of a household production function. Both assumed that consumers in a household receive utility from the goods they purchase. Such as for example, when consumers purchase raw food. If it is cooked, a utility arises from the meal. In 1981 Becker published \"Treatise on the Family\", where he stressed the importance of division of labor and gains from specification.\nEconomics of the family.\nDuring Becker's time at Chicago in the 1970s, he mostly focused on the family. He had previously done work on birth rates and family size, and he used this time to expand his understanding of how economics works within a family. Some specific family issues covered during this time were marriage, divorce, altruism toward other members of the family, investments by parents in their children, and long-term changes in what families do. All of Becker's research on the family resulted in \"A Treatise on the Family\" (1981). Throughout the decade, he contributed new ideas and information, and in 1991 an expanded edition of the work was published. His research applies basic economic assumptions such as maximizing behavior, preferences, and equilibrium to the family. He analyzed determinants for marriage and divorce, family size, parents' allocation of time to their children, and changes in wealth over several generations. This publication was an extensive overview of the economics of the family and helped to unite economics with other fields like sociology and anthropology.\nRotten kid theorem.\nAt the core of Becker's economic theory on the family, which he developed on the basis of figures for United States families in 1981, is the \"rotten kid theorem\". He applied the economics of an altruist to a family, wherein a person takes actions that improve the well-being of another person, despite more self-interested action being feasible. Becker pointed out that a parent forgoes higher income, by focusing on family work commitments in order to maximize a well-meaning objective. Becker also theorized that a child in a US family may be perfectly selfish because it maximizes its own utility. There have been attempts to test this economic thesis, in the course of which it was found that cross-generational families do not necessarily maximize their joint income.\nOrgan markets.\nA 2007 article by Gary Becker and Julio Jorge Elias entitled \"Introducing Incentives in the market for live and cadaveric organ donations\" posited that a free market could help solve the problem of a scarcity in organ transplants. Their economic modeling was able to estimate the price tag for human kidneys (about US$15,000) and human livers (about US$32,000). It is argued by critics that this particular market would exploit the underprivileged donors from the developing world.\nPersonal life.\nBecker's first wife was Doria Slote. They were married from 1954 until her death in 1970. The marriage produced two daughters, Catherine Becker and Judy Becker. About ten years later, in 1980 Becker married Guity Nashat, an Iranian historian of the Middle East whose research interests overlapped his own.\nIn 2014 Becker died in Chicago, Illinois, aged 83, due to surgical complications. The same year, he was honored in a three-day conference organized at the University of Chicago.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49807", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49807", "title": "Gross national product (finance)", "text": ""}
{"id": "49808", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49808", "title": "Measures of national income and output", "text": "A variety of measures of national income and output are used in economics to estimate total economic activity in a country or region, including gross domestic product (GDP), Gross national income (GNI), net national income (NNI), and adjusted national income (NNI adjusted for natural resource depletion \u2013 also called as NNI at factor cost). All are specially concerned with counting the total amount of goods and services produced within the economy and by various sectors. The boundary is usually defined by geography or citizenship, and it is also defined as the total income of the nation and also restrict the goods and services that are counted. For instance, some measures count only goods &amp; services that are exchanged for money, excluding bartered goods, while other measures may attempt to include bartered goods by \"imputing\" monetary values to them. \nNational accounts.\nArriving at a figure for the total production of goods and services in a large region like a country entails a large amount of data-collection and calculation. Although some attempts were made to estimate national incomes as long ago as the 17th century,\nthe systematic keeping of national accounts, of which these figures are a part, only began in the 1930s, in the United States and some European countries. The impetus for that major statistical effort was the Great Depression and the rise of Keynesian economics, which prescribed a greater role for the government in managing an economy, and made it necessary for governments to obtain accurate information so that their interventions into the economy could proceed as well-informed as possible.\nMarket value.\nIn order to count a good or service, it is necessary to assign value to it. The value that the measures of national income and output assign to a good or service is its market value \u2013 the price it fetches when bought or sold. The actual usefulness of a product (its use-value) is not measured \u2013 assuming the use-value to be any different from its market value.\nThree strategies have been used to obtain the market values of all the goods and services produced: the product (or output) method, the expenditure method, and the income method. The product method looks at the economy on an industry-by-industry basis. The total output of the economy is the sum of the outputs of every industry. However, since an output of one industry may be used by another industry and become part of the output of that second industry, to avoid counting the item twice we use not the value output by each industry, but the value-added; that is, the difference between the value of what it puts out and what it takes in. The total value produced by the economy is the sum of the values-added by every industry.\nThe expenditure method is based on the idea that all products are bought by somebody or some organisation. Therefore, we sum up the total amount of money people and organisations spend in buying things. This amount must equal the value of everything produced. Usually, expenditures by private individuals, expenditures by businesses, and expenditures by government are calculated separately and then summed to give the total expenditure. Also, a correction term must be introduced to account for imports and exports outside the boundary.\nThe income method works by summing the incomes of all producers within the boundary. Since what they are paid is just the market value of their product, their total income must be the total value of the product. Wages, proprietor's incomes, and corporate profits are the major subdivisions of income.\nOutput.\nThe output approach focuses on finding the total output of a nation by directly finding the total value of all goods and services a nation produces.\nBecause of the complication of the multiple stages in the production of a good or service, only the final value of a good or service is included in the total output. This avoids an issue often called 'double counting', wherein the total value of a good is included several times in national output, by counting it repeatedly in several stages of production. In the example of meat production, the value of the good from the farm may be $10, then $30 from the butchers, and then $60 from the supermarket. The value that should be included in final national output should be $60, not the sum of all those numbers, $100. The values added at each stage of production over the previous stage are respectively $10, $20, and $30. Their sum gives an alternative way of calculating the value of final output.\nKey formulae are:\nGDP at market price = value of output in the economy - intermediate consumption\nNNP at factor cost = GDP at market price - net indirect taxes - depreciation + net factor income from abroad\nNDP at factor cost = compensation of employees + net interest + rental &amp; royalty income + profit of incorporated and unincorporated NDP at factor cost\nExpenditure.\nThe expenditure approach is basically an output accounting method. It focuses on finding the total output of a nation by finding the total amount of money spent. This is acceptable to economists, because, like income, the total value of all goods is equal to the total amount of money spent on goods. The basic formula for domestic output takes all the different areas in which money is spent within the region, and then combines them to find the total output.\nformula_1\nwhere:\nC = Consumption (economics) (Household consumption expenditures / Personal consumption expenditures)\nI = Investment (macroeconomics) / Gross private domestic investment\nG = Government spending (Government consumption / Gross investment expenditures)\nX = Exports (Gross exports of goods and services)\nM = Imports (Gross imports of goods and services)\nNote: (X - M) is often written as XN or less commonly as NX, both stand for \"net exports\"\nThe names of the measures consist of one of the words \"Gross\" or \"Net\", followed by one of the words \"National\" or \"Domestic\", followed by one of the words \"Product\", \"Income\", or \"Expenditure\". All of these terms can be explained separately.\n\"Gross\" means total product, regardless of the use to which it is subsequently put.\n\"Net\" means \"Gross\" minus the amount that must be used to offset depreciation \u2013 ie., wear-and-tear or obsolescence of the nation's fixed capital assets. \"Net\" gives an indication of how much product is actually available for consumption or new investment.\n\"Domestic\" means the boundary is geographical: we are counting all goods and services produced within the country's borders, regardless of by whom.\n\"National\" means the boundary is defined by citizenship (nationality). We count all goods and services produced by the nationals of the country (or businesses owned by them) regardless of where that production physically takes place.\nThe output of a French-owned cotton factory in Senegal counts as part of the Domestic figures for Senegal, but the National figures of France.\n\"Product\", \"Income\", and \"Expenditure\" refer to the three counting methodologies explained earlier: the product, income, and expenditure approaches. However, the terms are used loosely.\n\"Product\" is the general term, often used when any of the three approaches was actually used. Sometimes the word \"Product\" is used and then some additional symbol or phrase to indicate the methodology; so, for instance, we get \"Gross Domestic Product by income\", \"GDP (income)\", \"GDP(I)\", and similar constructions.\n\"Income\" specifically means that the income approach was used.\n\"Expenditure\" specifically means that the expenditure approach was used.\nAll three counting methods should in theory give the same final figure.\nHowever, in practice, minor differences are obtained from the three methods for several reasons, including changes in inventory levels and errors in the statistics. One problem for instance is that goods in inventory have been produced (therefore included in Product), but not yet sold (therefore not yet included in Expenditure). Similar timing issues can also cause a slight discrepancy between the value of goods produced (Product) and the payments to the factors that produced the goods (Income), particularly if inputs are purchased on credit, and also because wages are collected often after a period of production.\nGross domestic product and gross national product.\nGross domestic product (GDP) is defined as \"the value of all final goods and services produced in a country in 1 year\".\nGross national product (GNP) is defined as \"the market value of all goods and services produced in one year by labour and property supplied by the residents of a country.\"\nAs an example, the table below shows some GDP and GNP, and NNI data for the United States:\nNational income and welfare.\nGDP per capita (per person) is often used as a measure of a person's welfare. Countries with higher GDP may be more likely to also score high on other measures of welfare, such as life expectancy. However, there are serious limitations to the usefulness of GDP as a measure of welfare:\nBecause of this, other measures of welfare such as the Human Development Index (HDI), Index of Sustainable Economic Welfare (ISEW), Genuine Progress Indicator (GPI), gross national happiness (GNH), and sustainable national income (SNI) are used.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49809", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49809", "title": "2010 - Odyssey Two", "text": ""}
{"id": "49810", "revid": "1879095", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49810", "title": "USS Oregon (BB-3)", "text": "Indiana-class pre-dreadnought battleship of the United States Navy\nUSS \"Oregon\" was the third and final member of the of pre-dreadnought battleships built for the United States Navy in the 1890s. The three ships were built as part of a modernization program aimed at strengthening the American fleet to prepare for a possible conflict with a European navy. Designed for short-range operations in defense of the United States, the three \"Indiana\"-class ships had a low freeboard and carried a main battery of four guns in a pair of gun turrets. \"Oregon\" and her sister ships were the first modern battleships built for the United States, though they suffered from significant stability and seakeeping problems owing to their small size and insufficient freeboard.\nAfter entering service in 1896, \"Oregon\" briefly served with the Pacific Squadron before being transferred to the East Coast of the United States as tensions with Spain over Cuba grew in early 1898. She completed a journey around South America in the span of 66 days, arriving shortly after the start of the Spanish\u2013American War. She thereafter took part in the blockade of Santiago de Cuba, which culminated in the Battle of Santiago de Cuba on 3 July, where \"Oregon\" contributed to the destruction of the Spanish squadron in Cuba. After the war, \"Oregon\" was deployed to the Asiatic Squadron, serving during the Philippine\u2013American War and the Boxer Rebellion in Qing China. The ship returned to the United States in 1906, when she was decommissioned and placed in reserve for the next five years, during which she was modernized.\nReactivated in 1911, \"Oregon\" spent the next several years cruising off the West Coast of the United States, frequently going in and out of service. During the Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War in 1918, she escorted a convoy for the Siberian expedition. The ship was decommissioned in 1919 and allocated the hull number BB-3 the following year. Efforts by naval enthusiasts in the early 1920s led the Navy to loan \"Oregon\" to her namesake state for use as a museum ship. After the start of World War II, the Navy decided in late 1942 to scrap the ship for the war effort, but after work began the Navy requested the ship's return for use as an ammunition hulk for the upcoming invasion of Guam in 1944. She remained off the island through the mid-1950s before being sold for scrap in 1956 and broken up in Japan.\nDesign.\nIn the late 1880s, the United States Navy's senior commanders began to plan for the possibility of a conflict with a European naval power, eventually coming to the conclusion that a force of both short- and long-range battleships would be necessary to defend the country. Congress agreed to begin modernizing the Navy and authorized three small vessels\u2014the ironclad battleship and the armored cruisers and . Three further ships, the , were authorized in 1890; these were to be the first installment of short-range battleships to meet the Navy's plans. The ships proved to be disappointments in service, as they were badly overweight upon completion, their low freeboard hampered operations at sea, and they handled poorly. They were nevertheless the first modern battleships for the American fleet.\n\"Oregon\" was long overall and had a beam of and a draft of . She displaced as designed and up to at full load. The ship was powered by two-shaft triple-expansion steam engines rated at and four coal-fired fire-tube boilers, generating a top speed of . She had a cruising radius of at a speed of . As built, she was fitted with a heavy military mast, this was later supplemented by a stern cage mast in 1910\u20131911. She had a crew of 32\u00a0officers and 441\u00a0enlisted men, which increased to a total of 586\u2013636 officers and enlisted.\nThe ship was armed with a main battery of four /35 caliber guns in two twin gun turrets on the centerline, one forward and aft. The secondary battery consisted of eight /35 cal. guns, which were placed in four twin wing turrets. These were supported by a battery of six /40 cal. guns in a casemate battery amidships. For close-range defense against torpedo boats, she carried twenty 6-pounder guns and six 1-pounder guns in individual mounts. As was standard for capital ships of the period, \"Oregon\" carried torpedo tubes in above-water mounts, though the number is unclear. According to \"Conway's All the World's Fighting Ships\" and the US Navy's \"Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships\", she was fitted with six tubes, though the naval historian Norman Friedman states she was ordered with seven but completed with five.\n\"Oregon\"'s main armored belt was thick over the magazines and the machinery spaces and was reduced to at the bow and stern. The main battery gun turrets had thick sides, and the supporting barbettes had the same thickness of armor plate on their exposed sides. The 8\u00a0in turrets had 6\u00a0in of armor plating and the casemate battery had . The conning tower had thick sides.\nService history.\nCongress authorized three \"Indiana\"-class battleships on 30 June 1890, and in the authorization, specified that one of the ships was to be built on the West Coast of the United States. Therefore, after the first two vessels\u2014 and \u2014were awarded to William Cramp &amp; Sons of Philadelphia, the contract for the third was given to Union Iron Works in San Francisco. Her keel was laid down on 19 November 1891 and her completed hull was launched on 26 October 1893. After completing fitting-out, she was commissioned into the fleet on 15 July 1896. She then completed sea trials as part of the Pacific Squadron, where she served for the next year.\nOn 15 February 1898, the armored cruiser \"Maine\" exploded in Havana, Cuba during a period of rising tensions between the United States and Spain, which possessed Cuba as part of its colonial empire. \"Oregon\", which was in dry dock at the time, was refloated the next day and placed under the command of Captain Charles Edgar Clark. Initial reports blamed a Spanish naval mine, and as the threat of war between the two countries grew, \"Oregon\" was ordered to steam to the East Coast of the United States to strengthen the North Atlantic Squadron. She steamed south to San Francisco, California to load ammunition on 9 March, departing ten days later for the long voyage around South America, a distance of some . \"Oregon\" reached Callao, Peru on 4 April, where she took on a fresh load of coal before continuing on the journey.\nClark decided to skip the scheduled coaling stop in Valpara\u00edso, Chile, electing to proceed to the Strait of Magellan directly, which the ship reached on 16 April. A severe storm complicated her passage through the hazardous waters and she was forced to drop anchor overnight to avoid running aground, but she reached Punta Arenas, Chile, the next morning. There, she joined the gunboat , which was also en route to join the North Atlantic Squadron. After both ships replenished their coal stocks there, they got underway for Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, on 21 April; false rumors of a Spanish torpedo boat in the area kept the ships' gun crews at their stations. The ships reached Rio de Janeiro on 30 April, where they learned of the state of war between the United States and Spain. They departed on 4 May, stopped briefly in Salvador, Bahia, Brazil, and then coaled in Barbados on 18 May. \"Oregon\" arrived in Jupiter, Florida on 24 May, where she met other elements of the North Atlantic Squadron. In the course of the voyage, which lasted sixty-six days, \"Oregon\" had traveled some . One long term result of this trip, which had received extensive press coverage, was public pressure for the construction of a Panama Canal to shorten future trans-oceanic repositionings.\nSpanish\u2013American War.\n\"Oregon\" sailed to Key West on 26 May, where she joined the rest of the North Atlantic Squadron, under the command of Rear Admiral William T. Sampson. By that time, the Flying Squadron, under Commodore Winfield Scott Schley's command, had located the Spanish squadron that had sailed to Cuba at the start of the war and had blockaded it in Santiago de Cuba. The Spanish squadron was commanded by Rear Admiral Pascual Cervera y Topete and consisted of the armored cruisers , , and and the destroyers and . \"Oregon\" arrived off that port on 1 June, and over the course of the month, took part in bombardments of Spanish positions around the city and helped to maintain the blockade.\nAt 08:45 on 3 July, Cervera sortied with his flag aboard \"Infanta Maria Teresa\", followed by \"Crist\u00f3bal Col\u00f3n\", \"Vizcaya\" and \"Almirante Oquendo\", with the two destroyers bringing up the rear. The Spaniards cleared the roadstead at 09:35; luckily for the Spanish, \"New York\"\u2014Sampson's flagship\u2014was out of position at the time and \"Massachusetts\" was replenishing her coal at Guant\u00e1namo Bay. Lookouts aboard the armored cruiser spotted Cervera approaching and fired one of her guns to warn the other American ships, which quickly ordered their crews to general quarters and initiated the Battle of Santiago de Cuba. As the Spanish ships attempted to break out to the west, Cervera charged at \"Brooklyn\" with \"Infanta Maria Teresa\" to delay the American pursuit and give his other ships time to escape. The Spanish coastal batteries also contributed their fire in the first stage of the battle but had little effect.\n\"Oregon\" took the lead in the ensuing chase as she was the only large American ship which had good steam pressure when the battle began. The cruiser \"Brooklyn\" had uncoupled two of her four engines, but could still achieve and was right behind her. Heavy American gunfire had set \"Infanta Maria Theresa\" on fire, and, fearing a magazine explosion, Cervara ordered her run aground at 10:25. \"Almirante Oquendo\"'s captain issued similar instructions five minutes later, as his ship, too, was burning badly. \"Vizcaya\" was also forced ashore shortly thereafter, striking her colors to surrender at 10:36. Meanwhile, the two Spanish destroyers had also been badly damaged by the American battleships; \"Indiana\" had nearly cut \"Plut\u00f3n\" in half with a 13-inch shell, forcing her to run aground, where she exploded. And \"Furor\" had been savaged by \"Oregon\"'s, 's, and \"Indiana\"'s secondary batteries, leading her crew to surrender to the gunboat .\nOnly \"Crist\u00f3bal Col\u00f3n\", which had a lead at that point, was still running westward. \"Oregon\" and \"Texas\" followed \"Brooklyn\" as they chased \"Crist\u00f3bal Col\u00f3n\"; the Americans slowly caught up to the fleeing Spanish cruiser and engaged her at long range. \"Crist\u00f3bal Col\u00f3n\", which had not been fitted with her main armament before being sent to Cuba, could not return fire, and her commander realized his hopeless position. At 13:20, he turned to shore and struck his flag, indicating his surrender, and the crew scuttled the ship. \"Oregon\" was not hit in the action, owing in large part to the poor quality of Spanish shooting. With the destruction of Cervera's squadron and American successes in Cuba and the Philippines, Spain sued for peace on 17 July, and the war ended on 12 August with the Treaty of Paris.\nAsiatic Station.\nAfter the war, \"Oregon\" steamed to New York for an overhaul, after which she was assigned to the Asiatic Squadron in October. She reached Manila in the Philippines on 18 March 1899 and operated there for the next year during the Philippine\u2013American War. During this period, she assisted with the blockade of Manila and Lingayen Gulf and supported the capture of the city of Vigan. On 13 February 1900, \"Oregon\" departed for a visit to Japan that lasted into May, when she steamed to Hong Kong. By that time, the Boxer Rebellion had broken out in Qing China, and the ship was ordered to steam to Taku, China, on 23 June to reinforce the Eight-Nation Alliance forces that were gathering there. While passing through the Bohai Strait on 28 June, she struck an uncharted rock, running hard aground. She remained on the rock for a week before being re-floated on 5 July. After completing temporary repairs, she steamed to Kure, Japan to be dry-docked for permanent repairs on 17 July.\n\"Oregon\" got underway again on 29 August for operations along the coast of China. She patrolled off the mouth of the Yangtze River and was then stationed at Wusong in Shanghai, China until 5 May 1901. That day, she departed to return to the United States for a refit, sailing first to Yokohama, Japan, and then to Honolulu, Hawaii. From there, she steamed to San Francisco, arriving there on 12 June. She then steamed north to the Puget Sound Navy Yard, which she reached on 6 July. She remained there for a year and a half before departing in early 1903 for China. She arrived in Hong Kong on 18 March, and over the course of the next three years, she served on the Asiatic Station, visiting ports in China, Japan, and the Philippines. The period passed uneventfully for \"Oregon\", and she returned to the United States in February 1906. She was decommissioned in Puget Sound on 27 April.\nLater career.\nThe ship remained out of service for the next five years. She received a fairly minimal modernization during her period in reserve, which included the installation of a cage main mast. She also had her slow-firing 6-inch guns removed and a battery of twelve quick-firing guns was installed to improve her defenses against torpedo-boats, which had grown in size and power since \"Oregon\"'s construction. These were placed in single mounts, with four in an open battery atop the deckhouse amidships, one on each 8-inch turret and two on the 13-inch turrets apiece. Her small size and cramped decks prevented the more thorough modernization of her superstructure that the later American pre-dreadnought battleships received at this time.\nOn 29 August 1911, \"Oregon\" was recommissioned, but she remained assigned to the reserve fleet until October, when she got underway for San Diego, California. Over the next two years, she cruised off the West Coast but saw no events of note. She was placed \"in ordinary\" on 9 April 1913 in Bremerton, Washington before being formally returned to the reserve fleet on 16 September 1914, though she remained in partial commission. She was fully commissioned again on 2 January 1915 to participate in the Panama\u2013Pacific International Exposition in San Francisco. She was again reduced to the reserve fleet on 11 February 1916, remaining there until 7 April 1917, though she was still in partial commission. This period was spent in San Francisco, and 7 April she was once again returned to full commission, the United States having entered World War I the day before. She saw no activity during the war, but she was used to escort the troop ships carrying the force for the Siberian expedition that intervened in the Russian Civil War in 1918.\nAfter returning from Russia, \"Oregon\" was decommissioned again on 12 June 1919 before being recommissioned briefly from 21 August to 4 October. During this period, she hosted President Woodrow Wilson during a review of the Pacific Fleet when it arrived in Seattle, Washington. She was assigned the hull number of \"BB-3\" on 17 July 1920 when the Navy adopted the system. Beginning in 1921, a group of naval enthusiasts embarked on a campaign to have \"Oregon\" preserved as a museum ship, to be based somewhere in her namesake state. The Washington Naval Treaty, signed in 1922, required \"Oregon\" to be demilitarized, and she was accordingly disarmed in 1923, being pronounced compliant with the terms of the treaty on 4 January 1924. She was listed on the Naval Vessel Register as an \"unclassified\" relic. The Navy loaned the ship to Oregon in June 1925, and she was moored in Portland and restored as a museum vessel.\nFate.\n\"Oregon\" was redesignated with the hull number IX-22 on 17 February 1941. After the United States entered World War II with the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941, the Navy determined that \"Oregon\" ought to be sold for scrap to free resources for the war effort. She was accordingly struck from the Naval Vessel Register on 2 November 1942 and was sold to ship breakers on 7 December. In March 1943, she was towed to Kalama, Washington to be broken up, but after the work began the Navy decided that \"Oregon\" would be of use during the planned reconquest of Guam scheduled for mid-1944, either as a storage hulk or as a breakwater. The Navy requested that the breakers stop after the superstructure had been cleared and her internal fittings and equipment had been removed and to return her. She was then loaded with ammunition to support the forces that would invade Guam and towed there as part of the invasion fleet.\nThe vessel remained moored in Guam through the end of the war in 1945 and for several years thereafter. During this period, on the night of 14\u201315 November 1948, \"Oregon\" broke free from her moorings during Typhoon Agnes and drifted away. After an extensive search, aircraft located the vessel adrift some southeast of Guam. The ship was towed back to Guam, and she remained there until 1956, when on 15 March she was sold to Massey Supply Corporation, which in turn resold her to Iwai Sanggo Company of Kawasaki, Japan. She was then towed there and broken up.\nSeveral parts of the ship remain in Portland; her military foremast was erected in 1956 at the Tom McCall Waterfront Park and her wheel is held in the collection of the Oregon Historical Society. Both of her funnels also survive, but are not on public display.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49811", "revid": "188944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49811", "title": "Gratacielo Pirelli", "text": ""}
{"id": "49812", "revid": "38359508", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49812", "title": "Avro", "text": "British aircraft manufacturer\nAvro (an initialism of the founder's name) was a British aircraft manufacturer. Its designs include the Avro 504, used as a trainer in the First World War, the Avro Lancaster, one of the pre-eminent bombers of the Second World War, and the delta wing Avro Vulcan, a stalwart of the Cold War.\nAvro was founded in 1910 by Alliott Verdon Roe at the Brownsfield Mill on Great Ancoats Street in Manchester. The company remained based primarily in Lancashire throughout its 53 years of existence, with key development and manufacturing sites in Alexandra Park, Chadderton, Trafford Park, and Woodford, Greater Manchester. The company was merged into Hawker Siddeley Aviation in 1963, although the Avro name has been used for some aircraft since then.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nOne of the world's first aircraft builders, A.V. Roe and Company was established on 1 January 1910 at Brownsfield Mill, Great Ancoats Street, Manchester, by Alliott Verdon Roe and his brother Humphrey Verdon Roe. Humphrey's contribution was chiefly financial and organizational; funding it from the earnings of the family webbing business and acting as managing director until he joined the RFC in 1917. Alliot had already constructed a successful aircraft, the Roe I Triplane, named \"The Bullseye\" after a brand of braces manufactured by Humphrey. The railway arch where A.V. Roe in 1909 built and achieved the first all-British powered flight still stands in the Lee Valley Park on the Walthamstow Marshes. In 1911, Roy Chadwick began work as Alliott's personal assistant and the firm's draughtsman and, in 1918, he was appointed Chief Designer.\nThe first Avro aircraft to be produced in any quantity was the Avro E or Avro 500, first flown in March 1912, of which 18 were manufactured, most for the newly formed Royal Flying Corps. The company also built the world's first aircraft with enclosed crew accommodation in 1912, the monoplane Type F and the biplane Avro Type G in 1912, neither progressing beyond the prototype stage. The Type 500 was developed into the Avro 504, first flown in September 1913. A small number were bought by the War Office before the outbreak of World War I, and the type saw some front-line service in the early months of the war, but it is best known as a training aircraft, serving in that role until 1933. Production lasted 20 years and totalled 8,340 aircraft from several factories: Hamble, Failsworth, Miles Platting and Newton Heath.\nInterwar years.\nAfter the boom in orders during the First World War, the lack of new work in peacetime caused severe financial problems and in August 1920, 68.5% of the company's shares were acquired by nearby Crossley Motors which had an urgent need for more factory space for automotive vehicle body building. \nIn 1924, the company left Alexandra Park Aerodrome in south Manchester where test flying had taken place since 1918; the site was used for a mixture of recreation and housing development. A rural site to the south of the city was found at New Hall Farm, Woodford in Cheshire, which continued to be used by aviation company BAE Systems until March 2011; the site has now been earmarked for a mixed use development. \nIn 1928 Crossley Motors sold AVRO to Armstrong Siddeley Holdings Ltd. In 1928 A.V. Roe resigned from the company he had founded and formed the Saunders-Roe company, which after World War II developed several radical designs for combat jets, and, eventually, a range of powerful hovercraft. \nIn 1935 Avro became a subsidiary of Hawker Siddeley.\nSecond World War.\nMaintaining their skills in designing trainer aircraft, the company built a more robust biplane called the Avro Tutor in the 1930s which the Royal Air Force (RAF) also bought in quantity. A twin piston-engined airliner called the Anson followed but as tensions rose again in Europe the firm's emphasis returned to combat aircraft. The Avro Manchester, Lancaster, and Lincoln were particularly famous Avro designs. Over 7,000 Lancasters were built and their bombing capabilities led to their use in the famous \"Dam Busters\" raid. Of the total, nearly half were built at Avro's Woodford (Stockport) and Chadderton (Oldham) sites, with some 700 Lancasters built at the Avro \"shadow\" factory next to Leeds Bradford Airport (formerly Yeadon Aerodrome), northwest Leeds. This factory employed 17,500 workers at a time when the population of Yeadon was just 10,000. It was the largest building in Europe at the time, at , and its roof was disguised by the addition of fields and hedges to hide it from enemy planes. The old taxiway from the factory to the runway is still evident.\nThe Avro Lancaster carried the heaviest bomb loads of the war, including the Grand Slam bomb.\nPostwar developments.\nThe civilian Lancastrian and maritime reconnaissance Shackleton were derived from the successful Lancaster design. The Tudor was a pressurised but problematic post-war Avro airliner which faced strong competition from designs by Bristol, Canadair, Douglas, Handley Page, and Lockheed. With the same wings and engines as the Lincoln, it achieved only a short (34 completed) production run following a first flight in June 1945 and the cancellation of an order from BOAC. The older Avro York was somewhat more successful in both the RAF and in commercial service, being distinguished by a fuselage square in cross-section. Both Tudors and Yorks played an important humanitarian part in the Berlin Airlift.\nThe postwar Vulcan bomber, originally designed as a nuclear-strike aircraft, was used to maintain the British nuclear deterrent, armed with the Avro Blue Steel stand-off nuclear bomb. The Vulcan saw service as a conventional bomber during the British campaign to recapture the Falkland Islands in 1982. Several Vulcans are prized as museum exhibits.\nA twin turboprop airliner, the Avro 748, was developed during the 1950s and sold widely to airlines and governments across the globe, powered by two Rolls-Royce Dart engines. The RAF bought 6 for use by the Queen's Flight and a variant with a rear-loading ramp and a \"kneeling\" main undercarriage was sold to the RAF (31 aircraft) as the Andover.\nAvro regional jets.\nThe Avro name would subsequently be resurrected by British Aerospace when this aircraft manufacturer renamed its BAe 146 family of regional jetliners as Avro regional jets (Avro RJ). Three differently sized versions of the four engine jetliner were produced: the Avro RJ70, the Avro RJ85 and the largest example, the Avro RJ100.\nAvro Canada.\nIn 1945, Hawker Siddeley Group purchased the former Victory Aircraft firm in Malton, Ontario, and renamed the operation A.V. Roe Canada Limited. Commonly known as Avro Canada, it was actually a subsidiary of the Hawker Siddeley Group and used the Avro name for trading purposes.\nAmalgamation.\nWhen the company was absorbed into Hawker Siddeley Aviation in July 1963 following the 1957 Defence White Paper, the Avro name ceased to be used. The brand still had a strong heritage appeal, and as mentioned above the marketing name \"Avro RJ\" (regional jet) was used by British Aerospace from 1994 to 2001 for production of the RJ70, RJ85 and RJ100 models which were respectively based on the BAe 146-100, BAe 146-200 and BAe 146-300. This four engine jet aircraft type is sometimes also loosely called the \"Avro 146\".\nThe BAe ATP (Advanced Turbo Prop) design evolved from the Avro 748 and examples continue in use on shorter, mainly domestic, scheduled air services. A few Avro 504s, Tutors, Ansons and Lancasters are maintained in flying condition. At 39 years, the Shackleton held the distinction of being the aircraft with the longest period of active RAF service, until overtaken by the English Electric Canberra in 1998.\nAvro aeroplanes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnbuilt projects.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRotorcraft.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAvro Canada.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnbuilt projects.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCar production.\nAvro also built motor vehicles in the immediate post-World War 1 era, including the three-wheeler Harper Runabout, as well as their own light car. Powered by a 1,330 cc 4-cylinder engine, wood and aluminium were used in an integral construction similar to an aircraft. Approximately 100 were built.\nIn 1927 Alliott Verdon-Roe designed a two-wheeler car powered by a 350 cc Villiers air-cooled engine. An outrigger wheel kept the car upright when stationary. The \"Mobile\" did not go into production.\nFootball.\nAvro F.C. was founded at the Chadderton factory and still exists today.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49813", "revid": "39762818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49813", "title": "Amherst, Massachusetts", "text": "Amherst () is a city in Hampshire County, Massachusetts, United States, in the Connecticut River valley. Amherst has a council\u2013manager form of government, and is considered a city under Massachusetts state law. Amherst is one of several Massachusetts municipalities that have city forms of government but retain \"The Town of\" in their official names. At the 2020 census, the population was 39,263, making it the highest populated municipality in Hampshire County (although the county seat is Northampton). The town is home to Amherst College, Hampshire College, and the University of Massachusetts Amherst, three of the Five Colleges.\nAmherst has three census-designated places: Amherst Center, North Amherst, and South Amherst.\nAmherst is part of the Springfield, Massachusetts Metropolitan Statistical Area. Lying north of the city of Springfield, Amherst is considered the northernmost town in the Hartford\u2013Springfield Metropolitan Region, \"The Knowledge Corridor\". Amherst is also located in the Pioneer Valley, which encompasses Hampshire, Hampden and Franklin counties.\nName.\nThe name of the town is pronounced without the \"h\" (\"AM-erst\") by natives and long-time residents, giving rise to the local saying, \"only the 'h' is silent\", in reference both to the pronunciation and to the town's politically active populace.\nHistory.\nThe earliest known document of the lands now comprising Amherst is the deed of purchase dated December 1658 between John Pynchon of Springfield and three native inhabitants, referred to as Umpanchla, Quonquont, and Chickwalopp. According to the deed, \"ye Indians of Nolwotogg (Norwottuck) upon ye River of Quinecticott (Connecticut)\" sold the entire area in exchange for \"two Hundred fatham of Wampam &amp; Twenty fatham, and one large Coate at Eight fatham wch Chickwollop set of, of trusts, besides severall small giftes\" [\"sic\"].\nAmherst was first visited by Europeans no later than 1665, when Nathaniel Dickinson surveyed the lands for its mother town Hadley. The first permanent English settlements arrived in 1727. It remained a part of Hadley, even when it gained precinct status in 1734, before becoming a township in 1759.\nWhen it incorporated, the colonial governor assigned the town the name \"Amherst\" after Jeffery Amherst, 1st Baron Amherst. Many a colonial governor at the time scattered his name during the influx of new town applications, which is why several towns in the Northeast bear the name. Amherst was Commander-in-Chief of the forces of North America during the French and Indian War who, according to popular legend, singlehandedly won Canada for the British and banished France from North America. Popular belief has it that he supported the American side in the Revolutionary War and resigned his commission rather than fight for the British. Baron Amherst actually remained in the service of the Crown during the war\u2014albeit in Great Britain rather than North America\u2014where he organized the defense against the proposed Franco-Spanish Armada of 1779. Nonetheless, his previous service in the French and Indian War meant he remained popular in New England. Amherst is also infamous for recommending, in a letter to a subordinate, the use of smallpox-covered blankets in warfare against the Native Americans along with any \"other method that can serve to Extirpate this Execrable Race\". For this reason, there have been occasional ad hoc movements to rename the town.\nAmherst celebrated its 250th anniversary in 2009. The Amherst 250th Anniversary Celebration Committee and Amherst Historical Society organized events, including a book published by the Historical Society and written by Elizabeth M. Sharpe, \"Amherst A to Z\".\nIn 2021 the City Council voted to establish the Amherst African Heritage Reparation Assembly to study reparations for the town's black residents. In 2022, at the Assembly's suggestion, the City Council approved $2,000,000 of initial funding for reparations.\nHistory of town government.\nThe Town converted from an open town meeting to a representative town meeting form in 1938. In 1953, Amherst voters passed the \"Town Manager Act\", which established the office of a town manager and reduced a number of elected positions. In 1995, a charter commission was approved to study Amherst's government; the charter majority recommended a seven-person Council and a mayor, while also maintaining a reduced size representative Town Meeting (150). This proposal failed in two successive votes.\nIn 2001, the League of Women Voters Amherst made a number of recommendations that were adopted in 2001 in the form of a revised \"Amherst Town Government Act\". An effort shortly thereafter to amend the charter to eliminate the town meeting, and establish an elected mayor and a nine-member Town Council, was rejected by voters twice, first in spring 2003 by fourteen votes and again on March 29, 2005 by 252 votes.\nIn 2016, a charter commission was approved to study Amherst's government. A majority of commissioners proposed a charter that would establish a 13-member council with no mayor. This proposal was voted on the March 27, 2018 local ballot, and was passed by over 1,000 votes, a 58% majority. The new town council was sworn in on December 2, 2018.\nGeography.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, Amherst has a total area of , of which are land and , or 0.48%, are water. The town is bordered by Hadley to the west, Sunderland and Leverett to the north, Shutesbury, Pelham, and Belchertown to the east, and Granby and South Hadley to the south. The highest point in the town is on the northern shoulder of Mount Norwottuck at the southern border of the town; the peak is in Granby but the town's high point is a few yards away and is about . This point is located in the Mount Holyoke Range, which forms the so-called \"Tofu Curtain\". Amherst is nearly equidistant from Massachusetts' borders with Connecticut and Vermont.\nAmherst's ZIP Code of 01002 is the second-lowest number in the continental United States after Agawam (not counting codes used for specific government buildings such as the IRS).\nClimate.\nAmherst has a humid continental climate that under the K\u00f6ppen system marginally falls into the warm-summer category (\"Dfb\"). It is interchangeable with the hot-summer subtype \"Dfa\" with July means hovering around . Winters are cold and snowy, albeit daytime temperatures often remain above freezing. Under the 2012 USDA Plant Hardiness Zone system, Amherst (ZIP Code 01002) is in zone 5b; however, Amherst closely borders zone 6a, which penetrates into Massachusetts in the Connecticut River Valley, and climate change may be shifting those zones.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the 2010 U.S. census, there were 37,819 people, 9,259 households, and 4,484 families residing in the town. There were 9,711 housing units. The racial makeup of the town was 76.9% White, 5.4% Black or African American, 0.2% Native American, 10.9% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 2.4% some other race, and 4.1% from two or more races. 7.3% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nOf the 9,259 households in the town, 23.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 35.6% were headed by married couples living together, 16.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 51.6% were non-families. Of all households, 27.3% were made up of individuals, and 9.7% were someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.44 and the average family size was 2.88.\nIn the town, 10.0% of the population were under the age of 18, 55.7% were from 18 to 24, 13.3% were from 25 to 44, 13.6% were from 45 to 64, and 7.4% were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 21.6 years. For every 100 females, there were 95.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 94.7 males.\nFor the period 2011\u20132015, the estimated median annual income for a household in the town was $48,059, and the median income for a family was $96,005. Male full-time workers had a median income of $64,750 versus $39,278 for females. The per capita income for the town was $18,905. About 8.7% of families and 34.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 18.2% of those under age 18 and 4.5% of those age 65 or over.\nOf residents 25 years old or older, 41.7% have a graduate or professional degree, and only 4.9% did not graduate from high school. The largest industry is education, health, and social services, in which 51.9% of employed persons work.\nThese statistics given above include some but not all of the large student population, roughly 30,000 in 2010, many of whom only reside in the town part of the year. Amherst is home to thousands of part-time and full-time residents associated with the University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst College, and Hampshire College.\nIncome.\nData is from the 2009\u20132013 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates.\nEconomy.\nMajor employers in Amherst include University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst College, William D. Mullins Memorial Center, Hampshire College, and Amherst-Pelham Regional School District.\nGovernment.\nAmherst has a town council for its legislative branch and a town manager for its executive branch. The town manager is appointed by the town council.\nAmherst's town council consists of ten district councilors and three councilors-at-large. Two district councilors are elected from each of five districts in Amherst. The three councilors-at-large are elected by the whole town. Each councilor serves a two-year term, except for the first council, where each member will serve a three-year term.\nAmherst also has the following elected bodies:\nAmherst also has a five-member housing authority in which three of the five members are elected by voters. Each member serves a two-year term.\nState and federal representation.\nIn the Massachusetts Senate Amherst is in the \"Hampshire, Franklin and Worcester\" district, represented by Democratic State Senator Jo Comerford since January 2019. In the Massachusetts House of Representatives Amherst is in the 3rd Hampshire district, represented by Democratic State Representative Mindy Domb since January 2019. Amherst is part of the Eighth Massachusetts Governor's Council district and has been represented by Tara Jacobs since January 2023.\nAmherst is represented at the federal level by an all-Democratic delegation, including Senators Elizabeth Warren and Ed Markey, and by Representative Jim McGovern of the Second Congressional District of Massachusetts.\nVoter registration.\nVoter registration data is from the state election enrollment statistics.\nPolitics.\nLike many college towns, Amherst leans heavily Democratic. In each of the presidential elections from 2012 to 2020, more than 80% of Amherst's votes went to the Democratic candidate. The last Republican to win Amherst on the Presidential level was Richard Nixon in 1960.\nIn the 2020 United States presidential election, Democrat Joe Biden received 90.3 percent of the vote to incumbent Republican Donald Trump's 7.4 percent. In the 2000 United States presidential election, Amherst was one of a small number of places that delivered more votes for Green Party candidate Ralph Nader (who took 24% of the vote) than Republican candidate George W. Bush, who received just 13%.\nEducation.\nThe town is part of the Amherst Regional School District along with Leverett, Pelham, and Shutesbury. Amherst has three elementary schools: Crocker Farm Elementary School, Fort River Elementary School, and Wildwood Elementary School serving K\u20136. Students in Amherst then attend Amherst Regional Middle School for grades 7\u20138. High school students then attend Amherst Regional High School.\nThere are three tertiary institutions located in the town: the public University of Massachusetts Amherst (the flagship of the UMass system), and two private liberal arts colleges\u2014Amherst College and Hampshire College.\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nBus.\nThe Pioneer Valley Transit Authority, funded by local governments and the Five College Consortium, provides public transportation in the area, operated by University of Massachusetts Transportation Services. Service runs well into the early morning hours on weekends when school is in session. Students attending any colleges in the Five Colleges Consortium have a fee included in their tuition bills (service fee for UMass Amherst students and student activity fees for the other colleges) for each semester that prepays their bus fares for the semester. UMass Transit buses operate via a proof-of-payment system, in which there are random inspections of student identification cards and bus passes and transfers.\nPeter Pan Bus Lines provides service between Amherst and Springfield, Boston, and other locations in New England. Megabus provides service between New York City, Amherst, and Burlington, Vermont.\nRail.\nAmtrak rail service is available in nearby Northampton on the \"Vermonter\" service between Washington, D.C., and St. Albans, Vermont. More frequent Amtrak service to New York City and Washington, D.C., is available from Union Station in Springfield.\nAirports.\nThe closest major domestic and limited international air service is available through Bradley International Airport (BDL) in Windsor Locks, Connecticut. Bradley is located approximately one hour's driving time from Amherst. Major international service is available through Logan International Airport (BOS) in Boston, away.\nGeneral aviation service is close by, at Northampton Airport, Westover Metropolitan Airport, and Turners Falls Airport.\nPolice report.\nSince 1997, the local newspaper, the \"Amherst Bulletin\", has published a weekly log of phone calls received by the Amherst Police Department. This police report, whose tone is deadpan and often unintentionally humorous, has been the subject of at least two books and a 2002 article in \"Harper's Magazine\", \"Gone When Police Got There\". For example, an entry from the March 27, 2015 police report reads: \"2:48 a.m.\u2014An Ann Whalen Apartments resident awoke to find someone on her balcony looking into her bedroom. The woman later told police she thinks she may have been dreaming prior to calling 911.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49814", "revid": "1254703973", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49814", "title": "USS Salt Lake City", "text": "Two ships of the United States Navy have borne the name USS \"Salt Lake City\", in honor of the city in Utah which has served successively as the capital of the Provisional State of Deseret, the Utah Territory, and the 45th state. See Salt Lake City, Utah.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n List of ships with the same or similar names\nThis article includes a with the same or similar names. If an [ internal link] for a specific ship led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended ship article, if one exists."}
{"id": "49815", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49815", "title": "Gross National Product", "text": ""}
{"id": "49816", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49816", "title": "896", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 896 (DCCCXCVI) was a leap year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49819", "revid": "1305382495", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49819", "title": "Gross world product", "text": "Combined gross national product of all the countries in the world\nThe gross world product (GWP), also known as gross world income (GWI), is the combined gross national income (previously, the \"gross national product\") of all the countries in the world. Because imports and exports balance exactly when considering the whole world, this also equals the total global gross domestic product (GDP). According to the World Bank, the 2013 nominal GWP was approximately 75.59\u00a0trillion United States dollars. In 2017, according to the CIA's \"World Factbook\", the GWP was around $80.27\u00a0trillion in nominal terms and totaled approximately 127.8\u00a0trillion international dollars in terms of purchasing power parity (PPP). The per capita PPP GWP in 2017 was approximately 17,500 international dollars according to the \"World Factbook\". According to the World Bank, the 2020 GWP in current dollars was approximately $84.705\u00a0trillion.\nRecent growth.\nThe table below gives recent percentage values for overall GWP growth from 2006 through 2020, as well as an estimate for 2021, according to the International Monetary Fund (IMF)'s World Economic Outlook database. Data is given in terms of constant year-on-year prices.\nHistorical and prehistorical estimates.\nIn 1998, economic historian J. Bradford DeLong estimated the total GWP in 1990 U.S. dollars for the main years between one million years BCE and 2000 CE (shown in the table below). \nEstimates from 2000 onwards are based on world GDP, PPP estimates in 2021 constant international dollars from the World Bank and subsequently converted to 1990 US$. \"Billion\" in the table below refers to the short scale usage of the term, where 1 billion = 1,000 million = 109.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49820", "revid": "49140406", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49820", "title": "904", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 904 (CMIV) was a leap year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49821", "revid": "1316225646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49821", "title": "Multivariate random variable", "text": "Random variable with multiple component dimensions\nIn probability and statistics, a multivariate random variable or random vector is a list or vector of mathematical variables each of whose value is unknown, either because the value has not yet occurred or because there is imperfect knowledge of its value. The individual variables in a random vector are grouped together because they are all part of a single mathematical system \u2014 often they represent different properties of an individual statistical unit. For example, while a given person has a specific age, height and weight, the representation of these features of \"an unspecified person\" from within a group would be a random vector. Normally each element of a random vector is a real number.\nRandom vectors are often used as the underlying implementation of various types of aggregate random variables, e.g. a random matrix, random tree, random sequence, stochastic process, etc.\nFormally, a multivariate random variable is a column vector formula_1 (or its transpose, which is a row vector) whose components are random variables on the probability space formula_2, where formula_3 is the sample space, formula_4 is the sigma-algebra (the collection of all events), and formula_5 is the probability measure (a function returning each event's probability).\nProbability distribution.\nEvery random vector gives rise to a probability measure on formula_6 with the Borel algebra as the underlying sigma-algebra. This measure is also known as the joint probability distribution, the joint distribution, or the multivariate distribution of the random vector.\nThe distributions of each of the component random variables formula_7 are called marginal distributions. The conditional probability distribution of formula_7 given formula_9 is the probability distribution of formula_7 when formula_9 is known to be a particular value.\nThe cumulative distribution function formula_12 of a random vector formula_13 is defined as\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;(\\mathbf{x}) = \\operatorname{P}(X_1 \\leq x_1,\\ldots,X_n \\leq x_n)&lt;/math&gt;\nwhere formula_14.\nOperations on random vectors.\nRandom vectors can be subjected to the same kinds of algebraic operations as can non-random vectors: addition, subtraction, multiplication by a scalar, and the taking of inner products.\nAffine transformations.\nSimilarly, a new random vector formula_15 can be defined by applying an affine transformation formula_16 to a random vector formula_17:\nformula_18, where formula_19 is an formula_20 matrix and formula_21 is an formula_22 column vector.\nIf formula_19 is an invertible matrix and formula_24 has a probability density function formula_25, then the probability density of formula_15 is\nformula_27.\nInvertible mappings.\nMore generally we can study invertible mappings of random vectors.\nLet formula_28 be a one-to-one mapping from an open subset formula_29 of formula_6 onto a subset formula_31 of formula_6, let formula_28 have continuous partial derivatives in formula_29 and let the Jacobian determinant formula_35 of formula_28 be zero at no point of formula_29. Assume that the real random vector formula_17 has a probability density function formula_39 and satisfies formula_40. Then the random vector formula_41 is of probability density\nformula_42\nwhere formula_43 denotes the indicator function and set formula_44 denotes support of formula_15.\nExpected value.\nThe expected value or mean of a random vector formula_17 is a fixed vector formula_47 whose elements are the expected values of the respective random variables.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCovariance and cross-covariance.\nDefinitions.\nThe covariance matrix (also called second central moment or variance-covariance matrix) of an formula_48 random vector is an formula_49 matrix whose (\"i,j\")th element is the covariance between the \"i\" th and the \"j\" th random variables. The covariance matrix is the expected value, element by element, of the formula_49 matrix computed as formula_51, where the superscript T refers to the transpose of the indicated vector:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt; = \\operatorname{Var}[\\mathbf{X}]=\\operatorname{E}[(\\mathbf{X}-\\operatorname{E}[\\mathbf{X}])(\\mathbf{X}-\\operatorname{E}[\\mathbf{X}])^{T}] = \\operatorname{E}[\\mathbf{X} \\mathbf{X}^T] - \\operatorname{E}[\\mathbf{X}]\\operatorname{E}[\\mathbf{X}]^T&lt;/math&gt;\nBy extension, the cross-covariance matrix between two random vectors formula_17 and formula_15 (formula_17 having formula_55 elements and formula_15 having formula_57 elements) is the formula_58 matrix\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt; = \\operatorname{Cov}[\\mathbf{X},\\mathbf{Y}]=\\operatorname{E}[(\\mathbf{X}-\\operatorname{E}[\\mathbf{X}])(\\mathbf{Y}-\\operatorname{E}[\\mathbf{Y}])^{T}] = \\operatorname{E}[\\mathbf{X} \\mathbf{Y}^T] - \\operatorname{E}[\\mathbf{X}]\\operatorname{E}[\\mathbf{Y}]^T&lt;/math&gt;\nwhere again the matrix expectation is taken element-by-element in the matrix. Here the (\"i,j\")th element is the covariance between the \"i\" th element of formula_17 and the \"j\" th element of formula_15.\nProperties.\nThe covariance matrix is a symmetric matrix, i.e.\nformula_61.\nThe covariance matrix is a positive semidefinite matrix, i.e.\nformula_62.\nThe cross-covariance matrix formula_63 is simply the transpose of the matrix formula_64, i.e.\nformula_65.\nUncorrelatedness.\nTwo random vectors formula_66 and formula_67 are called uncorrelated if\nformula_68.\nThey are uncorrelated if and only if their cross-covariance matrix formula_69 is zero.\nCorrelation and cross-correlation.\nDefinitions.\nThe correlation matrix (also called second moment) of an formula_48 random vector is an formula_49 matrix whose (\"i,j\")th element is the correlation between the \"i\" th and the \"j\" th random variables. The correlation matrix is the expected value, element by element, of the formula_49 matrix computed as formula_73, where the superscript T refers to the transpose of the indicated vector:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt; = \\operatorname{E}[\\mathbf{X} \\mathbf{X}^{\\mathrm T}]&lt;/math&gt;\nBy extension, the cross-correlation matrix between two random vectors formula_17 and formula_15 (formula_17 having formula_55 elements and formula_15 having formula_57 elements) is the formula_58 matrix\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt; = \\operatorname{E}[\\mathbf{X} \\mathbf{Y}^T]&lt;/math&gt;\nProperties.\nThe correlation matrix is related to the covariance matrix by\nformula_81.\nSimilarly for the cross-correlation matrix and the cross-covariance matrix:\nformula_82\nOrthogonality.\nTwo random vectors of the same size formula_83 and formula_67 are called orthogonal if\nformula_85.\nIndependence.\nTwo random vectors formula_17 and formula_15 are called independent if for all formula_88 and formula_89\nformula_90\nwhere formula_91 and formula_92 denote the cumulative distribution functions of formula_17 and formula_15 andformula_95 denotes their joint cumulative distribution function. Independence of formula_17 and formula_15 is often denoted by formula_98.\nWritten component-wise, formula_17 and formula_15 are called independent if for all formula_101\nformula_102.\nCharacteristic function.\nThe characteristic function of a random vector formula_103 with formula_104 components is a function formula_105 that maps every vector formula_106 to a complex number. It is defined by\nformula_107.\nFurther properties.\nExpectation of a quadratic form.\nOne can take the expectation of a quadratic form in the random vector formula_17 as follows:\nformula_109\nwhere formula_110 is the covariance matrix of formula_17 and formula_112 refers to the trace of a matrix \u2014 that is, to the sum of the elements on its main diagonal (from upper left to lower right). Since the quadratic form is a scalar, so is its expectation.\nProof: Let formula_113 be an formula_114 random vector with formula_115 and formula_116 and let formula_117 be an formula_118 non-stochastic matrix.\nThen based on the formula for the covariance, if we denote formula_119 and formula_120, we see that:\nformula_121\nHence\nformula_122\nwhich leaves us to show that\nformula_123\nThis is true based on the fact that one can cyclically permute matrices when taking a trace without changing the end result (e.g.: formula_124).\nWe see that\nformula_125\nAnd since\nformula_126\nis a scalar, then\nformula_127\ntrivially. Using the permutation we get:\nformula_128\nand by plugging this into the original formula we get:\nformula_129\nExpectation of the product of two different quadratic forms.\nOne can take the expectation of the product of two different quadratic forms in a zero-mean Gaussian random vector formula_17 as follows:\nformula_131\nwhere again formula_110 is the covariance matrix of formula_17. Again, since both quadratic forms are scalars and hence their product is a scalar, the expectation of their product is also a scalar.\nApplications.\nPortfolio theory.\nIn portfolio theory in finance, an objective often is to choose a portfolio of risky assets such that the distribution of the random portfolio return has desirable properties. For example, one might want to choose the portfolio return having the lowest variance for a given expected value. Here the random vector is the vector formula_134 of random returns on the individual assets, and the portfolio return \"p\" (a random scalar) is the inner product of the vector of random returns with a vector \"w\" of portfolio weights \u2014 the fractions of the portfolio placed in the respective assets. Since \"p\" = \"w\"Tformula_134, the expected value of the portfolio return is \"w\"TE(formula_134) and the variance of the portfolio return can be shown to be \"w\"TC\"w\", where C is the covariance matrix of formula_134.\nRegression theory.\nIn linear regression theory, we have data on \"n\" observations on a dependent variable \"y\" and \"n\" observations on each of \"k\" independent variables \"xj\". The observations on the dependent variable are stacked into a column vector \"y\"; the observations on each independent variable are also stacked into column vectors, and these latter column vectors are combined into a design matrix \"X\" (not denoting a random vector in this context) of observations on the independent variables. Then the following regression equation is postulated as a description of the process that generated the data:\nformula_138\nwhere \u03b2 is a postulated fixed but unknown vector of \"k\" response coefficients, and \"e\" is an unknown random vector reflecting random influences on the dependent variable. By some chosen technique such as ordinary least squares, a vector formula_139 is chosen as an estimate of \u03b2, and the estimate of the vector \"e\", denoted formula_140, is computed as\nformula_141\nThen the statistician must analyze the properties of formula_139 and formula_140, which are viewed as random vectors since a randomly different selection of \"n\" cases to observe would have resulted in different values for them.\nVector time series.\nThe evolution of a \"k\"\u00d71 random vector formula_17 through time can be modelled as a vector autoregression (VAR) as follows:\nformula_145\nwhere the \"i\"-periods-back vector observation formula_146 is called the \"i\"-th lag of formula_17, \"c\" is a \"k\"\u00a0\u00d7\u00a01 vector of constants (intercepts), \"Ai\" is a time-invariant \"k\"\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0\"k\" matrix and formula_148 is a \"k\"\u00a0\u00d7\u00a01 random vector of error terms.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49822", "revid": "10728040", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49822", "title": "Random vector", "text": ""}
{"id": "49823", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49823", "title": "Creole language", "text": "Stable natural languages that have developed from a pidgin\nA creole language, or simply creole, is a stable form of contact language that develops from the process of different languages simplifying and mixing into a new form (often a pidgin), and then that form expanding and elaborating into a full-fledged language with native speakers, all within a fairly brief period. While the concept is similar to that of a mixed or hybrid language, creoles are often characterized by a tendency to systematize their inherited grammar (e.g., by eliminating irregularities). Like any language, creoles are characterized by a consistent system of grammar, possess large stable vocabularies, and are acquired by children as their native language. These three features distinguish a creole language from a pidgin. Creolistics, or creology, is the study of creole languages and, as such, is a subfield of linguistics. Someone who engages in this study is called a creolist.\nThe precise number of creole languages is not known, particularly as many are poorly attested or documented. About one hundred creole languages have arisen since 1500. These are predominantly based on European languages such as English and French due to the European Age of Discovery and the Atlantic slave trade that arose at that time. With the improvements in ship-building and navigation, traders had to learn to communicate with people around the world, and the quickest way to do this was to develop a pidgin; in turn, full creole languages developed from these pidgins. In addition to creoles that have European languages as their base, there are, for example, creoles based on Arabic, Chinese, and Malay.\nThe lexicon of a creole language is largely supplied by the parent languages, particularly that of the most dominant group in the social context of the creole's construction. However, there are often clear phonetic and semantic shifts. On the other hand, the grammar that has evolved often has new or unique features that differ substantially from those of the parent languages.\nOverview.\nA creole is believed to arise when a pidgin, developed by adults for use as a second language, becomes the native and primary language of their children \u2013 a process known as nativization. The pidgin\u2013creole life cycle was studied by American linguist Robert Hall in the 1960s.\nSome linguists, such as Derek Bickerton, posit that creoles share more grammatical similarities with each other than with the languages from which they are phylogenetically derived. However, there is no widely accepted theory that would account for those perceived similarities. Moreover, no grammatical feature has been shown to be specific to creoles.\nMany of the creoles known today arose in the last 500 years, as a result of the worldwide expansion of European maritime power and trade in the Age of Discovery, which led to extensive European colonial empires. Like most non-official and minority languages, creoles have generally been regarded in popular opinion as degenerate variants or dialects of their parent languages. Because of that prejudice, many of the creoles that arose in the European colonies, having been stigmatized, have become extinct. However, political and academic changes in recent decades have improved the status of creoles, both as living languages and as object of linguistic study. Some creoles have even been granted the status of official or semi-official languages of particular political territories.\nOther scholars, such as Salikoko Mufwene, argue that pidgins and creoles arise independently under different circumstances, and that a pidgin need not always precede a creole nor a creole evolve from a pidgin. Pidgins, according to Mufwene, emerged in trade colonies among \"users who preserved their native vernaculars for their day-to-day interactions\". Creoles, meanwhile, developed in settlement colonies in which speakers of a European language, often indentured servants whose language would be far from the standard in the first place, interacted extensively with non-European slaves, absorbing certain words and features from the slaves' non-European native languages, resulting in a heavily basilectalized version of the original language. These servants and slaves would come to use the creole as an everyday vernacular, rather than merely in situations in which contact with a speaker of the superstrate was necessary.\nHistory.\nEtymology.\nThe English term \"creole\" comes from French , which is cognate with the Spanish term and Portuguese , all descending from the verb \"criar\" ('to breed' or 'to raise'), all coming from Latin 'to produce, create'. The specific sense of the term was coined in the 16th and 17th century, during the great expansion in European maritime power and trade that led to the establishment of European colonies in other continents.\nThe terms and were originally qualifiers used throughout the Spanish and Portuguese colonies to distinguish the members of an ethnic group who were born and raised locally from those who immigrated as adults. They were most commonly applied to nationals of the colonial power, e.g. to distinguish (people born in the colonies from Spanish ancestors) from (those born in the Iberian Peninsula, i.e. Spain). However, in Brazil the term was also used to distinguish between (blacks born in Brazil from African slave ancestors) and (born in Africa). Over time, the term and its derivatives (Creole, Kr\u00e9ol, Kreyol, Krey\u00f2l, Kriol, Krio, etc.) lost the generic meaning and became the proper name of many distinct ethnic groups that developed locally from immigrant communities. Originally, therefore, the term \"creole language\" meant the speech of any of those creole peoples.\nGeographic distribution.\nAs a consequence of colonial European trade patterns, most of the known European-based creole languages arose in coastal areas in the equatorial belt around the world, including the Americas, western Africa, Goa along the west of India, and along Southeast Asia up to Indonesia, Singapore, Macau, Hong Kong, the Philippines, Malaysia, Mauritius, R\u00e9union, Seychelles and Oceania.\nMany of those creoles are now extinct, but others still survive in the Caribbean, the north and east coasts of South America (The Guyanas), western Africa, Australia (see Australian Kriol language), the Philippines (see Chavacano), island countries such as Mauritius and Seychelles and in the Indian Ocean.\nAtlantic Creole languages are based on European languages with elements from African and possibly Amerindian languages. Indian Ocean Creole languages are based on European languages with elements from Malagasy and possibly other Asian languages. There are, however, creoles like Nubi and Sango that are derived solely from non-European languages.\nSocial and political status.\nBecause of the generally low status of the Creole peoples in the eyes of prior European colonial powers, creole languages have generally been regarded as \"degenerate\" languages, or at best as rudimentary \"dialects\" of the politically dominant parent languages. Because of this, the word \"creole\" was generally used by linguists in opposition to \"language\", rather than as a qualifier for it.\nAnother factor that may have contributed to the relative neglect of creole languages in linguistics is that they do not fit the 19th-century neogrammarian \"tree model\" for the evolution of languages, and its postulated regularity of sound changes (these critics including the earliest advocates of the wave model, Johannes Schmidt and Hugo Schuchardt, the forerunners of modern sociolinguistics). This controversy of the late 19th century profoundly shaped modern approaches to the comparative method in historical linguistics and in creolistics.\nBecause of social, political, and academic changes brought on by decolonization in the second half of the 20th century, creole languages have experienced revivals in the past few decades. They are increasingly being used in print and film, and in many cases, their community prestige has improved dramatically. In fact, some have been standardized, and are used in local schools and universities around the world. At the same time, linguists have begun to come to the realization that creole languages are in no way inferior to other languages. They now use the term \"creole\" or \"creole language\" for any language suspected to have undergone creolization, terms that now imply no geographic restrictions nor ethnic prejudices.\nThere is controversy about the extent to which creolization influenced the evolution of African-American Vernacular English (AAVE). In the American education system, as well as in the past, the use of the word \"ebonics\" to refer to AAVE mirrors the historical negative connotation of the word \"creole\".\nClassification.\nHistoric classification.\nAccording to their external history, four types of creoles have been distinguished: plantation creoles, fort creoles, maroon creoles, and creolized pidgins. By the very nature of a creole language, the phylogenetic classification of a particular creole usually is a matter of dispute; especially when the pidgin precursor and its parent tongues (which may have been other creoles or pidgins) have disappeared before they could be documented.\nPhylogenetic classification traditionally relies on inheritance of the lexicon, especially of \"core\" terms, and of the grammar structure. However, in creoles, the core lexicon often has mixed origin, and the grammar is largely original. For these reasons, the issue of which language is \"the\" parent of a creole \u2013 that is, whether a language should be classified as a \"French creole\", \"Portuguese creole\" or \"English creole\", etc. \u2013 often has no definitive answer, and can become the topic of long-lasting controversies, where social prejudices and political considerations may interfere with scientific discussion.\nSubstrate and superstrate.\nThe terms substrate and superstrate are often used when two languages interact. However, the meaning of these terms is reasonably well-defined only in second language acquisition or language replacement events, when the native speakers of a certain source language (the substrate) are somehow compelled to abandon it for another target language (the superstrate). The outcome of such an event is that erstwhile speakers of the substrate will use some version of the superstrate, at least in more formal contexts. The substrate may survive as a second language for informal conversation. As demonstrated by the fate of many replaced European languages (such as Etruscan, Breton, and Venetian), the influence of the substrate on the official speech is often limited to pronunciation and a modest number of loanwords. The substrate might even disappear altogether without leaving any trace.\nHowever, there is dispute over the extent to which the terms \"substrate\" and \"superstrate\" are applicable to the genesis or the description of creole languages. The language replacement model may not be appropriate in creole formation contexts, where the emerging language is derived from multiple languages without any one of them being imposed as a replacement for any other. The substratum\u2013superstratum distinction becomes awkward when multiple superstrata must be assumed (such as in Papiamento), when the substratum cannot be identified, or when the presence or the survival of substratal evidence is inferred from mere typological analogies. On the other hand, the distinction may be meaningful when the contributions of each parent language to the resulting creole can be shown to be very unequal, in a scientifically meaningful way. In the literature on Atlantic Creoles, \"superstrate\" usually means European and \"substrate\" non-European or African.\nDecreolization.\nSince creole languages rarely attain official status, the speakers of a fully formed creole may eventually feel compelled to conform their speech to one of the parent languages. This decreolization process typically brings about a post-creole speech continuum characterized by large-scale variation and hypercorrection in the language.\nIt is generally acknowledged that creoles have a simpler grammar and more internal variability than older, more established languages. However, these notions are occasionally challenged. (See also language complexity.)\nPhylogenetic or typological comparisons of creole languages have led to divergent conclusions. Similarities are usually higher among creoles derived from related languages, such as the languages of Europe, than among broader groups that include also creoles based on non-Indo-European languages (like Nubi or Sango). French-based creole languages in turn are more similar to each other (and to varieties of French) than to other European-based creoles. It was observed, in particular, that definite articles are mostly prenominal in English-based creole languages and English whereas they are generally postnominal in French creoles and in the variety of French that was exported to what is now Quebec in the 17th and 18th century. Moreover, the European languages which gave rise to the creole languages of European colonies all belong to the same subgroup of Western Indo-European and have highly convergent grammars; to the point that Whorf joined them into a single Standard Average European language group. French and English are particularly close, since English, through extensive borrowing, is typologically closer to French than to other Germanic languages. Thus the claimed similarities between creoles may be mere consequences of similar parentage, rather than characteristic features of all creoles.\nCreole genesis.\nThere are a variety of theories on the origin of creole languages, all of which attempt to explain the similarities among them. outline a fourfold classification of explanations regarding creole genesis:\nIn addition to the precise mechanism of creole genesis, a more general debate has developed whether creole languages are characterized by different mechanisms than traditional languages (which is McWhorter's 2018 main point) or whether in that regard creole languages develop by the same mechanisms as any other languages (e.g. DeGraff 2001).\nTheories focusing on European input.\nMonogenetic theory of pidgins and creoles.\nThe monogenetic theory of pidgins and creoles hypothesizes that all Atlantic creoles derived from a single Mediterranean Lingua Franca, via a West African Pidgin Portuguese of the seventeenth century, relexified in the so-called \"slave factories\" of Western Africa that were the source of the Atlantic slave trade. This theory was originally formulated by Hugo Schuchardt in the late nineteenth century and popularized in the late 1950s and early 1960s by Taylor, Whinnom, Thompson, and Stewart. However, this hypothesis is now not widely accepted, since it relies on all creole-speaking slave populations being based on the same Portuguese-based creole, despite no to very little historical exposure to Portuguese for many of these populations, no strong direct evidence for this claim, and with Portuguese leaving almost no trace on the lexicon of most of them, with the similarities in grammar explainable by analogous processes of loss of inflection and grammatical forms not common to European and West African languages. For example, points out that relexification postulates too many improbabilities and that it is unlikely that a language \"could be disseminated round the entire tropical zone, to peoples of widely differing language background, and still preserve a virtually complete identity in its grammatical structure wherever it took root, despite considerable changes in its phonology and virtually complete changes in its lexicon\".\nDomestic origin hypothesis.\nProposed by for the origin of English-based creoles of the West Indies, the domestic origin hypothesis argues that, towards the end of the 16th century, English-speaking traders began to settle in the Gambia and Sierra Leone rivers as well as in neighboring areas such as the Bullom and Sherbro coasts. These settlers intermarried with the local population leading to mixed populations, and, as a result of this intermarriage, an English pidgin was created. This pidgin was learned by slaves in slave depots, who later on took it to the West Indies and formed one component of the emerging English creoles.\nEuropean dialect origin hypothesis.\nThe French creoles are the foremost candidates to being the outcome of \"normal\" linguistic change and their creoleness to be sociohistoric in nature and relative to their colonial origin. Within this theoretical framework, a French creole is a language phylogenetically based on French, more specifically on a 17th-century koin\u00e9 French extant in Paris, the French Atlantic harbors, and the nascent French colonies. Supporters of this hypothesis suggest that the non-Creole French dialects still spoken in many parts of the Americas share mutual descent from this single koin\u00e9. These dialects are found in Canada (mostly in Qu\u00e9bec and in Acadian communities), Louisiana, Saint-Barth\u00e9lemy and as isolates in other parts of the Americas. Approaches under this hypothesis are compatible with gradualism in change and models of imperfect language transmission in koin\u00e9 genesis.\nForeigner talk and baby talk.\nThe Foreigner Talk (FT) hypothesis argues that a pidgin or creole language forms when native speakers attempt to simplify their language in order to address speakers who do not know their language at all. Because of the similarities found in this type of speech and speech directed to a small child, it is also sometimes called baby talk.\n suggest that four different processes are involved in creating Foreigner Talk:\nThis could explain why creole languages have much in common, while avoiding a monogenetic model. However, , in analyzing German Foreigner Talk, claims that it is too inconsistent and unpredictable to provide any model for language learning.\nWhile the simplification of input was supposed to account for creoles' simple grammar, commentators have raised a number of criticisms of this explanation:\nAnother problem with the FT explanation is its potential circularity. points out that FT is often based on the imitation of the incorrect speech of the non-natives, that is the pidgin. Therefore, one may be mistaken in assuming that the former gave rise to the latter.\nImperfect L2 learning.\nThe imperfect L2 (second language) learning hypothesis claims that pidgins are primarily the result of the imperfect L2 learning of the dominant lexifier language by the slaves. Research on naturalistic L2 processes has revealed a number of features of \"interlanguage systems\" that are also seen in pidgins and creoles:\nImperfect L2 learning is compatible with other approaches, notably the European dialect origin hypothesis and the universalist models of language transmission.\nTheories focusing on non-European input.\nTheories focusing on the substrate, or non-European, languages attribute similarities amongst creoles to the similarities of African substrate languages. These features are often assumed to be transferred from the substrate language to the creole or to be preserved invariant from the substrate language in the creole through a process of relexification: the substrate language replaces the native lexical items with lexical material from the superstrate language while retaining the native grammatical categories. The problem with this explanation is that the postulated substrate languages differ amongst themselves and with creoles in meaningful ways. argues that the number and diversity of African languages and the paucity of a historical record on creole genesis makes determining lexical correspondences a matter of chance. coined the term \"cafeteria principle\" to refer to the practice of arbitrarily attributing features of creoles to the influence of substrate African languages or assorted substandard dialects of European languages.\nFor a representative debate on this issue, see the contributions to ; for a more recent view, .\nBecause of the sociohistoric similarities amongst many (but by no means all) of the creoles, the Atlantic slave trade and the plantation system of the European colonies have been emphasized as factors by linguists such as .\nGradualist and developmental hypotheses.\nOne class of creoles might start as pidgins, rudimentary second languages improvised for use between speakers of two or more non-intelligible native languages. Keith Whinnom (in ) suggests that pidgins need three languages to form, with one (the superstrate) being clearly dominant over the others. The lexicon of a pidgin is usually small and drawn from the vocabularies of its speakers, in varying proportions. Morphological details like word inflections, which usually take years to learn, are omitted; the syntax is kept very simple, usually based on strict word order. In this initial stage, all aspects of the speech \u2013 syntax, lexicon, and pronunciation \u2013 tend to be quite variable, especially with regard to the speaker's background.\nIf a pidgin manages to be learned by the children of a community as a native language, it may become fixed and acquire a more complex grammar, with fixed phonology, syntax, morphology, and syntactic embedding. Pidgins can become full languages in only a single generation. \"Creolization\" is this second stage where the pidgin language develops into a fully developed native language. The vocabulary, too, will develop to contain more and more items according to a rationale of lexical enrichment.\nUniversalist approaches.\nUniversalist models stress the intervention of specific general processes during the transmission of language from generation to generation and from speaker to speaker. The process invoked varies: a general tendency towards semantic transparency, first-language learning driven by universal process, or a general process of discourse organization. Bickerton's language bioprogram theory, proposed in the 1980s, remains the main universalist theory.\nBickerton claims that creoles are inventions of the children growing up on newly founded plantations. Around them, they only heard pidgins spoken, without enough structure to function as natural languages; and the children used their own innate linguistic capacities to transform the pidgin input into a full-fledged language. The alleged common features of all creoles would then stem from those innate abilities being universal.\nRecent studies.\nThe last decades have seen the emergence of some new questions about the nature of creoles: in particular, the question of how complex creoles are and the question of whether creoles are indeed \"exceptional\" languages.\nCreole prototype.\nSome features that distinguish creole languages from noncreoles have been proposed (by Bickerton, for example).\nJohn McWhorter has proposed the following list of features as defining the creole prototype, that is, any language born recently of a pidgin:\nMcWhorter argues that the absence of these three features is predictable in languages that were born recently of a pidgin, since learning them would constitute a distinct challenge to the non-native speaker. Over the course of generations, however, such features would be expected to gradually (re-)appear, and therefore \"many creoles would harbor departures from the Prototype identifiable as having happened after the creole was born\" (McWhorter 2018). As one example, McWhorter (2013) notes that the creole Sranan, which has existed for centuries in a diglossic relationship with Dutch, has borrowed some Dutch verbs containing the prefix ( in Sranan) and whose meaning is not analyzable; for instance the pair 'to soil', 'to squander'.\nMcWhorter claims that these three properties characterize any language that was born recently as a pidgin, and states \"At this writing, in twenty years I have encountered not a single counterexample\" (McWhorter 2018). Nevertheless, the existence of a creole prototype has been disputed by others:\nExceptionalism.\nBuilding up on this discussion, McWhorter proposed that \"the world's simplest grammars are Creole grammars\", claiming that every noncreole language's grammar is at least as complex as any creole language's grammar. Gil has replied that Riau Indonesian has a simpler grammar than Saramaccan, the language McWhorter uses as a showcase for his theory. The same objections were raised by Wittmann in his 1999 debate with McWhorter.\nThe lack of progress made in defining creoles in terms of their morphology and syntax has led scholars such as Robert Chaudenson, Salikoko Mufwene, Michel DeGraff, and Henri Wittmann to question the value of \"creole\" as a typological class; they argue that creoles are structurally no different from any other language, and that \"creole\" is a sociohistoric concept \u2013 not a linguistic one \u2013 encompassing displaced populations and slavery.\n spell out the idea of creole exceptionalism, claiming that creole languages are an instance of nongenetic language change due to language shift with abnormal transmission. Gradualists question the abnormal transmission of languages in a creole setting and argue that the processes which created today's creole languages are no different from universal patterns of language change.\nGiven these objections to \"creole\" as a concept, DeGraff and others question the idea that creoles are exceptional in any meaningful way. Additionally, argues that some Romance languages are potential creoles but that they are not considered as such by linguists because of a historical bias against such a view.\nControversy.\nCreolistics investigates the relative creoleness of languages suspected to be creoles, what calls \"the cline of creoleness\". No consensus exists among creolists as to whether the nature of creoleness is prototypical or merely evidence indicative of a set of recognizable phenomena seen in association with little inherent unity and no underlying single cause.\n\"Creole\", a sociohistoric concept.\n\"Creoleness\" is at the heart of the controversy with John McWhorter and Mikael Parkvall opposing Henri Wittmann (1999) and Michel DeGraff. In McWhorter's definition, creoleness is a matter of degree, in that prototypical creoles exhibit all of the three traits he proposes to diagnose creoleness: little or no inflection, little or no tone, and transparent derivation. In McWhorter's view, less prototypical creoles depart somewhat from this prototype. Along these lines, McWhorter defines Haitian Creole, exhibiting all three traits, as \"the most creole of creoles\". A creole like Palenquero, on the other hand, would be less prototypical, given the presence of inflection to mark plural, past, gerund, and participle forms. Objections to the McWhorter\u2013Parkvall hypotheses point out that these typological parameters of creoleness can be found in languages such as Manding, Sooninke, and Magoua French, which are not considered creoles. Wittmann and DeGraff come to the conclusion that efforts to conceive a yardstick for measuring creoleness in any scientifically meaningful way have failed so far. comes to the same conclusion for Riau Indonesian. have adduced evidence as to creole languages which respond unexpectedly to one of McWhorter's three features (for example, inflectional morphology in Berbice Creole Dutch, tone in Papiamentu). and have argued further that Creole languages are structurally no different from any other language, and that Creole is in fact a sociohistoric concept (and not a linguistic one), encompassing displaced population and slavery. discuss creolistics in relation to colonialist ideologies, rejecting the notion that Creoles can be responsibly defined in terms of specific grammatical characteristics. They discuss the history of linguistics and nineteenth-century work that argues for the consideration of the sociohistorical contexts in which Creole languages emerged.\n\"Creole\", a genuine linguistic concept.\nOn the other hand, McWhorter points out that in languages such as Bambara, essentially a dialect of Manding, there is ample non-transparent derivation, and that there is no reason to suppose that this would be absent in close relatives such as Mandinka itself. Moreover, he also observes that Soninke has what all linguists would analyze as inflections, and that current lexicography of Soninke is too elementary for it to be stated with authority that it does not have non-transparent derivation. Meanwhile, Magoua French, as described by Henri Wittmann, retains some indication of grammatical gender, which qualifies as inflection, and it also retains non-transparent derivation. Michel DeGraff's argument has been that Haitian Creole retains non-transparent derivation from French.\nAdditional resources.\n critically assesses the proposal that creole languages exist as a homogeneous structural type with shared and/ or peculiar origins.\n groups creole genesis theories into four categories:\nThe authors also confine Pidgins and mixed languages into separate chapters outside this scheme whether or not relexification come into the picture.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49824", "revid": "114797", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49824", "title": "Grand Canal (China)", "text": "System of interconnected canals in China\nThe Grand Canal () is a system of interconnected canals linking various major rivers and lakes in North and East China, serving as an important waterborne transport infrastructure between the north and the south during Medieval and premodern China. It is the longest artificial waterway in the world and a World Heritage Site.\nThe Grand Canal has undergone several route changes throughout history. Its current main stem, known as the Jing\u2013Hang Grand Canal, is thought to extend for linking Beijing in the north to Hangzhou in the south, and is divided into 6 main subsections, with the southernmost sections remaining relatively unchanged over time. The Jiangnan Canal starts from the Qiantang River at Hangzhou's Jianggan District, looping around the east side of Lake Tai through Jiaxing, Suzhou and Wuxi, to the Yangtze at Zhenjiang; the Inner Canal from Yangzhou across the Yangtze from Zhenjiang, going through the Gaoyou Lake to join the Huai River at Huai'an, which for centuries was also its junction with the former course of the Yellow River; the Middle Canal from Huai'an to Luoma Lake at Suqian, then to the Nansi Lakes at Weishan; the Lu Canal from the Nansi Lakes at Jining and into the present course of the Yellow River at Liangshan, splitting off downstream at Liaocheng's Dong'e County before continuing to the Wei at Linqing; the Southern Canal (named for its location within Hebei) from Linqing to the Hai River at Tianjin; and the Northern Canal from Tianjin to Tongzhou on the outskirts of Beijing. As such, it passes through the provinces of Zhejiang, Jiangsu, Shandong, Hebei, and the municipalities of Tianjin and Beijing. In 2014, the Chinese government and UNESCO recognized the Eastern Zhejiang Canal from Hangzhou to Ningbo along the former Tongji and Yongji Canals also as official components of the Grand Canal.\nThe oldest sections of what is now the Grand Canal were completed in the early 5th century BC during the conflicts of China's Spring and Autumn period to provide supplies and transport routes for the states of Wu and Yue. The network was expanded and completed by Emperor Yang of Sui in 609, linking fertile Jiangnan in the south to his capital at Luoyang in the Central Plain and to his armies in the northern frontiers. His unsuccessful and unpopular Goguryeo\u2013Sui War and the massive amounts of civil conscription involved in creating the canals were among the chief factors in the rampant rebellions during his reign and the eventual rapid fall of the Sui, but the connection of major watersheds and population centers proved enormously beneficial during the subsequent Tang dynasty. \nAdditional canals supplied Chang'an (now Xi'an) even further west were rebuilt under the Tang to better connect the Guanzhong heartland to the Central Plain, while stopover towns along the main course became the economic hubs of the empire. Sections of the canal gradually degraded and faded into ruins during the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period and the Song dynasty, and periodic flooding of the Yellow River associated with climate changes during the Medieval Warm Period had eroded and threatened the safety and functioning of the canal while, during wartime, the rivers' high dikes were sometimes deliberately breached to delay or sweep away advancing enemy troops. Even so, restoration and improvement of the canal and its associated flood control works was assumed as a duty by each successive dynasty. The canal played a major role in periodically reuniting northern and southern China, and officials in charge of the canal and nearby salt works grew enormously wealthy. Despite damage from floods, rebellions and wars, the canal's importance only grew with the relocation of the national capital to Khanbaliq (now known as Beijing) under Kublai Khan during the Mongol Yuan dynasty, and again later under Yongle Emperor during the Ming dynasty and under Shunzhi Emperor the Manchu Qing dynasty. Despite the importance of railways and highways in modern times, the People's Republic of China has worked to improve the navigability of the canal since the end of the Chinese Civil War and the portion south of the Yellow River remains in heavy use by barges carrying bulk cargo. Increasing concern over pollution in China and particularly the use of the Grand Canal as the eastern path of the South-North Water Diversion Project\u2014intended to provide clean potable water to the north\u2014has led to regulations and several projects to improve water quality along the canals.\nThe greatest height on the canal is an elevation of above sea level reached in the foothills of Shandong. Ships in Chinese canals did not have trouble reaching higher elevations after the Song official and engineer Qiao Weiyue (926-1001) invented the pound lock in the 10th century. The canal has been admired by many visitors throughout its history, including the Japanese monk Ennin (794\u2013864), the Persian historian Rashid al-Din Hamadani (1247\u20131318), the Korean official Choe Bu (1454\u20131504), and the Italian missionary Matteo Ricci (1552\u20131610).\nHistory.\nEarly periods.\nIn the late Spring and Autumn period, King Fuchai of Wu (whose capital was in present-day Suzhou), ventured north to attack the State of Qi. He ordered a canal to be constructed for trading purposes, as well as a means to ship ample supplies north in case his forces should engage the northern states of Song and Lu. This became known as the Han or Hangou Canal ( , , \"H\u00e1ng\u014du\"). Work began in 486 BC, from south of Yangzhou to north of Huai'an in Jiangsu, and within three years the Han Canal had connected the Yangtze with the Huai River utilizing existing waterways, lakes, and marshes.\nThe Han Canal is known as the second oldest section of the later Grand Canal since the Hong Canal (, , \"H\u00f3ngg\u014du\", \"Canal of the Wild Geese\" or \"Far-Flung Canal\") most likely preceded it. It linked the Yellow River near Kaifeng to the Si and Bian rivers and became the model for the shape of the Grand Canal in the north. The exact date of the Hong Canal's construction is uncertain; it is first mentioned by the diplomat Su Qin in 330 BC when discussing state boundaries. The historian Sima Qian (145\u201390 BC) knew of no historical date for it, placing his discussion of it just after the legendary works of Yu the Great; modern scholars now consider it to belong to the 6th century BC.\nSui dynasty.\nThe reunification of China under the Sui dynasty (581\u2013618) ended three centuries of chaos since the Upheaval of the Five Barbarians, and the renewed political stability allowed both the thorough repair of existing canals and flood control systems as well as the construction of new canals. The primary consideration of the Sui canals was the need to tap into the expanding economic and agricultural resources of Jiangnan in the southeast to enrich the capital at Luoyang to the west and to supply the expeditionary Sui armies in the Goguryeo\u2013Sui War to the northeast. The institution of the Grand Canal also obviated the need for army garrisons to become self-sufficient part-time militia-farmers while guarding the dry frontiers between China, Goguryeo, and the First Turkic Khaganate.\nA levee-building project in 587 along the Yellow River\u2014overseen by engineer Liang Rui\u2014established canal lock gates to regulate water levels for the canal. Double slipways were installed to haul boats over when the difference in water levels was too great for the flash lock to operate. Similarly, by the year 600, there were major buildups of silt on the bottom of the Hong Canal, obstructing river barges whose drafts were too deep for its waters. The chief engineer of the Sui dynasty, Yuwen Kai, advised the digging of a new canal that would run parallel to the existing canal, diverging from it at Chenliu (Yanzhou). The new canal was to pass not Xuzhou but Suzhou, to avoid connecting with the Si River and instead make a direct connection with the Huai River just west of Hongze Lake. With the recorded labor of five million people under the supervision of Ma Shumou, the first major section of the Grand Canal was completed in the year 605 and was called the Bian Qu.\nThe Grand Canal was fully completed from the years 604 to 609 under Emperor Yang of Sui, first by linking his southern capital Yangzhou northwest to Luoyang by the Tongji Canal ( , , \"T\u014dngj\u00ec Q\u00fa\"). He then proceeded to connect Yangzhou southeast to Suzhou and Hangzhou by the Jiangnan Canal and to connect Luoyang northeast to his war with Goguryeo by the Yongji Canal ( , , \"Y\u01d2ngj\u00ec Q\u00fa\"). After this network's completion in 609, Emperor Yang was said to have led a flotilla of boats long from the north down to his southern capital at Yangzhou. This process again involved massive levies of conscripted labor and was detailed at length in the \"Record of the Opening of the Canal\" ( , , \"K\u0101ih\u00e9j\u00ec\").\nAt this point, the Grand Canal continued to use noncontiguous artificial channels and both canalized and natural waterways rather than presenting a single continuous manmade canal. However, running alongside and parallel to the course of the canals was an imperial roadway with stables maintained at regular intervals to support a rapid courier system. Enormous lines of trees were also planted along parts of the canal as windbreaks.\nTang to Yuan dynasties.\nAlthough the Tang dynasty (618\u2013907) capital at Chang'an was the most thriving metropolis of China in its day, it was the city of Yangzhou\u2014in proximity to the Grand Canal\u2014that was the economic hub of the Tang era. Besides being the headquarters for the government salt monopoly and the largest pre-modern industrial production center of the empire, Yangzhou was also the geographical midpoint along the north\u2013south trade axis, and so became the major center for southern goods shipped north. One of the greatest benefits of the canal system in the Tang dynasty\u2014and subsequent dynasties\u2014was that it reduced the cost of shipping grain that had been collected in taxes (caoyun) from the Yangtze Delta to northern China. Minor additions to the canal were made after the Sui period to cut down on travel time, but overall no fundamental differences existed between the Sui Grand Canal and the Tang Grand Canal.\nBy the year 735, it was recorded that about of grain were shipped annually along the canal. The Tang government oversaw canal lock efficiency and built granaries along the route in case a flood or other disaster impeded the path of shipment. To ensure smooth travel of grain shipments, Transport Commissioner Liu Yan (in office from 763 to 779) had special river barge ships designed and constructed to fit the depths of each section of the entire canal.\nAfter the An Lushan rebellion (755\u2013763), the economy of North China was greatly damaged and never recovered due to wars and to constant flooding of the Yellow River. Such a case occurred in the year 858 when an enormous flood along the Grand Canal inundated thousands of acres of farmland and killed tens of thousands of people in the North China Plain. Such an unfortunate event could reduce the legitimacy of a ruling dynasty by causing others to perceive it as having lost the Mandate of Heaven; this was a good reason for dynastic authorities to maintain a smooth and efficient canal system.\nThe city of Kaifeng grew to be a major hub, later becoming the capital of the Song dynasty (960\u20131279). Although the Tang and Song dynasty international seaports\u2014the greatest being Guangzhou and Quanzhou, respectively\u2014and maritime foreign trade brought merchants great fortune, it was the Grand Canal within China that spurred the greatest amount of economic activity and commercial profit. During the Song and earlier periods, barge ships occasionally crashed and wrecked along the Shanyang Yundao section of the Grand Canal while passing the double slipways, and more often than not those were then robbed of the tax grain by local bandits. This prompted Qiao Weiyue, an Assistant Commissioner of Transport for Huainan, to invent a double-gate system known as the pound lock in the year 984. This allowed ships to wait within a gated space while the water could be drained to appropriate levels; the Chinese also built roofed hangars over the space to add further protection for the ships.\nMuch of the Grand Canal was ruined for several years after 1128 when Kaifeng's governor Du Chong (, \"D\u00f9 Ch\u014dng\", d.1141) decided to break the dykes and dams holding back the waters of the Yellow River in order to decimate the oncoming Jurchen invaders during the Jin\u2013Song wars. Over a series of floods, this entirely shifted the river south of Shandong, capturing the course of the Si River and emptying the Yellow River into Hongze Lake and the East China Sea for centuries. The Jurchen Jin dynasty continually battled with the Song in this region. The warfare led to the dilapidation of the canal until the Mongols invaded in the 13th century and began necessary repairs.\nDuring the Mongol Yuan dynasty (1271\u20131368) the capital of China was moved to Beijing, eliminating the need for the canal arm flowing west to Kaifeng or Luoyang. A summit section was dug across the foothills of the Shandong massif during the 1280s, shortening the overall length by as much as , making the total length about and linking Hangzhou and Beijing with a direct north\u2013south waterway for the first time. As in the Song and Jin era, the canal fell into disuse and dilapidation during the Yuan dynasty's decline.\nThe Grand Canal as infrastructure has had influence on other architectural works in the west. The Erie Canal in North America is designed and draws inspiration from the Chinese architecture. Many saw the canal as an economic advantage that could bring economic prosperity, like the canal and its benefits. Matteo Ricci's Journals describes the canal in great detail documenting the economic prosperity. The pound lock is one of the more notable features of the Erie canal that is directly connected to the infrastructure of the Grand Canal as it is used in other similar bodies of water.\nMing dynasty restoration.\nThe Grand Canal was renovated almost in its entirety between 1411 and 1415 during the Ming dynasty (1368\u20131644). A magistrate of Jining, Shandong sent a memorandum to the throne of the Yongle Emperor protesting the current inefficient means of transporting 4,000,000 \"dan\" (428,000,000 liters) of grain a year by means of transferring it along several different rivers and canals in barge types that went from deep to shallow after the Huai River, and then transferred back onto deep barges once the shipment of grain reached the Yellow River. Chinese engineers built a dam to divert the Wen River to the southwest in order to feed 60% of its water north into the Grand Canal, with the remainder going south. They dug four large reservoirs in Shandong to regulate water levels, which allowed them to avoid pumping water from local sources and water tables. Between 1411 and 1415 a total of 165,000 laborers dredged the canal bed in Shandong and built new channels, embankments, and canal locks.\nThe Yongle Emperor moved the Ming capital from Nanjing to Beijing in 1403. This move deprived Nanjing of its status as chief political center of China. The reopening of the Grand Canal also benefited Suzhou over Nanjing since the former was in a better position on the main artery of the Grand Canal, and so it became Ming China's greatest economic center. The only other viable contender with Suzhou in the Jiangnan region was Hangzhou, but it was located further down the Grand Canal and away from the main delta. Even the shipwrecked Korean Choe Bu (1454\u20131504)\u2014while traveling for five months throughout China in 1488\u2014acknowledged that Hangzhou served not as a competitor but as an economic feeder into the greater Suzhou market. Therefore, the Grand Canal served to make or break the economic fortunes of certain cities along its route and served as the economic lifeline of indigenous trade within China.\nThe scholar Gu Yanwu of the early Qing dynasty (1644\u20131912) estimated that the previous Ming dynasty had to employ 47,004 full-time laborers recruited by the \"lijia\" corv\u00e9e system in order to maintain the entire canal system. It is known that 121,500 soldiers and officers were needed simply to operate the 11,775 government grain barges in the mid-15th century.\nBesides its function as a grain shipment route and major vein of river-borne indigenous trade in China, the Grand Canal had long been a government-operated courier route as well. In the Ming dynasty, official courier stations were placed at intervals of . Each courier station was assigned a different name, all of which were popularized in travel songs of the period.\nQing dynasty.\nThe Manchus invaded China in the mid-17th century, allowed through the northern passes by the Chinese general Wu Sangui once the Ming capital at Beijing had fallen into the hands of a rebel army. The Manchus established the Qing dynasty (1644\u20131912), and under their leadership, the Grand Canal was overseen and maintained just as in earlier times.\nIn 1855, the Yellow River flooded and changed its course, severing the course of the canal in Shandong. This was foreseen by a Chinese official in 1447, who remarked that the flood-prone Yellow River made the Grand Canal like a throat that could be easily strangled (leading some officials to request restarting the grain shipments through the East China Sea). In 1855 the dikes of the canal were opened to flood advancing troops of the Taiping Rebellion's Northern Expedition.\nModern China.\nBecause of various factors\u2014the difficulty of crossing the Yellow River, the increased development of an alternative sea route for grain-ships, and the opening of the Tianjin-Pukou Railway and the Beijing-Hankou Railway\u2014the canal languished and for decades the northern and southern parts remained separate. Many of the canal sections fell into disrepair, and some parts were returned to flat fields. Even today, the Grand Canal has not fully recovered its importance prior to the floods of the mid-19th century. After the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949, the need for economic development led the authorities to order heavy reconstruction work.\nThe Grand Canal played a major role during Mao Zedong's Great Leap Forward as it provided an efficient way to transport grain. It was further refurbished following Deng Xiaoping's Reform and Opening Up, with improving economic conditions leading to greater infrastructure investment. The economic importance of the canal will likely continue. The provincial governments of Shandong, Jiangsu, and Zhejiang undertook dredging intended to increase shipping capacity by 40 percent by 2012. The central government has also made the main route of the Grand Canal the eastern path of the South-North Water Diversion Project, using enormous pumping stations to redirect water from the Yangtze Delta to the drier north.\nThe canal became greatly polluted during China's industrialization. By the 1990s, canal barge crews could tell when they neared Hangzhou by the stench of the visibly black water they passed through. Similarly, fishermen on Dongping Lake in Shandong objected to the introduction of water from the Yangtze as part of the South-North Water Diversion Project when they saw it noticeably killing fish and affecting their catch. During the 21st century, increasing efforts have been made to improve environmental conditions along the canal. Around Hangzhou, for instance, a $250 million restoration project begun in 2001 improved water quality to the point where it no longer produces a noticeable odor and is once again capable of supporting some fauna.\nOn 22 June 2014, UNESCO's Conference on World Heritage listed the Grand Canal as a World Heritage Site. In 2021, the China Grand Canal Museum was opened.\nHistorical sections.\nAs well as its present-day course, fourteen centuries of canal-building have left the Grand Canal with a number of historical sections. Some of these have disappeared, others are still partially extant, and others form the basis for the modern canal. The following are the most important but do not form an exhaustive list.\nJia Canal.\nIn 12 BC, in order to solve the problem of the Grand Canal having to use of the perilous course of the Yellow River in Northern Jiangsu, a man named Li Hualong created the Jia Canal. Named after the Jia River whose course it followed, it ran from Xiazhen (modern Weishan) on the shore of Shandong's Weishan Lake to Suqian in Jiangsu. The construction of the Jia Canal left only of Yellow River navigation on the Grand Canal, from Suqian to Huai'an, which by 1688 had been removed by the construction of the Middle Canal by Jin Fu.\nNanyang New Canal.\nIn 1566, to escape the problems caused by flooding of the Yellow River around Yutai (now on the western shore of Weishan Lake), the Nanyang New Canal was opened. It ran for from Nanyang (now Nanyang Town, located in the center of Weishan Lake) to the small settlement of Liucheng (in the vicinity of modern Gaolou Village, Weishan County, Shandong) north of Xuzhou City. This change in effect moved the Grand Canal from the low-lying and flood-prone land west of Weishan Lake onto the marginally higher land to its east. It was fed by rivers flowing from east to west from the borders of the Shandong massif.\nHuitong Canal.\nNorth of the Jizhou Canal summit section, the Huitong Canal ran downhill, fed principally by the River Wen, to join the Wei River in the city of Linqing. In 1289, a geological survey preceded its one-year construction. The Huitong Canal, built by an engineer called Ma Zhizhen, ran across sharply sloping ground and the high concentration of locks gave it the nicknames \"chahe\" or \"zhahe\", i.e. 'the river of locks'. Its great number of feeder springs (between two and four hundred, depending on the counting method and season of the year) also led to it being called the \"quanhe\" or 'river of springs'.\nJizhou Canal.\nThis, the Grand Canal's first true summit section, was engineered by the Mongol Oqruq\u010di in 1238 to connect Jining to the southern end of the Huitong Canal. It rose to a height of 42 meters (138\u00a0ft) above the Yangtze, but environmental and technical factors left it with chronic water shortages until it was re-engineered in 1411 by Song Li of the Ming. Song Li's improvements, recommended by a local man named Bai Ying, included damming the rivers Wen and Guang and drawing lateral canals from them to feed reservoir lakes at the very summit, at a small town called Nanwang.\nDuke Huan's Conduit.\nIn AD 369, General Huan Wen of the Eastern Jin dynasty connected the shallow river valleys of the Huai and the Yellow. He achieved this by joining two of these rivers' tributaries, the Si and the Ji respectively, at their closest point, across a low watershed of the Shandong massif. Huan Wen's primitive summit canal became a model for the engineers of the Jizhou Canal.\nYilou Canal.\nThe Shanyang Canal originally opened onto the Yangtze a short distance south of Yangzhou. As the north shore of the Yangtze gradually silted up to create the sandbank island of Guazhou, it became necessary for boats crossing to and from the Jiangnan Canal to sail the long way around the eastern edge of that island. After a particularly rough crossing of the Yangtze from Zhenjiang, the local prefect realized that a canal dug directly across Guazhou would reduce the journey time and thus make the crossing safer. The Yilou Canal was opened in 738 and still exists, though not as part of the modern Grand Canal route.\nModern course.\nThe Grand Canal nominally runs between Beijing and Hangzhou over a total length of ; however, only the section from Hangzhou to Liangshan County is currently navigable. Its course is today divided into seven sections. From south to north these are the Jiangnan Canal, the Li Canal, the Inner Canal, the Middle Canal, the Lu Canal, the South Canal, the North Canal, and the Tonghui River.\nMan-Made Lake Lianhu\nTraining Lake \"Lianhu\" was used to feed water to the Grand Canal section near Jiangnan. Since the canal was man-made there was not enough naturally flowing water to keep the canal at proper depth so that boats could travel through it. So a man-made lake was used to feed water to the Jiangnan section of the Grand Canal. It was protected by the Government from reclamation and any use of the lake water without proper taxation was deemed illegal. It was supposed to be protected from profitable exploitation, but because the government changed over the years, lake Lianhu had been reclaimed many times and it started to become more shallow. The government changed the lake to become more profitable farmland which led to reclamations and agricultural irrigation using the lake. This began to lead to Lake Lianhu not being able to properly feed water to the Grand Canal. Loss of depth due to reclamation and maintenance costs became too high for the lake to become practical to use. Even though it was a man made lake it was still a beautiful sight. Many different people praised its beauty and various poems have been written about the lake. In recent years recreational uses for the lake have become more popular and may lead to the lake being restored.\nJiangnan Canal.\nThis southernmost section of the canal runs from Hangzhou in Zhejiang, where the canal connects with the Qiantang River, to Zhenjiang in Jiangsu, where it meets the Yangtze. After leaving Hangzhou heading north toward Beijing, the canal passes around the eastern border of Lake Tai, through the major cities of Jiaxing, Suzhou, Wuxi, and Changzhou before reaching Zhenjiang. \nThe Jiangnan (or 'South of the Yangtze') Canal is heavily utilized by barge traffic bringing coal, containers and construction materials to the booming delta. It is generally a minimum of 100 meters wide in the congested city centers, and often two or three times this width in the neighboring countryside. In recent years, broad bypass canals have been dug around the major cities to reduce 'traffic jams'.\nThe Suzhou section of the Jiangnan Canal flows through the western part of the city. It includes ten city gates and over 20 stone bridges of traditional design and historic areas that have been well preserved as well as temples and pavilions. \nInner Canal.\nThe Inner Canal runs between the Yangtze and Huai rivers, skirting the Shaobo, Gaoyou, and Hongze lakes of central Jiangsu. This section connects the cities of Huai'an and Yangzhou. Here the land lying to the west of the canal is higher than its bed while the land to the east is lower. Historically the Shanghe region west of the canal has been prone to frequent flooding, while the Xiahe region to its east has been hit by less frequent but immensely damaging inundations caused by the failure of the Grand Canal levees. Recent works have allowed floodwaters from Shanghe to be diverted safely out to sea. Like the Jiangnan Canal, the Inner Canal is heavily utilized by barge traffic bringing coal, construction materials and increasingly shipping containers around Jiangsu Province.\nMiddle Canal.\nThis 'Middle Canal' section runs from Huai'an to Weishan Lake, passing through Luoma Lake and following more than one course, the result of the impact of centuries of Yellow River flooding. After Pizhou, a northerly course passes through Tai'erzhuang to enter Weishan Lake at Hanzhuang bound for Nanyang and Jining (this course is the remnant of the New Nanyang Canal of 1566 \u2013 see below). A southerly course passes close by Xuzhou and enters Weishan Lake near Peixian. This latter course is less used today. Canal is utilized by barge traffic bringing coal and construction materials around northern Jiangsu Province.\nLu Canal.\nAt Weishan Lake, both courses enter Shandong province. From here to Linqing, the canal is called the Lu or 'Shandong' Canal. It crosses a series of lakes\u2014Zhaoyang, Dushan, and Nanyang\u2014which nominally form a continuous body of water. At present, diversions of water mean that the lakes are often largely dry land. North of the northernmost Nanyang Lake is the city of Jining. Further on, about north of Jining, the highest elevation of the canal ( above sea level) is reached at the town of Nanwang. In the 1950s a new canal was dug to the south of the old summit section. The old summit section is now dry, while the new canal holds too little water to be navigable. About further north, passing close by Dongping Lake, the canal reaches the Yellow River. By this point waterless, it no longer connects to the river. It reappears again in Liaocheng City on the north bank where, intermittently flowing through a renovated stone channel, it reaches the city of Linqing on the Shandong \u2013 Hebei border. Liangshan County is the northern terminus of the canal for barge traffic.\nSouthern Canal.\nThe fifth section of the canal extends for a distance of from Linqing to Tianjin along the course of the canalized Wei River. Though one of the northernmost sections, its name derives from its position relative to Tianjin. The Wei River at this point is heavily polluted while drought and industrial water extraction have left it too low to be navigable. The canal, now in Hebei province, passes through the cities of Dezhou and Cangzhou. Although to spectators, the canal appears to be a deep waterway in these city centers, its depth is maintained by weirs and the canal is all but dry where it passes through the surrounding countryside. At its terminus, the canal joins the Hai River in the center of Tianjin City before turning north-west.\nNorthern Canal and Tonghui River.\nIn Tianjin, the canal heads northwest, for a short time following the course of the Yongding, a tributary of the Hai River, before branching off toward Tongzhou on the edge of the municipality of Beijing. It is here that the modern canal stops and that a Grand Canal Cultural Park has been built. During the Yuan dynasty, a further canal on the Tonghui River connected Tongzhou with a wharf called the Houhai or \"rear sea\" in central Beijing. In the Ming and Qing dynasties, however, the water level in the Tonghui River dropped and ships could not travel from Tongzhou to Beijing. Tongzhou then became the northern shipping terminus of the canal. Cargo was unloaded at Tongzhou and transported to Beijing by land. The Tonghui river still exists as a wide, concrete-lined storm-channel and drain for the suburbs of Beijing.\nEastern Zhejiang Canal.\nThe Eastern Zhejiang Canal runs across the coastal plain south of Hangzhou Bay in northern Zhejiang. It begins at the Qiantang River in Xixing, Binjiang District, Hangzhou; crosses the Cao'e River in Shaoxing; and connects to the Yong River and ports on the East China Sea at Ningbo.\nThis Hangzhou\u2013Ningbo canal began as the Shanyin Canal excavated in Shaoxing by the Yue official Fan Li in the early 5th century BC during China's Spring and Autumn period. Despite the difficulty of connecting the route's various watersheds, the present route was completed with the construction of the Xixing Canal by the Jin official He Xun in the late 3rd century AD. The canal was an important artery of transport and supply for the region during periods of disunity in medieval China and was particularly prosperous and vital during the Southern Song, who established their capital at Lin'an within present-day Hangzhou. During the Yuan, Ming, and Qing, the canal diminished in importance but was kept navigable until the development of railways and roads in the 19th and 20th century. Renovation of the canal for use by modern barges began in 2002, was completed except for areas around Ningbo by 2009, and was fully completed in late 2013.\nIn November 2008, the Eastern Zhejiang Canal was added to the Grand Canal's UNESCO nomination and, in May 2013, was officially included as part of the Grand Canal and listed among the 7th group of Major Historical and Cultural Sites Protected at the National Level by the Chinese government. In 2014, it was included with the Beijing\u2013Hangzhou and Sui and Tang canals as part of UNESCO's listing for the Grand Canal.\nRegistered Sections and Sites of the World Heritage complex.\nThe Grand Canal World Heritage site is composed of 31 sections and a number of accessory heritage sites.\nElevations.\nThough the canal nominally crosses the watersheds of five river systems, in reality, the variation between these is so low that it has only a single summit section. The elevation of the canal bed varies from 1 m below sea level at Hangzhou to 38.5 m above at its summit. At Beijing, it reaches 27 m, fed by streams flowing downhill from the mountains to the west. The water flows from Beijing toward Tianjin, from Nanwang north toward Tianjin, and from Nanwang south toward Yangzhou. The water level in the Jiangnan Canal remains scarcely above sea level (the Zhenjiang ridge is 12 meters higher than that of the Yangtze River).\nUses.\nTransportation.\nFrom the Tang to Qing dynasties, the Grand Canal served as the main artery between northern and southern China and was essential for the transport of grain to Beijing. Although it was mainly used for shipping grain, it also transported other commodities and the corridor along the canal developed into an important economic belt. Records show that, at its height, every year more than 8,000 boats transported four to six million dan (240,000\u2013360,000 metric tons) of grain. The convenience of transport also enabled rulers to lead inspection tours to southern China. In the Qing dynasty, the Kangxi and Qianlong emperors made twelve trips to the south, on all occasions but one reaching Hangzhou.\nThe Grand Canal also enabled cultural exchange and political integration to occur between the north and south of China. The canal even made a distinct impression on some of China's early European visitors. Marco Polo recounted the Grand Canal's arched bridges as well as the warehouses and prosperous trade of its cities in the 13th century. The famous Roman Catholic missionary Matteo Ricci traveled from Nanjing to Beijing along the canal at the end of the 16th century.\nSince the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949, the canal has been used primarily to transport vast amounts of bulk goods such as bricks, gravel, sand, diesel, and coal. The Jianbi ship locks on the Yangtze are currently handling some 75,000,000 metric tons each year, and the Li Canal is forecast to reach 100,000,000 metric tons in the next few years. When first constructed, the canal served as a major source of transportation, linking northern and southern China. With the introduction of expressways, railways and high speed railways in modern China, passenger travel on the canal became far less common.\nCurrently, ships can only travel up to Jining. The section from Jining to Beijing is not available for transport due to the silt deposit buildup from the Yellow River and lack of water sources. There are plans for restoring transportation up to Tai'an.\nSouth-North Water Transfer Project.\nThe Grand Canal has been upgraded to serve as the Eastern Route of the South-North Water Transfer Project. Additional water is pumped into the canal from the Yangtze at Jiangdu near Yangzhou using a pumping station. and repumped through 23 stations until it reaches the watershed at Nanwang. Afterwards the water flows by gravity, one secondary canal going to the Shandong peninsula, and the main canal bypasses the Yellow River through 7.9 km tunnels and flows through a modified route into reservoirs in Tianjin. The extra waterflow has allowed the start of several projects to reestablish shipping in the northern half of the Grand Canal.\nNotable travelers.\nIn 1169, with China divided between the Jurchen-led Jin dynasty in the north and the Southern Song dynasty in the south, the Southern Song Emperor Xiaozong sent a delegation to the Jurchen to wish their ruler well for the New Year. A scholar-official named Lou Yue, secretary to the delegation, recorded the journey, much of which was made upon the Grand Canal, and submitted his \"Diary of a Journey to the North\" to the emperor on his return.\nIn 1170, the poet, politician, and historian Lu You traveled along the Grand Canal from Shaoxing to the river Yangtze, recording his progress in a diary.\nIn the late 1200s, Marco Polo traveled extensively through China and his trips included time on the Grand Canal, then a major artery for shipping silk, porcelain, and wine.\nIn 1345, Maghrebi traveler Ibn Battuta traveled China and journeyed through the Abe Hayat river (Grand Canal) up to the capital Khanbalik (Beijing).\nIn 1488, the shipwrecked Korean scholar Choe Bu traveled the entire length of the Grand Canal on his way from Zhejiang to Beijing (and on to Korea) and left a detailed account of his trip.\nIn 1600, Matteo Ricci traveled to Beijing from Nanjing via the Grand Canal waterway to gain the support of the Wanli Emperor of the Ming dynasty with the help of Wang Zhongde, the Director of the Board of Rites in the central government of China at the time.\nIn 1793, after a largely fruitless diplomatic mission to Jehol, a large part of Lord Macartney's embassy returned south to the Yangtze delta via the Grand Canal.\nIn 1848, Robert Fortune reached Hang Chow Foo by the Grand Canal in his quest for tea plants.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49827", "revid": "87591", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49827", "title": "Arcade video game", "text": "Coin-operated entertainment machine genre\nAn arcade video game is an arcade game that takes player input from its controls, processes it through electrical or computerized components, and displays output to an electronic monitor or similar display. All arcade video games are coin-operated or accept other means of payment, housed in an arcade cabinet, and located in amusement arcades alongside other kinds of arcade games. Until the early 2000s, arcade video games were the largest and most technologically advanced segment of the video game industry.\nEarly prototypical entries \"Galaxy Game\" and \"Computer Space\" in 1971 established the principle operations for arcade games, and Atari's \"Pong\" in 1972 is recognized as the first successful commercial arcade video game. Improvements in computer technology and gameplay design led to a golden age of arcade video games, the exact dates of which are debated but range from the late 1970s to the early 1980s. This golden age includes \"Space Invaders\", \"Pac-Man\", and \"Donkey Kong\". The arcade industry had a resurgence from the early 1990s to mid-2000s, including \"Street Fighter II\", \"Mortal Kombat\", and \"Dance Dance Revolution\", but ultimately declined in the Western world as competing home video game consoles such as the Sony PlayStation and Microsoft Xbox increased in their graphics and gameplay capability and decreased in cost. Nevertheless, Japan, China, and South Korea continue to maintain a robust arcade industry in contemporary times.\nHistory.\nGames of skill were popular amusement-park midway attractions from the 19th century on. With the introduction of electricity and coin-operated machines, they facilitated a viable business. When pinball machines with electric lights and displays were introduced in 1933 (but without the user-controller flippers which would not be invented until 1947) these machines were seen as games of luck. Numerous states and cities treated them as amoral playthings for rebellious young people, and banned them into the 1960s and 1970s.\nElectro-mechanical games (EM games) appeared in arcades in the mid-20th century. Following Sega's EM game \"Periscope\" (1966), the arcade industry experienced a \"technological renaissance\" driven by \"audio-visual\" EM novelty games, establishing the arcades as a suitable environment for the introduction of commercial video games in the early 1970s. In the late 1960s, college student Nolan Bushnell had a part-time job at an arcade where he became familiar with EM games watching customers play and helping to maintain the machinery, while learning the game business.\nThe early mainframe game \"Spacewar!\" (1962) inspired the first commercial arcade video game, \"Computer Space\" (1971), created by Nolan Bushnell and Ted Dabney and released by Nutting Associates. It was demonstrated at the Amusement &amp; Music Operators Association (AMOA) show in October 1971. Another \"Spacewar\"-inspired coin-operated video game, \"Galaxy Game\", was demonstrated at Stanford University in November 1971. Bushnell and Dabney followed their \"Computer Space\" success to create - with the help of Allan Alcorn - a table-tennis game, \"Pong\", released in 1972. \"Pong\" became a commercial success, leading numerous other coin-op manufacturers to enter the market.\nThe video game industry transitioned from discrete integrated circuitry to programmable microprocessors in the mid-1970s, starting with \"Gun Fight\" in 1975. The arcade industry entered a \"Golden Age\" in 1978 with the release of Taito's \"Space Invaders\", which introduced many novel gameplay features. From 1978 to 1982, several other major arcade-games from Namco, Atari, Williams Electronics, Stern Electronics, and Nintendo were all considered blockbusters, particularly Namco's \"Pac-Man\" (1980), which became a fixture in popular culture. Across North America and Japan, dedicated video-game arcades appeared and arcade-game cabinets appeared in many smaller storefronts. By 1981, the arcade video-game industry was worth US$ in the US.\nThe novelty of arcade games waned sharply after 1982 due to several factors, including market saturation of arcades and arcade games amd a moral panic over video games (similar to fears raised over pinball machines in the decades prior). The arcade market had recovered by 1986, with the help of software-conversion kits, the arrival of popular beat 'em up games (such as \"Kung-Fu Master\" (1984) and \"Renegade\" (1986\u20131987)), and advanced motion simulator games (such as Sega's \"taikan\" games including \"Hang-On\" (1985), \"Space Harrier\" (1985), and \"Out Run\" (1986)). However, the growth of home video-game systems such as the Nintendo Entertainment System led to another brief arcade decline toward the end of the 1980s.\nArcade games continued to improve with the development of technology and of gameplay. In the early 1990s, the release of Capcom's \"Street Fighter II\" established the modern style of fighting games and led to a number of similar games such as \"Mortal Kombat\", \"Fatal Fury\", \"Killer Instinct\", \"Virtua Fighter\", and \"Tekken\", creating a new renaissance in the arcades. Another factor was realism, including the \"3D Revolution\" from 2D and pseudo-3D graphics to \"true\" real-time 3D polygon graphics. This was largely driven by a technological arms-race between Sega and Namco. During the early 1990s games such as Sega's \"Virtua Racing\" and \"Virtua Fighter\" popularized 3D-polygon technology in arcades. 3D graphics later became popular in console and computer games by the mid-1990s, though arcade systems such as the Sega Model 3 remained considerably more advanced than home systems in the late 1990s. Until about 1996, arcade video-games had remained the largest segment of the global video-game industry. Arcades declined in the late 1990s, surpassed by the console market for the first time around 1997\u20131998.\nSince the 2000s, arcade games have taken different routes globally. In the United States, arcades have become niche markets as they compete with the home-console market, and they have adapted other business models, such as providing other entertainment options or adding prize redemptions. In Japan, where arcades continue to flourish, games like \"Dance Dance Revolution\" and \"The House of the Dead\" aim to deliver tailored experiences that players cannot easily have at home.\nTechnology.\nVirtually all modern arcade games (other than the very traditional fair midway) make extensive use of solid state electronics, integrated circuits, and monitor screens, all installed inside an arcade cabinet.\nWith the exception of \"Galaxy Game\" and \"Computer Space\", which were built around small form-factor mainframe computers, the first arcade games are based on combinations of multiple discrete logic chips, such as transistor\u2013transistor logic (TTL) chips. Designing an arcade game was more about the combination of these TTL chips and other electronic components to achieve the desired effect on screen. More complex gameplay required significantly more TTL components to achieve this result. By the mid-1970s, the first inexpensive programmable microprocessors had arrived on the market. The first microprocessor-based video game is Midway's \"Gun Fight\" in 1975 (a conversion of Taito's \"Western Gun\"), and with the advent of \"Space Invaders\" and the golden era, microprocessor-based games became typical. Early arcade games were also designed around raster graphics displayed on a cathode-ray tube (CRT) display. Many games of the late 1970s and early 1980s use special displays that rendered vector graphics, though these waned by the mid-1980s as display technology on CRTs improved. Prior to the availability of color CRT or vector displays, some arcade cabinets have a combination of angled monitor positioning, one-way mirrors, and clear overlays to simulate colors and other graphics onto the gameplay field.\nCoin-operated arcade video games from the 1990s to the 2000s generally use custom hardware often with multiple CPUs, highly specialized sound and graphics chips, and the latest in expensive computer graphics display technology. This allows more complex graphics and sound than contemporary video game consoles or personal computers. Many arcade games since the 2000s run on modified video game console hardware (such as the Sega NAOMI or Triforce) or gaming PC components (such as the Taito Type X). Many arcade games have more immersive and realistic game controls than PC or console games. This includes specialized ambiance or control accessories such as fully enclosed dynamic cabinets with force feedback controls, dedicated lightguns, rear-projection displays, reproductions of automobile or airplane cockpits, motorcycle or horse-shaped controllers, or highly dedicated controllers such as dancing mats and fishing rods. These accessories are usually too bulky, expensive, and specialized to be used with typical home PCs and consoles. Arcade makers experiment with virtual reality technology. Arcades have progressed from using coins as credits to smart cards that hold the virtual currency of credits.\nModern arcade cabinets use flat panel displays instead of cathode-ray tubes. Internet services such as ALL.Net, NESiCAxLive, e-Amusement and NESYS, allow the cabinets to download updates or new games, do online multiplayer gameplay, save progress, unlock content, or earn credits.\nGenres.\nMany arcade games have short levels, simple and intuitive control schemes, and rapidly increasing difficulty. The classic formula for a successful arcade video game is \"easy to learn, difficult to master\" along with a \"multiple life, progressively difficult level\" paradigm. This is due to the environment of the arcade, where the player is essentially renting the game for as long as their in-game avatar can stay alive or until they run out of tokens. Games on consoles or PCs can be referred to as \"arcade games\" if they share these qualities, or are direct ports of arcade games.\nArcade racing games often have sophisticated motion simulator arcade cabinets, a simplified physics engine, and short learning time when compared with more realistic racing simulations. Cars can turn sharply without braking or understeer, and the AI rivals are sometimes programmed so they are always near the player with a rubberband effect. Other types of arcade-style games include music games (particularly rhythm games), and mobile and casual games with intuitive controls and short sessions.\nAction.\nThe term \"arcade game\" can refer to an action video game designed to play similarly to an arcade game with frantic, addictive gameplay. The focus of arcade action games is on the user's reflexes, and many feature very little puzzle-solving, complex thinking, or strategy skills. These include fighting games often played with an arcade controller, beat 'em up games including fast-paced hack and slash games, and light gun rail shooters and \"bullet hell\" shooters with intuitive controls and rapidly increasing difficulty.\nMany arcade combat flight simulation games have sophisticated hydraulic motion simulator cabinets, and simplified physics and handling. Arcade flight games are meant to have an easy learning curve, in order to preserve their action component. Increasing numbers of console flight video games, such as \"\", \"Ace Combat\", and \"Secret Weapons Over Normandy\" indicate the falling of manual-heavy flight sim popularity in favor of instant arcade flight action.\nA modern subgenre of action games called \"hack and slash\" or \"character action games\" represent an evolution of traditional arcade action games, and are sometimes considered a subgenre of beat 'em up brawlers. This subgenre of games was largely defined by Hideki Kamiya, creator of the \"Devil May Cry\" and \"Bayonetta\" franchises.\nIndustry.\nArcade games are found in restaurants, bowling alleys, college campuses, video rental shops, dormitories, laundromats, movie theaters, supermarkets, shopping malls, airports, and other retail environments. They are popular in public places where people are likely to have free time.\nTheir profitability is expanded by the popularity of conversions of arcade games for home-based platforms. In 1997, WMS Industries (parent company of Midway Games) reported that if more than 5,000 arcade units are sold, at least 100,000 home version units will be sold.\nThe American Amusement Machine Association (AAMA) is a trade association established in 1981 that represents the American coin-operated amusement machine industry, including 120 arcade game distributors and manufacturers. The Japan Amusement Machine and Marketing Association (JAMMA) represents the Japanese arcade industry. Arcade machines may have standardized connectors or interfaces such as JAMMA, or JVS, that help with quick replacement of game systems or boards in arcade cabinets. The game boards or arcade boards may themselves allow for games to be replaced via game cartridges or discs.\nConversions, emulators, and recreations.\nPrior to the 2000s, successful video games were often converted to a home video game console or home computer. Many of the initial Atari VCS games, for example, were conversions of Atari's success arcade games. Arcade game manufacturers that were not in the home console or computer business found licensing of their games to console manufacturers to be a successful business model, as console manufacturer competitors would vie for rights to more popular games. Coleco famously bested Atari to secure the rights to convert Nintendo's \"Donkey Kong\", which it subsequently included as a pack-in game for the ColecoVision to challenge the VCS.\nArcade conversions typically had to make concessions for the lower computational power and capabilities of the home console, such as limited graphics or alterations in gameplay. Such conversions had mixed results. The Atari VCS conversion of \"Space Invaders\" was considered the VCS's killer application, helping to quadruple the VCS sales in 1980. In contrast, the VCS conversion of \"Pac-Man\" in 1982 was highly criticized for technical flaws due to VCS limitations such as flickering ghosts and simplified gameplay. Though \"Pac-Man\" was the best-selling game on the VCS, it eroded consumer confidence in Atari's games and partially contributed to the 1983 crash.\nThe need for arcade conversions began to wane as arcade game manufacturers like Nintendo, Sega, and SNK entered the home console market and used similar technology within their home consoles as found at the arcade, negating the need to simplify the game. Concessions still may be made for a home release; notably, the Super Nintendo Entertainment System conversion of \"Mortal Kombat\" removed much of the gore from the arcade version to meet Nintendo's quality control standards.\nExact copies of arcade video games can be run through emulators such as MAME on modern devices. An emulator is an application that translates foreign software onto a modern system, in real-time. Emulated games appeared legally and commercially on the Macintosh in 1994 with Williams floppy disks, Sony PlayStation in 1996, and Sega Saturn in 1997 with CD-ROM compilations such as \"Williams Arcade's Greatest Hits\" and \"\", and on the PlayStation 2 and GameCube with DVD-ROM compilations such as \"Midway Arcade Treasures\". Arcade games are downloaded and emulated through the Nintendo Wii Virtual Console service starting in 2009.\nUsing emulation, companies like Arcade1Up have produced at-scale or reduced-scale recreations of arcade cabinets using modern technology, such as LCD monitors and lightweight construction. These cabinets are typically designed to resemble the original arcade game cabinets, but may also support multiple related games. These cabinets can be offered in diverse and miniaturized styles, such as table-mounted and wall-mounted versions.\nHighest-grossing.\nFor arcade games, success is usually judged by either the number of arcade hardware units sold to operators, or the amount of revenue generated. The revenue can include the coin drop earnings from coins (such as quarters, dollars, or 100 yen coins) inserted into machines, and/or the earnings from hardware sales with each unit costing thousands of dollars. Most of the revenue figures listed below are incomplete as they only include hardware sales revenue, due to a lack of available data for coin drop earnings which typically account for the majority of a hit arcade game's gross revenue. This list only includes arcade games that either sold more than 10,000 hardware units or generated a revenue of more than $. Most of the games listed were released between the golden age of arcade video games (1978\u20131984) and the 1990s.\nFranchises.\nThese are the combined hardware sales of at least two or more arcade games that are part of the same franchise. This list only includes franchises that have sold at least 5,000 hardware units or grossed at least $10\u00a0million revenues.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49828", "revid": "42312242", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49828", "title": "Otto von Guericke", "text": "German scientist, inventor, and politician (1602-1686)\nOtto von Guericke ( , , ; spelled Gericke until 1666; 30 November\u00a0[O.S. 20 November]\u00a01602 \u2013 21 May\u00a0[O.S. 11 May]\u00a01686) was a German scientist, inventor, mathematician, and physicist. His pioneering scientific work, the development of experimental methods and repeatable demonstrations on the physics of the vacuum, atmospheric pressure, electrostatic repulsion, his advocacy for the reality of \"action at a distance\" and of \"absolute space\" were noteworthy contributions for the advancement of the Scientific Revolution.\nVon Guericke was a very pious man in the Dionysian tradition and attributed the vacuum of space to the creations and designs of an infinite divinity. Von Guericke described this duality \"as something that 'contains all things' and is 'more precious than gold, without beginning and end, more joyous than the perception of bountiful light' and 'comparable to the heavens'.\"\nBiography.\nEarly life and education.\nOtto von Guericke was born to a patrician family of Magdeburg. He was privately tutored until the age of fifteen. In 1617 he began studying law and philosophy at the Leipzig University. However, in 1620 his studies were disrupted by his father's death. He briefly returned home before continuing his studies at the Academia Julia in Helmstedt and the universities of Jena and Leiden. It was at Leiden that he first attended courses on mathematics, physics and military engineering. He concluded his academic education with a nine-month Grand Tour to France and England. \nFamily.\nUpon his return to Magdeburg in 1626 he married Margarethe Alemann, with whom he had three children (Anna Catherine, Hans Otto, and Jacob Christopher) before her untimely death in 1645. Anna Catherine and Jacob Christopher both died in infancy and in 1652 von Guericke married Dorothea Lentke.\nPolitical career.\nVon Guericke was the offspring of one of Magdeburg's leading patrician families, that were well-educated and well-connected. His father and grandfather had been life-long members of the city council and at various occasions during their careers been appointed to serve as mayor of the city. In 1626, Otto von Guericke started his career as political representative of Magdeburg and accepted an official appointment to join the city council. However, in 1618, the Thirty Years' War had broken out. This exceptionally long, tragic and destructive conflict would soon also descend upon Magdeburg. Only a few years later, he had luckily fled from the city before an army of the imperial Catholic League, led by the Count of Tilly had completely surrounded and cut off Magdeburg. The attack culminated in the single most devastating event of the entire war, namely the Sack of Magdeburg. In May 1631, the imperial troops had crushed the city walls and indiscriminately plundered the riches. Around eighty percent of its more than 25,000 inhabitants perished. The material loss was also unusually high as widespread fires destroyed about 1,700 of a total of 1,900 buildings, including all of von Guericke's personal property. He returned to Magdeburg in 1631 and his academic engineer education designated him an appointee of the reconstruction committee.\nHe became a master brewer in an attempt to speedily acquire a new personal fortune and accumulate wealth for the city. In 1646, he was elected as Magdeburg's Burgomeister, the city's chief magistrate or executive, an office that arguably bestowed more power (in a practical sense) than that of a mayor. He held this position until his retirement in 1678. During four decades in office he undertook numerous diplomatic missions, which took him to many European courts and councils, where he met powerful executives and secretaries and addressed the illustrious elite of dukes, kings and emperors. In 1666, Otto von Guericke was ennobled by emperor Leopold I, which, apart from entitling him to add the \"von\" prefix to his name, was of little consequence. He also altered the spelling of his last name from \"Gericke\" to \"Guericke\".\nDiplomatic pursuits.\nOtto von Guericke's first diplomatic mission on behalf of the city led him in September 1642 to the court of the Elector of Saxony at Dresden. Von Guericke's mandate was to bring about a more lenient treatment from the Saxon military commander for Magdeburg. In 1648, he represented the city at the peace treaty delegation, that ended the Thirty Year's War. During a 1654 diplomatic mission to Regensburg, Guericke presented his invention of the air-pump to impress those he was going to meet and help sway the talks in his favour, as well as promote his own scientific achievements. Diplomacy assignments, often dangerous as well as tedious, would occupy much of his time for the next twenty years. His private life, of which much remains unclear, was developing in parallel. Otto von Guericke utilised both his official status and his scientific knowledge in each other's support to serve his city's political agenda. Demonstrations of his inventions, such as the air-pump and the electrostatic generator were meant to impress his audiences and improve and extend political communication. He would, if necessary forgo scientific and technical elaborations on how his showpieces worked, leaving people to believe in his wizardry, a characteristic that was of great use for the promotion of a great leader.\nInitial scientific investigations.\nCurious and inspired by the Copernican cosmology and hardly understanding new ideas of vast, endless, empty space where light would propagate, bodies of matter could move about unhindered, and sound cannot be detected, von Guericke set about replicating this \"nothing\" phenomenon on Earth. Von Guericke first started investigating the concept of a vacuum through the use of fire pumps by pumping water out of wooden barrels. However, he soon realised that the porosity of wood was allowing unwanted water, filled with dissolved air, to enter. The pressure fluctuations experienced inside the barrel were allowing this encapsulated air to escape: spoiling the vacuum inside. In 1647 he turned his focus to pumping out enclosed air instead of water to solve this problem.\nMerging of his scientific and political careers.\nHis scientific and diplomatic pursuits finally intersected when, at the Reichstag in Ratisbon in 1654, he was invited to demonstrate his experiments on the vacuum before the highest dignitaries of the Holy Roman Empire. He built a vacuum pump, pumped air out of two joined Magdeburg hemispheres, attached a team of horses to each side, and had them pull. He demonstrated this again to the King of Prussia in 1663 and was awarded a lifetime pension. One of these dignitaries, the Archbishop Elector Johann Philipp von Sch\u00f6nborn, bought von Guericke's apparatus from him and had it sent to his Jesuit College at W\u00fcrzburg. One of the professors at the College, Fr. Gaspar Schott, entered into friendly correspondence with von Guericke and thus it was that, at the age of 55, von Guericke's work was first published as an Appendix to a book by Fr. Schott \u2013 \"Mechanica Hydraulico-pneumatica\" \u2013 published in 1657. This book came to the attention of Robert Boyle who, stimulated by it, embarked on his own experiments on air pressure and the vacuum, and in 1660 published \"New Experiments Physico-Mechanical touching the Spring of Air and its Effects\". The following year this was translated into Latin and, made aware of it in correspondence with Fr. Schott, von Guericke acquired a copy.\nIn the decade following the first publication of his own work von Guericke, in addition to his diplomatic and administrative commitments, was scientifically very active. He embarked upon his Magnum Opus\u2014\"Ottonis de Guericke Experimenta Nova (ut vocantur) Magdeburgica de Vacuo Spatio\"\u2014which as well as a detailed account of his experiments on the vacuum, contains his pioneering electrostatic experiments in which electrostatic repulsion was demonstrated for the first time and he sets out his theologically based view of the nature of space, but there are also contemporary arguments that he did not conceptualise these demonstrations as electrical. In the Preface to the Reader he claims to have finished the book on 14 March 1663, though publication was delayed for another nine years until 1672. In 1664, his work again appeared in print, again through the good offices of Gaspar Schott, the first section of whose book \"Technica Curiosa\", titled \"Mirabilia Magdeburgica\", was dedicated to von Guericke's work. The earliest reference to the celebrated Magdeburg hemispheres experiment is on page 39 of the \"Technica Curiosa\", where Schott notes that von Guericke had mentioned them in a letter of 22 July 1656. Schott goes on to quote a subsequent letter of von Guericke of 4 August 1657, in which he states that he now had carried out the experiment, at considerable cost, with 12 horses.\nThe 1660s marked the ultimate end for the Magdeburg citizen's hope of achieving Free Imperial City status, a goal to which von Guericke had devoted some twenty years of diplomatic effort. On behalf of Magdeburg, he was the first signatory to the \"Treaty of Klosterberg\" in 1666 whereby Magdeburg accepted a garrison of Brandenburg troops (upon the withdrawal of the imperial garrison) and the obligation to pay dues to the Great Elector, Friedrich Wilhelm I of Brandenburg. Despite the Elector's crushing of Magdeburg's political aspirations, the personal relationship of von Guericke and Friedrich Wilhelm remained warm. The Great Elector was a patron of scientific scholarship. He had employed von Guericke's son, Hans Otto, as his resident in Hamburg and in 1666 had called Otto himself to the Brandenburg Rat. When the \"Experimenta Nova\" finally appeared it was prefaced with a dedication to Friedrich Wilhelm.\nLater years.\nIn 1677 von Guericke was reluctantly permitted to step down from his civic responsibilities, after repeated requests. In January 1681, as a precaution against an outbreak of the plague then threatening Magdeburg, he and his second wife Dorothea moved to Hamburg, where their son Hans Otto lived. There von Guericke died peacefully on 11 May (Julian) 1686, to the day 55 years after he had fled the siege in 1631. His body was returned to Magdeburg for interment in the Ulrichskirche on 23 May (Julian). The Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg was named in his honour.\nPrimary publications.\nThere are three bodies of text, that contain systematic treatises on von Guericke's scientific work.\nThe scientific studies and related experiments contained in the above works may be grouped under three topics, to each of which the following books of \"Experimenta Nova\" are dedicated:\nScientific work.\n\"Nature of Space and the Possibility of the Void\".\nBook II of the \"Experimenta Nova\" is an extended philosophical essay in which von Guericke puts forward a view of the nature of space similar to that later espoused by Newton. He is explicitly critical of the plenist views of Aristotle and of their adoption by his younger contemporary Descartes. A particular and repeated target of his criticism is the manner in which the \"nature abhors a vacuum\" principle had migrated from simply a matter of experiment to a high principle of physics which could be invoked to explain phenomena such as suction but which itself was above question. In setting out his own view, von Guericke, while acknowledging the influence of previous philosophers such as Lessius (but not Gassendi), makes it clear that he considers his thinking on this topic to be original and new. There is no evidence that von Guericke was aware of the \"Nouvelles Experiences touchant le vide\" of Blaise Pascal published in 1647. In the \"Experimenta Nova\", Book III, Ch. 34, he relates how he first became aware of Torricelli's mercury tube experiment from Valerianus Magnus at Regensburg in 1654. Pascal's work built upon reports of the mercury tube experiment which had reached Paris via Marin Mersenne in 1644. An indication of the unresolved status of the \"nature abhors a vacuum\" principle at that time may be taken from Pascal's opinion, expressed in the conclusion of the \"Nouvelles Experiences\", when he writes: \"I hold for true the maxims set out below: (a) that all bodies possess a repugnance to being separated one from another and from admitting a vacuum in the interval between them \u2013 that is to say that nature abhors a void.\" Pascal goes on to claim that this abhorrence of a void is, however, a limited force and thus that the creation of a vacuum is possible.\nThere were three broad currents of opinion from which von Guericke dissented. Firstly, there was the Aristotelian view that there simply was no void and that everything that exists objectively is in the category of substance. The general plenist position lost credibility in the 17th century, owing primarily to the success of Newtonian mechanics. It was revived again in the 19th century as a theory of an all-pervading aether and again lost plausibility with the success of Special Relativity. Secondly, there was the Augustinian position of an intimate relation between space, time, and matter; all three, according to St. Augustine in the \"Confessions\" (Ch. XI) and the \"City of God\" (Book XI, Ch. VI), came into being as a unity and ways of speaking that purport to separate them \u2013 such as \"outside the universe\" or \"before the beginning of the universe\" are, in fact, meaningless. Augustine's way of thinking is also attractive to many and seems to have a strong resonance with General Relativity. The third view, which von Guericke discusses at length, but does not attribute to any individual, is that space is a creation of the human imagination. Thus, it is not truly objective in the sense in which matter is objective. The later theories of Leibniz and Kant seem inspired by this general outlook, but the denial of the objectivity of space has not been scientifically fruitful.\nVon Guericke sidestepped the vexing question of the meaning of \"nothing\" by asserting that all objective reality fell into one of two categories \u2013 the created and the uncreated. Space and time were objectively real but were uncreated, whereas matter was created. In this way he created a new fundamental category alongside Aristotle's category of substance, that of the uncreated. His understanding of space is theological and similar to that expressed by Newton in the General Scholium to the \"Principia\". For instance, von Guericke writes (Book II, Chapter VII): \"For God cannot be contained in any location, nor in any vacuum, nor in any space, for He Himself is, of His nature, location and vacuum.\"\nAir pressure and the vacuum.\nIn 1650 von Guericke invented the vacuum pump. His model consisting of a piston and an air gun cylinder with two-way flaps designed to pull air out of whatever vessel it was connected to, and used it to investigate the properties of the vacuum in many experiments. Guericke demonstrated the force of air pressure with dramatic experiments.\nIn 1657, he machined two 20-inch diameter hemispheres and pumped all the air out of them, locking them together with a vacuum seal. The air pressure outside held the halves together so tightly that sixteen horses, eight harnessed to each side of the globe, could not pull the halves apart. It would have required more than 4,000 pounds of force to separate them. It is estimated that by pumping the air out of these spheres, he was able to reduce the internal pressure to roughly 1/25 of an atmosphere.\nWith his experiments Guericke disproved the hypothesis of \"horror vacui\", that nature abhors a vacuum. Aristotle (e.g. in \"Physics\" IV 6\u20139) had argued against the existence of the void and his views commanded near-universal endorsement by philosophers and scientists up to the 17th century. Guericke showed that substances were not pulled by a vacuum, but were pushed by the pressure of the surrounding fluids.\nAll of von Guericke's work on the vacuum and air pressure is described in Book III of the \"Experimenta Nova\" (1672). As regards the more detailed chronology of his work we have, in addition to the \"Experimenta Nova\"'s description of his demonstrations at Regensburg in 1654, the two accounts published by Fr. Schott in 1657 and 1663.\nIn Chapter 27 he alludes to what transpired at Regensburg in 1654. The first experiment he explicitly records as having been demonstrated was the crushing of a non-spherical vessel as the air was withdrawn from it. He did not use a vacuum pump directly on the vessel, but allowed the air in it to expand into a previously evacuated receiver.\nThe second was an experiment in which a number of men proved able to pull an airtight piston only about halfway up a cylindrical copper vessel. Von Guericke then attached his evacuated receiver to the space below the piston and succeeded in drawing the piston back down again against the force of the men pulling it up. In a letter to Friar Schott of June 1656, reproduced in \"Mechanica Hydraulico-pneumatica\" (pp.\u00a0454\u201355), von Guericke gives a short account of his experiences at Regensburg. Based on this, Schimank [1936] gives a list of ten experiments that he considers likely to have been carried out at Regensburg. In addition to the above two, these included the extraction of air using a vacuum pump, the extinction of a flame in a sealed vessel, the raising of water by suction, a demonstration that air has weight, and a demonstration of how fog and mist can be produced in a sealed vessel. The \"Mechanica Hydraulico-pneumatica\" also provides the earliest drawing of von Guericke's vacuum pump. This corresponds to the description in the opening chapters of Book III of the \"Experimenta Nova\" of the first version of his pump.\nStimulated by the interest taken in his work, von Guericke was scientifically very active in the decade after 1654. In June 1656 we find him writing to Fr. Schott (\"Mechanica Hydraulico-pneumatica\", p.\u00a0444) \"Since the time when I produced the exhibition for the said eminent Elector, I have a better and clearer grasp of all these matters and many other topics as well.\" The celebrated hemispheres experiment was, as noted in the biographical section above, carried out between July 1656 and August 1657. In Chapter IV of Book III he describes a new and much-improved design of vacuum pump and attributes its invention to the need for a more easily transportable machine with which he could demonstrate his experiments to Frederick William, who had expressed the desire to see them. The new pump is also described on p.\u00a067 of the \"Technica Curiosa\". The demonstration in the Elector's Library at C\u00f6lln an der Spree took place in November 1663 and was recorded by a tutor to the Elector's sons. (Schneider p.\u00a0113.) A number of experiments, such as the rather cruel testing of the effect of a vacuum on birds and fish (\"Experimenta Nova\", Book III, Chapter XVI), are not described in the \"Technica Curiosa\". Although the \"Experimenta Nova\" does contain correspondence from 1665, there is no reason to doubt von Guericke's assertion that the work was essentially finished by March 1663.\nThroughout Books II and III he returns again and again to the theme of there being no abhorrence of a vacuum and that all the phenomena explained by this supposed principle are in fact attributable to the pressure of the atmosphere in conjunction with various incorporeal potencies which he held to be acting. Thus the Earth's \"conservative potency\" (\"virtus conservativa\") provided the explanation for the fact that the Earth retains its atmosphere though travelling through space. In countering the objection of a Dr. Deusing that the weight of the atmosphere would simply crush the bodies of all living things, he shows explicit awareness of the key property of a fluid \u2013 that it exerts pressure equally across all planes. In Chapter XXX of Book III he writes: \"Dr. Deusing ought to have borne in mind that the air does not just press on our heads but flows all around us. Just as it presses from above on the head, it likewise presses on the soles of the feet from below and simultaneously on all parts of the body from all directions.\"\nRelevant research.\nIn the \"Experimenta Nova\", Book III, Chapter 20, von Guericke reports on a barometer he had constructed and its application to weather forecasting. The earliest reference to his barometer is in a letter to Fr. Schott of November 1661 (\"Technica Curiosa\", p.\u00a037) where he writes: \"I have observed the variation in the weight of the air by using a little man (i.e. a statue in the form of one) who hangs from a wall in my hypocaust where it floats on air in a glass tube and uses a finger to show the weight or lightness of the air. At the same time it indicates whether or not it is raining in nearby localities or whether there is unusually stormy weather at sea.\" In a subsequent letter of 30 December 1661 (\"Technica Curiosa\" p.\u00a052) he gives a somewhat amplified account. His barometer thus prepared the way for meteorology. His later works focused on electricity. He invented the \"Elektrisiermaschine\", a version of which is illustrated in the engraving by Hubert-Fran\u00e7ois Gravelot, c. 1750. This device, which is usually identified as the first electrostatic generator, was developed as part of von Guericke's interest in the worldly powers (\"mundane virtues\") that operated in the universe. Von Guericke also showed that electrical (magnetic) attraction does not require a medium to operate in by an experiment using electrical transmission through linen thread.\nElectrostatic investigations.\nVon Guericke thought of the capacity of body to exert an influence beyond its immediate boundaries in terms of \"corporeal and incorporeal potencies\". Examples of corporeal potencies were the giving off of fumes, smells, gases etc. by bodies. An example of an incorporeal potency was the Earth's \"conservative potency\" whereby it retained its atmosphere and caused the return of objects thrown upwards to the Earth's surface. The Earth also possessed an \"expulsive potency\" which was deemed to explain why objects that fall bounce back up again. The notion of an \"incorporeal potency\" is similar to that of \"action at a distance\", except the former notion remained purely qualitative and there is no inkling of the fundamental \"action and reaction\" principle.\nVon Guericke describes his work on electrostatics in Chapter 15 of Book IV of the \"Experimenta Nova\". In a letter of November 1661 to Fr. Schott, reproduced in the \"Technica Curiosa\", he notes that the then projected Book IV would be concerned with \"cosmic potencies\" (\"virtutes mundanae\"). Accepting the claim of the preface to the \"Experimenta Nova\" that the entire work had been essentially completed before March 1663, von Guericke can be fairly credited with inventing a primitive form of frictional electrical machine before 1663. His electrostatic generator was created using a sulphur globe attached to an iron rod. By rubbing the sphere with a dry hand, von Guericke was able to impart a charge imbalance on the surface, which would allow him to attract and repel other objects.\nIn Chapter 6 of Book IV von Guericke writes: \"It seems reasonable to suppose that if the Earth has a fitting and appropriate attractive potency it will also have a potency of repelling things that might be dangerous or disagreeable to it. This is to be seen in the case of the sulphur sphere described below in Chapter 15. When that sphere is stroked or rubbed not only does it attract all light objects, but it sometimes arbitrarily also repels them before attracting them again. Sometimes indeed it doesn't even attract them again.\" Von Guericke was aware of both Gilbert's book \"On the Magnet and Magnetic bodies and on the great magnet the Earth\" (\"De Magnete\") published in 1600 and of the Jesuit Niccolo Cabeo's \"Philosophia Magnetica\" (1629). He does not explicitly acknowledge any anticipation of his demonstration of electrostatic repulsion by the latter but, as he quotes a passage from the same page, could not have been unaware that, in a discussion of the nature of electrical attraction, Cabeo had written (\"Philosophia Magnetica\", p.\u00a0192): \"When we see that small bodies (\"corpuscula\") are lifted (\"sublevari et attolli\") above the amber and also fall back to the motionless amber, it cannot be said that such erratic behaviour (\"talem matum\" \u2013 but if \"matum\" is taken as a misprint for \"motum\", then the translation is simply \"such motion\") is an attraction by the gravity of the attracting body.\" In Book IV, Chapter 8 of the \"Experimenta Nova\" von Guericke is at pains to point out the difference between his own \"incorporeal potency\" views and Cabeo's more Aristotelian conclusions. He writes: \"Writers who have written on magnetism, always confuse it with electrical attraction, although there is a great difference. In particular, Gilbert in his book \"De Magnete\" claims that electrical attraction is caused by the effluence of a humour, that the humid seeks the humid and this is the cause of the attraction. Moreover in \"Philosophia Magnetica\", Book 2, Chapter 21, Cabeo criticises Gilbert but does admit that this attraction is created by the agency of an effluent. Humidity does not play any role but the attraction is brought about purely by the agency of an effluent, by which the air is disturbed. After the initial impulse, the air returns to the amber again taking with it little particles. He (Cabeo) concludes by saying: 'I say therefore that from amber or any other electrically attracting body, a very rarefied effluent is emitted which dispels and attenuates the air, extremely agitating it. Then the agitated and attenuated air returns to the amber body sweeping along with it whatever dust or small bodies are in its way'. We however, who in the previous chapter, take the attraction of the sulphur ball as electrical in nature and operating through a conservative potency, cannot admit that the air plays a role in producing the attraction. Experiment visibly shows that this sulphur globe (once it has been rubbed) also exercises its potency through a linen cord up to a range of a cubit and more and can attract at that distance.\" Unknown to them at the time, this \"mysterious\" attraction and repulsion they had been witnessing was actually electrical conduction.\nThe key Chapter 15 is titled \"On an experiment, in which these potencies, listed above, can be evoked by the rubbing of a sulphur ball.\" In Section 3 of this chapter, he describes how light bodies are repelled from a sulphur sphere which has been rubbed with a dry hand, and are not again attracted until they have touched another body. Oldenburg's review of the \"Experimenta Nova\" (November 1672) in the \"Proceedings of the Royal Society\" sceptically observes: \"How far this globe may be confided in, the Tryals and Consideration of some ingenious person here may perhaps inform us hereafter.\" In fact, Robert Boyle repeated von Guericke's experiments for the Royal Society in November 1672 and February 1673.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49829", "revid": "28856560", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49829", "title": "Material dispersion coefficient", "text": "In an optical fiber, the material dispersion coefficient, \"M\"(\u03bb), characterizes the amount of pulse broadening by material dispersion per unit length of fiber and per unit of spectral width. It is usually expressed in picoseconds per (nanometre\u00b7kilometre). \nFor many optical fiber materials, \"M\"(\u03bb) approaches zero at a specific wavelength \u03bb0 between 1.3 and 1.5 \u03bcm. At wavelengths shorter than \u03bb0, \"M\"(\u03bb) is negative and increases with wavelength; at wavelengths longer than \u03bb0, \"M\"(\u03bb) is positive and decreases with wavelength. \nPulse broadening caused by material dispersion in a unit length of optical fiber is given by the product of \"M\"(\u03bb) and spectral width (\u0394\u03bb)."}
{"id": "49830", "revid": "300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49830", "title": "King Alfred the Great", "text": ""}
{"id": "49831", "revid": "10841396", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49831", "title": "Light pen", "text": "Computer input device\nA light pen is a computer input device in the form of a light-sensitive wand used in conjunction with a computer's cathode-ray tube (CRT) display.\nIt allows the user to point to displayed objects or draw on the screen in a similar way to a touchscreen but with greater positional accuracy. A light pen can work with any CRT-based display, but its ability to be used with LCDs was unclear (though Toshiba and Hitachi displayed a similar idea at the \"Display 2006\" show in Japan).\nA light pen detects changes in brightness of nearby screen pixels when scanned by cathode-ray tube electron beam and communicates the timing of this event to the computer. Since a CRT scans the entire screen one pixel at a time, the computer can keep track of the expected time of scanning various locations on screen by the beam and infer the pen's position from the latest time stamps.\nHistory.\nThe first light pen, at this time still called \"light gun\", was created around 1951\u20131955 as part of the Whirlwind I project at MIT, where it was used to select discrete symbols on the screen, and later at the SAGE project, where it was used for tactical real-time-control of a radar-networked airspace.\nOne of the first more widely deployed uses was in the Situation Display consoles of the AN/FSQ-7 for military airspace surveillance. This is not very surprising, given its relationship with the Whirlwind projects. See Semi-Automatic Ground Environment for more details.\nDuring the 1960s, light pens were common on graphics terminals such as the IBM 2250 and were also available for the IBM 3270 text-only terminal.\nThe first nonlinear editor, the CMX 600 was controlled by a light pen, where operator clicked symbols superimposed on edited footage.\nLight pen usage was expanded in the early 1980s to music workstations such as the Fairlight CMI and personal computers such as the BBC Micro and Holborn 9100. IBM PC-compatible MDA (only early versions), CGA, HGC (including HGC+ and InColor) and some EGA graphics cards also featured a connector compatible with a light pen, as did early Tandy 1000 computers, the Thomson MO5 computer family, the Amiga, Atari 8-bit, , some MSX computers and Amstrad PCW home computers. For the MSX computers, Sanyo produced a light pen interface cartridge.\nBecause the user was required to hold their arm in front of the screen for long periods of time (potentially causing \"gorilla arm\") or to use a desk that tilts the monitor, the light pen fell out of use as a general-purpose input device. Light pen was also perceived as working well only on displays with low persistence, which tend to flicker.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49836", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49836", "title": "N-ary code", "text": "In telecommunications, an \"n\"-ary code is a code that has \"n\" significant conditions, where \"n\" is a positive integer greater than 1. The integer substituted for \"n\" indicates the specific number of significant conditions, \"i.e.\", quantization states, in the code. For example, an 8-ary code has eight significant conditions and can convey three bits per code symbol. A prefix that indicates an integer, \"e.g.\", \"bin\", \"tern,\" or \"quatern\", may be used in lieu of a numeral, to produce \"binary\", \"ternary\", or \"quaternary\" (2, 3, and 4 states respectively).\nSee also.\nSource: from Federal Standard 1037C and from MIL-STD-188"}
{"id": "49838", "revid": "5662528", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49838", "title": "OGG", "text": "OGG or ogg may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "49839", "revid": "45521654", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49839", "title": "RealMedia", "text": "Digital file format\nRealMedia is a proprietary multimedia container format created by RealNetworks with the filename extension .rm. RealMedia is used in conjunction with RealVideo and RealAudio, while also being used for streaming content over the Internet. Typically these streams are in CBR (constant bitrate), but a container for VBR (variable bitrate) streams named RMVB (RealMedia variable bitrate) has been developed.\nOverview.\nA RealMedia file consists of a series of chunks that can be of several different types:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49842", "revid": "20726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49842", "title": "Keyboard instrument", "text": "Musical instrument played using a keyboard\nA keyboard instrument is a musical instrument played using a keyboard, a row of levers that are pressed by the fingers. The most common of these are the piano, organ, and various electronic keyboards, including synthesizers and digital pianos. Other keyboard instruments include celestas, which are struck idiophones operated by a keyboard, and carillons, which are usually housed in bell towers or belfries of churches or municipal buildings.\nToday, the term \"keyboard\" often refers to keyboard-style synthesizers and arrangers as well as work-stations. These keyboards typically work by translating the physical act of pressing keys into electrical signals that produce sound. Under the fingers of a sensitive performer, the keyboard may also be used to control dynamics, phrasing, shading, articulation, and other elements of expression\u2014depending on the design and inherent capabilities of the instrument. Modern keyboards, especially digital ones, can simulate a wide range of sounds beyond traditional piano tones, thanks to advanced sound synthesis techniques and digital sampling technology.\nAnother important use of the word \"keyboard\" is in historical musicology, where it means an instrument whose identity cannot be firmly established. Particularly in the 18th century, the harpsichord, the clavichord, and the early piano competed, and the same piece might be played on more than one. Hence, in a phrase such as \"Mozart excelled as a keyboard player\", the word \"keyboard\" is typically all-inclusive.\nThe term keyboard classifies instruments based on how the performer plays the instrument, and not on how the sound is produced. Categories of keyboard instruments include the following families (of which this is only a partial list):\nHistory.\n Late 4th century AD \"Mosaic of the Female Musicians\" from a Byzantine villa in Maryamin, Syria.\nThe earliest known keyboard instrument was the Ancient Greek hydraulis, a type of pipe organ invented in the third century BC. The keys were likely balanced and could be played with a light touch, as is clear from the reference in a Latin poem by Claudian (late 4th century), who says \"magna levi detrudens murmura tactu . . . intonet,\" that is \"let him thunder forth as he presses out mighty roarings with a light touch\" (\"Paneg. Manlio Theodoro,\" 320\u201322). From its invention until the fourteenth century, the organ remained the only keyboard instrument. Often, the organ did not feature a keyboard at all, but rather buttons or large levers operated by a whole hand. Almost every keyboard until the fifteenth century had seven naturals to each octave.\nThe clavicymbalum, clavichord, and the harpsichord appeared during the fourteenth century\u2014the clavichord probably being earlier. The harpsichord and clavichord were both common until the widespread adoption of the piano in the eighteenth century, after which their popularity decreased. The first template for the modern piano was introduced in 1698 in Italy by Bartolomeo Cristofori as the \"gravic\u00e8mbalo con piano e forte\" (\"harpsichord with soft and loud\"), also shortened to \"pianoforte\", as it allowed the pianist to control the dynamics by adjusting the force with which each key was struck. In its current form, the piano is a product of further developments made since the late nineteenth century and is distinct in both sound and appearance from the instruments known to earlier pianists, including Mozart, Haydn, and Beethoven. Beginning in the twentieth century, early electromechanical instruments, such as the Ondes Martenot, began to appear as well. Later in the 20th century, electronic keyboards appeared.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49843", "revid": "1926", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49843", "title": "Electronic instrument", "text": ""}
{"id": "49852", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49852", "title": "Local exchange carrier", "text": "Company that provides local phone service\nLocal exchange carrier (LEC) is a regulatory term in telecommunications for the local telephone company.\nIn the United States, wireline telephone companies are divided into two large categories: long-distance (interexchange carrier, or IXCs) and local (local exchange carrier, or LECs). This structure is a result of 1984 divestiture of then-regulated monopoly carrier American Telephone &amp; Telegraph. Local telephone companies at the time of the divestiture are also known as Incumbent Local Exchange Carriers (ILEC).\nThe divestiture created local exchange carriers for the management of local telephone lines and switches, and provisioning of local phone services within their business area, as well as the long-distance calls originating or terminating in their business area. The vast majority of the United States are served by LECs called Baby Bells, or RBOCs (Regional Bell Operating Companies). The rest of the United States, most commonly in rural or outlying suburban areas, are served by independent LECs, known in the industry simply as the \"independents.\" Although independent companies typically serve these areas, RBOC LECs still have vast territories of low population density regions of the country. Therefore, independents generally exist as pockets of territory within a greater RBOC region. Popular independents are Frontier Communications, and Windstream Communications.\nLocal calls are defined as calls originating and terminating within a local access and transport area (LATA) which is defined by the Federal Communications Commission. All of the Baby Bells, as well as other LECs, typically operate businesses in more than one LATA yet their services of local telephone calls are still defined by LATA boundaries, not their business areas.\nResidential local exchange services.\nThe following information applied to residential local telephone service in the Detroit, Michigan area during the 1970s and 1980s. Much about this subject has changed dramatically since that time, and continues to do so.\nA local exchange carrier is a carrier of telephone calls and other communication services carried by telephone lines. A local exchange is generally either an exchange within one's own LATA or in an immediately adjacent LATA. A call that is neither local nor long-distance is called a local toll call. A local exchange carrier normally sells package deals that include local and local toll calls. Local calls are customarily billed in by the call, or in blocks of calls. Residential local exchange carrier services typically charges formula_1, where formula_2 is the monthly minimum and covers the first formula_3 calls, formula_4 is the price per local call, and formula_5 is the total quantity of calls consumed. Local toll calls are each billed at formula_6, where formula_2 is minimum charge for a local toll call, formula_4 is the per-minute charge, and formula_9 is the duration of the call in minutes. Local toll calls are traditionally grouped into two price ranges, called \"near zone\" and \"far zone\", with values of formula_2 and formula_4 higher for far zone.\nDuties.\nGenerally, the local exchange carrier has the following duties: \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49853", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49853", "title": "Lilliput", "text": "Lilliput is an island nation in Jonathan Swift's novel \"Gulliver's Travels\".\nLilliput may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "49855", "revid": "49959671", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49855", "title": "Umayyad Caliphate", "text": "Second Islamic caliphate (661\u2013750)\nThe Umayyad Caliphate or Umayyad Empire (; ) was the second caliphate established after the death of the Islamic prophet Muhammad and was ruled by the Umayyad dynasty from 661 to 750. It succeeded the Rashidun Caliphate, of which the third caliph, Uthman ibn Affan, was also a member of the Umayyad clan. The Umayyad family established a dynasty with hereditary rule under Mu'awiya ibn Abi Sufyan, the long-time governor of Greater Syria, who became caliph after the end of the First Fitna in 661. After Mu'awiya's death in 680, conflicts over the succession resulted in the Second Fitna, and power was eventually claimed by Marwan ibn al-Hakam, who came from another branch of the clan. Syria remained the Umayyads' core power base thereafter, with Damascus as their capital.\nThe Umayyads continued the Muslim conquests, conquering Ifriqiya, Transoxiana, Sind, the Maghreb and Hispania (al-Andalus). At its greatest extent, the Umayyad Caliphate covered an area of , making it one of the largest empires in history in terms of size. The dynasty was overthrown by the Abbasids in 750. Survivors of the dynasty established an emirate and then a caliphate in C\u00f3rdoba, with Cordoba becoming a major center of science, medicine, philosophy and invention during the Islamic Golden Age.\nThe Umayyad Caliphate ruled over a vast multiethnic and multicultural population. Christians, who still constituted a majority of the caliphate's population, and the Jews were allowed to practice their own religion in exchange for the payment of \"jizya\" (poll tax), from which Muslims were exempt. Muslims were required to pay the zakat, which was explicitly collected for the purposes of charity and for the benefit of Muslims or Muslim converts. Under the early Umayyad caliphs, prominent positions were held by Christians, some of whom belonged to families that had served under the Byzantines. The employment of Christians was part of a broader policy of religious toleration that was necessitated by the presence of large Christian populations in the conquered provinces, such as in their metropolitan province of Syria. This policy also helped to increase Mu'awiya's popularity and solidified Syria as his power base. The Umayyad era is often considered the formative period of Islamic art.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nEarly influence.\nDuring the pre-Islamic period, the Umayyads or Banu Umayya were a leading clan of the Quraysh tribe of Mecca. By the end of the 6th century, the Umayyads dominated the Quraysh's increasingly prosperous trade networks with Syria and developed economic and military alliances with the nomadic Arab tribes that controlled the northern and central Arabian desert expanses, affording the clan a degree of political power in the region. The Umayyads under the leadership of Abu Sufyan ibn Harb were the principal leaders of Meccan opposition to the Islamic prophet Muhammad, but after the latter captured Mecca in 630, Abu Sufyan and the Quraysh embraced Islam. To reconcile his influential Qurayshite tribesmen, Muhammad gave his former opponents, including Abu Sufyan, a stake in the new order. Abu Sufyan and the Umayyads relocated to Medina, Islam's political centre, to maintain their new-found political influence in the nascent Muslim community.\nMuhammad's death in 632 left open the succession of leadership of the Muslim community. Leaders of the Ansar, the natives of Medina who had provided Muhammad safe haven after his emigration from Mecca in 622, discussed forwarding their own candidate out of concern that the Muhajirun, Muhammad's early followers and fellow emigrants from Mecca, would ally with their fellow tribesmen from the former Qurayshite elite and take control of the Muslim state. The Muhajirun gave allegiance to one of their own, the early, elderly companion of Muhammad, Abu Bakr (r.\u2009632\u00a0\u2013\u00a0634), and put an end to Ansarite deliberations. Abu Bakr was viewed as acceptable by the Ansar and the Qurayshite elite and was acknowledged as caliph (leader of the Muslim community). He showed favor to the Umayyads by awarding them command roles in the Muslim conquest of Syria. One of the appointees was Yazid, the son of Abu Sufyan, who owned property and maintained trade networks in Syria.\nAbu Bakr's successor Umar (r.\u2009634\u00a0\u2013\u00a0644) curtailed the influence of the Qurayshite elite in favor of Muhammad's earlier supporters in the administration and military, but nonetheless allowed the growing foothold of Abu Sufyan's sons in Syria, which was all but conquered by 638. When Umar's overall commander of the province Abu Ubayda ibn al-Jarrah died in 639, he appointed Yazid governor of Syria's Damascus, Palestine and Jordan districts. Yazid died shortly after and Umar appointed his brother Mu'awiya in his place. Umar's exceptional treatment of Abu Sufyan's sons may have stemmed from his respect for the family, their burgeoning alliance with the powerful Banu Kalb tribe as a counterbalance to the influential Himyarite settlers in Homs who viewed themselves as equals to the Quraysh in nobility, or the lack of a suitable candidate at the time, particularly amid the plague of Amwas which had already killed Abu Ubayda and Yazid. Under Mu'awiya's stewardship, Syria remained domestically peaceful, organized and well-defended from its former Byzantine rulers.\nCaliphate of Uthman.\nUmar's successor, Uthman ibn Affan, was a wealthy Umayyad and early Muslim convert with marital ties to Muhammad. He was elected by the \"shura\" council, composed of Muhammad's cousin Ali, al-Zubayr ibn al-Awwam, Talha ibn Ubayd Allah, Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas and Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf, all of whom were close, early companions of Muhammad and belonged to the Quraysh. He was chosen over Ali because he would ensure the concentration of state power into the hands of the Quraysh, as opposed to Ali's determination to diffuse power among all of the Muslim factions. From early in his reign, Uthman displayed explicit favoritism to his kinsmen, in stark contrast to his predecessors. He appointed his family members as governors over the regions successively conquered under Umar and himself, namely much of the Sasanian Empire, i.e. Iraq and Iran, and the former Byzantine territories of Syria and Egypt. In Medina, he relied extensively on the counsel of his Umayyad cousins, the brothers al-Harith and Marwan ibn al-Hakam. According to the historian Wilferd Madelung, this policy stemmed from Uthman's \"conviction that the house of Umayya, as the core clan of Quraysh, was uniquely qualified to rule in the name of Islam\".\nUthman's nepotism provoked the ire of the Ansar and the members of the \"shura\". In 645/46, he added the Jazira (Upper Mesopotamia) to Mu'awiya's Syrian governorship and granted the latter's request to take possession of all Byzantine crown lands in Syria to help pay his troops. He had the surplus taxes from the wealthy provinces of Kufa and Egypt forwarded to the treasury in Medina, which he used at his personal disposal, frequently disbursing its funds and war booty to his Umayyad relatives. Moreover, the lucrative Sasanian crown lands of Iraq, which Umar had designated as communal property for the benefit of the Arab garrison towns of Kufa and Basra, were turned into caliphal crown lands to be used at Uthman's discretion. Mounting resentment against Uthman's rule in Iraq and Egypt and among the Ansar and Quraysh of Medina culminated in the killing of the caliph in 656. In the assessment of the historian Hugh N. Kennedy, Uthman was killed because of his determination to centralize control over the caliphate's government by the traditional elite of the Quraysh, particularly his Umayyad clan, which he believed possessed the \"experience and ability\" to govern, at the expense of the interests, rights and privileges of many early Muslims.\nFirst Fitna.\nAfter Uthman's assassination, Ali was recognized as the next Rashidun caliph in Medina, though his support stemmed from the Ansar and the Iraqis, while the bulk of the Quraysh was wary of his rule. The first challenge to his authority came from the Qurayshite leaders al-Zubayr and Talha, who had opposed Uthman's empowerment of the Umayyad clan but feared that their own influence and the power of the Quraysh, in general, would dissipate under Ali. Backed by one of Muhammad's wives, Aisha, they attempted to rally support against Ali among the troops of Basra, prompting the caliph to leave for Iraq's other garrison town, Kufa, where he could better confront his challengers. Ali defeated them at the Battle of the Camel, in which al-Zubayr and Talha were slain and Aisha consequently entered self-imposed seclusion. Ali's sovereignty was thereafter recognized in Basra and Egypt and he established Kufa as the caliphate's new capital.\nAlthough Ali was able to replace Uthman's governors in Egypt and Iraq with relative ease, Mu'awiya had developed a strong powerbase and an effective military against the Byzantines from the Arab tribes of Syria. Mu'awiya did not yet explicitly claim the caliphate but was determined to retain control of Syria and opposed Ali in the name of avenging his kinsman Uthman, accusing the caliph of complicity in his death. Ali and Mu'awiya fought to a stalemate at the Battle of Siffin in early 657. Ali agreed to settle the matter with Mu'awiya by arbitration, though the talks failed to achieve a resolution. The decision to arbitrate fundamentally weakened Ali's political position as he was forced to negotiate with Mu'awiya on equal terms, while it drove a significant number of Ali's supporters, who became known as the Kharijites, to revolt. Ali's coalition steadily disintegrated and many Iraqi tribal nobles secretly defected to Mu'awiya, while Mu'awiya's ally Amr ibn al-As ousted Ali's governor from Egypt in July 658. In July 660 Mu'awiya was formally recognized as caliph in Jerusalem by his Syrian tribal allies. Ali was assassinated by a Kharijite dissident in January 661. His son Hasan succeeded him but abdicated in return for compensation upon Mu'awiya's invasion of Iraq with his Syrian army in the summer. Mu'awiya then entered Kufa and received the allegiance of the Iraqis.\nSufyanid period.\nCaliphate of Mu'awiya.\nThe recognition of Mu'awiya in Kufa, referred to as the \"year of unification of the community\" in the Muslim traditional sources, is generally considered the start of his caliphate. With his accession, the political capital and the caliphal treasury were transferred to Damascus, the seat of Mu'awiya's power. Syria's emergence as the metropolis of the Umayyad Caliphate was the result of Mu'awiya's twenty-year entrenchment in the province, the geographic distribution of its relatively large Arab population throughout the province in contrast to their seclusion in garrison cities in other provinces, and the domination of a single tribal confederation, the Quda'a who were led by the Banu Kalb with whom Mu'awiya had a marriage alliance, as opposed to the wide array of competing tribal groups in Iraq. The long-established, formerly Christian Arab tribes in Syria, having been integrated into the military of the Byzantine Empire and their Ghassanid client kings, were \"more accustomed to order and obedience\" than their Iraqi counterparts, according to historian Julius Wellhausen. Mu'awiya relied on the powerful Kalbite chief Ibn Bahdal and the Kindite nobleman Shurahbil ibn Simt alongside the Qurayshite commanders al-Dahhak ibn Qays al-Fihri and Abd al-Rahman, the son of the prominent general Khalid ibn al-Walid, to guarantee the loyalty of the key military components of Syria. Mu'awiya preoccupied his core Syrian troops in nearly annual or bi-annual land and sea raids against Byzantium, which provided them with battlefield experience and war spoils, but secured no permanent territorial gains. Toward the end of his reign the caliph entered a thirty-year truce with Byzantine emperor Constantine IV (r.\u2009668\u00a0\u2013\u00a0685), obliging the Umayyads to pay the Empire an annual tribute of gold, horses and slaves.\nMu'awiya's main challenge was reestablishing the unity of the Muslim community and asserting his authority and that of the caliphate in the provinces amid the political and social disintegration of the First Fitna. There remained significant opposition to his assumption of the caliphate and to a strong central government. The garrison towns of Kufa and Basra, populated by the Arab immigrants and troops who arrived during the conquest of Iraq in the 630s\u2013640s, resented the transition of power to Syria. They remained divided, nonetheless, as both cities competed for power and influence in Iraq and its eastern dependencies and remained divided between the Arab tribal nobility and the early Muslim converts, the latter of whom were divided between the pro-Alids (loyalists of Ali) and the Kharijites, who followed their own strict interpretation of Islam. The caliph applied a decentralized approach to governing Iraq by forging alliances with its tribal nobility, such as the Kufan leader al-Ash'ath ibn Qays, and entrusting the administration of Kufa and Basra to highly experienced members of the Thaqif tribe, al-Mughira ibn Shu'ba and the latter's protege Ziyad ibn Abihi (whom Mu'awiya adopted as his half-brother), respectively. In return for recognizing his suzerainty, maintaining order, and forwarding a token portion of the provincial tax revenues to Damascus, the caliph let his governors rule with practical independence. After al-Mughira's death in 670, Mu'awiya attached Kufa and its dependencies to the governorship of Basra, making Ziyad the practical viceroy over the eastern half of the caliphate. Afterward, Ziyad launched a concerted campaign to firmly establish Arab rule in the vast Khurasan region east of Iran and restart the Muslim conquests in the surrounding areas. Not long after Ziyad's death, he was succeeded by his son Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad. Meanwhile, Amr ibn al-As ruled Egypt from the provincial capital of Fustat as a virtual partner of Mu'awiya until his death in 663, after which loyalist governors were appointed and the province became a practical appendage of Syria. Under Mu'awiya's direction, the Muslim conquest of Ifriqiya (central North Africa) was launched by the commander Uqba ibn Nafi in 670, which extended Umayyad control as far as Byzacena (modern southern Tunisia), where Uqba founded the permanent Arab garrison city of Kairouan.\nSuccession of Yazid I and collapse of Sufyanid rule.\nIn contrast to Uthman, Mu'awiya restricted the influence of his Umayyad kinsmen to the governorship of Medina, where the dispossessed Islamic elite, including the Umayyads, was suspicious or hostile toward his rule. However, in an unprecedented move in Islamic politics, Mu'awiya nominated his own son, Yazid I, as his successor in 676, introducing hereditary rule to caliphal succession and, in practice, turning the office of the caliph into a kingship. The act was met with disapproval or opposition by the Iraqis and the Hejaz-based Quraysh, including the Umayyads, but most were bribed or coerced into acceptance. Yazid acceded after Mu'awiya's death in 680 and almost immediately faced a challenge to his rule by the Kufan partisans of Ali who had invited Ali's son and Muhammad's grandson Husayn to stage a revolt against Umayyad rule from Iraq. An army mobilized by Iraq's governor Ibn Ziyad intercepted and killed Husayn outside Kufa at the Battle of Karbala. Although it stymied active opposition to Umayyad authority in Iraq for the time being, the killing of Muhammad's grandson left many Muslims outraged and significantly increased Kufan hostility toward the Umayyads and sympathy for the family of Ali.\nThe next major challenge to Yazid's rule emanated from the Hejaz where Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr, the son of al-Zubayr ibn al-Awwam and grandson of Abu Bakr, advocated for a \"shura\" among the Quraysh to elect the caliph and rallied opposition to the Umayyads from his headquarters in Islam's holiest sanctuary, the Ka'aba in Mecca. The Ansar and Quraysh of Medina also took up the anti-Umayyad cause and in 683 expelled the Umayyads from the city. Yazid's Syrian troops routed the Medinans at the Battle of al-Harra and subsequently plundered Medina before besieging Ibn al-Zubayr in Mecca. The Syrians withdrew upon news of Yazid's death in 683, after which Ibn al-Zubayr declared himself caliph and soon after gained recognition in most provinces of the caliphate, including Iraq and Egypt. In Syria Ibn Bahdal secured the succession of Yazid's son and appointed successor Mu'awiya II, whose authority was likely restricted to Damascus and Syria's southern districts. Mu'awiya II had been ill from the beginning of his accession, with al-Dahhak assuming the practical duties of his office, and he died in early 684 without naming a successor. His death marked the end of the Umayyads' Sufyanid ruling house, called after Mu'awiya I's father Abu Sufyan.\nEarly Marwanid period.\nMarwanid transition and end of Second Fitna.\nUmayyad authority nearly collapsed in their Syrian stronghold after the death of Mu'awiya II. Al-Dahhak in Damascus, the Qays tribes in Qinnasrin (northern Syria) and the Jazira, the Judham in Palestine, and the Ansar and South Arabians of Homs all opted to recognize Ibn al-Zubayr. Marwan ibn al-Hakam, the leader of the Umayyads expelled to Syria from Medina, was prepared to submit to Ibn al-Zubayr as well but was persuaded to forward his candidacy for the caliphate by Ibn Ziyad. The latter had been driven out of Iraq and strove to uphold Umayyad rule. During a summit of pro-Umayyad Syrian tribes, namely the Quda'a and their Kindite allies, organized by Ibn Bahdal in the old Ghassanid capital of Jabiya, Marwan was elected caliph in exchange for economic privileges to the loyalist tribes. At the subsequent Battle of Marj Rahit in August 684, Marwan led his tribal allies to a decisive victory against a much larger Qaysite army led by al-Dahhak, who was slain. Not long after, the South Arabians of Homs and the Judham joined the Quda'a to form the tribal confederation of Yaman. Marj Rahit led to the long-running conflict between the Qays and Yaman coalitions. The Qays regrouped in the Euphrates river fortress of Circesium under Zufar ibn al-Harith al-Kilabi and moved to avenge their losses. Although Marwan regained full control of Syria in the months following the battle, the inter-tribal strife undermined the foundation of Umayyad power: the Syrian army.\nIn 685, Marwan and Ibn Bahdal expelled the Zubayrid governor of Egypt and replaced him with Marwan's son Abd al-Aziz, who would rule the province until his death in 704/05. Another son, Muhammad, was appointed to suppress Zufar's rebellion in the Jazira. Marwan died in April 685 and was succeeded by his eldest son Abd al-Malik. Although Ibn Ziyad attempted to restore the Syrian army of the Sufyanid caliphs, persistent divisions along Qays\u2013Yaman lines contributed to the army's massive rout and Ibn Ziyad's death at the hands of the pro-Alid forces of Mukhtar al-Thaqafi of Kufa at the Battle of Khazir in August 686. The setback delayed Abd al-Malik's attempts to reestablish Umayyad authority in Iraq, while pressures from the Byzantine Empire and raids into Syria by the Byzantines' Mardaite allies compelled him to sign a peace treaty with Byzantium in 689 which substantially increased the Umayyads' annual tribute to the Empire. During his siege of Circesium in 691, Abd al-Malik reconciled with Zufar and the Qays by offering them privileged positions in the Umayyad court and army, signaling a new policy by the caliph and his successors to balance the interests of the Qays and Yaman in the Umayyad state. With his unified army, Abd al-Malik marched against the Zubayrids of Iraq, having already secretly secured the defection of the province's leading tribal chiefs, and defeated Iraq's ruler, Ibn al-Zubayr's brother Mus'ab, at the Battle of Maskin in 691. Afterward, the Umayyad commander al-Hajjaj ibn Yusuf besieged Mecca and killed Ibn al-Zubayr in 692, marking the end of the Second Fitna and the reunification of the caliphate under Abd al-Malik's rule.\nDomestic consolidation and centralization.\nIraq remained politically unstable and the garrisons of Kufa and Basra had become exhausted by warfare with Kharijite rebels. In 694 Abd al-Malik combined both cities as a single province under the governorship of al-Hajjaj, who oversaw the suppression of the Kharijite revolts in Iraq and Iran by 698 and was subsequently given authority over the rest of the eastern caliphate. Resentment among the Iraqi troops towards al-Hajjaj's methods of governance, particularly his death threats to force participation in the war efforts and his reductions to their stipends, culminated with a mass Iraqi rebellion against the Umayyads in c.\u2009700. The leader of the rebels was the Kufan nobleman Ibn al-Ash'ath, grandson of al-Ash'ath ibn Qays. Al-Hajjaj defeated Ibn al-Ash'ath's rebels at the Battle of Dayr al-Jamajim in April. The suppression of the revolt marked the end of the Iraqi \"muq\u0101tila\" as a military force and the beginning of Syrian military domination of Iraq. Iraqi internal divisions, and the utilization of more disciplined Syrian forces by Abd al-Malik and al-Hajjaj, voided the Iraqis' attempt to reassert power in the province.\nTo consolidate Umayyad rule after the Second Fitna, the Marwanids launched a series of centralization, Islamization and Arabization measures. These measures included the creation of multiple classes of Arabic-inscribed administrative media as a way to proliferate their particular political, cultural, and religious disposition to both Arab and non-Arab audiences. To prevent further rebellions in Iraq, al-Hajjaj founded a permanent Syrian garrison in Wasit, situated between Kufa and Basra, and instituted a more rigorous administration in the province. Power thereafter derived from the Syrian troops, who became Iraq's ruling class, while Iraq's Arab nobility, religious scholars and \"maw\u0101l\u012b\" became their virtual subjects. The surplus from the agriculturally rich Sawad lands was redirected from the \"muq\u0101tila\" to the caliphal treasury in Damascus to pay the Syrian troops in Iraq. The system of military pay established by Umar, which paid stipends to veterans of the earlier Muslim conquests and their descendants, was ended, salaries being restricted to those in active service. The old system was considered a handicap on Abd al-Malik's executive authority and financial ability to reward loyalists in the army. Thus, a professional army was established during Abd al-Malik's reign whose salaries derived from tax proceeds.\nIn 693, the Byzantine gold \"solidus\" was replaced in Syria and Egypt with the dinar. Initially, the new coinage contained depictions of the caliph as the spiritual leader of the Muslim community and its supreme military commander. This image proved no less acceptable to Muslim officialdom and was replaced in 696 or 697 with image-less coinage inscribed with Qur'anic quotes and other Muslim religious formulas. In 698/699, similar changes were made to the silver dirhams issued by the Muslims in the former Sasanian Persian lands of the eastern caliphate. Arabic replaced Persian as the language of the \"d\u012bw\u0101n\" in Iraq in 697, Greek in the Syrian \"d\u012bw\u0101n\" in 700, and Greek and Coptic in the Egyptian \"d\u012bw\u0101n\" in 705/706. Arabic ultimately became the sole official language of the Umayyad state, but the transition in faraway provinces, such as Khurasan, did not occur until the 740s. Although the official language was changed, Greek and Persian-speaking bureaucrats who were versed in Arabic kept their posts. According to Gibb, the decrees were the \"first step towards the reorganization and unification of the diverse tax-systems in the provinces, and also a step towards a more definitely Muslim administration\". Indeed, it formed an important part of the Islamization measures that lent the Umayyad Caliphate \"a more ideological and programmatic coloring it had previously lacked\", according to Blankinship.\nIn 691/692, Abd al-Malik completed the Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem. It was possibly intended as a monument of victory over the Christians that would distinguish Islam's uniqueness within the common Abrahamic setting of Jerusalem, home of the two older Abrahamic faiths, Judaism and Christianity. An alternative motive may have been to divert the religious focus of Muslims in the Umayyad realm from the Ka'aba in Zubayrid Mecca (683\u2013692), where the Umayyads were routinely condemned during the Hajj. In Damascus, Abd al-Malik's son and successor al-Walid I (r.\u2009705\u00a0\u2013\u00a0715) confiscated the cathedral of St. John the Baptist and founded the Great Mosque in its place as a \"symbol of the political supremacy and moral prestige of Islam\", according to historian Nikita Eliss\u00e9eff. Noting al-Walid's awareness of architecture's propaganda value, historian Robert Hillenbrand calls the Damascus mosque a \"victory monument\" intended as a \"visible statement of Muslim supremacy and permanence\".\nRenewal of conquests.\nUnder al-Walid I the Umayyad Caliphate reached its greatest territorial extent. The war with the Byzantines had resumed under his father after the civil war, with the Umayyads defeating the Byzantines at the Battle of Sebastopolis in 692. The Umayyads frequently raided Byzantine Anatolia and Armenia in the following years. By 705, Armenia was annexed by the caliphate along with the principalities of Caucasian Albania and Iberia, which collectively became the province of Arminiya. In 695\u2013698 the commander Hassan ibn al-Nu'man al-Ghassani restored Umayyad control over Ifriqiya after defeating the Byzantines and Berbers there. Carthage was captured and destroyed in 698, signaling \"the final, irretrievable end of Roman power in Africa\", according to Kennedy. Kairouan was firmly secured as a launchpad for later conquests, while the port town of Tunis was founded and equipped with an arsenal on Abd al-Malik's orders to establish a strong Arab fleet. Hassan ibn al-Nu'man continued the campaign against the Berbers, defeating them and killing their leader, the warrior queen al-Kahina, between 698 and 703. His successor in Ifriqiya, Musa ibn Nusayr, subjugated the Berbers of the Hawwara, Zenata and Kutama confederations and advanced into the Maghreb (western North Africa), conquering Tangier and Sus in 708/709. Musa's Berber \"mawla\", Tariq ibn Ziyad, invaded the Visigothic Kingdom of Hispania (the Iberian Peninsula) in 711 and within five years most of Hispania was conquered.\nAl-Hajjaj managed the eastern expansion from Iraq. His lieutenant governor of Khurasan, Qutayba ibn Muslim, launched numerous campaigns against Transoxiana (Central Asia), which had been a largely impenetrable region for earlier Muslim armies, between 705 and 715. Despite the distance from the Arab garrison towns of Khurasan, the unfavorable terrain and climate and his enemies' numerical superiority, Qutayba, through his persistent raids, gained the surrender of Bukhara in 706\u2013709, Khwarazm and Samarkand in 711\u2013712 and Farghana in 713. During Qutayba's campaigns in conquering the Bukharan territories of Numushkat and Ramithna in 707 CE (88 AH), he faced a coalition force of Turks and the Tang Empire. their army roughly numbered 200,000 soldiers of Ferghana and Sogdiana, led by Kur Maghayun, who the sources identify as the Chinese emperor's nephew. a heavy battle occurred. Qutayba managed to defeat the coalition army in combat, driving its commander to retreat, and then led his army back to his base at Merv. He established Arab garrisons and tax administrations in Samarkand and Bukhara and demolished their Zoroastrian fire temples. Both cities developed as future centers of Islamic and Arabic learning. Umayyad suzerainty was secured over the rest of conquered Transoxiana through tributary alliances with local rulers, whose power remained intact. From 708/709, al-Hajjaj's kinsman Muhammad ibn al-Qasim conquered northwestern South Asia and established out of this new territory the province of Sind. The massive war spoils netted by the conquests of Transoxiana, Sind and Hispania were comparable to the amounts accrued in the early Muslim conquests during the reign of Caliph Umar.\nAl-Walid I's successor, his brother Sulayman (r.\u2009715\u00a0\u2013\u00a0717), continued his predecessors' militarist policies, but expansion mostly ground to a halt during his reign. The deaths of al-Hajjaj in 714 and Qutayba in 715 left the Arab armies in Transoxiana in disarray. For the next 25 years, no further eastward conquests were undertaken and the Arabs lost territory. The Tang Chinese defeated the Arabs at the Battle of Aksu in 717, forcing their withdrawal to Tashkent. Meanwhile, in 716, the governor of Khurasan, Yazid ibn al-Muhallab, attempted to conquer the principalities of Jurjan and Tabaristan along the southern Caspian coast. His Khurasani and Iraqi troops were reinforced by Syrians, marking their first deployment to Khurasan, but the Arabs' initial successes were reversed by the local Iranian coalition of Farrukhan the Great. Afterward, the Arabs withdrew in return for a tributary agreement.\nOn the Byzantine front, Sulayman took up his predecessor's project to capture Constantinople with increased vigor. His brother Maslama besieged the Byzantine capital from the land, while Umar ibn Hubayra al-Fazari launched a naval campaign against the city. The Byzantines destroyed the Umayyad fleets and defeated Maslama's army, prompting his withdrawal to Syria in 718. The massive losses incurred during the campaign led to a partial retrenchment of Umayyad forces from the captured Byzantine frontier districts, but already in 720, Umayyad raids against Byzantium recommenced. Nevertheless, the goal of conquering Constantinople was effectively abandoned, and the frontier between the two empires stabilized along the line of the Taurus and Anti-Taurus Mountains, over which both sides continued to launch regular raids and counter-raids during the next centuries.\nCaliphate of Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz.\nContrary to expectations of a son or brother succeeding him, Sulayman had nominated his cousin, Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz, as his successor and he took office in 717. After the Arabs' severe losses in the offensive against Constantinople, Umar drew down Arab forces on the caliphate's war fronts, though Narbonne in modern France was conquered during his reign. To maintain stronger oversight in the provinces, Umar dismissed all his predecessors' governors, his new appointees being generally competent men he could control. To that end, the massive viceroyalty of Iraq and the east was broken up.\nUmar's most significant policy entailed fiscal reforms to equalize the status of the Arabs and \"mawali\", thus remedying a long-standing issue which threatened the Muslim community. The jizya (poll tax) on the \"mawali\" was eliminated. Hitherto, the jizya, which was traditionally reserved for the non-Muslim majorities of the caliphate, continued to be imposed on non-Arab converts to Islam, while all Muslims who cultivated conquered lands were liable to pay the (land tax). Since avoidance of taxation incentivized both mass conversions to Islam and abandonment of land for migration to the garrison cities, it put a strain on tax revenues, especially in Egypt, Iraq and Khurasan. Thus, \"the Umayyad rulers had a vested interest in preventing the conquered peoples from accepting Islam or forcing them to continue paying those taxes from which they claimed exemption as Muslims\", according to Hawting. To prevent a collapse in revenue, the converts' lands would become the property of their villages and remain liable for the full rate of the .\nIn tandem, Umar intensified the Islamization drive of his Marwanid predecessors, enacting measures to distinguish Muslims from non-Muslims and inaugurating Islamic iconoclasm. His position among the Umayyad caliphs is unusual, in that he became the only one to have been recognized in subsequent Islamic tradition as a righteous and legitimate caliph (\"khalifa\") and not merely someone who was a worldly king (\"malik\").\nLate Marwanid period.\nAfter the death of Umar II, another son of Abd al-Malik, Yazid II (r.\u2009720\u00a0\u2013\u00a0724) became caliph. Not long after his accession, another mass revolt against Umayyad rule was staged in Iraq, this time by the prominent statesman Yazid ibn al-Muhallab. The latter declared a holy war against the Umayyads, took control of Basra and Wasit and gained the support of the Kufan elite. The caliph's Syrian army defeated the rebels and pursued and nearly eliminated the influential Muhallabids, marking the suppression of the last major Iraqi revolt against the Umayyads.\nYazid II reversed Umar II's equalization reforms, reimposing the jizya on the , which sparked revolts in Khurasan in 721 or 722 that persisted for some twenty years and met strong resistance among the Berbers of Ifriqiya, where the Umayyad governor was assassinated by his discontented Berber guards. Warfare on the frontiers was also resumed, with renewed annual raids against the Byzantines and the Khazars in Transcaucasia.\nCaliphate of Hisham and end of expansion.\nThe final son of Abd al-Malik to become caliph was Hisham (r.\u2009724\u00a0\u2013\u00a0743), whose long and eventful reign was above all marked by the curtailment of military expansion. Hisham established his court at Resafa in northern Syria, which was closer to the Byzantine border than Damascus, and resumed hostilities against the Byzantines, which had lapsed following the failure of the last siege of Constantinople. The new campaigns resulted in a number of successful raids into Anatolia, but also in a major defeat (the Battle of Akroinon), and did not lead to any significant territorial expansion.\nFrom the caliphate's north-western African bases, a series of raids on coastal areas of the Visigothic Kingdom paved the way to the permanent occupation of most of Iberia by the Umayyads (starting in 711), and on into south-eastern Gaul (last stronghold at Narbonne in 759). Hisham's reign witnessed the end of expansion in the west, following the defeat of the Arab army by the Franks at the Battle of Tours in 732. Arab expansion had already been limited following the Battle of Toulouse in 721. In 739 a major Berber Revolt broke out in North Africa, which was probably the largest military setback in the reign of Caliph Hisham. From it emerged some of the first Muslim states outside the caliphate. It is also regarded as the beginning of Moroccan independence, as Morocco would never again come under the rule of an eastern caliph or any other foreign power until the 20th century. It was followed by the collapse of Umayyad authority in al-Andalus. In India, the Umayyad armies were defeated by the south Indian Chalukya dynasty and by the north Indian Pratiharas, stagnating further eastwards Arab expansion.\nIn the Caucasus, the confrontation with the Khazars peaked under Hisham: the Arabs established Derbent as a major military base and launched several invasions of the northern Caucasus, but failed to subdue the nomadic Khazars. The conflict was arduous and bloody, and the Arab army even suffered a major defeat at the Battle of Marj Ardabil in 730. Marwan ibn Muhammad, the future Marwan II, finally ended the war in 737 with a massive invasion that is reported to have reached as far as the Volga, but the Khazars remained unsubdued.\nHisham suffered still worse defeats in the east, where his armies attempted to subdue both Tokharistan, with its centre at Balkh, and Transoxiana, with its centre at Samarkand. Both areas had already been partially conquered but remained difficult to govern. Once again, a particular difficulty concerned the question of the conversion of non-Arabs, especially the Sogdians of Transoxiana. Following the Umayyad defeat in the \"Day of Thirst\" in 724, Ashras ibn 'Abd Allah al-Sulami, governor of Khurasan, promised tax relief to those Sogdians who converted to Islam but went back on his offer when it proved too popular and threatened to reduce tax revenues from the province.\nDiscontent among the Khorasani Arabs rose sharply after the losses suffered in the Battle of the Defile in 731. In 734, al-Harith ibn Surayj led a revolt that received broad backing from Arab settlers and native inhabitants alike, capturing Balkh but failing to take Merv. After this defeat, al-Harith's movement seems to have been dissolved. The problem of the rights of non-Arab Muslims would continue to plague the Umayyads to their end.\nThird Fitna.\nHisham was succeeded by Al-Walid II (743\u2013744), the son of Yazid II. Al-Walid is reported to have been more interested in earthly pleasures than in religion, a reputation that may be confirmed by the decoration of the so-called \"desert palaces\" (including Qusayr Amra and Khirbat al-Mafjar) that have been attributed to him. He quickly attracted the enmity of many, both by executing a number of those who had opposed his accession and by persecuting the Qadariyya.\nIn 744, Yazid III, a son of al-Walid I, was proclaimed caliph in Damascus, while his army killed al-Walid II. Yazid III has received a certain reputation for piety and may have been sympathetic to the Qadariyya. He died a mere six months into his reign.\nYazid had appointed his brother, Ibrahim, as his successor, but Marwan II (744\u2013750), the grandson of Marwan I, led an army from the northern frontier and entered Damascus in December 744, where he was proclaimed caliph. Marwan immediately moved the capital north to Harran, in present-day Turkey. A rebellion soon broke out in Syria, perhaps due to resentment over the relocation of the capital, and in 746 Marwan razed the walls of Homs and Damascus in retaliation.\nMarwan also faced significant opposition from Kharijites in Iraq and Iran, who put forth first Dahhak ibn Qays and then Abu Dulaf as rival caliphs. In 747, Marwan managed to reestablish control of Iraq, but by this time a more serious threat had arisen in Khorasan.\nAbbasid Revolution and fall.\nThe Hashimiyya movement (a sub-sect of the Kaysanites Shia), led by the Abbasid family, overthrew the Umayyad caliphate. The Abbasids were members of the Hashim clan, rivals of the Umayyads, but the word \"Hashimiyya\" seems to refer specifically to Abu Hashim, a grandson of Ali and son of Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyya. According to certain traditions, Abu Hashim died in 717 in Humeima in the house of Muhammad ibn Ali, the head of the Abbasid family, and before dying named Muhammad ibn Ali as his successor. This tradition allowed the Abbasids to rally the supporters of the failed revolt of Mukhtar, who had represented themselves as the supporters of Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyya.\nBeginning around 719, Hashimiyya missions began to seek adherents in Khurasan. Their campaign was framed as one of proselytism (dawah). They sought support for a \"member of the family\" of Muhammad, without making explicit mention of the Abbasids. These missions met with success both among Arabs and non-Arabs (mawali), although the latter may have played a particularly important role in the growth of the movement.\nAround 746, Abu Muslim assumed leadership of the Hashimiyya in Khurasan. In 747, he successfully initiated an open revolt against Umayyad rule, which was carried out under the sign of the black flag. He soon established control of Khurasan, expelling its Umayyad governor, Nasr ibn Sayyar, and dispatched an army westwards. Kufa fell to the Hashimiyya in 749, the last Umayyad stronghold in Iraq, Wasit, was placed under siege, and in November of the same year Abul Abbas as-Saffah was recognized as the new caliph in the mosque at Kufa. At this point Marwan mobilized his troops from Harran and advanced toward Iraq. In January 750 the two forces met in the Battle of the Zab, and the Umayyads were defeated. Damascus fell to the Abbasids in April, and in August, Marwan was killed in Egypt. Some Umayyads in Syria continued to resist the takeover. The Umayyad princes Abu Muhammad al-Sufyani, al-Abbas ibn Muhammad, and Hashim ibn Yazid launched revolts in Syria and the Islamic\u2013Byzantine frontier around late 750, but they were defeated.\nThe victors desecrated the tombs of the Umayyads in Syria, sparing only that of Umar II, and most of the remaining members of the Umayyad family were tracked down and killed. When Abbasids declared amnesty for members of the Umayyad family, eighty gathered to receive pardons, and all were massacred. One grandson of Hisham, Abd al-Rahman I, survived, escaped across North Africa, and established an emirate in Moorish Iberia (Al-Andalus). In a claim unrecognized outside of al-Andalus, he maintained that the Umayyad Caliphate, the true, authentic caliphate, more legitimate than the Abbasids, was continued through him in C\u00f3rdoba. It was to survive for centuries.\nSome Umayyads also survived in Syria, and their descendants would once more attempt to restore their old regime during the Fourth Fitna. Two Umayyads, Abu al-Umaytir al-Sufyani and Maslama ibn Ya'qub, successively seized control of Damascus from 811 to 813, and declared themselves caliphs. However, their rebellions were suppressed.\nPrevit\u00e9-Orton argues that the reason for the decline of the Umayyads was the rapid expansion of Islam. During the Umayyad period, mass conversions brought Persians, Berbers, Copts, and Aramaic to Islam. These \"mawalis\" (clients) were often better educated and more civilised than their Arab overlords. The new converts, on the basis of equality of all Muslims, transformed the political landscape. Previt\u00e9-Orton also argues that the feud between Syria and Iraq further weakened the empire.\nAdministration.\nThe early Umayyad caliphs created a stable administration for the empire, following the administrative practices and political institutions of the Byzantine Empire which had ruled the same region previously. These consisted of four main governmental branches: political affairs, military affairs, tax collection, and religious administration. Each of these was further subdivided into more branches, offices, and departments.\nProvinces.\nGeographically, the empire was divided into several provinces, the borders of which changed numerous times during the Umayyad reign. Each province had a governor appointed by the caliph. The governor was in charge of the religious officials, army leaders, police, and civil administrators in his province. Local expenses were paid for by taxes coming from that province, with the remainder each year being sent to the central government in Damascus. As the central power of the Umayyad rulers waned in the later years of the dynasty, some governors neglected to send the extra tax revenue to Damascus and created great personal fortunes.\nGovernment workers.\nAs the empire grew, the number of qualified Arab workers was too small to keep up with the rapid expansion of the empire. Therefore, Muawiya allowed many of the local government workers in conquered provinces to keep their jobs under the new Umayyad government. Thus, much of the local government's work was recorded in Greek, Coptic, and Persian. It was only during the reign of Abd al-Malik that government work began to be regularly recorded in Arabic.\nMilitary.\nThe Umayyad army was mainly Arab, with its core consisting of those who had settled in urban Syria and the Arab tribes who originally served in the army of the Eastern Roman Empire in Syria. These were supported by tribes in the Syrian desert and in the frontier with the Byzantines, as well as Christian Syrian tribes. Soldiers were registered with the Army Ministry, the Diwan Al-Jaysh, and were salaried. The army was divided into junds based on regional fortified cities. The Umayyad Syrian forces specialized in close order infantry warfare and favored using a kneeling spear wall formation in battle, probably as a result of their encounters with Roman armies. This was radically different from the original Bedouin style of mobile and individualistic fighting.\nCoinage.\nThe Byzantine and Sassanid Empires relied on money economies before the Muslim conquest and that system remained in effect during the Umayyad period. Byzantine coinage was used until 658; Byzantine gold coins were still in use until the monetary reforms c.\u2009700. In addition to this, the Umayyad government began to mint its own coins in Damascus, which were initially similar to pre-existing coins but evolved in an independent direction. These were the first coins minted by a Muslim government in history.\nEarly Islamic coins re-used Byzantine and Sasanian iconography directly but added new Islamic elements. So-called \"Arab-Byzantine\" coins replicated Byzantine coins and were minted in Levantine cities before and after the Umayyads rose to power. Some examples of these coins, likely minted in Damascus, copied the coins of Byzantine emperor Heraclius, including a depiction of the emperor and his son Heraclius Constantine. On the reverse side, the traditional Byzantine cross-on-steps image was modified to avoid any explicitly non-Islamic connotation.\nIn the 690s, under Abd al-Malik's reign, a new period of experimentations began. Some \"Arab-Sasanian\" coins dated between 692 and 696, associated with the mints in Iraq under governor Bishr ibn Marwan, stopped using the Sasanian image of the fire altar and replaced it with three male figures standing in Arab dress. This was possibly an attempt to depict the act of Muslim prayer or the delivery of the \"khutba\" (Friday sermon). Another coin minted probably between 695 and 698 features the image of a spear under an arch. This has been variously interpreted as representing a \"mihrab\" or a \"sacral arch\", the latter being a late antique motif. The spear is believed to be the spear (\"'anaza\") that Muhammad carried before him when entering the mosque.\nBetween 696 and 699, the caliph introduced a new system of coinage of gold, silver, and bronze. The coins generally featured Arabic inscriptions without any images, ending the earlier iconographic traditions. The main gold unit was the \"dinar\" (from Roman \"denarius\"), which was worth 20 silver coins. It was most likely modeled on the Byzantine \"solidus\". The silver coin was called a \"dirham\" (from Greek \"drachma\"). Its size and shape was based on Sasanian coins and they were minted in much larger quantities than in the earlier Byzantine era. The bronze coin was called a \"fals\" or \"fulus\" (from Byzantine \"follis\").\nOne group of bronze coins from Palestine, dated after the coinage reform of the late 690s, features the image of a seven-branched menorah and then later of a five-branched menorah, topped by an Arabic inscription of the \"shahada\". These images may have been based on Christian representations of the menorah or on earlier Hasmonean models. The switch to a five-branched version may have been intended to further differentiate this depiction from Jewish and Christian versions.\nCentral diwans.\nTo assist the caliph in administration there were six boards at the centre: Diwan al-Kharaj (the Board of Revenue), Diwan al-Rasa'il (the Board of Correspondence), Diwan al-Khatam (the Board of Signet), Diwan al-Barid (the Board of Posts), Diwan al-Qudat (the Board of Justice) and Diwan al-Jund (the Military Board).\nDiwan al-Kharaj.\nThe Central Board of Revenue administered the entire finances of the central government. It also imposed and collected taxes from the empire and disbursed the revenue of the state.\nDiwan al-Rasa'il.\nA regular Board of Correspondence was established under the Umayyads. It issued state missives and circulars to the Central and Provincial Officers. It coordinated the work of all Boards and dealt with all correspondence as the chief secretariat.\nDiwan al-Khatam.\nIn order to reduce forgery, Diwan al-Khatam (Bureau of Registry), a kind of state chancellery, was instituted by Mu'awiyah. It used to make and preserve a copy of each official document before sealing and dispatching the original to its destination. Thus in the course of time a state archive developed in Damascus by the Umayyads under Abd al-Malik. Under the Umayyads, lead seals bearing Arabic text became an important tool in the construction of a distinct Arab and Muslim political entity and which were critical to the proliferation of the state's Islamic orientation.\nDiwan al-Barid.\nMu'awiya introduced the postal service, Abd al-Malik extended it throughout his empire, and Walid made full use of it. Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz developed it further by building caravanserais at stages along the Khurasan highway. Relays of horses were used for the conveyance of dispatches between the caliph and his agents and officials posted in the provinces. The main highways were divided into stages of each and each stage had horses, donkeys, or camels ready to carry the post. Primarily the service met the needs of government officials, but travelers and their important dispatches were also benefited by the system. The postal carriages were also used for the swift transport of troops. They were able to carry fifty to a hundred men at a time. Under governor Yusuf ibn Umar al-Thaqafi, the postal department of Iraq cost 4,000,000 dirhams a year.\nDiwan al-Qudat.\nIn the early period of Islam, justice was administered by Muhammad and the Rashidun caliphs in person. After the expansion of the Caliphate, Umar I had to separate the judiciary from the general administration and appointed the first \"qadi\" in Egypt as early as AD 643/23 AH. After 661, a series of judges served in Egypt during the caliphates of Hisham and Walid II.\nDiwan al-Jund.\nThe Diwan of Umar, assigning annuities to all Arabs and to the Muslim soldiers of other races, underwent a change in the hands of the Umayyads. The Umayyads meddled with the register and the recipients regarded pensions as the subsistence allowance even without being in active service. Hisham reformed it and paid only to those who participated in the battle. On the pattern of the Byzantine system, the Umayyads reformed their army organization in general and divided it into five corps: the center, two wings, vanguards, and rearguards, following the same formation while on the march or on a battlefield. Marwan II (740\u201350) abandoned the old division and introduced the Kurdus (cohort), a small compact body. The Umayyad troops were divided into three divisions: infantry, cavalry, and artillery. Arab troops were dressed and armed in Greek fashion. The Umayyad cavalry used plain and round saddles. The artillery used the arradah (ballista), the manjaniq (mangonel), and the dabbabah or kabsh (battering ram). The heavy engines, siege machines, and baggage were carried on camels behind the army.\nSocial organization.\nThe Umayyad Caliphate had four main social classes:\nThe Muslim Arabs were at the top of the society and saw it as their duty to rule over the conquered areas. The Arab Muslims held themselves in higher esteem than Muslim non-Arabs and generally did not mix with other Muslims.\nAs Islam spread, more and more of the Muslim population consisted of non-Arabs. This caused social unrest, as the new converts were not given the same rights as Muslim Arabs. As conversions increased, tax revenues from non-Muslims also decreased to dangerous lows. These issues continued to worsen until they helped cause the Abbasid Revolt in the 740s.\nNon-Muslims.\nNon-Muslim groups in the Umayyad Caliphate, which included Christians, Jews, Zoroastrians, and pagans, were called dhimmis. They were given a legally protected status as second-class citizens as long as they accepted and acknowledged the political supremacy of the ruling Muslims. More specifically, non-Muslims had to pay a tax, known as jizya, which the Muslims did not have to pay; Muslims would instead pay the zakat tax. If non-Muslims converted to Islam, they would cease paying jizya and would instead pay zakat.\nAlthough the Umayyads were harsh when it came to defeating their Zoroastrian adversaries, they did offer protection and relative religious tolerance to the Zoroastrians who accepted their authority. As a matter of fact, Umar II was reported to have said in one of his letters commanding not to \"destroy a synagogue or a church or temple of fire worshippers (meaning the Zoroastrians) as long as they have reconciled with and agreed upon with the Muslims\". Fred Donner says that Zoroastrians in the northern parts of Iran were hardly penetrated by the \"believers\", winning virtually complete autonomy in-return for tribute-tax or jizyah. Donner adds \"Zoroastrians continued to exist in large numbers in northern and western Iran and elsewhere for centuries after the rise of Islam, and indeed, much of the canon of Zoroastrian religious texts was elaborated and written down during the Islamic period.\"\nChristians and Jews still continued to produce great theological thinkers within their communities, but as time wore on, many of the intellectuals converted to Islam, leading to a lack of great thinkers in the non-Muslim communities. Important Christian writers from the Umayyad period include the theologian John of Damascus, bishop Cosmas of Maiuma, Pope Benjamin I of Alexandria and Isaac of Nineveh.\nAlthough non-Muslims could not hold the highest public offices in the empire, they held many bureaucratic positions within the government. An important example of Christian employment in the Umayyad government is that of Sarjun ibn Mansur. He was a Melkite Christian official of the early Umayyad Caliphate. The son of a prominent Byzantine official of Damascus, he was a favourite of the early Umayyad caliphs Mu'awiya I and Yazid I, and served as the head of the fiscal administration for Syria from the mid-7th century until the year 700, when Caliph Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan dismissed him as part of his efforts to Arabicize the administration of the caliphate. According to the Muslim historians al-Baladhuri and al-Tabari, Sarjun was a \"mawla\" of the first Umayyad caliph, Mu'awiya I (r.\u2009661\u00a0\u2013\u00a0680), serving as his \"secretary and the person in charge of his business\". The hagiographies, although less reliable, also assign to him a role in the administration, even as \"ruler\" (\"archon\" or even \"amir\"), of Damascus and its environs, where he was responsible for collecting the revenue. In this capacity, he is attested in later collections of source material such as that of al-Mas'udi. Sarjun ibn Mansur was replaced by Sulayman ibn Sa'd al-Khushani, another Christian.\nMu'awiya's marriage to Maysun bint Bahdal (Yazid's mother) was politically motivated, as she was the daughter of the chief of the Kalb tribe, which was a large Syriac Orthodox Christian Arab tribe in Syria. The Kalb tribe had remained largely neutral when the Muslims first went into Syria. After the plague that killed much of the Muslim army in Syria, by marrying Maysun, Mu'awiya used the Syriac Orthodox Christians against the Byzantines.\nTom Holland writes that Christians, Jews, Samaritans and Manichaeans were all treated well by Mu'awiya. Mu'awiya even restored Edessa's cathedral after it had been toppled by an earthquake. Holland also writes that, \"Savagely though Mu'awiya prosecuted his wars against the Romans, yet his subjects, no longer trampled by rival armies, no longer divided by hostile watchtowers, knew only peace at last. Justice flourished in his time, and there was great peace in the regions under his control. He allowed everyone to live as they wanted.\"\nArchitecture.\nThe Umayyads constructed grand congregational mosques and palaces within their empire. Most of their surviving monuments are located in the Levant region, their main base of power. They also continued the existing Muslim policy of building new garrison cities (\"amsar\") in their provinces that served as bases for further expansion. Their most famous constructions include the Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem and the Great Mosque of Damascus, while other constructions included desert palaces, such as Khirbat al-Majfar and Qusayr 'Amra. Among these projects, the construction of the Great Mosque in Damascus reflected the diversity of the empire, as Greek, Persian, Coptic, Indian and Maghrebi craftsmen were recruited to build it.\nUnder Umayyad patronage, Islamic architecture was derived from established Byzantine and Sasanian architectural traditions, but it also innovated by combining elements of these styles together, experimenting with new building types, and implementing lavish decorative programs. Byzantine-style mosaics are prominently featured in both the Dome of the Rock and the Great Mosque of Damascus, but the lack of human figures in their imagery was a new trait that demonstrates an Islamic taboo on figural representation in religious art. Palaces were decorated with floor mosaics, frescoes, and relief carving, and some of these included representations of human figures and animals. Umayyad architecture was thus an important transitional period during which early Islamic architecture and visual culture began to develop its own distinct identity.\nThe later offshoot of the Umayyad dynasty in al-Andalus, which ruled the Emirate and subsequent Caliphate of C\u00f3rdoba, also undertook major architectural projects in the Iberian Peninsula such as the Great Mosque of C\u00f3rdoba and Madinat al-Zahra, which influenced later architecture in the western Islamic world.\nLegacy.\nThe Umayyad Caliphate was marked both by territorial expansion and by the administrative and cultural problems that such expansion created. Despite some notable exceptions, the Umayyads tended to favor the rights of the old Arab elite families, and in particular their own, over those of newly converted Muslims (mawali). Therefore, they held to a less universalist conception of Islam than did many of their rivals. As G.R. Hawting has written, \"Islam was in fact regarded as the property of the conquering aristocracy.\"\nDuring the period of the Umayyads, Arabic became the administrative language and the process of Arabization was initiated in the Levant, Mesopotamia, North Africa, and Iberia. State documents and currency were issued in Arabic. Conversions to Islam also created a growing population of Muslims in the territory of the caliphate.\nAccording to one common view, the Umayyads transformed the caliphate from a religious institution (during the Rashidun Caliphate) to a dynastic one. However, the Umayyad caliphs do seem to have understood themselves as the representatives of God on earth, and to have been responsible for the \"definition and elaboration of God's ordinances, or in other words the definition or elaboration of Islamic law.\"\nThe Umayyads have met with a largely negative reception from later Islamic historians, who have accused them of promoting a kingship (\"mulk\", a term with connotations of tyranny) instead of a true caliphate (\"khilafa\"). In this respect it is notable that the Umayyad caliphs referred to themselves not as \"khalifat rasul Allah\" (\"successor of the messenger of God\", the title preferred by the tradition), but rather as \"khalifat Allah\" (\"deputy of God\"). The distinction seems to indicate that the Umayyads \"regarded themselves as God's representatives at the head of the community and saw no need to share their religious power with, or delegate it to, the emergent class of religious scholars.\" In fact, it was precisely this class of scholars, based largely in Iraq, that was responsible for collecting and recording the traditions that form the primary source material for the history of the Umayyad period. In reconstructing this history, therefore, it is necessary to rely mainly on sources, such as the histories of Tabari and Baladhuri, that were written in the Abbasid court at Baghdad.\nThe book \"Al Muwatta\", by Imam Malik, was written in the early Abbasid period in Medina. It does not contain any anti-Umayyad content because it was more concerned with what the Quran and what Muhammad said and was not a history book on the Umayyads. Even the earliest pro-Shia accounts of al-Masudi are more balanced. Al-Masudi's \"Ibn Hisham\" is the earliest Shia account of Mu'awiya. He recounted that Mu'awiya spent a great deal of time in prayer, in spite of the burden of managing a large empire. After killing off most of the Umayyads and destroying the graves of the Umayyad rulers apart from Mu'awiya and Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz, the history books were written during the later Abbasid period are more anti-Umayyad. The books written later in the Abbasid period in Iran are more anti-Umayyad, despite Iran being Sunni at the time. There was much anti-Arab sentiment in Iran after the fall of the Persian Empire.\nModern Arab nationalism regards the period of the Umayyads as part of the Arab Golden Age which it sought to emulate. This is particularly true of Syrian nationalists and the present-day state of Syria, centered like that of the Umayyads on Damascus. The Umayyad banners were white, after the banner of Mu'awiya ibn Abi Sufyan; it is now one of the four Pan-Arab colors which appear in various combinations on the flags of most Arab countries.\nReligious perspectives.\nSunni.\nSome Muslims criticized the Umayyads for having too many non-Muslim, former Roman administrators in their government. As the Muslims took over cities, they left the people's political representatives, the Roman tax collectors, and the administrators in the office. The taxes to the central government were calculated and negotiated by the people's political representatives. Both the central and local governments were compensated for the services each provided. Many Christian cities used some of the taxes to maintain their churches and run their own organizations. Later, the Umayyads were criticized by many Muslims for not reducing the taxes of the people who converted to Islam.\nLater, when Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz came to power, he reduced these taxes. He is therefore praised as one of the greatest Muslim rulers after the four Rashidun caliphs. Imam Abu Muhammad Abdullah ibn Abdul Hakam (who lived in 829 and wrote a biography on Umar Ibn Abd al-Aziz) stated that the reduction in these taxes stimulated the economy and created wealth but it also reduced the government's budget, including eventually the defense budget.\nThe only Umayyad ruler who is unanimously praised by Sunni sources for his devout piety and justice is Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz. In his efforts to spread Islam, he established liberties for the \"Mawali\" by abolishing the jizya tax for converts to Islam. Imam Abu Muhammad Abdullah ibn Abdul Hakam stated that Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz also stopped the personal allowance offered to his relatives, stating that he could only give them an allowance if he gave an allowance to everyone else in the empire. After Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz was poisoned in 720, successive governments tried to reverse Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz's tax policies, but rebellion resulted.\nShias.\nThe negative view of the Umayyads held by Shias is briefly expressed in the Shi'a book \"Sulh al-Hasan\". According to Shia hadiths, which are not considered authentic by Sunnis, Ali described them as the worst Fitna. In Shia sources, the Umayyad Caliphate is widely described as \"tyrannical, anti-Islamic and godless\". Shias point out that the founder of the dynasty, Muawiyah, declared himself a caliph in 657 and went to war against Muhammad's son-in-law and cousin, the ruling caliph Ali, clashing at the Battle of Siffin. Muawiyah also declared his son, Yazid, as his successor in breach of a treaty with Hassan, Muhammad's grandson. Another of Muhammad's grandsons, Husayn ibn Ali, would be killed by Yazid in the Battle of Karbala. Further Shia Imams, Ali ibn Husayn Zayn al-Abidin would be killed at the hands of ruling Umayyad caliphs.\nBahais.\nAsked for an explanation of the prophecies in the Book of Revelation (12:3), `Abdu'l-Bah\u00e1 suggests in Some Answered Questions that the \"great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his heads\", refers to the Umayyad caliphs who \"rose against the religion of Prophet Muhammad and against the reality of Ali\".\nThe seven heads of the dragon are symbolic of the seven provinces of the lands dominated by the Umayyads: Damascus, Persia, Arabia, Egypt, Africa, Andalusia, and Transoxiana. The ten horns represent the ten names of the leaders of the Umayyad dynasty: Abu Sufyan, Muawiya, Yazid, Marwan, Abd al-Malik, Walid, Sulayman, Umar, Hisham, and Ibrahim. Some names were re-used, as in the case of Yazid II and Yazid III, which were not accounted for in this interpretation.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49856", "revid": "20248368", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49856", "title": "Abbasid Caliphate", "text": "Third Islamic caliphate\nThe Abbasid Caliphate or Abbasid Empire was the third Islamic caliphate, founded by a descendant of Muhammad's uncle, Abbas ibn Abd al-Muttalib (566\u2013653 CE), from whom the dynasty derives its name. The preceding Umayyad Caliphate was overthrown by the Abbasid Revolution in 750 CE (132\u00a0AH), after which the Abbasids ruled as caliphs from their base in Iraq, with Baghdad as their capital for most of their history.\nThe Abbasid Revolution had its origins and first successes in the easterly region of Khurasan, far from the Levantine center of Umayyad influence. The Abbasids first centered their government in Kufa, Iraq, but in 762 the second caliph al-Mansur founded the city of Baghdad and made it the capital. Baghdad became a center of science, culture, arts, and invention, ushering in what became known as the Golden Age of Islam. Baghdad housed several key academic institutions, such as the House of Wisdom, and along with its multi-ethnic and multi-religious population, made the city famous as a centre of learning across the world. The Abbasid period was marked by the use of bureaucrats in the government, including the vizier, as well as an in the \"ummah\" (Muslim community) and among the political elites.\nThe height of Abbasid power and prestige is traditionally associated with the reign of Harun al-Rashid (r.\u2009786\u00a0\u2013\u00a0809). The civil war which followed after his death brought new divisions and was followed by significant changes to the character of the state, including the creation of a new professional army recruited mainly from Turkic slaves and the construction of a new capital, Samarra, in 836. The 9th century also saw the provinces becoming increasingly autonomous, giving rise to local dynasties who controlled different regions of the empire, such as the Aghlabids, Tahirids, Samanids, Saffarids, and Tulunids. After a period of turmoil in the 860s, the caliphate regained some stability and its seat returned to Baghdad in 892.\nDuring the 10th century, the caliphs were reduced to mere figureheads, with real political and military power resting in the hands of the Iranian Buyids and the Seljuq Turks, who took control of Baghdad in 945 and 1055, respectively. The Abbasids eventually regained control of Mesopotamia during the reign of Caliph al-Muqtafi (r.\u20091136\u00a0\u2013\u00a01160) and extended their rule into Iran during the reign of Caliph al-Nasir (r.\u20091180\u00a0\u2013\u00a01225). This revival ended in 1258 with the sack of Baghdad by the Mongols under Hulagu Khan and the execution of Caliph al-Musta'sim. A surviving branch of the Abbasid dynasty was reinstated in the Mamluk capital of Cairo in 1261. Though lacking in political power, with the brief exception of Caliph al-Musta'in, the dynasty continued to claim symbolic authority until a few years after the Ottoman conquest of Egypt in 1517, the last Abbasid caliph being al-Mutawakkil III.\nHistory.\nAbbasid Revolution (747\u2013750).\nThe Abbasid caliphs descended from Abbas ibn Abd al-Muttalib, one of the youngest uncles of Muhammad and of the same Banu Hashim clan. This family relation to Muhammad made them appealing to those who were discontented with the rule of the Umayyad caliphs (661\u2013750), who did not descend from the same family. Over the course of their rule, the Umayyads even suppressed several rebellions that attempted to bring other members of Muhammad's family to power. One of the claims that the Abbasids made in the early years of their political movement was that Abu Hashim, the son of Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyya and grandson of Ali, had formally transferred the Imamate () to Muhammad ibn Ali (the great-grandson of Abbas) and thus to the Abbasid family. Muhammad ibn Ali began to campaign in Persia for the return of power to the family of Muhammad, the Hashemites, during the reign of Umar II. Later, after they had attained power and needed to broaden their support among Muslims, the Abbasids supplemented this claim with other claims to justify their legitimacy.\nThe Abbasids also distinguished themselves from the Umayyads by attacking their moral character and administration in general. According to Ira Lapidus, \"The Abbasid revolt was supported largely by Arabs, mainly the aggrieved settlers of Merv with the addition of the Yemeni faction and their Mawali\". The Abbasids also appealed to non-Arab Muslims, known as \"mawali\", who remained outside the kinship-based society of the Arabs and were perceived as a lower class within the Umayyad empire.\nDuring the reign of Marwan II, this opposition culminated in the rebellion of Ibrahim al-Imam, the fourth in descent from Abbas. Supported by the province of Khurasan (eastern Iran), even though the governor opposed them, and the Shi'i Arabs, he achieved considerable success, but was captured in the year 747 and died, possibly assassinated, in prison.\nOn 9 June 747 (15 Ramadan AH 129), Abu Muslim, rising from Khurasan, successfully initiated an open revolt against Umayyad rule, which was carried out under the sign of the Black Standard. Close to 10,000 soldiers were under Abu Muslim's command when the hostilities officially began in Merv. General Qahtaba followed the fleeing governor Nasr ibn Sayyar west defeating the Umayyads at the Battle of Gorgan, the Battle of Nahavand and finally in the Battle of Karbala, all in the year 748.\nIbrahim was captured by Marwan and was killed. The quarrel was taken up by Ibrahim's brother Abdallah, known by the name of Abu al-'Abbas as-Saffah, who defeated the Umayyads in 750 in the battle near the Great Zab and was subsequently proclaimed caliph. After this loss, Marwan fled to Egypt, where he was subsequently killed. The remainder of his family, barring one male, were also eliminated.\nEstablishment and consolidation (750\u2013775).\nImmediately after their victory, al-Saffah (r.\u2009750\u00a0\u2013\u00a0754) sent his forces to Central Asia, where his forces fought against Tang expansion during the Battle of Talas. Al-Saffah focused on putting down numerous rebellions in Syria and Mesopotamia. The Byzantines conducted raids during these early distractions.\nOne of the first major changes effected by Abbasid rule was the move of the caliphate's center of power from Syria to Mesopotamia (present-day Iraq). This was closer to the Persian \"mawali\" support base of the Abbasids and the move addressed their demand for reduced Arab dominance in the empire. However, no definitive capital was yet selected. In these early Abbasid years, Kufa generally served as the administrative capital, but the caliphs were wary of the Alid sympathies in the city and did not always reside here. In 752, al-Saffah built a new city called al-Hashimiyya, at an uncertain location, most likely near Kufa. Later that same year, he moved to Anbar, where he built a new settlement for his Khurasani soldiers and a palace for himself.\nIt was al-Saffah's successor, Abu Ja'far al-Mansur (r.\u2009754\u00a0\u2013\u00a0775) who firmly consolidated Abbasid rule and faced down internal challenges. His uncle, Abdallah ibn Ali, the victor over the Umayyads at the Battle of the Zab, was the most serious potential rival for leadership and al-Mansur sent Abu Muslim, the Khurasani revolutionary commander, against him in 754. After Abu Muslim successfully defeated him, al-Mansur then turned to eliminate Abu Muslim himself. He arranged to have him arrested and executed in 755.\nOn the western frontier, the Abbasids were unable to re-assert caliphal control over the western and central Maghreb, which the Umayyads had lost in the 740s. One member of the Umayyad dynasty, Abd ar-Rahman, also managed to escape the purge of his family and established independent rule in al-Andalus (present-day Spain and Portugal) in 756, founding the Umayyad Emirate of C\u00f3rdoba.\nIn 756, al-Mansur had also sent over 4,000 Arab mercenaries to assist the Chinese Tang dynasty in the An Lushan Rebellion against An Lushan. The Abbasids, or \"Black Flags\" as they were commonly called, were known in Tang dynasty chronicles as the \"h\u0113iy\u012b D\u00e0sh\u00ed\", \"The Black-robed Tazi\" () (\"Tazi\" being a borrowing from Persian \"T\u0101z\u012b\", the word for \"Arab\"). Later, Caliph Harun al-Rashid sent embassies to the Chinese Tang dynasty and established good relations with them. After the war, these embassies remained in China with al-Rashid establishing an alliance with China. Several embassies from the Abbasid Caliphs to the Chinese court have been recorded in the \"Old Book of Tang\", the most important being those of al-Saffah, al-Mansur, and Harun al-Rashid.\nIn 762, al-Mansur suppressed a rebellion in the Hejaz led by al-Nafs al-Zakiyya, a descendant from Ali ibn Abi Talib, whose challenge to the Abbasid claim to leadership was based on his Alid lineage and thus presented a serious political threat. He was defeated by an Abbasid army led by Isa ibn Musa. It was after this victory, in 762, that al-Mansur finally established a proper Abbasid capital, Baghdad \u2013 officially called \"Madinat al-Salam\" ('City of Peace') \u2013 located on the Tigris River, near the former ancient capital city of Ctesiphon. Prior to this, he had continued to consider multiple sites for a capital, including al-Hashimiyya, which he used as a capital for a while, and al-Rumiyya (near the ruins of Ctesiphon), which he used for a few months. Various other sites in the region also appear to have served as \"capitals\" under either al-Saffah or al-Mansur prior to the founding of Baghdad.\nAl-Mansur centralised the judicial administration and, later, Harun al-Rashid established the institution of Great Qadi to oversee it. The Umayyad empire was mostly Arab; however, the Abbasids progressively became made up of more and more converted Muslims in which the Arabs were only one of many ethnicities. The Abbasids had depended heavily on the support of Persians in their overthrow of the Umayyads. Al-Mansur welcomed non-Arab Muslims to his court. While this helped integrate Arab and Persian cultures, it alienated many of their Arab supporters, particularly the Khurasani Arabs who had supported them in their battles against the Umayyads.\nGolden age (775\u2013861).\nThe Abbasid leadership had to work hard in the last half of the 8th century (750\u2013800) under several competent caliphs and their viziers to usher in the administrative changes needed to keep order of the political challenges created by the far-flung nature of the empire, and the limited communication across it. It was also during this early period of the dynasty, in particular during the rule of al-Mansur, Harun al-Rashid, and al-Ma'mun, that its reputation and power were created.\nThe position of \"wazir\" (vizier) developed in this period. It was initially akin to a secretary, but under the tenure of the Barmakids, an Iranian family close to the Abbasids, the position became powerful and Harun al-Rashid delegated state affairs to them for many years. This resulted in a more ceremonial role for many Abbasid caliphs compared with caliphal rule under the Umayyads; the viziers began to exert greater influence, and the role of the caliph's aristocracy was slowly replaced by a Barmakid bureaucracy. At the western end of the empire, Harun al-Rashid agreed to grant the province of Ifriqiya (centered in present-day Tunisia) as a hereditary emirate to Ibrahim ibn al-Aghlab, who founded the Aghlabid dynasty there.\nUnder Harun al-Rashid's reign (r.\u2009786\u00a0\u2013\u00a0809), the Abbasid Empire reached its peak. His father, al-Mahdi (r.\u2009775\u00a0\u2013\u00a0785), restarted the fighting with the Byzantines, and his sons continued the conflict until Empress Irene pushed for peace. After several years of peace, Nikephoros I broke the treaty, then fended off multiple incursions during the first decade of the 9th century. These Abbasid attacks pushed into the Taurus Mountains, culminating with a victory at the Battle of Krasos and the massive invasion of 806, led by al-Rashid himself. Harun al-Rashid's navy also proved successful, taking Cyprus. Al-Rashid then focused on the rebellion of Rafi ibn al-Layth in Khurasan and died while there.\nDomestically, al-Rashid pursued policies similar to those of his father al-Mahdi. He released many of the Umayyads and Alids his brother al-Hadi (r.\u2009785\u00a0\u2013\u00a0786) had imprisoned and declared amnesty for all political groups of the Quraysh. While Baghdad remained the official capital, al-Rashid chose to reside in Raqqa from 796 until the end of his reign. In 802, he established an unusual succession plan which decreed that his son al-Amin would inherit the title of Caliph and have control of Iraq and the western empire while his other son al-Ma'mun would rule Khurasan and most eastern parts of the empire. In 803, he turned on and imprisoned or killed most of the Barmakids, who had wielded administrative power on his behalf. The reasons for this sudden and ruthless move remain unclear and have been the subject of much discussion by contemporary writers and later historians.\nAl-Rashid's decision to split the succession proved to be damaging to the longevity of the empire. After his death in 809, his succession pact eventually collapsed and the empire was split by a civil war between al-Amin in Iraq and al-Ma'mun in Khurasan. This ended with a successful siege of Baghdad by al-Ma'mun's forces. When the city fell in 813, al-Amin was captured and executed on the orders of al-Ma'mun's general, Tahir ibn Husayn. This marked the first time that an Abbasid ruler was publicly executed and it irrevocably damaged the prestige of the caliphate.\nAl-Ma'mun became caliph and ruled until his death in 833. He initially ruled the empire from his established base in Merv, Khurasan, where his main support was found, but this prolonged the discontent and instability in Iraq and triggered further fighting in the years following his victory. In 817, he officially declared an Alid, 'Ali al-Rida, as his heir, instead of an Abbasid family member, perhaps hoping to promote Muslim unity, but the move backfired. Eventually, he was compelled to step back from these policies and move his court to Baghdad, where he arrived in August 819. After this, the rest of his reign was relatively peaceful. Exceptions included a rebellion in Azerbaijan by the Khurramites, supported by the Byzantines, which continued until 837. He also repulsed a Byzantine attack on Syria around 829, followed by counter-attacks into Anatolia, and suppressed a rebellion in Egypt in 832.\nThe later years of al-Ma'mun's reign are known for his intellectual interests and patronage. The so-called \"translation movement\" \u2014 the state-sponsored translation of scientific and literary works of antiquity into Arabic \u2014 that had begun under his predecessors was pushed even further during this time and al-Ma'mun shifted its focus to ancient Greek works of science and philosophy. In matters of religion, his interest in philosophy spurred him to endorse Mu'tazilism, the rationalist school of Islamic thought. Under its influence, he officially endorsed the doctrine of createdness of the Qur'an in 827. In 833, he went further and forcibly imposed it on the \"ulama\", the Sunni religious scholars. This controversial policy, known as the \"Mihna\", was eventually abandoned in 848. Ultimately, it failed to convince the Sunni \"ulama\" and instead contributed to the emergence of the latter as a more cohesive social class whose views and interests did not always align with the caliph.\nFollowing the civil war between al-Amin and al-Ma'mun, the traditional mainstay of the Abbasid army, the \"Khurasaniyya\" and \"'Abna al-dawla\", were no longer seen as reliable and the caliphs sought to recruit a new type of army whose loyalty could be better assured. This process began under al-Ma'mun but it is his brother and successor, al-Mu'tasim (r.\u2009833\u00a0\u2013\u00a0842), who is known for its more radical implementation. Soldiers were recruited from several new sources, but the most important, especially under al-Mu'tasim, were the group referred to by Arabic chronicles as \"Turks\" (), who appear to have been mainly Turkic people from Central Asia. Some modern scholars refer to them as Mamluks, marking them as the antecedent of the later slave-soldiers known by that term, but their exact legal status has been a subject of scholarly debate. Many, perhaps the majority, were originally purchased or captured slaves, but they were paid regular salaries and thus likely manumitted. In any case, these outsiders did not have political ties among the traditional elites and thus their loyalty was to the caliph alone.\nThese troops were likely the first standing army of the caliphate and provided the caliph with a strong base of military support. However, the influx of new foreign troops into the capital created tensions with its inhabitants and with older elites. This was one of the main reasons why, in 836, al-Mu'tasim decided to found a new capital, Samarra, on an open site to the north of Baghdad. The new capital housed the caliph's army, allowed for the unhindered construction of massive new palaces, and became the focus of an even more elaborate courtly culture.\nAl-Mu'tasim's reign marked the end of the strong caliphs. He strengthened his personal army with the Mamluks and promptly restarted the war with the Byzantines. Though his attempt to seize Constantinople failed when his fleet was destroyed by a storm, his military excursions were generally successful, culminating with a resounding victory in the Sack of Amorium.\nPolitical fragmentation (861\u2013945).\nFrom the ninth century onward, the Abbasids found they could no longer keep together a centralized polity from Baghdad, which had grown larger than that of Rome. As mentioned, Harun al-Rashid had already granted the province of Ifriqiya to the Aghlabids, who ruled this region as an autonomous vassal state until its fall to the Fatimids in 909. In al-Ma'mun's reign, Tahir ibn Husayn (al-Ma'mun's general in the civil war) was appointed viceroy of Iran and most of the eastern regions of the empire from 821 onward. His descendants, the Tahirids, continued to govern in this position with significant autonomy until 873, although they remained loyal to the caliph and used only the title of \"amir\". From their capital at Nishapur, they were important patrons of Arabic literature and Sunni religious scholarship, in addition to making major improvements to agriculture. In Transoxiana, the Persian Samanids of Bukhara and Samarkand ruled as local governors, initially under the Tahirids. They oversaw the development of the region's cities into major trade centers, profiting from long-distance trade between China, Central Asia, Eastern Europe, and the Middle East.\nThe reign of al-Mutawakkil (r.\u2009847\u00a0\u2013\u00a0861) was characterized by the caliph's extravagant spending, his attempts to further consolidate power within the state, and his replacement of the \"Mihna\" policy with support for more orthodox Sunni scholars, in particular the Hanbali school. In 853, the Byzantines sacked Damietta in Egypt, and the caliph responded by sending troops into Anatolia, who sacked and marauded until they were eventually annihilated in 863.\nAl-Mutawakkil's lifestyle and spending weakened his support among the military. In 861, he was murdered at a party by a group of Turkish soldiers. This was the first time the Abbasid military intervened so directly and violently at court and it set a precedent for further coups. The following period, sometimes known as the \"Anarchy at Samarra\" (861\u2013870), saw four different caliphs come and go. While they each attempted to reassert their authority, they were at the mercy of military and political factions. Tax collection lapsed and, along with al-Mutawakkil's previous spending, this left the state short on funds, which exacerbated the infighting. In 865, the Turkish soldiers of Samarra even besieged Baghdad to overthrow the caliph al-Musta'in and, when the city fell the following year, they replaced him with al-Mu'tazz. The latter was overthrown by the same faction in 869 and replaced by al-Muhtadi, who was similarly overthrown in 870. Al-Muhtadi was succeeded by al-Mu'tamid, who was finally able to restore some order, in large part thanks to the help of his brother al-Muwaffaq, who kept the military under control and ran most government affairs. The restoration was hampered by the Zanj rebellion, which erupted in 869 and threatened the center of Abbasid control in Iraq. This major threat was not brought under control until a determined campaign was launched in 879.\nBy the 870s, Egypt became autonomous under Ahmad ibn Tulun and his Tulunid successors, though they continued to acknowledge the caliph and generally sent tribute to Baghdad. For a time, they even controlled Syria and parts of the Jazira (Upper Mesopotamia). In 882, the caliph al-Mu'tamid even tried to move his residence to Egypt at Ibn Tulun's invitation, though this move was aborted by the intervention of al-Muwaffaq.\nIn the east, the Saffarids were former soldiers in the Abbasid army who were stationed in Sistan and remained there as local strongmen. They began to challenge the Tahirids from 854 onward and in 873 they captured Nishapur, ending Tahirid rule. They marched on Baghdad in 876 but were defeated by al-Muwaffaq. The two sides were forced to come to terms and the Abbasids allowed the Saffarids to rule over Sistan, Fars, Kirman, and Khurasan.\nIn 898, al-Mu'tadid set the Saffarids and Samanids against each other by formally endorsing a Saffarid claim over Transoxiana, the Samanid domain. The Samanids emerged triumphant in battle and were able to expand their control thenceforth to Khurasan, while the Saffarids were contained further south. The Samanids never threatened Iraq or western Iran, but they were also not as close to the caliphs as their Tahirid predecessors and in practice they were almost entirely independent of Baghdad. They became even greater patrons of religion and the arts than the Tahirids. They still maintained an orthodox Sunni ideology but they differed from their predecessors by promoting the Persian language.\nThere was a brief Abbasid political and military revival at the end of the 9th century, especially under the policies of caliphs al-Mu'tadid (r.\u2009892\u00a0\u2013\u00a0902) and al-Muktafi (r.\u2009902\u00a0\u2013\u00a0908). Under al-Mu'tadid, the capital was moved from Samarra back to Baghdad. Incursions by the Qarmatians and allied Bedouin tribes posed a serious threat from 899 onwards, but the Abbasid army, led by Muhammad ibn Sulayman, won a reprieve against them in 904 and 907. In 905, the same general invaded Egypt and overthrew the weakened Tulunids, re-establishing Abbasid control to the west. By the time caliph al-Muktafi died in 908, the Abbasid revival was at its peak and a strong centralized state was in place again.\nAfter his death, however, the state became dominated by feuding bureaucrats. Under al-Muqtadir (r.\u2009908\u00a0\u2013\u00a0932), the Abbasid court continued to project power and wealth publicly but the politics and financial policies of the time compromised the caliphate's sustainability in the long-term. It was in this period that the practice of giving out \"iqta\"s (fiefs in the form of tax farms) as favours began, which had the effect of reducing the caliphate's own tax revenues.\nIn 909, North Africa was lost to the Fatimid dynasty, an Isma'ili Shia sect tracing its roots to Muhammad's daughter Fatima. The Fatimids took control of Ifriqiya from the Aghlabids and eventually conquered Egypt in 969, where they established their capital, Cairo, near Fustat. By the end of the century, they were one of the main political and ideological challenges to Sunni Islam and the Abbasids, contesting the Abbasids for the titular authority of the Islamic \"ummah\". The challenge of the Fatimid Caliphate only ended with their downfall in the 12th century.\nUnder the caliph al-Radi (r.\u2009934\u00a0\u2013\u00a0941), Baghdad's authority declined further as local governors refused to send payments to the capital. The Ikhshidids ruled Egypt and Syria autonomously prior to the Fatimid takeover. Even in Iraq, many governors refused to obey and the caliph was unable to send armies against them. Al-Radi was forced to invite the governor of Wasit, Muhammad ibn Ra'iq, to take over the administration under the newly created position of \"amir al-umara\" (\"Commander of Commanders\"). Ibn Ra'iq disbanded the salaried army of the caliph and reduced much of the government's bureaucratic infrastructure, including the traditional vizierate, thus removing much of the Abbasid state's basis for power. He was overthrown in 938 and the following years were bogged down in political turmoil.\nAl-Mustakfi had a short reign from 944 to 946, and it was during this period that the Persian faction known as the Buyids from Daylam swept into power and assumed control over the bureaucracy in Baghdad. According to the history of Miskawayh, they began distributing \"iqta\"s to their supporters. This period of localized secular control was to last nearly 100 years.\nOutside Iraq, all the autonomous provinces slowly took on the characteristic of de facto states with hereditary rulers, armies, and revenues and operated under only nominal caliph suzerainty, which may not necessarily be reflected by any contribution to the treasury, such as the Soomro emirs that had gained control of Sindh and ruled the entire province from their capital of Mansura. Mahmud of Ghazni took the title of sultan, as opposed to the \"amir\" that had been in more common usage, signifying the Ghaznavid Empire's independence from caliphal authority, despite Mahmud's ostentatious displays of Sunni orthodoxy and ritual submission to the caliph. In the 11th century, the loss of respect for the caliphs continued, as some Islamic rulers no longer mentioned the caliph's name in the Friday \"khutba\", or struck it off their coinage.\nBuyid and Seljuq control (945\u20131118).\nDespite the power of the Buyid amirs, the Abbasids retained a highly ritualized court in Baghdad, as described by the Buyid bureaucrat Hilal al-Sabi', and they retained a certain influence over Baghdad as well as religious life. As Buyid power waned with the rule of Baha' al-Daula, the caliphate was able to regain some measure of strength. The caliph al-Qadir, for example, led the ideological struggle against the Shia with writings such as the \"Baghdad Manifesto\". The caliphs kept order in Baghdad itself, attempting to prevent the outbreak of \"fitna\"s in the capital, often contending with the \"ayyarun\".\nWith the Buyid dynasty on the wane, a vacuum was created that was eventually filled by the dynasty of Oghuz Turks known as the Seljuqs. By 1055, the Seljuqs had wrested control from the Buyids and Abbasids, and took temporal power. When the amir and former slave Basasiri took up the Shia Fatimid banner in Baghdad in 1056\u201357, the caliph al-Qa'im was unable to defeat him without outside help. Toghril Beg, the Seljuq sultan, restored Baghdad to Sunni rule and took Iraq for his dynasty.\nOnce again, the Abbasids were forced to deal with a military power that they could not match, though the Abbasid caliph remained the titular head of the Islamic community. The succeeding sultans Alp Arslan and Malikshah, as well as their vizier Nizam al-Mulk, took up residence in Persia, but held power over the Abbasids in Baghdad. When the dynasty began to weaken in the 12th century, the Abbasids gained greater independence once again.\nRevival of caliphal state (1118\u20131258).\nCaliph al-Mustarshid (r.\u20091118\u00a0\u2013\u00a01135) was the first caliph to build an army and to lead it in battle since the 10th century. He recruited Kurdish and Arab Bedouin tribes and re-fortified Baghdad. His first concern was not the Seljuks but the Mazyadids of Hilla in central Iraq, whom he met in battle in 1123. His bid for independence was ultimately unsuccessful, as he was defeated by a Seljuk army in 1135 and assassinated soon after.\nUnder al-Muqtafi (r.\u20091136\u00a0\u2013\u00a01160), a new caliphal state began to emerge with the help of his vizier Ibn Hubayra. Ibn Hubayra concentrated on reasserting authority in Iraq while the Seljuk Empire deteriorated. The Abbasids successfully defended Baghdad against the Seljuqs in the siege of 1157 and then conquered their Mazyadid enemies in Hilla in 1162. By the end of al-Muqtafi's reign, Baghdad controlled a state stretching from Basra in the south to the edges of Mosul in the north. After over two hundred years of Abbasid subjection to foreign dynasties, Caliph al-Mustanjid (r.\u20091160\u00a0\u2013\u00a01170) formally declared independence from the Seljuk sultans in 1165, when he dropped their names from Abbasid coinage. Initially, the caliphs were still vulnerable to the power of the viziers, but al-Mustadi (r.\u20091170\u00a0\u2013\u00a01180) was able to further rally some support from the Baghdad public as well as symbolic support abroad from the Ayyubid sultan Saladin and the Rum Seljuk sultan Kilij Arslan II.\nThe long reign of Caliph al-Nasir (r.\u20091180\u00a0\u2013\u00a01225) marked a definitive shift in late Abbasid power. He reinvigorated public displays of caliphal prestige, removed officials who were too powerful, engaged in diplomacy with regions beyond Iraq, and extended his control over former Seljuk territories in western Iran \u2014 including Isfahan, Hamadan, Qazvin and Zanjan. He sought to build up his influence among Muslim rulers abroad largely through the Sufi-inspired \"futuwwa\" brotherhood that he headed. Under caliph al-Mustansir (r.\u20091226\u00a0\u2013\u00a01242), the Abbasid state achieved significant stability and many of the same policies continued. He built the Mustansiriyya Madrasa, inaugurated in 1234, the first madrasa to teach all four Sunni \"maddhab\"s (schools of jurisprudence) and the first madrasa commissioned by an Abbasid caliph.\nMongol invasion and end.\nIn 1206, Genghis Khan established a powerful dynasty among the Mongols of Central Asia. During the 13th century, this Mongol Empire conquered most of the Eurasian land mass, including both China in the east and much of the old Islamic caliphate and the Kievan Rus' in the west. In 1252, Hulagu Khan, a grandson of Genghis Khan and brother of the new Mongol ruler, M\u00f6ngke Khan, was placed in charge of a new western campaign to the Middle East that would culminate in the conquest of Baghdad in 1258.\nIn the years leading up the Mongol invasion, Baghdad's strength was sapped by political rivalries, sectarian tensions between Sunnis and Shias, and damaging floods. In 1257, after destroying the Assassins in Iran, Hulagu wrote to the Abbasid caliph, al-Musta'sim, demanding his submission. The caliph refused, with Hulagu's status as a non-Muslim (unlike the earlier Buyids and Seljuks) likely a factor. There followed months of diplomacy, during which the Mongols may have been informed of Baghdad's weakness by correspondence with the caliph's vizier, Ibn al-Alqami, a Shia who was later accused of colluding with them.\nThe Mongols began their siege of the city on 29 January 1258. On 10 February, al-Musta'sim agreed to meet with Hulagu, who demanded that the caliph order the defenders to stand down and come out of the city in exchange for mercy. The caliph complied, but the Mongols slaughtered the population and then began the sack of the city on 13 February. Contemporary accounts describe destruction, looting, rape, and killing on a massive scale over many days, with hundreds of thousands killed and the city reduced to near-empty ruins, though some, like the Christian and Shia communities, were spared. The Mongols feared rumours that a supernatural disaster would strike if the blood of al-Musta'sim, a direct descendant of Muhammad's uncle and part of a dynasty that had reigned for five centuries, was spilled. As a precaution and in accordance with a Mongol taboo against spilling royal blood, Hulagu had al-Musta'sim wrapped in a carpet and trampled to death by horses on 20 February 1258. The caliph's immediate family was also executed, with the lone exceptions of his youngest son who was sent to Mongolia and a daughter who became a slave in the harem of Hulagu.\nThe fall of Baghdad marked the effective end of the Abbasid Caliphate. It made a deep impression on contemporary and later writers both inside and outside the Muslim world, some of whom created legendary stories about the last caliph's demise. It is also traditionally seen as the approximate end to the \"classical age\" or \"golden age\" of Islamic civilization. The events brought profound geopolitical changes to the traditional lands of the Islamic caliphate, with Iraq, Iran, and most of the eastern lands falling under Mongol control while other Muslim rulers retained the lands to the west. Mongol expansion further west was eventually halted by the Mamluks of Egypt at the Battle of Ain Jalut in 1260, followed by the conflict between the Ilkhanids (Hulagu and his successors) and their Golden Horde rivals, which diverted Mongol attention.\nAbbasid caliphs in Cairo (1261\u20131517).\nPrior to the Mongol invasion, the later Ayyubid sultans of Egypt had built up an army recruited from slaves, the Mamluks. During a political and military crisis in 1250, the Mamluks seized power and established what is now known as the Mamluk Sultanate. Following the devastation of Baghdad in 1258 and in an effort to secure political legitimacy for the new regime in Egypt, the Mamluk ruler Baybars invited a surviving member of the Abbasid family to establish himself in Cairo in 1260\u20131261. The new caliph was al-Mustansir II, a brother of the former caliph al-Mustansir. In 1262, he disappeared while leading a small army in an attempt to recapture Baghdad from the Mongols. Baybars subsequently replaced him with al-Hakim I, another Abbasid family member who had just been proclaimed in Aleppo.\nThereafter, the Abbasid caliphs in Cairo continued to exist as a strictly ceremonial but nonetheless important institution within the Mamluk Sultanate, conferring significant prestige on the Mamluks. It continued to be relevant even to other Muslim rulers until the 14th century; for example, the sultans of Delhi, the Muzaffarid sultan Muhammad, the Jalayirid sultan Ahmad, and the Ottoman sultan Bayezid I all sought diplomas of investiture from the caliph or declared nominal allegiance to him. Caliph al-Musta'in even managed to reign as sultan in Cairo for a brief six months in 1412.\nDuring the 15th century, however, the institution of the caliph declined in significance. The last Abbasid caliph in Cairo was al-Mutawakkil III, who was in place when the Ottoman sultan Selim I defeated the Mamluks in 1516 and conquered Egypt in 1517, ending the Mamluk Sultanate. Selim I met with al-Mutawakkil III in Aleppo in 1516, prior to marching into Egypt, and the caliph was then sent to the Ottoman capital of Constantinople (present-day Istanbul), ending the Abbasid caliphate definitively. The idea of a \"caliphate\" subsequently became an ambiguous concept that was occasionally revisited by later Muslim rulers and intellectuals for political or religious reasons. The Ottoman sultans, who were thenceforth the most powerful Muslim rulers in western Asia and the Mediterranean, did not use the title of \"caliph\" at all before the mid-16th century and only did so vaguely and inconsistently afterwards. The claim that al-Mutawakkil III \"transferred\" the office of the caliph to the Ottoman sultan during their meeting in Aleppo is a legend that was elaborated in the 19th century and is not corroborated by contemporary accounts.\nCulture.\nIslamic Golden Age.\nThe Abbasid historical period lasting to the Mongol conquest of Baghdad in 1258 CE is considered the Islamic Golden Age. The Islamic Golden Age was inaugurated by the middle of the 8th century by the ascension of the Abbasid Caliphate and the transfer of the capital from Damascus to Baghdad. The Abbasids were influenced by the Qur'anic injunctions and hadith, such as \"the ink of a scholar is more holy than the blood of a martyr\", stressing the value of knowledge. During this period the Muslim world became an intellectual center for science, philosophy, medicine and education as the Abbasids championed the cause of knowledge and established the House of Wisdom in Baghdad, where both Muslim and non-Muslim scholars sought to translate and gather all the world's knowledge into Arabic. Many classic works of antiquity that would otherwise have been lost were translated into Arabic and Persian and later in turn translated into Turkish, Hebrew and Latin. During this period the Muslim world was a cauldron of cultures which collected, synthesized and significantly advanced the knowledge gained from the Roman, Chinese, Indian, Persian, Egyptian, North African, Ancient Greek and Medieval Greek civilizations. According to Huff, \"[i]n virtually every field of endeavor\u2014in astronomy, alchemy, mathematics, medicine, optics and so forth\u2014the Caliphate's scientists were in the forefront of scientific advance.\"\nLiterature.\nThe best-known fiction from the Islamic world is \"One Thousand and One Nights\", a collection of fantastical folk tales, legends and parables compiled primarily during the Abbasid era. The collection is recorded as having originated from an Arabic translation of a Sassanian-era Persian prototype, with likely origins in Indian literary traditions. Stories from Arabic, Persian, Mesopotamian, and Egyptian folklore and literature were later incorporated. The epic is believed to have taken shape in the 10th century and reached its final form by the 14th century; the number and type of tales have varied from one manuscript to another. All Arabian fantasy tales were often called \"Arabian Nights\" when translated into English, regardless of whether they appeared in \"The Book of One Thousand and One Nights\". This epic has been influential in the West since it was translated in the 18th century, first by Antoine Galland. Many imitations were written, especially in France. Various characters from this epic have themselves become cultural icons in Western culture, such as Aladdin, Sinbad and Ali Baba.\nA famous example of Islamic poetry on romance was \"Layla and Majnun\", an originally Arabic story which was further developed by Iranian, Azerbaijani and other poets in the Persian, Azerbaijani, and Turkish languages. It is a tragic story of undying love much like the later \"Romeo and Juliet\".\nArabic poetry reached its greatest height in the Abbasid era, especially before the loss of central authority and the rise of the Persianate dynasties. Writers like Abu Tammam and Abu Nuwas were closely connected to the caliphal court in Baghdad during the early 9th century, while others such as al-Mutanabbi received their patronage from regional courts.\nUnder Harun al-Rashid, Baghdad was renowned for its bookstores, which proliferated after the making of paper was introduced. Chinese papermakers had been among those taken prisoner by the Arabs at the Battle of Talas in 751. As prisoners of war, they were dispatched to Samarkand, where they helped set up the first Arab paper mill. In time, paper replaced parchment as the medium for writing, and the production of books greatly increased. These events had an academic and societal impact that could be broadly compared to the introduction of the printing press in the West. Paper aided in communication and record-keeping, it also brought a new sophistication and complexity to businesses, banking, and the civil service. In 794, Jafa al-Barmak built the first paper mill in Baghdad, and from there the technology circulated. Harun required that paper be employed in government dealings, since something recorded on paper could not easily be changed or removed, and eventually, an entire street in Baghdad's business district was dedicated to selling paper and books.\nPhilosophy.\nOne of the common definitions for \"Islamic philosophy\" is \"the style of philosophy produced within the framework of Islamic culture\". Islamic philosophy, in this definition is neither necessarily concerned with religious issues, nor is exclusively produced by Muslims. Their works on Aristotle were a key step in the transmission of learning from ancient Greeks to the Islamic world and the West. They often corrected the philosopher, encouraging a lively debate in the spirit of ijtihad. They also wrote influential original philosophical works, and their thinking was incorporated into Christian philosophy during the Middle Ages, notably by Thomas Aquinas.\nThree speculative thinkers, al-Kindi, al-Farabi, and Avicenna, combined Aristotelianism and Neoplatonism with other ideas introduced through Islam, and Avicennism was later established as a result. Other influential Abbasid philosophers include al-Jahiz, and Ibn al-Haytham (Alhacen).\nArchitecture.\nAs power shifted from the Umayyads to the Abbasids, the architectural styles changed also, from Greco-Roman tradition (which features elements of Hellenistic and Roman representative style) to Eastern tradition which retained their independent architectural traditions from Mesopotamia and Persia. The Abbasid architecture was particularly influenced by Sasanian architecture, which in turn featured elements present since ancient Mesopotamia. The Christian styles evolved into a style based more on the Sasanian Empire, utilizing mud bricks and baked bricks with carved stucco. Other architectural innovations and styles were few, such as the four-centered arch, and a dome erected on squinches. Unfortunately, much was lost due to the ephemeral nature of the stucco and luster tiles.\nAnother major development was the creation or vast enlargement of cities as they were turned into the capital of the empire, beginning with the creation of Baghdad in 762, which was planned as a walled city with four gates, and a mosque and palace in the center. Al-Mansur, who was responsible for the creation of Baghdad, also planned the city of Raqqa, along the Euphrates. Finally, in 836, al-Mu'tasim moved the capital to a new site that he created along the Tigris, called Samarra. This city saw 60 years of work, with race-courses and game preserves to add to the atmosphere. Due to the dry remote nature of the environment, some of the palaces built in this era were isolated havens. Al-Ukhaidir Fortress is a fine example of this type of building, which has stables, living quarters, and a mosque, all surrounding inner courtyards. Mesopotamia only has one surviving mausoleum from this era, in Samarra: an octagonal domed structure known as the \"Qubbat al-Sulaibiyya\", which is the first known monumental tomb in Islamic architecture and may be the final resting place of al-Muntasir.\nBaghdad, the epicenter of the empire, was originally organized in a circular fashion next to the Tigris River, with massive brick walls being constructed in successive rings around the core by a workforce of 100,000 with four huge gates (named Kufa, Basra, Khurasan and Syria). The central enclosure of the city contained Mansur's palace of in area and the great mosque of Baghdad, encompassing . Travel across the Tigris and the network of waterways allowing the drainage of the Euphrates into the Tigris was facilitated by bridges and canals servicing the population.\nOutside the Abbasid heartlands, architecture was still influenced by the capital. In present-day Tunisia, the Great Mosque of Kairouan was founded under the Umayyad dynasty but completely rebuilt in the 9th century under the patronage of the Aghlabids, vassals of the Abbasids. The styles utilized were mainly Abbasid. In Egypt, Ahmad Ibn Tulun commissioned the Ibn Tulun Mosque, completed in 879, that is based on the style of Samarra and is now one of the best-preserved Abbasid-style mosques from this period.\nArts.\nThe establishment of Abbasid power based in Iraq, rather than Syria, resulted in a cultural and artistic development influenced not only by the Mediterranean and Middle Eastern traditions but also by connections further afield with India, Central Asia, and China. The importation of Chinese ceramics elicited local imitations but also stirred innovations in local production. Abbasid ceramics became a more important art form with greater emphasis on decoration. A major innovation was the emergence of monochrome and polychrome lustreware, a technical achievement that had an important impact on the wider development of Islamic ceramics. Glassware also became a more important art form and was likely the origin of the lustre technique that was introduced into ceramics. Few textiles have survived but the production of \"tiraz\", textiles with royal inscriptions, is well attested. \nAnother major art form was calligraphy and manuscript production. During the Abbasid period, Arabic calligraphy evolved into a more refined discipline. Rounded Kufic script was typical and became increasingly stylized. Parchment only allowed for a few lines of script, but from the late 8th century onward paper began to be produced. Qur'ans are the main type of book to have survived from this period.\nScience and technology.\nScience.\nA number of medieval thinkers and scientists living under Islamic rule played a role in transmitting Islamic science to the Christian West. In addition, the period saw the recovery of much of the Alexandrian mathematical, geometric and astronomical knowledge, such as that of Euclid and Claudius Ptolemy. These recovered mathematical methods were later enhanced and developed by other Islamic scholars, notably by Persian scientists Al-Biruni and Abu Nasr Mansur.\nChristians (particularly Nestorian Christians) contributed to the Arab Islamic Civilization during the Umayyads and the Abbasids by translating works of Greek philosophers to Syriac and afterwards to Arabic. Nestorians played a prominent role in the formation of Arab culture, with the Academy of Gondishapur being prominent in the late Sassanid, Umayyad and early Abbasid periods. Notably, eight generations of the Nestorian Bukhtishu family served as private doctors to caliphs and sultans between the eighth and eleventh centuries.\nAlgebra was significantly developed by Persian scientist Muhammad ibn M\u016bs\u0101 al-Khw\u0101rizm\u012b during this time in his landmark text, \"Kitab al-Jabr wa-l-Muqabala\", from which the term \"algebra\" is derived. He is thus considered to be the father of algebra by some, although the Greek mathematician Diophantus has also been given this title. The terms \"algorism\" and \"algorithm\" are derived from the name of al-Khwarizmi, who was also responsible for introducing the Arabic numerals and Hindu\u2013Arabic numeral system beyond the Indian subcontinent.\nArab scientist Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen) developed an early scientific method in his \"Book of Optics\" (1021). The most important development of the scientific method was the use of experiments to distinguish between competing scientific theories set within a generally empirical orientation, which began among Muslim scientists. Ibn al-Haytham's empirical proof of the intromission theory of light (that is, that light rays entered the eyes rather than being emitted by them) was particularly important. Ibn al-Haytham was significant in the history of scientific method, particularly in his approach to experimentation, and has been referred to as the \"world's first true scientist\".\nMedicine in medieval Islam was an area of science that advanced particularly during the Abbasids' reign. During the 9th century, Baghdad contained over 800 doctors, and great discoveries in the understanding of anatomy and diseases were made. The clinical distinction between measles and smallpox was described during this time. Famous Persian scientist Ibn Sina (known to the West as Avicenna) produced treatises and works that summarized the vast amount of knowledge that scientists had accumulated, and was very influential through his encyclopedias, \"The Canon of Medicine\" and \"The Book of Healing\". The work of him and many others directly influenced the research of European scientists during the Renaissance.\nAstronomy in medieval Islam was advanced by Al-Battani, who improved the precision of the measurement of the precession of the Earth's axis. The corrections made to the geocentric model by al-Battani, Averroes, Nasir al-Din al-Tusi, Mo'ayyeduddin Urdi and Ibn al-Shatir were later incorporated into the Copernican heliocentric model. The astrolabe, though originally developed by the Greeks, was developed further by Islamic astronomers and engineers, and subsequently brought to medieval Europe.\nMuslim alchemists influenced medieval European alchemists, particularly the writings attributed to J\u0101bir ibn Hayy\u0101n (Geber).\nTechnology.\nIn technology, the Abbasids adopted papermaking from China. The use of paper spread from China into the caliphate in the 8th century CE, arriving in al-Andalus (Islamic Spain) and then the rest of Europe in the 10th century. It was easier to manufacture than parchment, less likely to crack than papyrus, and could absorb ink, making it ideal for making records and copies of the Qur'an. \"Islamic paper makers devised assembly-line methods of hand-copying manuscripts to turn out editions far larger than any available in Europe for centuries.\" It was from the Abbasids that the rest of the world learned to make paper from linen. The knowledge of gunpowder was also transmitted from China via the caliphate, where the formulas for pure potassium nitrate and an explosive gunpowder effect were first developed.\nAdvances were made in irrigation and farming, using new technology such as the windmill. Crops such as almonds and citrus fruit were brought to Europe through al-Andalus, and sugar cultivation was gradually adopted by the Europeans. Apart from the Nile, Tigris and Euphrates, navigable rivers were uncommon, so transport by sea was very important. Navigational sciences were highly developed, making use of a rudimentary sextant (known as a \"kamal\"). When combined with detailed maps of the period, sailors were able to sail across oceans rather than skirt along the coast. Abbasid sailors were also responsible for reintroducing large three masted merchant vessels to the Mediterranean. The name \"caravel\" may derive from an earlier Arab ship known as the \"q\u0101rib\". Arab merchants dominated trade in the Indian Ocean until the arrival of the Portuguese in the 16th century. Hormuz was an important center for this trade. There was also a dense network of trade routes in the Mediterranean, along which Muslim countries traded with each other and with European powers such as Venice or Genoa. The Silk Road crossing Central Asia passed through the Abbasid caliphate between China and Europe.\nEngineers in the Abbasid caliphate made a number of innovative industrial uses of hydropower, and early industrial uses of tidal power, wind power, and petroleum (notably by distillation into kerosene). The industrial uses of watermills in the Islamic world date back to the 7th century, while horizontal-wheeled and vertical-wheeled water mills were both in widespread use since at least the 9th century. By the time of the Crusades, every province throughout the Islamic world had mills in operation, from al-Andalus and North Africa to the Middle East and Central Asia. These mills performed a variety of agricultural and industrial tasks. Abbasid engineers also developed machines (such as pumps) incorporating crankshafts, employed gears in mills and water-raising machines, and used dams to provide additional power to watermills and water-raising machines. Such advances made it possible for many industrial tasks that were previously driven by manual labour in ancient times to be mechanized and driven by machinery instead in the medieval Islamic world. It has been argued that the industrial use of waterpower had spread from Islamic to Christian Spain, where fulling mills, paper mills, and forge mills were recorded for the first time in Catalonia.\nA number of industries were generated during the Arab Agricultural Revolution, including early industries for textiles, sugar, rope-making, matting, silk, and paper. Latin translations of the 12th century passed on knowledge of chemistry and instrument making in particular. The agricultural and handicraft industries also experienced high levels of growth during this period.\nSociety.\nArabization.\nWhile the Abbasids originally gained power by exploiting the social inequalities against non-Arabs in the Umayyad Empire, during Abbasid rule the empire rapidly Arabized, particularly in the Fertile Crescent region (namely Mesopotamia and the Levant) as had begun under Umayyad rule. As knowledge was shared in the Arabic language throughout the empire, many people from different nationalities and religions began to speak Arabic in their everyday lives. Resources from other languages began to be translated into Arabic, and a unique Islamic identity began to form that fused previous cultures with Arab culture, creating a level of civilization and knowledge that was considered a marvel in Europe at the time.\nStatus of women.\nIn contrast to the earlier era, women in Abbasid society were absent from all arenas of the community's central affairs. While their Muslim forebears led men into battle, started rebellions, and played an active role in community life, as demonstrated in the Hadith literature, Abbasid women were ideally kept in seclusion. Conquests had brought enormous wealth and large numbers of slaves to the Muslim elite. The majority of the slaves were women and children, many of whom had been dependents or harem-members of the defeated Sassanian upper classes. In the wake of the conquests an elite man could potentially own a thousand slaves, and ordinary soldiers could have ten people serving them.\nIt was narrated from Ibn Abbas that Muhammad said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is no man whose two daughters reach the age of puberty and he treats them kindly for the time they are together, but they will gain him admittance to Paradise.\nWhoever has three daughters and is patient towards them, and feeds them, gives them to drink, and clothes them from his wealth; they will be a shield for him from the Fire on the Day of Resurrection.\nEven so, slave courtesans (qiyans and jawaris) and princesses produced prestigious and important poetry. Enough survives to give us access to women's historical experiences, and reveals some vivacious and powerful figures, such as the Sufi mystic Raabi'a al-Adwiyya (714\u2013801 CE), the princess and poet 'Ulayya bint al-Mahdi (777\u2013825 CE), and the singing-girls Sh\u0101riyah (c.\u2009815\u2013870 CE), Fadl Ashsha'ira (d. 871 CE) and Arib al-Ma'muniyya (797\u2013890 CE).\nEach wife in the Abbasid harem had an additional home or flat, with her own enslaved staff of eunuchs and maidservants. When a concubine gave birth to a son, she was elevated in rank to umm walad and also received apartments and (slave) servants as a gift.\nTreatment of Jews and Christians.\nThe status and treatment of Jews, Christians, and non-Muslims in the Abbasid Caliphate was a complex and continually changing issue. Non-Muslims were called dhimmis. Dhimmis faced some level of discrimination in Abbasid society: they did not have all the privileges of Muslims and had to pay jizya, a tax on non-Muslims. However, as people of the book (non-Muslim monotheists), Jews and Christians were allowed to practice their religion and were not required to convert.\nOne of the common aspects of the treatment of the dhimmis is that their treatment depended on who the caliph was at the time. Some Abbasid rulers, like Al-Mutawakkil (822\u2013861 CE) imposed strict restrictions on what dhimmis could wear in public, often yellow garments that distinguished them from Muslims. Other restrictions al-Mutawakkil imposed included limiting the role of the dhimmis in government, seizing dhimmi housing and making it harder for dhimmis to become educated. Most other Abbasid caliphs were not as strict as al-Mutawakkil. During the reign of Al-Mansur (754\u2013775 CE), it was common for Jews and Christians to influence the overall culture in the caliphate, specifically in Baghdad. Jews and Christians did this by participating in scholarly work.\nIt was common that laws that were imposed against dhimmis during one caliph's rule were either discarded or not practiced during future caliphs' reigns. Al-Mansur and al-Mutawakkil both instituted laws that forbade non-Muslims from participating in public office. Al-Mansur did not follow his own law very closely, bringing dhimmis back to the caliphate's treasury due to the needed expertise of dhimmis in the area of finance. Al-Mutawakkil followed the law banning dhimmis from public office more seriously, although, soon after his reign, many of the laws concerning dhimmis participating in government were completely unobserved or at least less strictly observed. Even Al-Muqtadir (r.\u2009908\u00a0\u2013\u00a0932\u00a0CE), who held a similar stance as al-Mutawakkil on barring non-Muslims from public office, himself had multiple Christian secretaries, indicating that non-Muslims still had access to many of the most important figures within the caliphate. Past having a casual association or just being a secretary to high-ranking Islamic officials, some of them achieved the second highest office after the caliph: the vizier.\nJews and Christians may have had a lower overall status compared to Muslims in the Abbasid Caliphate, but dhimmis were often allowed to hold respectable and even prestigious occupations in some cases, such as doctors and public officeholders. Jews and Christians were also allowed to be rich even if they were taxed for being a dhimmi. Dhimmis were capable of moving up and down the social ladder, though this largely depended on the particular caliph. An indication as to the social standing of Jews and Christians at the time was their ability to live next to Muslim people. While al-Mansur was ruling the caliphate, for instance, it was not uncommon for dhimmis to live in the same neighborhoods as Muslims. One of the biggest reasons why dhimmis were allowed to hold prestigious jobs and positions in government is that they were generally important to the well-being of the state and were proficient to excellent with the work at hand. Some Muslims in the caliphate took offense to the idea that there were dhimmis in public offices who were in a way ruling over them although it was an Islamic state, while other Muslims were at time jealous of some dhimmis for having a level of wealth or prestige greater than other Muslims, even if Muslims were still the majority of the ruling class. In general, Muslims, Jews, and Christians had close relations that could be considered positive at times, especially for Jews, in contrast to how Jews were being treated in Europe.\nMany of the laws and restrictions that were imposed on dhimmis often resembled other laws that previous states had used to discriminate against a minority religion, specifically Jewish people. Romans in the fourth century banned Jewish people from holding public offices, banned Roman citizens from converting to Judaism, and often demoted Jews who were serving in the Roman military. In direct contrast, there was an event in which two viziers, Ibn al-Furat and Ali ibn Isa ibn al-Jarrah, argued about Ibn al-Furat's decision to make a Christian the head of the military. A previous vizier, Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Bazuri, had done so. These laws predated al-Mansur's laws against dhimmis and often had similar restrictions, although Roman emperors were often much more strict on enforcing these laws than many Abbasid caliphs.\nMost of Baghdad's Jews were incorporated into the Arab community and considered Arabic their native language. Some Jews studied Hebrew in their schools and Jewish religious education flourished. The united Muslim empire allowed Jews to reconstruct links between their dispersed communities throughout the Middle East. The city's Talmudic institute helped spread the rabbinical tradition to Europe, and the Jewish community in Baghdad went on to establish ten rabbinical schools and twenty-three synagogues. Baghdad not only contained the tombs of Muslim saints and martyrs, but also the tomb of Yusha, whose corpse had been brought to Iraq during the first migration of the Jews out of the Levant.\nHolidays.\nThere were large feasts on certain days, as the Muslims of the empire celebrated Christian holidays as well as their own. There were two main Islamic feasts: one marked by the end of Ramadan; the other, \"the Feast of Sacrifice\". The former was especially joyful because children would purchase decorations and sweetmeats; people prepared the best food and bought new clothes. At midmorning, the caliph, wearing Muhammad's thobe, would guide officials, accompanied by armed soldiers to the Great Mosque, where he led prayers. After the prayer, all those in attendance would exchange the best wishes and hug their kin and companions. The festivities lasted for three days. During those limited number of nights, the palaces were lit up and boats on the Tigris hung lights. It was said that Baghdad \"glittered 'like a bride'\". During the Feast of Sacrifice, sheep were butchered in public arenas and the caliph participated in a large-scale sacrifice in the palace courtyard. Afterward, the meat would be divided and given to the poor.\nIn addition to these two holidays, Shias celebrated the birthdays of Fatimah and Ali ibn Abi Talib. Matrimonies and births in the royal family were observed by all in the empire. The announcement that one of the caliph's sons could recite the Koran smoothly was greeted by communal jubilation. When Harun developed this holy talent, the people lit torches and decorated the streets with wreaths of flowers, and his father, Al-Mahdi, freed 500 slaves.\nOf all the holidays imported from other cultures and religions, the one most celebrated in Baghdad (a city with many Persians) was Nowruz, which celebrated the arrival of spring. In a ceremonial ablution introduced by Persian troops, residents sprinkled themselves with water and ate almond cakes. The palaces of the imperial family were lit up for six days and nights. The Abbasids also celebrated the Persian holiday of Mihraj, which marked the onset of winter (signified with pounding drums), and Sadar, when homes burned incense and the masses would congregate along the Tigris to witness princes and viziers pass by.\nMilitary.\nThe Abbasid army amassed an array of siege equipment, such as catapults, mangonels, battering rams, ladders, grappling irons, and hooks. All such weaponry was operated by military engineers. However, the primary siege weapon was the , a type of siege weapon that was comparable to the trebuchet employed in Western medieval times. From the seventh century onward, it had largely replaced torsion artillery. By Harun al-Rashid's time, the Abbasid army employed fire grenades. The Abbasids also utilized field hospitals and ambulances drawn by camels. The cavalry was entirely covered in iron, with helmets. Similar to medieval knights, their only exposed spots were the end of their noses and small openings in front of their eyes. Their foot soldiers were issued spears, swords, and pikes, and (in line with Persian fashion) trained to stand so solidly that, one contemporary wrote \"you would have thought them held fast by clamps of bronze\". Although the Abbasids never retained a substantial regular army, the caliph could recruit a considerable number of soldiers in a short time when needed from levies. There were also cohorts of regular troops who received steady pay and a special forces unit. At any moment, 125,000 Muslim soldiers could be assembled along the Byzantine frontier, Baghdad, Medina, Damascus, Rayy, and other geostrategic locations in order to quell any unrest.\nDuring the Abbasid revolution, Abu Muslim's Khorasani army, composed largely of Arab settlers disillusioned with Umayyad rule, marched under black banners, forming a powerful force that swept westward in open revolt.\nIn Baghdad there were many Abbasid military leaders who were or said they were of Arab descent. However, it is clear that most of the ranks were of Iranian origin, the vast majority being from Khurasan and Transoxiana, not from western Iran or Azerbaijan. Most of the Khurasani soldiers who brought the Abbasids to power were Arabs. The standing army of the Muslims in Khurasan was overwhelmingly Arab. The unit organization of the Abbasids was designed with the goal of ethnic and racial equality among supporters. When Abu Muslim recruited officers along the Silk Road, he registered them based not on their tribal or ethno-national affiliations but on their current places of residence. Under the Abbasids, Iranian peoples became better represented in the army and bureaucracy as compared to before. The Abbasid army was centred on the Khurasan Abna al-dawla infantry and the Khurasaniyya heavy cavalry, led by their own semi-autonomous commanders () who recruited and deployed their own men with Abbasid resource grants. al-Mu\u2018tasim began the practice of recruiting Turkic slave soldiers from the Samanids into a private army, which allowed him to take over the reins of the caliphate. He abolished the old \"jund\" system created by Umar and diverted the salaries of the original Arab military descendants to the Turkic slave soldiers. The Turkic soldiers transformed the style of warfare, as they were known as capable horse archers, trained from childhood to ride. This military was now drafted from the ethnic groups of the faraway borderlands, and were completely separate from the rest of society. Some could not speak Arabic properly. This led to the decline of the caliphate starting with the Anarchy at Samarra.\nCivil administration.\nAs a result of such a vast Empire, the caliphate was decentralized and divided into 24 provinces.\nHarun's vizier enjoyed close to unchecked powers. Under Harun, a special \"bureau of confiscation\" was created. This governmental wing made it possible for the vizier to seize the property and riches of any corrupt governor or civil servant. In addition, it allowed governors to confiscate the estates of lower-ranking officials. Finally, the caliph could impose the same penalty on a vizier who fell from grace. As one later caliph put it: \"The vizier is our representative throughout the land and amongst our subjects. Therefore, he who obeys him obeys us; and he who obeys us obeys God, and God shall cause him who obeys Him to enter paradise.\"\nEvery regional metropolis had a post office and hundreds of roads were paved in order to link the imperial capital with other cities and towns. The empire employed a system of relays to deliver mail. The central post office in Baghdad even had a map with directions that noted the distances between each town. The roads were provided with roadside inns, hospices, and wells and could reach eastward through Persia and Central Asia, to as far as China. The post office not only enhanced civil services but also served as intelligence for the caliph. Mailmen were employed as spies who kept an eye on local affairs.\nEarly in the days of the caliphate, the Barmakids took the responsibility of shaping the civil service. The family had roots in a Buddhist monastery in northern Afghanistan. In the early 8th century, the family converted to Islam and began to take on a sizable part of the civil administration for the Abbasids.\nCapital poured into the caliphate's treasury from a variety of taxes, including a real estate tax; a levy on cattle, gold and silver, and commercial wares; a special tax on non-Muslims; and customs dues.\nTrade.\nUnder Harun, maritime trade through the Persian Gulf thrived, with Arab vessels trading as far south as Madagascar and as far east as China, Korea, and Japan. The growing economy of Baghdad and other cities inevitably led to the demand for luxury items and formed a class of entrepreneurs who organized long-range caravans for the trade and then the distribution of their goods. A whole section in the East Baghdad suq was dedicated to Chinese goods.\nArabs traded with the Baltic region and made it as far north as the British Isles. Tens of thousands of Arab coins have been discovered in parts of Russia and Sweden, which bear witness to the comprehensive trade networks set up by the Abbasids. King Offa of Mercia (in England) minted gold coins similar to those of the Abbasids in the eighth century.\nMuslim merchants employed ports in Bandar Siraf, Basra, and Aden and some Red Sea ports to travel and trade with India and South East Asia. Land routes were also utilized through Central Asia. Arab businessmen were present in China as early as the eighth century. Arab merchants sailed the Caspian Sea to reach and trade with Bukhara and Samarkand.\nMany caravans and goods never made it to their intended destinations. Some Chinese exports perished in fires, while other ships sank. It was said that anybody who made it to China and back unharmed was blessed by God. Common sea routes were also plagued by pirates who built and crewed vessels that were faster than most merchant ships. It is said that many of the adventures at sea in the Sinbad tales were based on historical fiction of mariners of the day.\nThe Abbasids also established overland trade with Africa, largely for gold and slaves. When trade with Europe ceased due to hostilities, Jews served as a link between the two hostile worlds.\nThe Abbasids engaged in extensive trade with the Italian maritime republics of Venice and Genoa, from the 11th century. Venetian merchants facilitated the exchange of high-value goods such as spices, silk, and precious metals from the East. In return, Venice exported European manufactured goods and luxury items. While Genoese merchants traded in luxury goods like spices, textiles, and other high-demand items. Genoa's strategic position in the Mediterranean enabled it to integrate into the broader Mediterranean trade network, connecting the Abbasid Caliphate with other European markets. These trade relations played a key role in linking the medieval Mediterranean with the broader Islamic world. This exchange of goods, alongside cultural and technological transfers, fostered a more interconnected medieval global economy.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49858", "revid": "16680171", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49858", "title": "Banu Abbas", "text": ""}
{"id": "49860", "revid": "41864", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49860", "title": "Fauna of Australia", "text": " \nThe fauna of Australia consists of a large variety of animals; some 46% of birds, 69% of mammals, 94% of amphibians, and 93% of reptiles that inhabit the continent are endemic to it. This high level of endemism can be attributed to the continent's long geographic isolation, tectonic stability, and the effects of a unique pattern of climate change on the soil and flora over geological time. A unique feature of Australia's fauna is the relative scarcity of native placental mammals. Consequently, the marsupials \u2013 a group of mammals that raise their young in a pouch, including the macropods, possums and dasyuromorphs \u2013 occupy many of the ecological niches placental animals occupy elsewhere in the world. Australia is home to two of the five known extant species of monotremes and has numerous venomous species, which include the platypus, spiders, scorpions, octopus, jellyfish, molluscs, stonefish, and stingrays. Uniquely, Australia has more venomous than non-venomous species of snakes.\nThe settlement of Australia by Indigenous Australians between 48,000 and 70,000 years ago and by Europeans from 1788, has significantly affected the fauna. Hunting, the introduction of non-native species, and land-management practices involving the modification or destruction of habitats have led to numerous extinctions. Based on the list of Australian animals extinct in the Holocene, about 33 mammals (27 from the mainland, including the thylacine), 24 birds (three from the mainland), one reptile, and three frog species or subspecies are strongly believed to have become extinct in Australia during the Holocene epoch. These figures exclude dubious taxa like the Roper River scrub robin (\"Drymodes superciliaris colcloughi\") and possibly extinct taxa like the Christmas Island shrew (\"Crocidura trichura\"). Unsustainable land use still threatens the survival of many species. To target threats to the survival of its fauna, Australia has passed wide-ranging federal and state legislation and established numerous protected areas.\nOrigins and history.\nBoth geologic and climatic events helped to make Australia's fauna unique. Australia was once part of the southern supercontinent Gondwana, which also included South America, Africa, India and Antarctica. Gondwana began to break up 140\u00a0million years ago (MYA); 50 MYA Australia separated from Antarctica and was relatively isolated until the collision of the Indo-Australian Plate with Asia in the Miocene epoch 5.3 MYA. The establishment and evolution of the present-day fauna was apparently shaped by the unique climate and the geology of the continent. As Australia drifted, it was, to some extent, isolated from the effects of global climate change. The unique fauna that originated in Gondwana, such as the marsupials, survived and adapted in Australia.\nAfter the Miocene, fauna of Asian origin were able to establish themselves in Australia. The Wallace Line \u2014 the hypothetical line separating the zoogeographical regions of Asia and Australasia \u2014 marks the tectonic boundary between the Eurasian and Indo-Australian plates. This continental boundary prevented the formation of land bridges and resulted in a distinct zoological distribution, with limited overlap, of most Asian and Australian fauna, with the exception of birds. Following the emergence of the circumpolar current in the mid-Oligocene era (some 15 MYA), the Australian climate became increasingly arid, giving rise to a diverse group of arid-specialised organisms, just as the wet tropical and seasonally wet areas gave rise to their own uniquely adapted species.\nMammals.\nAustralia has a rich mammalian fossil history, as well as a variety of extant mammalian species, dominated by the marsupials, currently however there is limited taxonomic research into Australia's mammals. The fossil record shows that monotremes have been present in Australia since the Early Cretaceous 145\u201399 MYA, and that marsupials and placental mammals date from the Eocene 56\u201334 MYA, when modern mammals first appeared in the fossil record. Although terrestrial marsupials and placental mammals did coexist in Australia in the Eocene, only the marsupials have survived to the present. Non-volant placental mammals made their reappearance in Australia in the Miocene, when Australia moved closer to Indonesia, and rodents started to appear reliably in the Late Miocene fossil record. The marsupials evolved to fill specific ecological niches, and in many cases they are physically similar to the placental mammals in Eurasia and North America that occupy similar niches, a phenomenon known as convergent evolution. For example, the top predator in Australia, the thylacine, bore a striking resemblance to canids. Gliding possums and flying squirrels have similar adaptations enabling their arboreal lifestyle; and the numbat and anteaters are both digging insectivores. For the most part, mammals are not a highly visible part of the faunal landscape, as most species are nocturnal and many arboreal.\nMonotremes and marsupials.\nTwo of the five living species of monotreme occur in Australia: the platypus and the short-beaked echidna, the other three being echidnas that only occur in New Guinea. Monotremes differ from other mammals in their methods of reproduction; in particular, they lay eggs instead of giving birth to live young. The platypus \u2014 a venomous, egg-laying, duck-billed amphibious mammal \u2014 is considered to be one of the strangest creatures in the animal kingdom. When it was first presented by Joseph Banks to English naturalists, it was thought to be a hoax. The short-beaked echidna is covered in hairy spikes, with a tubular snout in the place of a mouth, and a tongue that can move in, and out of the snout at a rate of 100 times a minute to capture termites.\nAustralia has the world's largest, and most diverse range of marsupials. Marsupials are characterised by the presence of a pouch, in which they rear their young after birth. The carnivorous marsupials \u2014 Dasyuromorphia \u2014 are represented by two surviving families: the Dasyuridae with 51 members, and the Myrmecobiidae with the numbat as its sole extant species. The Tasmanian tiger was the largest Dasyuromorphia and the last living specimen of the family Thylacinidae died in captivity in 1936. The world's largest surviving carnivorous marsupial is the Tasmanian devil; it is the size of a small dog and can hunt, although it is mainly a scavenger. It became extinct on the mainland some 600 years ago, and is now found only in Tasmania. There are four species of quoll, or \"native cat\", all of which are threatened species. The eastern quoll for example is believed to have been extinct on the mainland since the 1960s, though there are efforts to reintroduce it. The remainder of the Dasyuridae are referred to as \"marsupial mice\"; most weigh less than 100\u00a0g. There are two species of marsupial mole \u2014 order Notoryctemorphia \u2014 that inhabit the deserts of Western Australia. These rare, blind and earless carnivorous creatures spend most of their time underground; little is known about them.\nThe bandicoots and bilbies \u2014 order Peramelemorphia \u2014 are marsupial omnivores. There are seven extant species in Australia, most of which are endangered. These small creatures share several characteristic physical features: a plump, arch-backed body with a long, delicately tapering snout, large upright ears, long, thin legs, and a thin tail. The evolutionary origin of this group is unclear, because they share characteristics from both carnivorous and herbivorous marsupials.\nMarsupials with two front teeth (diprotodont) on the lower jaw and syndactyly are classified in the order Diprotodontia, and further into the suborders Vombatiformes, Macropodiformes and Phalangerida. The Vombatiformes include the koala and the three species of wombat. One of Australia's best-known marsupials, the koala is an arboreal species that feeds on the leaves of various species of eucalyptus. Wombats, on the other hand, live on the ground and feed on grasses, sedges and roots. Wombats use their diprotodont teeth and powerful claws to dig extensive burrow systems; they are mainly crepuscular and nocturnal.\nThe Phalangerida includes six families and 26 species of possum and three families with 53 species of macropod. The possums are a diverse group of arboreal marsupials and vary in size from the little pygmy possum, weighing just 7\u00a0g, to the cat-sized common ringtail and brushtail possums. The sugar and squirrel gliders are common species of gliding possum, found in the eucalypt forests of eastern Australia, while the feathertail glider is the smallest glider species. The gliding possums have membranes called \"patagia\" that extend from the fifth finger of their forelimb back to the first toe of their hind foot. These membranes, when outstretched, allow them to glide between trees.\nThe macropods are divided into three families: the Hypsiprymnodontidae, with the musky rat-kangaroo as its only member; the Potoroidae, with 11 species; and the Macropodidae, with 45 species. Macropods are found in all Australian environments except alpine areas. The Potoroidae include the bettongs, potoroos and rat-kangaroos, small species that make nests and carry plant material with their tails. The Macropodiae include kangaroos, wallabies and associated species; size varies widely within this family. Most macropods have large hind legs and long, narrow hind feet, with a distinctive arrangement of four toes, and powerfully muscled tails, which they use to hop around. The musky rat-kangaroo is the smallest macropod and the only species that is quadrupedal not bipedal, while the male red kangaroo is the largest, reaching a height of about 2\u00a0m and weighing up to 85\u00a0kg.\nPlacental mammals.\nAustralia has indigenous placental mammals from two orders: the bats \u2014 order Chiroptera \u2014 represented by six families; and the mice and rats \u2014 order Rodentia, family Muridae. There are only two endemic genera of bats, although 7% of the world's bat species live in Australia. Rodents first arrived in Australia 5\u201310 MYA, undergoing a wide radiation to produce the species collectively known as the \"old endemic\" rodents. The old endemics are represented by 14 extant genera. A million years ago, the rat entered Australia from New Guinea and evolved into seven species of \"Rattus\", collectively called the \"new endemics\".\nSince human settlement many additional placental mammals have been introduced to Australia and are now feral. The first placental mammal introduced to Australia was the dingo. Fossil evidence suggests that people from the north brought the dingo to Australia about 5,000 years ago. When Europeans settled Australia they intentionally released many species into the wild including the red fox, European hare, and the European rabbit. Other domestic species have escaped and over time have produced wild populations including the banteng, cat, fallow deer, red deer, sambar deer, rusa deer, chital, hog deer, horse, donkey, pig, goat, water buffalo, and the camel. Only three species of non-native placental mammal were not deliberately introduced to Australia: the house mouse, black rat and the brown rat.\nForty-six marine mammals from the infraorder Cetacea are found in Australian coastal waters. Since the majority of these species have global distribution, some authors do not consider them to be Australian species. There are eleven species of baleen whale present; humpback whales, southern right whales, dwarf minke whales and pygmy blue whales are more commonly observed. There are 37 species of toothed whale, which include all six genera of the family Ziphiidae, and 21 species of oceanic dolphin, including the Australian snubfin dolphin, a species first described in 2005. Some oceanic dolphins, such as the orca, can be found in all waters around the continent; others, such as the Irrawaddy dolphin, are confined to the warm northern waters. The dugong is an endangered marine species that inhabits the waters of north-eastern and north-western Australia, particularly the Torres Strait. It can grow up to 3\u00a0m long and weigh as much as 400\u00a0kg. The dugong is the only herbivorous marine mammal in Australia, feeding on sea grass in coastal areas. The destruction of sea grass beds is a threat to the survival of this species. Eleven species of seal \u2014 family Pinnipedia \u2014 live off the southern coast.\nBirds.\nAustralia and its territories are home to around 800 species of bird; 45% of these are endemic to Australia. The fossil record of birds in Australia is patchy; however, there are records of the ancestors of contemporary species as early as the Late Oligocene. Birds with a Gondwanan history include the flightless ratites (the emu and southern cassowary), megapodes (the malleefowl and Australian brush-turkey), and a huge group of endemic parrots, order Psittaciformes. Australian parrots comprise a sixth of the world's parrots, including many cockatoos and galahs. The kookaburra is the largest species of the kingfisher family, known for its call, which sounds uncannily like loud, echoing human laughter. The Brolga is the only crane exclusive to Australia, and it shares habitat with the more widely distributed Sarus Cranes.The passerines of Australia, also known as songbirds or perching birds, include wrens, robins, the magpie group, thornbills, pardalotes, the huge honeyeater family, treecreepers, lyrebirds, birds of paradise and bowerbirds. The satin bowerbird has attracted the interest of evolutionary psychologists; it has a complex courtship ritual in which the male creates a bower filled with blue, shiny items to woo mates.\nRelatively recent colonists from Eurasia are swallows, larks, thrushes, cisticolas, sunbirds, and some raptors, including the large wedge-tailed eagle. A number of bird species have been introduced by humans; some, like the European goldfinch and greenfinch, coexist happily with Australian species, while others, such as the common starling, common blackbird, house sparrow and Indian mynah, are destructive of some native bird species and thus destabilise the native ecosystem.\nAbout 200 species of seabird live on the Australian coast, including many species of migratory seabird. Australia is at the southern end of the East Asian-Australasian Flyway for migratory water birds, which extends from Far-East Russia and Alaska through Southeast Asia to Australia and New Zealand. About two million birds travel this route to and from Australia each year. One very common large seabird is the Australian pelican, which can be found in most waterways in Australia. The Australian little penguin is the only species of penguin that breeds on mainland Australia.\nAmphibians and reptiles.\nAustralia has four families of native frogs and one introduced toad, the cane toad. In 1935 the cane toad was introduced to Australia in a failed attempt to control pests in sugarcane crops. It has since become a devastating pest, spreading across northern Australia. As well as competing with native insectivores for food, the cane toad produces a venom that is toxic to native fauna, as well as to humans. The Myobatrachidae, or southern frogs, are Australia's largest group of frogs, with 112 species classified into anywhere from 17 to 22 genera. Notable members of this group are the colourful and endangered corroboree frogs. The tree frogs, from family Hylidae, are common in high rainfall areas on the north and east coasts; there are 77 Australian species from three genera. The 18 species from two genera of the Microhylidae frogs are restricted to the rainforests of northern Australia and nearby habitats; the smallest species, the scanty frog, is from this family. There is a single species from the world's dominant frog group, family Ranidae \u2013 the Australian wood frog \u2013 which only occurs in the Queensland rainforests. As elsewhere, there has been a precipitous decline in Australia's frog populations in recent years. Although the full reasons for the decline are uncertain, it can be at least partly attributed to the fatal amphibian fungal disease chytridiomycosis. Another theory for the decline might be, as research shows, that species from the Southern Hemisphere are on average 4.6 million years old, compared to an average 2.9 million years old for the Northern Hemisphere: Researchers believe this age difference is because of the history of severe ice ages in the Northern Hemisphere, which may drive older species to extinction.\nAustralia has two species of crocodile. The saltwater crocodile, known colloquially as the \"salty\", is the largest living crocodile species; reaching over 7\u00a0m, and weighing over 1,000\u00a0kg, they can and do kill people. They live on the coast and in the freshwater rivers and wetlands of northern Australia, and they are farmed for their meat and leather. Freshwater crocodiles, found only in northern Australia, are not considered dangerous to humans.\nThe Australian coast is visited by six species of sea turtle: the flatback, green, hawksbill, olive ridley, loggerhead and the leatherback sea turtles; all are protected in Australian waters. There are 35 species of Australian freshwater turtles from eight genera of the family Chelidae. The pig-nosed turtle is the only Australian turtle not of that family. Australia is the only continent without any living species of land tortoises of the Testudinoidea superfamily besides Antarctica.\nAustralia is the only continent where venomous snakes outnumber their non-venomous cousins. Australian snakes belong to seven families. Of these, the most venomous species, including the fierce snake, eastern brown snake, taipan and eastern tiger snake are from the family Elapidae. Of the 200 species of elapid, 106 are found in Australia and 86 are found only in Australia. Thirty-three sea snakes from family Hydrophiidae inhabit Australia's northern waters; many are extremely venomous. Two species of sea snake from the Acrochordidae also occur in Australian waters. Australia has only 11 species from the world's most significant snake family Colubridae; none are endemic, and they are considered to be relatively recent arrivals from Asia. There are 15 python species and 45 species of insectivorous blind snake.\nThere are more species of snake in Darwin than any other Australian state capital, with 34 non-marine snake species found in the region, of which 23 have been recorded by professional snake catchers in Darwin itself. Fortunately for the citizens of Darwin, a far smaller proportion of these snakes are highly venomous than is typically found in other cities, due to the low numbers of front-fanged elapid species and dominance of relatively harmless pythons and colubrid species.\nThere are more than 700 species of lizards in Australia with representatives of five families. There are over 130 species in 20 genera of gecko found throughout the Australian continent. The Pygopodidae is a family of limbless lizards endemic to the Australian region; all 39 species from seven genera occur in Australia. The Agamidae or dragon lizards are represented by 70 species in 14 genera, including the thorny devil, bearded dragon and frill-necked lizard. There are 30 species of monitor lizard, family Varanidae, in Australia, where they are commonly known as goannas. The largest Australian monitor is the perentie, which can reach up to 2\u00a0m in length. There are about 450 species of skink from more than 40 genera, comprising more than 50% of the total Australian lizard fauna; this group includes the blue-tongued lizards.\nFish.\nMore than 5,000 species of fish inhabit Australia's waterways; of these, 24% are endemic. However, because of the relative scarcity of freshwater waterways, Australia has only about 300 species of freshwater fish. Two families of freshwater fish have ancient origins: the arowana or bonytongues, and the Queensland lungfish. The Queensland lungfish is the most primitive of the lungfish, having evolved before Australia separated from Gondwana. One of the smallest freshwater fish, peculiar to the southwest of Western Australia, is the salamanderfish, which can survive desiccation in the dry season by burrowing into mud. Other families with a potentially Gondwanan origin include the Retropinnidae, Galaxiidae, Aplochitonidae and Percichthyidae. Apart from the ancient freshwater species, 70% of Australia's freshwater fish have affinities with tropical Indo-Pacific marine species that have adapted to freshwater. These species include freshwater lampreys, Herrings, catfish, rainbowfish, and some 50 species of gudgeon, including the sleepy cod. Native freshwater game fish include the barramundi, Murray cod, and golden perch. Two species of endangered freshwater shark are found in the Northern Territory.\nSeveral exotic freshwater fish species, including brown, brook and rainbow trout, Atlantic and Chinook salmon, redfin perch, common carp, and mosquitofish, have been introduced to Australian waterways. The mosquitofish is a particularly aggressive species known for harassing and nipping the fins of other fish. It has been linked to declines and localised extirpations of several small native fish species. The introduced trout species have had serious negative impacts on a number of upland native fish species including trout cod, Macquarie perch and mountain galaxias species as well as other upland fauna such as the spotted tree frog. The common carp is strongly implicated in the dramatic loss in waterweed, decline of small native fish species and permanently elevated levels of turbidity in the Murray-Darling Basin of south west Australia.\nMost of Australia's fish species are marine, and 75% live in tropical marine environments. This is partly due to Australia's huge marine territory, covering 9 million km2. Groups of interest include the moray eels and squirrelfish, as well as the pipefish and seahorses, whose males incubate their partner's eggs in a specialised pouch. There are 80 species of grouper in Australian waters, including one of the world's biggest bony fish, the giant grouper, which can grow as large as 2.7\u00a0m and weigh up to 400\u00a0kg. The trevally, a group of 50 species of silver schooling fish, and the snappers are popular species for commercial fishing. The Great Barrier Reef supports a huge variety of small- and medium-sized reef fish, including the damselfish, butterflyfish, angelfish, gobies, cardinalfish, wrassees, triggerfish and surgeonfish. There are several venomous fish, among them several species of stonefish and pufferfish and the red lionfish, all of which have toxins that can kill humans. There are 11 venomous species of stingray, the largest of which is the smooth stingray. The barracudas are one of the reef's largest species. However, large reef fish should not be eaten for fear of ciguatera poisoning.\nSharks inhabit all the coastal waters and estuarine habitats of Australia's coast. There are 166 species, including 30 species of requiem shark, 32 of catshark, six of wobbegong shark, and 40 of dogfish shark. There are three species from the family Heterodontidae: the Port Jackson shark, the zebra bullhead shark and the crested bullhead shark. In 2004, there were 12 unprovoked shark attacks in Australia, of which two were fatal. Only 3 species of shark pose a significant threat to humans: the bull shark, the tiger shark and the great white shark. Some popular beaches in Queensland and New South Wales are protected by shark netting, a method that has reduced the population of both dangerous and harmless shark species through accidental entanglement. The overfishing of sharks has also significantly reduced shark numbers in Australian waters, and several species are now endangered. A megamouth shark was found on a Perth beach in 1988; very little is known about this species, but this discovery may indicate the presence of the species in Australian coastal waters.\nInvertebrates.\nOf the estimated 200,000 animal species in Australia, about 96% are invertebrates. While the full extent of invertebrate diversity is uncertain, 90% of insects and molluscs are considered endemic. Invertebrates occupy many ecological niches and are important in all ecosystems as decomposers, pollinators, and food sources. The largest group of invertebrates is the insects, comprising 75% of Australia's known species of animals. The most diverse insect orders are the Coleoptera, with 28,200 species of beetles and weevils, the Lepidoptera with 20,816 species including butterflies and moths, and around 14,800 species of Hymenoptera, including the ants, bees and wasps. Order Diptera, which includes the flies and mosquitoes, comprises 7,786 species. Order Hemiptera, including bugs, aphids and hoppers, comprises 5,650 species; and there are 2,827 species of order Orthoptera, including grasshoppers, crickets and katydids. Introduced species that pose a significant threat to native species include the European wasp, the red fire ant, the yellow crazy ant and feral honeybees which compete with native bees.\nAustralia has a wide variety of arachnids, including 78 spider families with 79 species of spider familiar enough to have common names. There are numerous highly venomous species, including the notorious Sydney funnel-web and allied mygalomorphs, whose bites can be deadly. The redback spider was thought to be deadly but redback bites are no longer thought to be life-threatening, as the lack of deaths since 1956 was thought to be due to the development of an anti-venom which has since been shown to be no better than placebo. There are thousands of species of mites and ticks from the subclass Acari. Australia also has at least 150 species of pseudoscorpion with an estimated 550 more waiting to be described, and at least 17 scorpion genera with 120 species.\nIn the Annelida (sub)class Oligochaeta there are many families of aquatic worms, and for native terrestrial worms: the Enchytraeidae (pot worms) and the \"true\" earthworms in families Acanthodrilidae, Octochaetidae and Megascolecidae. The latter includes the world's largest earthworm, the giant Gippsland earthworm, found only in Gippsland, Victoria. On average they reach 80\u00a0cm in length, but specimens up to 3.7\u00a0m in length have been found.\nThe large family Parastacidae includes 124 species of Australian freshwater crayfish. These include the world's smallest crayfish, the swamp crayfish, which does not exceed 30\u00a0mm in length, and the world's largest crayfish, the Tasmanian giant freshwater crayfish, measuring up to 76\u00a0cm long and weighing 4.5\u00a0kg. The crayfish genus \"Cherax\" includes the common yabby, in addition to the farmed species marron and Queensland red claw. Species from the genus \"Engaeus\", commonly known as the land crayfish, are also found in Australia. \"Engaeus\" species are not entirely aquatic, because they spend most of their lives living in burrows. Australia has seven species of freshwater crab from the genus \"Austrothelphusa\". These crabs live burrowed into the banks of waterways and can plug their burrows, surviving through several years of drought. The extremely primitive freshwater mountain shrimp, found only in Tasmania, are a unique group, resembling species found in the fossil record from 200 MYA.\nA huge variety of marine invertebrates are found in Australian waters, with the Great Barrier Reef an important source of this diversity. Families include the Porifera or sea sponges, the Cnidaria (includes the jellyfish, corals and sea anemones, comb jellies), the Echinodermata (includes the sea urchins, sea stars, brittle stars, sea cucumbers, the lamp shells) and the Mollusca (includes snails, slugs, limpets, squid, octopus, cockles, oysters, clams, and chitons). Venomous invertebrates include the box jellyfish, the blue-ringed octopus, and ten species of cone snail, which can cause respiratory failure and death in humans. The crown-of-thorns starfish usually inhabits the reef at low densities. However, under conditions that are not yet well understood, they can reproduce to reach an unsustainable population density when coral is devoured at a rate faster than it can regenerate. This presents a serious reef management issue. Other problematic marine invertebrates include the native species purple sea urchin and the white urchin, which have been able to take over marine habitats and form urchin barrens due to the over harvesting of their natural predators which include abalone and rock lobster. Introduced invertebrate pests include the Asian mussel, New Zealand green-lipped mussel, black-striped mussel and the northern Pacific seastar, all of which displace native shellfish.\nThere are many unique marine crustaceans in Australian waters. The best-known class, to which all the edible species of crustacean belong, is Malacostraca. The warm waters of northern Australia are home to many species of decapod crustaceans, including crabs, false crabs, hermit crabs, lobsters, shrimps, and prawns. The peracarids, including the amphipods and isopods, are more diverse in the colder waters of southern Australia. Less-well-known marine groups include the classes Remipedia, Cephalocarida, Branchiopoda, Maxillopoda (which includes the barnacles, copepods and fish lice), and the Ostracoda. Notable species include the Tasmanian giant crab, the second largest crab species in the world, found in deep water, and weighing up to 13\u00a0kg, and the Australian spiny lobsters, such as the western rock lobster, which are distinct from other lobster species as they do not have claws.\nInvasive species.\nIntroduction of exotic fauna in Australia by design, accident and natural processes has led to a considerable number of invasive, feral and pest species which have flourished and now impact the environment adversely. Introduced organisms affect the environment in a number of ways. European rabbits render land economically useless by eating everything. Red foxes affect local endemic fauna by predation while the cane toad poisons the predators by being eaten. Some water fleas may have been introduced to Australia by humans or birds. Other invasive species include birds (Indian mynah), fish (common carp), insects (red imported fire ant), molluscs (Asian mussel). The problem is compounded by invasive exotic flora as well as introduced diseases, fungi and parasites. An example of this is Blue Green Algae, which is spreading through many bodies of water in rural Victoria, such as the Gippsland Lakes.\nCostly, laborious and time-consuming efforts at control of these species has met with little success and this continues to be a major problem area in the conservation of Australia's biodiversity.\nMany of the introduced species are not regulated through wildlife services and can be regularly hunted year round. Some states even fund hunting initiatives though the efficacy of these programs are disputed.\nAccording to a 2023 report co-authored by biologist Tim Low, invasive species are the leading cause of native Australian animal extinctions since the 1960s.\nHuman impact and conservation.\nFor at least 40,000 years, Australia's fauna played an integral role in the traditional lifestyles of Indigenous Australians, who relied upon many species as a source of food and skins. Vertebrates commonly harvested included macropods, possums, seals, fish and the short-tailed shearwater, most commonly known as the muttonbird. Invertebrates used as food included insects such as the bogong moth and larvae collectively called witchetty grubs and molluscs. The use of fire-stick farming, in which large swathes of bushland were burnt to facilitate hunting, modified both flora and fauna \u2013 and are thought to have contributed to the extinction of large herbivores with a specialised diet, such as the flightless birds from the genus \"Genyornis\". The role of hunting and landscape modification by aboriginal people in the extinction of the Australian megafauna is debated, but increasingly favours the idea humans were responsible for megafaunal extinction.\nDespite the major impact of Aboriginals on native species populations, this is considered to be less significant than that of the European settlers, whose impact on the landscape has been on a relatively large scale. Since European settlement, direct exploitation of native fauna, habitat destruction and the introduction of exotic predators and competitive herbivores has led to the extinction of some 27 mammal, 23 bird and 4 frog species. Much of Australia's fauna is protected by legislation. The federal Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 was created to meet Australia's obligations as a signatory to the 1992 Convention on Biological Diversity. This act protects all native fauna and provides for the identification and protection of threatened species. In each state and territory, there is statutory listing of threatened species. At present, 380 animal species are classified as either endangered or threatened under the EPBC Act, and other species are protected under state and territory legislation. More broadly, a complete cataloguing of all the species within Australia has been undertaken, a key step in the conservation of Australian fauna and biodiversity. In 1973, the federal government established the Australian Biological Resources Study (ABRS), which coordinates research in the taxonomy, identification, classification and distribution of flora and fauna. The ABRS maintains free online databases cataloguing much of the described Australian flora and fauna. Impacts such as the illegal setting of traps in rivers affect animals such as the Australian platypus, along with lack of awareness each year an average of 2\u20135 Australians lose their lives to what is presumed a safe creature. The key is understanding of Australia's diverse wildlife and fauna; what seems safe is often deadly.\nThe Australian Wildlife Conservancy is the largest private owner of land for conservation in the country which is dedicated to protecting endangered species across 4.8 million hectares of land in the most popular regions such as the Kimberley, Cape York, Lake Eyre and the Top End. This not-for-profit organisation is working hard to avoid extinction of the endangered native species in various wildlife sanctuaries.\nAustralia is a member of the International Whaling Commission and is strongly opposed to commercial whaling \u2014 all cetacean species are protected in Australian waters. Australia is also a signatory to the CITES agreement and prohibits the export of endangered species. Protected areas have been created in every state and territory to protect and preserve the country's unique ecosystems. These protected areas include national parks and other reserves, as well as 64 wetlands registered under the Ramsar Convention and 16 World Heritage Sites. As of 2002[ [update]], 10.8% (774,619.51\u00a0km2) of the total land area of Australia is within protected areas. Protected marine zones have been created in many areas to preserve marine biodiversity; as of 2002[ [update]], these areas cover about 7% (646,000\u00a0km2) of Australia's marine jurisdiction. The Great Barrier Reef is managed by the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority under specific federal and state legislation. Some of Australia's fisheries are already overexploited, and quotas have been set for the sustainable harvest of many marine species.\nThe \"State of the Environment Report, 2001\", prepared by independent researchers for the federal government, concluded that the condition of the environment and environmental management in Australia had worsened since the previous report in 1996. Of particular relevance to wildlife conservation, the report indicated that many processes \u2014 such as salinity, changing hydrological conditions, land clearing, fragmentation of ecosystems, poor management of the coastal environment, and invasive species \u2014 pose major problems for protecting Australia's biodiversity.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49861", "revid": "50979809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49861", "title": "Alexandra Feodorovna (Alix of Hesse)", "text": "Empress of Russia from 1894 to 1917\nAlexandra Feodorovna (; born Princess Alix of Hesse and by Rhine; 6 June 1872 \u2013 17 July 1918) was the last empress of Russia as the consort of Nicholas II from their marriage on 26 November\u00a0[O.S. 14 November]\u00a01894 until his forced abdication on 15 March\u00a0[O.S. 2 March]\u00a01917. A granddaughter of Queen Victoria, Alexandra was one of the most famous royal carriers of hemophilia and passed the condition to her only son, Alexei.\nAlexandra was deeply involved in the personal and political life of her husband, Tsar Nicholas II. Her reputation suffered due to her influence over Nicholas, particularly in her insistence on maintaining autocratic rule in the face of growing revolutionary pressures in Russia. Her relationship with the Russian mystic Grigori Rasputin became a subject of controversy. Rasputin's alleged ability to alleviate Alexei's suffering from hemophilia increased Alexandra's reliance on him, damaging the public perception of the Romanovs and fueling rumors about Rasputin's power within the royal family. These associations with Rasputin and her opposition to political reform were seen as contributing factors to the collapse of the Romanov dynasty.\nFollowing Nicholas II's abdication, the imperial family were placed under house arrest by the Bolsheviks during the Russian Revolution. On 17 July 1918, they were murdered by Bolshevik forces in Yekaterinburg, marking the violent end of over three centuries of Romanov rule. Despite her unpopularity during her reign, Alexandra was canonized as \"Saint Alexandra the Passion Bearer\" by the Russian Orthodox Church in 2000.\nEarly life.\nAlexandra was born on 6 June 1872 at the in Darmstadt as Princess \"Alix Viktoria Helene Luise Beatrix\" of Hesse and by Rhine, a grand duchy then part of the German Empire. She was the sixth child and fourth daughter among the seven children of Louis IV, Grand Duke of Hesse, and his first wife, Princess Alice of the United Kingdom, the second daughter of Queen Victoria.\nAlix was baptised on 1 July 1872 (her parents' tenth wedding anniversary) in the Protestant Lutheran Church and given the names of her mother and each of her mother's four sisters, some of which were transliterated into German. Her mother wrote to Queen Victoria, \"'Alix' we gave for 'Alice' as they murder my name here: 'Ali-ice' they pronounce it, so we thought 'Alix' could not so easily be spoilt.\" Her mother gave her the nickname of \"Sunny\", due to her cheerful disposition, a name adopted later by her husband. Her British relatives nicknamed her as \"Alicky\", to distinguish her from her aunt-by-marriage, Alexandra, Princess of Wales, who was known within the family as Alix.\nAlix's godparents were the Prince and Princess of Wales (her maternal uncle and aunt), Princess Beatrice of the United Kingdom (her maternal aunt), the Duchess of Cambridge (her great-great-aunt), the Tsesarevich and Tsesarevna of Russia (her future parents-in-law), and Princess Anna of Prussia.\nAlix's older brother Prince Friedrich of Hesse and by Rhine (\"Frittie\") suffered from hemophilia and died in May 1873 after a fall, when Alix was about one year old. Of her siblings, Alix was closest to Princess Marie (\"May\"), who was two years younger; they were noted as \"inseparable\".\nIn November 1878, diphtheria swept through the House of Hesse; Alix, her three sisters, her brother Ernst (\"Ernie\"), and their father fell ill. Elisabeth (\"Ella\"), Alix's older sister, was visiting their paternal grandmother, and escaped the outbreak. Alix's mother Alice tended to the children herself, rather than abandon them to nurses and doctors. Alice fell ill and died on 14 December 1878, when Alix was six years old. This was the 17th anniversary of Alice's own father's death. Marie also died, but the rest of the siblings survived. She described her childhood before the deaths of her mother and sister as \"unclouded, happy babyhood, of perpetual sunshine, then of a great cloud\".\nQueen Victoria doted on the motherless Alix and became a surrogate mother to her. She felt highly protective of Alix and declared that \"while I live Alicky, til she is married, will be more than ever my own child.\" She handpicked Alix's tutors and instructed them to send detailed reports back to Windsor every month. She invited Alix and her surviving siblings to England for their holidays, and they grew close to their British cousins. Every birthday and Christmas, she sent Alix gifts of dresses, jewelry, lace, and dolls. Alix signed herself \"your loving and grateful child,\" rather than grandchild, in her letters. Alix reflected that she saw Queen Victoria as \"the best and dearest of grandmamas,\" \"a very august person,\" \"a Santa Clause,\" and \"the dearest and kindest Woman alive.\" When she was betrothed to Nicholas, Alix assured Victoria that \"my marrying will [not] make a difference to my love for You.\" When Queen Victoria died in 1901, Alix openly wept at her memorial service in Saint Petersburg and shocked the Russian courtiers who considered her cold and unfeeling.\nAlong with her sister, Princess Irene, Alix was a bridesmaid at the 1885 wedding of her godmother and maternal aunt, Princess Beatrice, to Prince Henry of Battenberg. At the age of 15, she attended Queen Victoria's Golden Jubilee celebrations in 1887.\nIn March 1892, when Alix was nineteen years old, her father Grand Duke Louis IV, died of a heart attack. According to her biographer, Baroness Buxhoeveden, Alix regarded the death of her father as the greatest sorrow of her life. Buxhoeveden recalled in her 1928 biography that \"for years she could not speak of him, and long after when she was in Russia, anything that reminded her of him would bring her to the verge of tears\".\nProposed matches.\nQueen Victoria greatly favored Alix and she wanted Alix to become the queen consort of the United Kingdom, which she considered \"the greatest position there is.\" On 2 March 1888, she wrote to Alix's oldest sister Victoria that \"My heart and mind are bent on securing dear Alicky for either Eddy or Georgie\", respectively the second in line to the British throne and his brother, the future George V, both of whom were Alexandra's first cousins. In 1889, Victoria invited Alix and Eddy to Balmoral in hopes that they would fall in love. Eddy grew infatuated with her and proposed, but Alix was not interested in him and rejected his proposal. However, Victoria still persisted and tried to convince Alix of the benefits of the match. Victoria wrote to Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine, Alix's older sister, that Alix \"should be made to reflect seriously on the folly of throwing away the chance of a very good husband, kind, affectionate and steady, and of entering a united happy family and a very good position which is second to none in the world!\" Alix's older sister Ella opposed the match because \"he [Eddy] does not look over strong and is too stupid.\" In May 1890, Alix wrote a letter to Eddy that although it \"pained her to pain him,\" she only saw him as a cousin and could not marry him. She wrote to Victoria that she would marry Eddy if she were \"forced\" by the family but that both of them would be miserable. Victoria was disappointed, but she decided that Alix had shown \"great strength of character\" in refusing to acquiesce to such strong pressure.\nIn 1891, Queen Victoria tried to arrange a match between Alix and Prince Maximilian of Baden. She asked Louis to invite the prince to Darmstadt as soon as possible. When he arrived in Darmstadt, Maximilian told Alix that he intended to propose to her. Alix was surprised and unhappy, and she later reflected that \"I did not know him at all.\" She asked her older sister Victoria to intervene and help her reject Maximilian politely.\nEngagement.\nIn 1884, Alix attended the wedding of her sister Elisabeth to Grand Duke Sergei Alexandrovich in St. Petersburg. At this wedding, the 12-year-old Alix met the 16-year-old Tsesarevich Nicholas, nephew of the groom and heir-apparent to the Imperial throne of Russia. In his diary Nicholas called Alix \"sweet little Alix\" and declared \"we love each other.\" He gave her a brooch as a sign of his affection, and they scratched their names into a windowpane.\nIn January 1890, Alix visited her sister Ella in Russia. She and Nicholas skated together, met at tea parties, and played badminton. Nicholas wrote in his diary: \"It is my dream to one day marry Alix H. I have loved her for a long time, but more deeply and strongly since 1889 when she spent six weeks in Petersburg. For a long time, I have resisted my feeling that my dearest dream will come true.\"\nAlix's sister Ella and her husband Sergei were enthusiastically in favor of the match between Nicholas and Alix. Ella and Alix's uncle, the future King Edward VII, told his mother, Queen Victoria, that \"Ella will move heaven and earth to get [Alix] to marry a Grand Duke.\" Ella wrote to Ernest, \"God grant this marriage will come true.\"\nNicholas and Alix were second cousins through Wilhelmina of Baden, the mother of both Nicholas's paternal grandmother, Empress Maria Alexandrovna of Russia, formerly Princess Wilhelmine Marie of Hess-Darmstadt, the first wife of Tsar Alexander II, and Alix's paternal grandfather, Prince Charles of Hesse and by Rhine, brother of Louis III, Grand Duke of Hesse and by Rhine.\nQueen Victoria opposed the match to Nicholas. She personally liked Nicholas, but she disliked Russia and Nicholas's father and worried that Alix would not be safe in Russia. She wrote to Alix's older sister Victoria of her suspicions that Sergei and Ella were encouraging the match. After the betrothal was announced, she reflected: \"The more I think of sweet Alicky's marriage the more unhappy I am. Not as to the personality for I like [Nicholas] very much but on account of the country and the awful insecurity to which that poor child will be exposed.\"\nAlexander and Maria Feodorovna were both vehemently anti-German and did not want Alix as a daughter-in-law. Maria Feodorovna told her sister Alexandra of Denmark that the youngest daughter of an undistinguished grand duke was not worthy to marry the heir to the Russian throne, and she believed that Alix was too tactless and unlikeable to be a successful empress. Alexander favored Princess H\u00e9l\u00e8ne of Orl\u00e9ans, the tall, dark-haired daughter of Philippe, Comte de Paris, pretender to the throne of France. Nicholas was not attracted to H\u00e9l\u00e8ne, writing in his diary: \"Mama made a few allusions to H\u00e9l\u00e8ne, daughter of the Comte de Paris. I myself want to go in one direction and it is evident that Mama wants me to choose the other one.\" H\u00e9l\u00e8ne also resisted this match, as she was Roman Catholic and her father refused to allow her to convert to Russian Orthodoxy. Alexander sent emissaries to Princess Margaret of Prussia, sister of Wilhelm II, German Emperor, and a granddaughter of Queen Victoria. Nicholas declared that he would rather become a monk than marry Margaret; she in turn was unwilling to convert to the Russian Orthodox Church from being Protestant.\nWhen his health failed in 1894, Alexander III decided to allow Nicholas to marry Alix so that he could secure the succession. Maria reluctantly permitted Nicholas to propose to Alix. Nicholas was ecstatic and immediately inquired about Alix.\nDespite her love for Nicholas, Alix was initially reluctant to marry Nicholas because she did not want to renounce her Lutheran faith to join the Orthodox Church. She wrote to Nicholas that \"I cannot [convert to Orthodoxy] against my conscience\" because \"What happiness can come from a marriage which begins without the real blessing of God?\" Nicholas was devastated, but he remained hopeful because Ella assured him that Alix was \"utterly miserable\" and had a \"deep and pure\" love for him. Nicholas begged her \"not [to] say 'no' directly\" and declared, \"Do you think there can exist any happiness in the whole world without you!\"\nIn April 1894 Alix's brother Ernest Louis married Princess Victoria Melita of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha. Princess Victoria was Alexander III's niece by his sister Grand Duchess Maria Alexandrovna of Russia and Nicholas's first cousin, so several Russians attended the wedding, including Grand Dukes Vladimir, Sergei and Paul, Grand Duchesses Elisabeth Feodorovna and Maria Pavlovna, and Nicholas. Nicholas was determined to persuade Alix to marry him. He was evidently confident in his future success: he brought Father Ioann Yanyshev, confessor to the Imperial family, to teach Alix about Russian Orthodoxy, and he brought Ekaterina Adolfovna Schneider to teach Alix Russian.\nThe day after his arrival in Coburg Nicholas proposed to Alix and tried for two hours to persuade her to convert to Orthodoxy. She wept continuously but refused. Ella spoke to Alix afterwards and she convinced Alix that she did not need to renounce Lutheranism to convert to Orthodoxy. Ella herself had not been required to abjure her Lutheran faith when she converted to Orthodoxy. The next day Alix spoke to Wilhelm II (who hoped that a German empress would lead to better German-Russian relations) and Duchess Marie of Mecklenburg-Schwerin (a German princess who had converted from Lutheranism to Orthodoxy to marry Nicholas's uncle Grand Duke Vladimir Alexandrovich of Russia). She accepted Nicholas's second proposal.\nFollowing the engagement Alix returned to England and her grandmother. In June Nicholas travelled to England to visit her and attend the christening of the eldest son of Prince George, Duke of York. Alix and Nicholas were both named as godparents of the boy, who reigned briefly as Edward VIII of the United Kingdom in 1936. Alix wrote to her old governess that \"I am more happy than words can express. At last, after these five sad years!\" Nicholas declared that \"my soul was brimming with joy and life.\"\nIn September, as Alexander III's health declined, Nicholas obtained the permission of his dying father to summon Alix to the Romanovs' Livadia Palace in Crimea. Escorted by her sister Ella from Warsaw to the Crimea, she traveled by ordinary passenger train. The dying tsar insisted on receiving Alix in full dress uniform and gave her his blessing.\nEmpress of Russia.\nWedding.\nOn 1 November 1894, Alexander III died at the age of 49. Nicholas was confirmed as Tsar Nicholas II. The next day, Alix was received into the Russian Orthodox Church as \"the truly believing Grand Duchess Alexandra Feodorovna.\" However, she was not required to repudiate Lutheranism. Alix wanted to take the name \"Yekaterina\", but Nicholas wanted her to take the name Alexandra so that they could be a second Nicholas and Alexandra. He was inspired by his great-grandfather Nicholas I and his great-grandmother Alexandra Feodorovna.\nAlexandra, the Prince and Princess of Wales, and Nicholas's Greek relatives accompanied the coffin of Alexander III first through Moscow and St. Petersburg. The funeral of Alexander III occurred on 19 November.\nOn 26 November 1894, Alexandra and Nicholas married in the Grand Church of the Winter Palace of Saint Petersburg. Court mourning could be relaxed because it was the birthday of Nicholas's mother, now Dowager Empress Maria Feodorovna. Many Russians considered Alexandra a bad omen because she arrived so soon after the death of Emperor Alexander: \"She has come to us behind a coffin. She brings misfortune with her.\" Alexandra herself wrote to her sister: \"Our wedding seemed to me, a mere continuation of the funeral liturgy for the dead Tsar, with one difference; I wore a white dress instead of a black one.\"\nCoronation.\nOn 26 May 1896, Alexandra and Nicholas were crowned at the Dormition Cathedral in the Kremlin.\nFive hundred thousand Russians gathered in Moscow to watch the entertainment, eat the court-sponsored food, and collect the gifts in honor of their new tsar. There were rumors that there was not enough food for everyone, so the crowd rushed towards the gift tables. The police failed to maintain order, and a thousand Russians were trampled to death at the Khodynka Field.\nNicholas and Alexandra were horrified by the deaths, and they decided not to attend the ball that the French ambassador, the Marquis de Montebello, hosted in their honor. Nicholas's uncles urged him to attend so as not to offend the French and give credence to the rumors that the German Alexandra was prejudiced against the French. Sergei Witte commented, \"We expected the party would be called off. Instead it took place as if nothing had happened and the ball was opened by Their Majesties dancing a quadrille.\" The British ambassador informed Queen Victoria that \"the Empress appeared in great distress, her eyes reddened by tears.\"\nThe next day, Alexandra and Nicholas visited the wounded and paid for the coffins of the dead. However, many Russians took the disaster at Khodynka Field as an omen that Nicholas's reign would be unhappy. Others used the circumstances of the tragedy and the behaviour of the royal establishment to underscore the heartlessness of the autocracy and the contemptible shallowness of the young tsar and his \"German woman\".\nRejection by the Russian people.\nAlexandra was extremely unpopular among her husband's Russian subjects. Her shy and introverted nature was interpreted as arrogance and coldness, and she struggled to win friends. The Russian court judged her as \"devoid of charm, wooden, cold eyes, holds herself as if she'd swallowed a yardstick.\"\nAlexandra struggled to communicate. She spoke English and German fluently, but she is said to have struggled to speak French, the official language of the court. Her letters and notes show that she could read and write French very fluently however, and communication between herself and her children's French tutor Pierre Gilliard was always in French. Alexandra also spoke Italian, having learned that language as a teenager.\nIt is often said that she struggled with Russian and did not learn it until she became Empress. This is however untrue. Her teenage diaries show that she had some Russian lessons prior to visiting her sister Ella in Russia. She began learning Russian in earnest after her engagement to Nicholas, and during the period of her engagement wrote long passages to him in Russian - with some minor errors, but improving over time. She learned to speak Russian very well. The letters between Alexandra and her son Alexei were almost without exception in Russian.\nAlexandra failed to understand her public role at court as the empress. Traditionally, the empress led the social scene and hosted numerous balls. However, Alexandra was shocked by the decadence, love affairs, and gossip that characterized parties. She declared that \"the heads of the young ladies of St. Petersburg are filled with nothing but thoughts of young officers,\" and she crossed off the names of noblemen and noblewomen whom she deemed scandalous from the invitation lists until no one was left. Many people in St. Petersburg society dismissed Alexandra as a prude. In one of her first balls, Alexandra sent a lady-in-waiting to reprimand a young woman in a low-cut gown: \"Her Majesty wants me to tell you that in Hesse-Darmstadt we don't wear our dresses this way.\" The unnamed woman replied, \"Pray tell Her Majesty that in Russia we do wear our dresses this way.\" In 1896, she launched the \"Help Through Handwork\" project. She wanted to create a series of workshops in which noblewomen would teach poor peasants how to sew and raise funds for needy families.\nAlexandra had a difficult relationship with her mother-in-law, Maria Feodorovna. Unlike other European courts of the day, Russian protocol gave the dowager empress seniority in rank to the empress. At royal balls, Maria entered on her son's arm and Alexandra followed on the arm of one of the grand dukes. Maria was so accustomed to the tradition that she was surprised when Alexandra was bitter about her junior role at court. Maria also \"carried her insistence on precedence so far that the \"chiffres\" of the maids of honor of both Empresses bore the initials M. A. instead of A. M., which was the proper order.\" The crown jewels were the property of the current Empress, but Maria initially refused to relinquish them to Alexandra. Maria begrudgingly surrendered the magnificent collection only after Alexandra threatened not to wear any jewels at all to official court events.\nAlexandra was unpopular in the imperial family. She was a fervent advocate of the 'divine right of kings' and believed that it was unnecessary to attempt to secure the approval of the people, according to her aunt, German Empress Victoria, who wrote to Queen Victoria that \"Alix is very imperious and will always insist on having her own way; she will never yield one iota of power she will imagine she wields...\" She dreaded social functions and enjoyed being alone with Nicholas, so she did not host the balls and parties that a tsarina normally would. Members of the imperial family resented that she closed off their access to the tsar and the inner court. She disliked Nicholas's uncle, Grand Duke Vladimir Alexandrovich. She declared that Vladimir's sons Kirill, Boris and Andrei were irredeemably immoral. In 1913 she refused Boris's proposal for the hand of Grand Duchess Olga. During the war Vladimir's wife, Grand Duchess Marie Pavlovna, openly criticized Alexandra.\nInsecure about her modest origins as a minor German princess, Alexandra insisted on being treated with the full honors due to an empress. In 1896 Alexandra and Nicholas went on a European tour. When Wilhelm II lent her an antique silver toilette service that had once belonged to his great-grandmother, Queen Louise of Prussia, she was insulted and declared that only a gold service was suitable for an empress. She dressed herself \"with great magnificence\". At the Russian court courtiers mocked for her \"dress[ing] in the heavy brocade of which she was so fond, and with diamonds scattered all over her, in defiance of good taste and common sense.\"\nAlexandra refused to court the public because she believed that the Russian people automatically loved and revered their emperor and empress. When she and Nicholas were traveling to Crimea by train, hundreds of peasants wore their best clothes and waited overnight to see the imperial couple. Nicholas went to the window and waved, but Alexandra refused to open the curtains and acknowledge the crowd. Dowager Empress Maria was furious that \"[Alexandra] thinks the Imperial family should be 'above that sort of thing.' What does she mean? Above winning the people's affection?...And yet, how often she complains of the public indifference toward her.\" Queen Victoria worried about Alexandra's unpopularity in her new country and she advised her granddaughter: \"I've ruled more than 50 years ... and nevertheless every day I think about what I need to do to retain and strengthen the love of my subjects ... It is your first duty to win their love and respect.\" Alexandra replied, \"You are mistaken, my dear grandmamma; Russia is not England. Here we do not need to earn the love of the people. The Russian people revere their Tsars as divine beings ... As far as Petersburg society is concerned, that is something which one may wholly disregard.\" This letter, while quoted in Montefiore's book, The Romanovs, was first published in English in Orlando Figes's book A People's Tragedy. The footnotes show that the source of this letter was to be found in the Russian language book \"Tsar i Tsaritsa\" by Vladimir Iosifovich Gurko, who also noted \"Of course, I do not vouch for the authenticity of the letters cited, but in any case they were passed around Petersburg and, of course, did not contribute to the establishment of good relations between the young Empress and the only outside world with which she came into direct contact.\" Following the death of Queen Victoria, all the correspondence of Empress Alexandra to Queen Victoria was returned to her. In 1917, following the Tsar's abdication, Alexandra burnt the entirety of her correspondence with Queen Victoria, and therefore the veracity of these letters cannot be confirmed as there are no extant letters between Queen Victoria and Alexandra Feodorovna in the Russian State Archives, nor is there any in the Royal Archives post 1894 other than a couple of telegrams.\nStruggle to bear an heir.\nOn 15 November 1895, Alexandra gave birth to her eldest child and daughter, Olga, at the Alexander Palace. Many Russians and members of the imperial family were disappointed in the sex of the child, but Nicholas and Alexandra were delighted with their daughter and doted on her. The birth of Olga did not change Grand Duke George's position as Nicholas's heir presumptive. The Pauline Laws implemented by Tsar Paul I forbade women from taking the Romanov throne as long as any male Romanov was alive. If Alexandra did not bear a son, Nicholas's heirs would be his brothers and uncles. However few worried because Alexandra was only 23, so she was expected to be able to bear a son soon.\nA few months after giving birth to Olga Alexandra was pregnant again. Owing to the stress of the coronation she had a miscarriage. No announcement was made, because she had not publicly confirmed her pregnancy. However, there were unfounded and malicious rumors in St Petersburg that Alexandra had become pregnant by a lover and aborted the baby to hide her infidelity.\nOn 10 June 1897 Alexandra gave birth to her second child and daughter, Tatiana. Nicholas was overjoyed but the members of his family were unhappy and worried. When she woke up from the chloroform, Alexandra saw the \"anxious and troubled faces\" around her and \"burst into loud hysterics.\" She cried, \"My God, it is again a daughter. What will the nation say, what will the nation say?\" Alexandra's failure to have a son made her even more unpopular among the Russians. Nicholas's brother George said that he was disappointed not to have a nephew to relieve him of his duties as heir: \"I was already preparing to go into retirement, but it was not to be.\nOn 26 June 1899 Alexandra gave birth to her third child and daughter, Maria. Queen Victoria sent Alexandra a telegram when Maria was born: \"I am so thankful that dear Alicky has recovered so well, but I regret the third girl for the country.\" Grand Duke Konstantin fretted: \"And so there's no Heir. The whole of Russia will be disappointed by this news.\" Russians saw the birth of a third daughter as proof that Alexandra was bad luck. Two weeks after Maria's birth, Nicholas's brother George died and their younger brother Michael became the heir presumptive to the throne. Courtiers flocked to Michael and treated him as the heir apparent, which distressed Alexandra. In October 1900 Nicholas became ill with abdominal typhus and was confined to bed for five weeks. The cabinet were forced to discuss what would happen if Nicholas died. Alexandra was pregnant with her fourth child, and she insisted that she be named regent in the hope that she would bear a son. However Nicholas's ministers refused: If Nicholas died, Michael would become tsar. If Alexandra's baby was a boy, Michael would renounce the throne in his nephew's favor. Alexandra was not satisfied and she grew to distrust Nicholas's ministers for trying to \"steal\" her future son's inheritance.\nOn 18 June 1901 Alexandra gave birth to Anastasia. Nicholas's sister, Grand Duchess Xenia, exclaimed, \"My God! What a disappointment!... a fourth girl!\" The French diplomat Maurice Pal\u00e9ologue reported: \"The German [Alexandra] has the evil eye. Thanks to her nefarious influence our Emperor is doomed to catastrophe.\" The Russian peasants decided that \"the Empress was not beloved in heaven or she would have borne a son.\"\nAlexandra and Nicholas turned to the faith in hopes of having a son. Shortly after Anastasia's birth, Grand Duchess Militza Nikolaevna introduced Alexandra to a mystic named Philippe Nizier-Vachot. He was an unlicensed quack who claimed that he could use his magnetic powers to change the sex of a baby inside the womb. Nicholas contrived a medical diploma from the Imperial Military Medical Academy for Philippe and made him State Councilor and military doctor. Nicholas's mother (Maria), sister (Xenia) and sister-in-law (Ella) were alarmed and warned him and Alexandra to stay away from Philippe, but the imperial couple did not heed their advice.\nIn the end of 1901 Alexandra seemed to have become pregnant again and Philippe swore that she was carrying a boy. By the summer of 1902 it was clear that the Empress was not pregnant. Grand Duke Constantine Constantinovich of Russia wrote, \"From 8 August we have been waiting every day for confirmation of the Empress's pregnancy. Now we have suddenly learned that she is not pregnant, indeed that there never was any pregnancy, and that the symptoms that led to suppose it were in fact only anaemia!\". In reality, Alexandra had had a molar pregnancy. On 19 August 1902 she had suffered a discharge of \"a spherical, fleshy mass the size of a walnut\", which Dr Dmitry Ott confirmed was a dead fertilized egg in the fourth week of gestation. To save face, the court physicians published a bulletin on 21 August claiming that Alexandra had \"a straightforward miscarriage, without any complications.\" Humiliated, Alexandra sent Philippe to France.\nIn 1903 Alexandra and Nicholas decided to support the canonisation of Seraphim of Sarov. Before he left Russia Philippe told them that Seraphim would grant Alexandra a son. Seraphim had been a monk in the Tambov region who had supposedly performed local miracles and had been dead for seventy years. The Metropolitan of Moscow reluctantly agreed to canonize the saint. On 19 August Alexandra and Nicholas bathed in the Sarov Spring in which Seraphim had once bathed and prayed that the sacred waters would bless them with a son.\nIn 1904 Alexandra became pregnant. There was high anticipation for a son. As her due date drew near, a newspaper noted that \"a few days will decide whether the Czarina is to be the most popular woman in Russia, or regarded by the great bulk of the people as a castaway \u2013 under the special wrath of God.\" On 12 August 1904 Alexandra gave birth to Alexei Nikolaevich in Peterhof. Alexei's birth affirmed Nicholas and Alexandra's faith in Philippe. In her diary Nicholas's sister Olga wrote, \"I am sure it was Seraphim who brought it about.\" Nicholas wrote to Militza to \"pass on our gratitude and joy ... to Philippe.\"\nRelationship with her children.\nAlexandra had a distant relationship with Olga. She relied on Olga to keep her younger siblings in order. Her letters to Olga include frequent reminders to mind her siblings: \"Remember above all to always be a good example to the little ones\" and \"Try to have a serious word with Tatiana and Maria about how they should conduct themselves towards God.\" Olga was frustrated by trying to keep her boisterous siblings in order, and she complained that her mother had no time for her. Olga preferred her father.\nAlexandra was closest to her second daughter, Tatiana. Tatiana resembled Alexandra the most in terms of appearance and personality. She was described by her paternal aunt Xenia: \"[Tatiana] and her mother are like as two peas in a pod!... so pretty.\" She was cautious and reserved, and she was unquestioningly devoted to Alexandra. During the family's final months, she helped her mother by pushing her about the house in a wheelchair.\nMaria felt insecure about her role in the family, and Alexandra frequently assured Maria that she was as loved as her siblings: \"Sweet child you must promise me never again to think that nobody loves you. How did such an extraordinary idea get into your little head? Get it quickly out again.\" Maria worried that Alexandra favored Anastasia over her, and Alexandra reassured her that \"I have no secrets with Anastasia.\"\nAnastasia physically resembled Alexandra, but her boisterous, mischievous personality was very different from her mother's. She was dubbed the \"shvibzik,\" Russian for \"imp.\" During the family's last months, Anastasia was the only one who could make the melancholy Alexandra laugh.\nAlexandra doted on Alexei because he was her only son and the heir to the Russian Empire. The children's tutor Pierre Gilliard wrote, \"Alexei was the centre of a united family, the focus of all its hopes and affections. His sisters worshipped him. He was his parents' pride and joy. When he was well, the palace was transformed. Everyone and everything in it seemed bathed in sunshine.\" Alexandra was obsessed with trying to protect him from his disease of hemophilia. According to Gilliard, she \"press[ed] the little boy to her with the convulsive movement of a mother who always seems in fear of her child's life.\" She sat at Alexei's bedside for days as he suffered through his attacks. She feared that he would injure himself in tantrums, so she spoiled him and never punished him.\nDespite her fears of never bearing a son, Alexandra loved her daughters and called them her \"little four-leaved clover\". She wrote that \"our girlies are our joy and happiness\" and \"the apostles of God\".\nHealth.\nAlexandra's health was never robust and her frequent pregnancies, with four daughters in six years and her son three years after, drew from her energy. Her biographers, including Robert K. Massie, Carolly Erickson, Greg King, and Peter Kurth, attribute the semi-invalidism of her later years to nervous exhaustion from obsessive worry over the fragile tsarevich, who suffered from hemophilia. She spent most of her time in bed or reclining on a chaise in her boudoir or on a veranda. This immobility enabled her to avoid the social occasions that she found distasteful. Alexandra regularly took a herbal medicine known as \"adonis vernalis\" in order to regulate her pulse. She was constantly tired, slept badly, and complained of swollen feet. She ate little, but never lost weight (except for the last year of her life). She may have suffered from Graves disease (hyperthyroidism), a condition resulting in high levels of the thyroid hormone, which can also result in atrial fibrillation, poor heartbeat and lack of energy.\nHemophilia and Rasputin.\nTsarevich Alexei Nikolaevich of Russia was heir apparent to the throne of Russia and the only son of Nicholas and Alexandra. Shortly after his birth, the court doctors realized that he had hemophilia. After his umbilical cord was cut, his stomach bled for days, and his blood did not clot. Nicholas wrote that Alexei lost \"1/8 to 1/9 of the total quantity\" of his blood in 48 hours. Hemophilia had entered the royal houses of Europe via the daughters of Queen Victoria, including Alexandra's mother, Princess Alice. In the early 20th century, hemophilia was often fatal, and the average life expectancy of hemophiliacs was 13. Alexandra's brother, Friedrich, and maternal uncle Prince Leopold, Duke of Albany, had died young of hemophilia. Alexandra's sister Princess Irene of Hesse and by Rhine and first cousin Princess Victoria Eugenie of Battenberg were also carriers of the hemophilia gene and had hemophiliac sons.\nAlexandra felt immense guilt that she had passed down the disease to her son. Shortly after Alexei's diagnosis, she wept and told the nurse, \"If only you knew how fervently I've prayed for God to protect my son from our inherited curse.\" Nicholas's sister Xenia called hemophilia \"the terrible disease of the English family\", and members of the imperial family blamed Alexandra for \"contaminating the Romanovs with the diseases of her own race.\"\nAs the incurable illness threatened the sole son and heir of the emperor, the imperial family decided to keep his condition secret from the Russian people. They wanted to limit social instability because of uncertainty. At first, Alexandra turned to Russian doctors to treat Alexei. Their treatments generally failed. Burdened with the threats to her son from any fall or cut, Alexandra turned toward faith for comfort. She studied the Orthodox faith and saints and spent hours daily praying in her private chapel for deliverance.\nGrigori Rasputin, a peasant from Siberia, appeared to have a cure for her son by praying for him and became powerful in court as a result. Over time, Alexandra grew to believe that Rasputin was the only man who could save her son's life. Rasputin was straightforward with Alexandra and told her, \"Neither the Emperor nor you can do without me. If I am not there to protect you, you will lose your son... within six months.\" Alexandra blinded herself to evidence of Rasputin's debauchery and the harm his presence did to imperial prestige. The director of the national police told Alexandra that a drunk Rasputin had exposed himself at a popular Moscow restaurant and bragged that Nicholas gave him sexual access to her, but she blamed the account on malicious gossip. \"Saints are always calumniated,\" she once wrote. \"He is hated because we love him.\" Nicholas recognized Rasputin's faults, but he felt powerless to do anything about the man who seemingly saved his only son's life. Pierre Gilliard wrote, \"He did not like to send Rasputin away, for if Alexei died, in the eyes of the mother, he would have been the murderer of his own son.\"\nFrom the start, members of the court exchanged gossip about Rasputin. Although some of St Petersburg's top clergy accepted him as a living prophet, others angrily denounced him as a fraud and a heretic. Made-up stories from his life in Siberia were heard in St. Petersburg. For instance, he was said to conduct weddings for villagers in exchange for sleeping on the first night with the bride. He lived in St Petersburg with his two daughters and two housekeepers and was often visited by persons seeking his blessing, a healing, or a favour from the tsarina. Women, enchanted by the healer, also came to Rasputin for advice and individual blessings and received a private audience in his apartment, jokingly called the \"Holy of Holies\". Rasputin liked to preach a unique theology that one must become familiar with sin before having a chance to overcome it. No one believed that Rasputin could heal Alexei, so court officials were confused as to why Alexandra was so dependent on him.\nIn 1912, Alexei suffered a life-threatening haemorrhage in the thigh while the family was at Spa\u0142a in Poland. Alexandra sat for days at his bedside, and she rarely ate or slept. She cried helplessly when Alexei begged for death and asked her to bury him in a forest instead of the mausoleum with his Romanov ancestors. The doctors expected Alexei to die, and a priest performed his last rites. The court officials prepared an official telegram to announce the death of the tsarevich. In desperation, Alexandra sent a telegram to Rasputin, who replied: \"God has seen your tears and heard your prayers. Do not grieve. The Little One will not die. Do not allow the doctors to bother him too much.\" To the shock of his doctors, Alexei recovered his health and survived. From 1912, Alexandra came to rely increasingly on Rasputin and to believe in his ability to ease Alexei's suffering. It looked as if this reliance enhanced Rasputin's political power, but it is hard to detach gossip from the truth. His role in the court seriously undermined Romanov rule during the First World War.\nRasputin was assassinated to end his perceived interference in political matters on 30 December 1916. Among the conspirators were the nobleman Prince Felix Yusupov, who was married to Nicholas II's niece, Princess Irina of Russia, and Grand Duke Dmitri Pavlovich, who had once been close to Nicholas and Alexandra's family.\nWorld War I.\nThe outbreak of World War I was a pivotal moment for Russia and Alexandra. The war pitted the Russian Empire of the Romanov dynasty against the German Empire of the Hohenzollern dynasty. When Alexandra learned of the Russian mobilization, she stormed into her husband's study and said: \"War! And I knew nothing of it! This is the end of everything.\" During the first World War, Alexandra and Nicholas exchanged around 1,700 letters.\nAlexandra's ties to Germany made her more unpopular among some societies in Russia. Her brother Ernest Louis ruled the Grand Duchy of Hesse and by Rhine, so he fought with the Germans. The German Emperor, Wilhelm II, was Alexandra's first cousin. Alexandra's sister, Irene, was married to Wilhelm's brother, Henry. Ironically, Alexandra was an ardent Russian patriot and disliked the German Emperor. She privately wrote that Wilhelm II \"is really nothing but a clown. He has no real worth. His only virtues are his strict morals and his conjugal fidelity.\"\nHigh society in St Petersburg, renamed the Russified Petrograd, accused her of collaboration with the Germans. In Petrograd there was a rumor that Alexandra was hiding her brother Ernest in Russia. In 1916 Alexandra's lady-in-waiting wrote that she was asked \"in all seriousness whether the Grand Duke of Hesse was not hidden in the cellars of the palace.\" Alexandra worked as a nurse to wounded soldiers but her efforts went unappreciated. There were also rumors that Alexandra and Rasputin were carrying on nightly conversations with Wilhelm II in Berlin to negotiate a dishonorable peace.\nWhen Nicholas travelled to the front line in 1915 to take personal command of the army he left Alexandra in charge as regent in the capital. Her brother-in-law, Grand Duke Alexander Mikhailovich, recorded, \"When the Emperor went to war of course his wife governed instead of him.\"\nIt looked as if Alexandra appointed and dismissed ministers based on Rasputin's self-serving advice but those close to the imperial family circle denied it. In only sixteen months she appointed three prime ministers, five ministers of the interior and three ministers of war. \"After the middle of 1915,\" wrote Florinsky, \"the fairly honorable and efficient group who formed the top of the bureaucratic pyramid degenerated into a rapidly changing succession of the appointees of Rasputin.\" Alexei Polivanov was an excellent official, credited with revitalizing the Imperial Russian Army, but Alexandra declared, \"I don't like the choice of Minister of War Polivanov. Is he not our Friend's [Rasputin's] enemy?\" The general Grand Duke Nicholas Nikolaevich disliked Rasputin because Rasputin saw and told Alexandra that the grand duke was deliberately currying favor in the army and overshadowing Nicholas so that he could claim the throne. On 16 June Alexandra wrote to the tsar, \"I have absolutely no faith in N... [he has] gone against a Man of God [Rasputin], his work can't be blessed or his advice good... Russia will not be blessed if her sovereign lets a Man of God sent to help him be persecuted, I am sure.\" She insisted to Nicholas that \"[Rasputin] has your interest and Russia's at heart. It is not for nothing God sent him to us, only we must pay more attention to what He says. His words are not lightly spoken and the importance of having not only his prayers but his advice is great.\"\nEver a believer in autocracy, Alexandra persuaded Nicholas that he must never relinquish his absolute power as Emperor. She wrote to him: \"You are master and sovereign of Russia. Almighty God set you in place, and they should all bow down before your wisdom and steadfastness.\" She advised him to \"Be Peter the Great, Ivan the Terrible, Emperor Paul-- crush them all.\" She criticized the Duma and declared \"they want to discuss things not concerning them and bring more discontent\u2014they must be kept away... We are not ready for constitutional government.\"\nDuring the war there was great concern within the imperial house about the influence Empress Alexandra had upon state affairs through the Tsar and the influence Rasputin was believed to have upon her, since it was considered to provoke the public and endanger the safety of the imperial throne and the survival of the monarchy. On behalf of the imperial relatives of the Tsar, Grand Duchesses Elizabeth Feodorovna and Victoria Feodorovna had been selected to mediate and ask Empress Alexandra to banish Rasputin from court to protect her and the throne's reputation, the former twice, but without success. In parallel, several of the grand dukes had tried to intervene with the Tsar but with no more success.\nDuring this conflict of 1916\u20131917 Grand Duchess Maria Pavlovna reportedly planned a coup d'\u00e9tat to depose the Tsar with the help of four regiments of the Russian Imperial Guard, which were to invade the Alexander Palace, force the tsar to abdicate and replace him with his underage son under the regency of her son Grand Duke Kirill Vladimirovich.\nThere are documents that support the fact that, in this critical situation, the Empress Dowager Maria Feodorovna was involved in a planned coup d'\u00e9tat to depose her son from the throne in order to save the monarchy. The plan was reportedly for Maria to make a final ultimatum to the Tsar to banish Rasputin unless he wished her to leave the capital, which would be the signal to unleash the coup. Exactly how she planned to replace her son is unconfirmed but two versions are available: first, that Grand Duke Paul Alexandrovich would take power in her name and that she herself would thereafter become ruling empress; the other version claims that she and Grand Duke Paul would replace the Tsar with his son, the heir to the throne, Maria's grandson Alexei, whereupon Maria and Paul would share power as regents during his minority. Reportedly, Empress Alexandra was informed about the planned coup and when Maria Feodorovna made the ultimatum to the Tsar the empress persuaded him to order his mother to leave the capital. Consequently, the dowager empress left Petrograd to live in the Mariinskyi Palace in Kiev the same year. She never again returned to the capital of Russia.\nRevolution (1917).\nWorld War I put what proved to be an unbearable burden on Imperial Russia's government and economy, both of which were dangerously weak. Mass shortages and hunger became the daily situation for tens of millions of Russians owing to the disruptions of the war economy. Fifteen million men were diverted from agricultural production to fight in the war and the transport infrastructure (primarily railroads) was diverted towards war use, exacerbating food shortages in the cities since available agricultural products could not be brought to urban areas. Inflation was rampant. This, combined with the food shortages and the poor performance by the Russian military in the war, generated a great deal of anger and unrest among the people in Petrograd and other cities.\nThe decision of the Tsar to take personal command of the military was disastrous, since he was blamed personally for all losses. His relocation to the front, leaving the Empress in charge of the government, helped undermine the Romanov dynasty. The poor performance of the military led to rumours, believed by the people, that the German-born Empress was part of a conspiracy to help Germany win the war. Moreover, within several months of taking personal command of the army, the Tsar replaced several capable ministers with less able men at the Empress's and Rasputin's behest; most notable among these replacements was replacing N. B. Shcherbatov with Alexei Khvostov as minister of the interior. The severe winter of 1916\u201317 essentially doomed Imperial Russia. Food shortages worsened and famine gripped the cities. The mismanagement and failures of the war turned the soldiers against the Tsar. By 1917 the Tsar had realized that Russia could not fight the war much longer, and as railroads carried troops to the front there was little capacity left to bring food to the cities.\nBy March 1917 conditions had become even worse. Steelworkers went on strike on 7 March and the following day crowds hungry for bread began rioting on the streets of Petrograd to protest against food shortages and the war. After two days of rioting the Tsar ordered the army to restore order and on 11 March they fired on the crowd. That very same day the Duma, the elected legislature, urged the Tsar to take action to ameliorate the concerns of the people. The Tsar responded by dissolving the Duma.\nOn 12 March soldiers sent to suppress the rioting crowds mutinied and joined the rebellion, thus providing the spark to ignite the February Revolution. (Like the later October Revolution of November 1917, the Russian Revolutions of 1917 are named according to the Old-Style calendar.) Soldiers and workers set up the 'Petrograd Soviet\" of 2,500 elected deputies whilst the Duma declared a Provisional Government on 13 March. Alexander Kerensky was a key player in the new regime. The Duma informed the Tsar that day that he must abdicate.\nIn an effort to put an end to the uprising in the capital, Nicholas tried to get to Petrograd by train from army headquarters at Mogilev. The route was blocked so he tried another way. His train was stopped at Pskov where, after receiving advice from his generals, he first abdicated the throne for himself and later, on seeking medical advice, for himself and his son, the Tsarevich Alexei.\nAlexandra was now in a perilous position as the wife of the deposed Tsar, hated by the Russian people. Attempts were made by the mutinous Tsarskoye Selo garrison to storm the Alexander Palace but it was successfully defended by the palace guards. The palace guards and other troops gradually left for the capital after being informed about the abdication and Alexandra asked the Duma to put in place security measures for her and her household in view of the riots and violence in the nearby capital. On 18 March Mikhail Rodzianko sent the newly appointed Minister of War, Alexander Guchkov, and General Lavr Kornilov to Alexandra to inspect the security of the palace, which resulted in an officer being appointed to maintain the security of the palace as well as to act as a channel of communication between the palace and the Duma. After this Alexandra noticed that the guards defending the palace gradually began to wear handkerchiefs around their wrists, signalling that they supported the Duma, which also meant that she and her children, while being defended from immediate harm, were nevertheless under de facto house arrest from that moment on. Alexandra and her children and household were not molested in any way and the household was left to continue its everyday life as before, with the exception of occasional power cuts. On 21 March Kornilov informed Alexandra that she was formally under house arrest and the members of the household were informed that they were free to leave if they wished but if they chose to stay they would have to obey the same rules as pertained to the house arrest of Alexandra.\nThe following day, on 22 March, Nicholas was finally allowed to return to the Alexander Palace at Tsarskoe Selo, where he was placed under arrest with his family. Alexandra told him that \"the husband and father was of more value in her eyes than the Emperor whose throne she had shared.\"\nImprisonment (1917\u20131918).\nThe Provisional Government formed after the revolution kept Nicholas, Alexandra and their children confined under house arrest in their home, the Alexander Palace at Tsarskoye Selo. They were visited by Alexander Kerensky from the government, who interviewed Alexandra regarding her involvement in state affairs and Rasputin's involvement in them through his influence over her. She answered that as she and her spouse kept no secrets from each other they often discussed politics and she naturally gave him advice to support him; as for Rasputin, he had been a true holy man of God and his advice had been only in the interest of the good of Russia and the imperial family. After the interview Kerensky told the Tsar that he believed that Alexandra had told him the truth and was not lying.\nThe Provisional Government did not wish to keep the family in Russia, particularly as both the family and the government were under threat from the Bolsheviks; they trusted that the former Tsar and his family would be received in Great Britain and ensured that inquiries were being made. Despite the fact he was a first cousin of both Nicholas and Alexandra, George V refused to allow them and their family permission to evacuate to the United Kingdom, since he was alarmed by their unpopularity in his country and the potential repercussions to his own throne. After this it was suggested they be moved to France. However, although the French government was never asked, British diplomats in France reported that the family was not likely to be welcome there, since anti-German sentiments were strong in France during the war and Alexandra was widely unpopular because she was believed to be a sympathizer of Germany. The Provisional Government was reportedly very disappointed that no foreign state seemed to be willing to receive the family and was forced to relocate them within Russia, since the security situation was becoming more and more difficult.\nIn August 1917 the family were moved to Tobolsk in Siberia, a step by the Kerensky government designed to remove them from the capital and possible harm. Nicholas and Alexandra had themselves suggested that they be moved to the Livadia Palace in the Crimea, but Kerensky deemed it to be too dangerous: to get to the Crimea they would have to travel through Central Russia, an area at that time affected by widespread revolutionary violence and riots where the upper classes and aristocracy were attacked by the public and their mansions burned. Tobolsk in Siberia was, in contrast to Central and Southern Russia, a calm and peaceful place with greater security and more sympathy for the former Tsar. There were indications that the Provisional Government were actually attempting to transport them out of Russia by the Trans-Siberian Railway, thus fulfilling the government's wish to have them expelled, but now via a different route, after the first attempt to exile them to Europe had failed. However this plan was not revealed to the family, and if it had indeed been the intent of the government it had to be cancelled because of a strong Bolshevik presence in Yekaterinburg and other cities along the Trans-Siberian Railway east of Tobolsk, and the family therefore continued to their official destination.\nFrom Tobolsk Alexandra managed to send a letter to her sister-in-law, Xenia Alexandrovna, in Crimea:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My darling Xenia,\nMy thoughts are with you, how magically good and beautiful everything must be with you \u2013 you are the flowers. But it is indescribably painful for the kind motherland, I cannot explain. I am glad for you that you are finally with all your family as you have been apart. I would like to see Olga in all her new big happiness. Everybody is healthy, but myself, during the last 6 weeks I experience nerve pains in my face with toothache. Very tormenting ...\nWe live quietly, have established ourselves well [in Tobolsk] although it is far, far away from everybody, But God is merciful. He gives us strength and consolation ...\nAlexandra and her family remained in Tobolsk until after the Bolshevik Revolution in November 1917. The fall of the Provisional Government and the Bolshevik's accession to power greatly worsened their position.\nIn 1918 they were moved to Bolshevik-controlled Yekaterinburg. Nicholas, Alexandra and their daughter Maria arrived at the Ipatiev House on 30 April 1918. On entering their new prison they were ordered to open all their luggage. Alexandra immediately objected. Nicholas tried to come to her defence saying, \"So far we have had polite treatment and men who were gentlemen but now -\" The former Tsar was quickly cut off. The guards informed him he was no longer at Tsarskoye Selo and that refusal to comply with their request would result in his removal from the rest of his family; a second offence would be rewarded with hard labour. Fearing for her husband's safety, Alexandra quickly gave in and allowed the search. On the window frame of what was to be her last bedroom in the Ipatiev House, Alexandra scrawled a swastika, her favourite good-luck symbol, and pencilled the date 17/30 April 1918. In May the rest of the family arrived in Yekaterinburg. They had not been able to travel earlier owing to the illness of Alexei. Alexandra was pleased to be reunited with her family once more.\nSeventy-five men did guard duty at the Ipatiev House. Many of them were factory workers from the local Zlokazovsky Factory and the Verkh-Isetsk Factory. The commandant of the Ipatiev House, Alexander Avadeyev, was described as \"a real Bolshevik\". The majority of witnesses recall him as coarse, brutish and a heavy drinker. If a request for a favour on behalf of the family reached Avadeyev, he always gave the same response, \"Let them go to hell!\" The guards in the house often heard him refer to the deposed Tsar as \"Nicholas the Blood-Drinker\" and to Alexandra as \"The German Bitch\".\nFor the Romanovs life at the Ipatiev House was a nightmare of uncertainty and fear. The imperial family never knew if they would still be in the Ipatiev House from one day to the next or if they might be separated or killed. The privileges allowed to them were few. For an hour each afternoon they could exercise in the rear garden under the watchful eye of the guards. Alexei could still not walk and his sailor Nagorny had to carry him. Alexandra rarely joined her family in these daily activities. Instead she spent most of her time sitting in a wheelchair, reading the Bible or the works of St Seraphim. At night the Romanovs played cards or read; they received little mail from the outside world and the only newspapers they were allowed were outdated editions.\nDmitri Volkogonov and other Soviet historians believe that indirect evidence indicates that Vladimir Lenin personally ordered the execution of the imperial family, although official Soviet accounts place the responsibility for the decision with the Ural Regional Soviet. Leon Trotsky, in his diary, makes it quite clear that the execution took place on the authority of Lenin. Trotsky wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My next visit to Moscow took place after the fall of Ekaterinburg. Talking to Sverdlov I asked in passing, \"Oh yes, and where is the tsar?\" \"It's all over,\" he answered. \"He has been shot.\" \"And where is his family?\" \"And the family with him.\" \"All of them?\" I asked, apparently with a touch of surprise. \"All of them,\" replied Sverdlov. \"What about it?\" He was waiting to see my reaction. I made no reply. \"And who made the decision?\" I asked. \"We decided it here. Ilyich (Lenin) believed that we shouldn't leave The Whites a live banner to rally around, especially under the present difficult circumstances.\"\nOn 4 July 1918 Yakov Yurovsky, the chief of the Yekaterinburg Cheka, was appointed commandant of the Ipatiev House. Yurovsky was a loyal Bolshevik, a man Moscow could rely on to carry out its orders regarding the imperial family. Yurovsky quickly tightened security. From the imperial family he collected all of their jewellery and valuables. These he placed in a box which he sealed and left with the prisoners. Alexandra kept only two bracelets, which her uncle Prince Leopold, Duke of Albany had given her as a child and which she could not take off. He did not know that the former tsarina and her daughters wore concealed on their person diamonds, emeralds, rubies and ropes of pearls. These would be discovered only after the executions. Yurovsky had been given the order for the execution on 13 July.\nOn Sunday 14 July 1918 two priests came to the Ipatiev House to celebrate the Divine Liturgy. One of them, Father Storozhev, later recalled:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I went into the living room first, then the deacon and Yurovsky. At the same time Nicholas and Alexandra entered through the doors leading into the inner room. Two of his daughters were with him. I did not have a chance to see exactly which ones. I believe Yurovsky asked Nicholas Alexandrovich, \"Well, are you all here?\" Nicholas Alexandrovich answered firmly, \"Yes, all of us.\" Ahead beyond the archway, Alexandra Feodorovna was already in place with two daughters and Alexei Nicolaievich. He was sitting in a wheelchair and wore a jacket, as it seemed to me, with a sailor's collar. He was pale, but not so much as at the time of my first service. In general he looked more healthy. Alexandra Feodorovna also had a healthier appearance. ...According to the liturgy of the service it is customary at a certain point to read the prayer, \"Who Resteth with the Saints.\" On this occasion for some reason the deacon, instead of reading the prayer began to sing it, and I as well, somewhat embarrassed by this departure from the ritual. But we had scarcely begun to sing when I heard the members of the Romanov family, standing behind me, fall on their knees ...\nExecution.\nTuesday 16 July 1918 passed normally for the former imperial family. At four o'clock in the afternoon, Nicholas and his daughters took their usual walk in the small garden. Early in the evening, Yurovsky sent away the fifteen-year-old kitchen boy, Leonid Sednev, saying that his uncle wished to see him. At 7 pm, Yurovsky summoned all the Cheka men into his room and ordered them to collect all the revolvers from the outside guards. With twelve heavy military revolvers lying before him on the table he said, \"Tonight, we shoot the entire family, everybody.\" Upstairs Nicholas and Alexandra passed the evening playing bezique; at ten thirty they went to bed.\nThe former tsar, tsarina and all of their family, including the gravely ill Alexei, along with several family servants, were executed by firing squad and bayonets in the basement of the Ipatiev House, where they had been imprisoned, early in the morning of 17 July 1918, by a detachment of Bolsheviks led by Yakov Yurovsky. In the basement room of the Ipatiev House Alexandra complained that there were no chairs for them to sit on, whereupon Nicholas asked for and received three chairs from the guards. Minutes later, at about 2:15\u00a0am, a squad of soldiers, each armed with a revolver, entered the room. Their leader Yurovsky ordered the entire party to stand; Alexandra complied \"with a flash of anger\" and Yurovsky then casually pronounced, \"Your relatives have tried to save you. They have failed and we must now shoot you.\" Nicholas rose from his chair and had time to utter only \"What...?\" before he was shot several times, not (as is usually said) in the head but in the chest; his skull bears no bullet wounds but his ribs were shattered by at least three fatal bullet wounds. Standing about six feet from the gunmen and facing them, Alexandra watched the execution of her husband and two manservants before military commissar Peter Ermakov took aim at her. She instinctively turned away from him and began to make the sign of the cross, but before she could finish the gesture Ermakov killed her with a single gunshot which, as she had partly turned away, entered her head just above the left ear and exited at the same spot above her right ear. After all the victims had been shot, Ermakov in a drunken haze stabbed Alexandra's body and that of her husband, shattering both their rib cages and chipping some of Alexandra's vertebrae.\nIdentification of remains.\nAfter the execution of the Romanov family in the Ipatiev House, Alexandra's body, along with those of Nicholas, their children and some faithful retainers who died with them, was stripped and the clothing burnt according to the Yurovsky Note, a secret report by Yurovsky, which came to light in the late 1970s but did not become public knowledge until the 1990s. Initially the bodies were thrown down a disused mine-shaft at Ganina Yama, 12\u00a0miles\u00a0(19\u00a0km) north of Yekaterinburg. A short time later the bodies were retrieved. Their faces were smashed and the bodies, dismembered and disfigured with sulphuric acid, were hurriedly buried under railway sleepers with the exception of two of the children, whose bodies were not discovered until 2007. The Yurovsky Note helped the authorities to locate the bodies. The missing bodies were those of a daughter\u2014Maria or Anastasia\u2014and Alexei. In the early 1990s, following the fall of the Soviet Union, the bodies of the majority of the Romanovs were located along with their loyal servants, exhumed and formally identified. Preliminary results of genetic analysis carried out on the remains of a boy and a young woman believed to belong to Nicholas II's son and heir Alexei and daughter Anastasia or Maria were revealed on 22 January 2008. The Ekaterinburg region's chief forensic expert said, \"Tests conducted in Yekaterinburg and Moscow allowed DNA to be extracted from the bones, which proved positive,\" Nikolai Nevolin said. \"Once the genetic analysis has been completed in Russia, its results will be compared with test results from foreign experts.\" Nevolin said the final results would be published in April or May 2008. Certainty about the remains definitively put an end to the claim that Anna Anderson could be connected with the Romanovs, since all remaining bodies would be accounted for.\nDNA analysis represented a key means of identifying the bodies. A blood sample from Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh (a grandson of Alexandra's oldest sister, Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine), was used to identify Alexandra and her daughters through their mitochondrial DNA. They belonged to Haplogroup H (mtDNA). Nicholas was identified using DNA obtained from, among others, his late brother Grand Duke George Alexandrovich of Russia. Grand Duke George had died of tuberculosis in the late 1890s and was buried in the Peter and Paul Fortress in St Petersburg.\nBurial.\nAlexandra, Nicholas and three daughters plus the servants who were killed with them were reinterred in the St Catherine Chapel of the Peter and Paul Cathedral at the Peter and Paul Fortress in Saint Petersburg in 1998, with much ceremony, on the eightieth anniversary of the execution.\nPersonality and appearance.\nAlexandra was revered by many for her beauty. Her maternal grandmother, Queen Victoria, praised her as \"a most lovely child.\" Her friend Anna Vyrubova described her as \"tall...and delicately, beautifully shaped, with exquisitely white neck and shoulders. Her abundant hair, red gold, was so long that she could easily sit upon it when it was unbound. Her complexion was clear and as rosy as a little child's. The Empress had large eyes, deep gray and very lustrous.\" A lady-in-waiting, Baroness Sophie Buxhoeveden, said that she was \"a tall, slim girl\" with \"beautiful luminous eyes,\" \"regular features,\" a \"very good complexion,\" and \"beautiful golden hair.\" An imperial courtier commented favourably about \"her wonderful hair which lay like a heavy crown on her head and large dark-blue eyes beneath long lashes.\" In 1905, her daughters' tutor Pierre Gilliard wrote that \"the Tsarina was still a beautiful woman at that time. She was tall and slender and carried herself superbly. But all this ceased the moment one looked into her eyes\u2014those speaking, grey-blue eyes which mirrored the emotions of a sensitive soul.\"\nAlexandra was shy. When her grandmother Queen Victoria insisted that she play the piano for others, she felt that her \"clammy hands... [were] literally glued to the keys\" and later described the experience as \"one of the worst ordeals\" of her life. When she was empress, a page in the imperial household described her as \"so obviously nervous of conversation\" and claimed that \"at moments when she needed to show some social graces or a charming smile, her face would become suffused with little red spots and she would look intensely serious.\" Grand Duke Konstantin Konstantinovich of Russia noted that she \"is terribly shy... It's noticeable that she does not have her mother-in-law's charm, and still does not, therefore, inspire general adulation.\" Nadine Wonar-Larsky, her lady-in-waiting, noted that she was \"extremely shy even at such an informal affair as receiving\" Wonlar-Larsky and her mother to tea. An imperial courtier noted that \"when she was conversing or grew tired, her face became covered in red blotches [and] her hands were red and fleshy.\" She herself admitted that during social functions, she \"long[ed] to disappear into the ground.\" She told her friend Marie Bariatinsky that \"I am not made to shine before an assembly\u2014I have not got the easy nor the witty talk one needs for that.\" This was often mistaken as haughtiness. Her brother Ernest Louis reflected that \"she would unsmilingly tilt her head to one side if something displeased her, with the result that people often thought that she was unhappy, or bored, or simply capricious.\" Her daughters' tutor Pierre Gilliard reflected that \"the reserve which so many people had taken as an affront and had made her so many enemies was rather the effect of a natural timidity, as it were\u2014a mask covering her sensitiveness.\"\nEven from a young age, Alexandra was serious and melancholic. Her first cousin and childhood friend Princess Marie Louise said that she had \"a curious atmosphere of fatality.\" Princess Marie Louise allegedly asked her, \"Alix, you always play at being sorrowful; one day the Almighty will send you some real crushing sorrows, and then what are you going to do?\" Sir George William Buchanan, who was a diplomat for Alexandra's grandmother Queen Victoria, reflected that Alexandra had a \"sad and pathetic expression.\"\nAlexandra was devoutly religious. Although she loved Nicholas, she initially refused his proposal because she refused to convert from Lutheranism and join the Russian Orthodox Church, as was expected of all wives of Russian emperors. She told Nicholas that even though \"it grieves me terribly and makes me very unhappy\" not to marry him, leaving the Lutheran church would be \"a wrongful thing.\" Generous to her friends, she would try to help others: her lady-in-waiting Sophie Buxhoeveden wrote that she was \"ready to do literally anything for her friends\" and that \"she would take up things and people with violent enthusiasm.\" Alexandra admitted that \"I am of the preacher type. I want to help others in life, to help them to fight their battles and bear their crosses.\". Such feelings give a clue to her friendship with the plain, na\u00efve Anna Vyrubova whom she consoled after a brief and disastrous marriage.\nPrincess Alice had encouraged in her children the importance of and potential learning from literature and Alexandra grew up well-read in English and German. In her first years as empress, she translated Russian writings and studied Russian music to improve her command of the language. She read Leo Tolstoy's novels and discussed them with her husband.\nAlexandra enjoyed music. When she was young, she played the banjo and sang duets for hours with Queen Victoria's lady-in-waiting Minnie Cochrane. She enjoyed playing the piano with her daughter Olga, who inherited her musical talent.\nSainthood.\nIn 1981 Alexandra and her immediate family were recognised as martyrs by the Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia. In 2000 Alexandra was canonized as a saint and passion bearer by the Russian Orthodox Church, together with her husband, their children and others including her sister Grand Duchess Elisabeth Feodorovna and the Grand Duchess's fellow nun Varvara.\nArchives.\nAlexandra Feodorovna's letters to Anna Vyrubova and Lili Dehn, written in the years 1916\u20131918, are preserved in the 'Romanov collection' in the Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Yale University (New Haven, Connecticut, USA).\nDocuments about Alexandra and her family (including photographs and correspondence) can also be found in the Archive of the House of Hesse, which is kept in Fasanerie Palace in Eichenzell, Germany.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49862", "revid": "494861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49862", "title": "Ummayads", "text": ""}
{"id": "49863", "revid": "1314848765", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49863", "title": "Laputa", "text": "Fictional flying island\nLaputa is a flying island described in the 1726 book \"Gulliver's Travels\" by Jonathan Swift. It is about 4\u00bd miles (7\u00bckm) in diameter, with an adamantine base, which its inhabitants can manoeuvre in any direction using magnetic levitation. The island is the home of the king of Balnibarbi and his court, and is used by the king to enforce his rule over the lands below.\nLocation.\nLaputa was located above the realm of Balnibarbi, which was ruled by its king from the flying island. Gulliver states the island flew by the \"magnetic virtue\" of certain minerals in the grounds of Balnibarbi which did not extend to more than above, and beyond the extent of the kingdom, showing the limit of its range. The position of the island, and the realm below, is some five days' journey south-south-east of Gulliver's last known position, 46\u00b0 N, 183\u00b0 E (i.e. east of Japan, south of the Aleutian Islands) down a chain of small rocky islands.\nIn foreign languages.\nIn Spanish translations of Gulliver's Travels, \"Laputa\" was renamed as \"Lupata\", \"Laput\", \"Lapuda\", and so on, to avoid similarities with the vulgar phrase \"la puta\" (\"the whore\").\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49865", "revid": "36336112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49865", "title": "Abbadid dynasty", "text": "Arab Muslim dynasty (1023\u20131091)\nThe Abbadid dynasty or Abbadids () was an Arab dynasty from the tribe of Banu Lakhm of al-Hirah, which ruled the Taifa of Seville in al-Andalus following the fall of the Caliphate of Cordoba in 1031. After the collapse, they were the most powerful Taifa and before long absorbed most of the others. Abbadid rule lasted from about 1023 until 1091, but during the short period of its existence it exhibited singular energy and typified its time.\nOverview.\nDuring their reign, the Abbadids also made significant contributions to the development of science, military technology and medicine. Their patronage of scholars and researchers helped to create a culture of learning that encouraged scientific inquiry and experimentation. The Abbadids' interest in science is evident in the many scientific works that were written during their reign, including the famous Book of Optics by the polymath Ibn al-Haytham.\nIn addition to their patronage of the arts, sciences, and literature, the Abbadids also made significant contributions to the development of Islamic law and jurisprudence. They were known for their fair and just rule, and they encouraged the use of Islamic law to settle disputes and conflicts. This helped to create a stable and peaceful society in Andalusia, which was admired by people throughout the Muslim world.\nDespite their many achievements, the Abbadids were eventually overthrown by the Almoravids, who were more conservative and orthodox in their interpretation of Islam. The Almoravids saw the Abbadids' tolerance of other religions and cultures as a threat to the purity of Islam, and they were determined to impose their own strict interpretation of the faith on Andalusia. This led to a period of religious and cultural repression that stifled the creative and intellectual energy of the region.\nDespite their eventual downfall, the Abbadids left a lasting legacy in Andalusia. They were known for their love of art and architecture, their patronage of literature and science, and their tolerance of other religions and cultures. Their reign helped to create a rich and diverse society that was admired throughout the Muslim world, and their contributions to Islamic law and jurisprudence helped to create a stable and just society in Andalusia. The Abbadids' legacy continues to be celebrated today as an important period in the history of the Iberian Peninsula.\nHistory.\nAbu al-Qasim Muhammad ibn Abbad (ruled 1023\u20131042).\nAbu al-Qasim Muhammad ibn Abbad (r.\u20091023\u00a0\u2013\u00a01042), the \"qadi\" of Seville, founded the house in 1023.\nThe Abbadids had not previously played a major role in history though they were of noble pedigree from tribe Lakhm in Egypt and were among the first Arab Muslim families to settle in al-Andalus after the Umayyad conquest of Hispania. Abu al-Qasim's father, Isma'il ibn Abbad (died 1023) was named as \"qadi\" of Sevilla by the regent Almanzor, and established his family's leading role in the city: the contemporary historian Ibn Hayyan reports that his son owned no less than third of Seville's territory, making him by far the richest man in the city.\nAbu al-Qasim gained the confidence of the townsmen by playing a major role in the successful resistance to the Berber soldiers of fortune who had grasped at the fragments of the Caliphate of Cordoba. After the Berbers were forced out, he was, by near unanimous voice of the people and prompting of the merchant and nobles, given the reins of power. Initially, he refused the position, worried of the fatal repercussions that could follow failure or the changing of the voice of the people. At first, he professed to rule only with the advice of a council formed of the nobles.\nAbu al-Qasim's first order of business was to rebuild the military of Seville, which had, in recent times, disappeared. This, he accomplished by first creating recruiting posts in all settlements controlled by Seville. The promise of substantial pay along with promises of unrestricted looting brought many able men to him. Second, he opened the ranks to all races and social class, as Berbers, Arabs, Christians, and foreigners were all accepted along with slaves from Nubia and Sudan. Before the military could become a formidable force, a Berber army from M\u00e1laga was at the gates demanding entrance and fealty, in the form of sons of the richest and most powerful nobles and merchants as hostages. Abu al-Qasim, to show his people his trust in the situation, offered his own son as solitary collateral. This show of bravery, convinced his population to follow him with near zeal, and at this time dismissed the council and began his solitary rule.\nFrom this point on, he was able to make small inroads into the small principalities surrounding him. This began with an alliance forged with the governor of Carmona. His first conquest was Beja, followed by the plunder and subsequent control of the coastal regions from C\u00e1diz west. The Taifa of Badajoz was next as he defeated and captured the son of the emir, and at this early time nearly defeated the Taifa of C\u00f3rdoba, beaten back at the end by an alliance Cordoba made with the Berbers.\nThe Berbers continued to be a thorn in the side of Abu al-Qasim, as they now recognized Yahya as their supreme leader, something that had not been accomplished before. At this time, it was apparent to Abu al-Qasim that a coalition was needed to defeat the growing Berber threat; however it was also apparent that he would not be accepted as the head of this coalition of caliphates. Abu al-Qasim was able to procure an imposter who resembled the caliph Hisham II. This man, who was a mat-maker by trade, had previously been involved in an unsuccessful attempt at trickery. This time the deception was successful and the coalition formed starting with Cordoba, then followed by D\u00e9nia, Balearic Islands, Tortosa, and Valencia. Angered by the growing forces against him, Yahya was lured into an ambush and along with the larger portion of his command killed. When Abu al-Qasim died in 1042 he had created a state which, though weak in itself, appeared strong as compared to its neighbours. He had made his family the recognized leaders of the Andalusian Muslims against the neo-Berber element arrayed under the king of Granada.\nAbbad II al-Mu'tadid (ruled 1042\u20131069).\nAbbad II al-Mu'tadid (1042\u20131069), the son and successor of Abu al-Qasim, became one of the most remarkable figures in Iberian Muslim history. He had a striking resemblance to the Italian princes of the later Middle Ages and the early Renaissance, of the stamp of Filippo Maria Visconti.\nAbbad wrote poetry and loved literature; he also appears as a poisoner, a drinker of wine, a sceptic, and a man treacherous to the utmost degree. Though he waged war all through his reign, he himself very rarely appeared in the field, but directed the generals, whom he never trusted, from his \"lair\" in the fortified palace, the Alc\u00e1zar of Seville. He killed with his own hand one of his sons who had rebelled against him. In 1053, he tricked a number of his enemies, the Berber chiefs of southern al-Andalus, into visiting him, and got rid of them by smothering them in the hot room of a bath. He then seized their kingdoms of Arcos, Moron, and Ronda. He also forcibly annexed the kingdoms of Mertola, Niebla, Huelva and Saltes, Santa Maria do Algarve, and Silves.\nHe habitually preserved the skulls of the enemies he had killed\u2014those of the meaner men to be used as flower-pots, while those of the princes were kept in special chests. He devoted his reign mainly to extending his power at the expense of his smaller neighbours, and in conflicts with his chief rival the king of Granada. These incessant wars weakened the Muslims, to the great advantage of the rising power of the Christian kings of Le\u00f3n and Castile, but they gave the kingdom of Seville a certain superiority over the other little states. After 1063 he was assailed by Fernando El Magno of Castile and Le\u00f3n, who marched to the gates of Seville, and forced him to pay tribute. This fealty was so complete, for the remaining two years of Fernando's reign, that Abbad even surrendered the remains of St. Isidore.\nMuhammad al-Mu'tamid (ruled 1069\u20131095).\nThe son of Abbad II, Muhammad al-Mu'tamid (1069\u20131095) \u2014 who reigned under the title \"al-Mu'tamid\" \u2014 was the third and last of the Abbadids. No less remarkable than his father, and more amiable, he also wrote poetry and favoured poets. Al-Mu'tamid went, however, considerably further in patronage of literature than his father, for he chose as his favourite and prime minister the poet Ibn Ammar. In the end the vanity and folly of Ibn Ammar drove his master to kill him.\nAl-Mu'tamid was even more influenced by his favourite wife, al-Rumaikiyya, than by his vizier. He had met her paddling in the Guadalquivir, purchased her from her master, and made her his wife. The caprices of Romaica, and the lavish extravagance of Abbad III in his efforts to please her, form the subject of many stories; a brief tale of the queen appears in the book \"'Libro de los ejemplos del Conde Lucanor y de Patronio\" (Book of the examples of Count Lucanor and Patronio), as the tale XXX, \"De lo que aconteci\u00f3 al rey Abenabed de Sevilla con su mujer, Ramaiqu\u00eda\" (Of What Happened to King Abenabed of Seville with his Wife, Ramaiqu\u00eda). On the other hand, the stories about Ibn Ammar and Rumaiqiyya that appear in much later western works probably describe imaginary events.\nIn 1071, al-Mu'tamid took control of Cordoba. This was a weak period of control as he had to re-assert control in 1078 and then lost it permanently in 1081. During this period his vizier Ibn Ammar captured Murcia. This period marked the beginning of the end for the Abbadid dynasty, as the following years saw them growing weaker and weaker due to a number of events: first came the start of hostilities with Alfonso VI, followed by the Christians succeeding in Aragon, Valencia, and Toledo; finally, domestic Muslims created issues at home. When Alfonso VI, from Castile, took Toledo in 1085, Al-Mu'tamid called in Yusuf ibn Tashfin, the Berber Almoravid ruler. He had foreseen the probability that the Almoravids might overthrow him; nevertheless, he chose to ally with them. When his son, Rashid, advised him not to call on Yusuf ibn Tashfin, Al-Mu'tamid rebuffed him and famously said,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have no desire to be branded by my descendants as the man who delivered al-Andalus as prey to the infidels. I am loath to have my name cursed in every Muslim pulpit. And, for my part, I would rather be a camel-driver in Africa than a swineherd in Castile.\nWith the assistance of the Almoravids, they were able to defeat Alfonso in 1086. During the six years which preceded his deposition in 1091, Abbasid behaved with valour on the field, but was politically inept and cruel. At the end what he had foreseen happened to him: in 1095 his kingdom was overthrown by Yusuf ibn Tashfin and Almoravid sympathizers within his city, following which he was deposed. He was exiled to Morocco\nAl-Mu'tamid was the father-in-law, through his son, Fath al-Mamun (d. 1091), of Zaida, mistress, and possibly wife, of Alfonso VI of Castile. She is said by Iberian Muslim sources to have been the daughter-in-law of Al Mutamid, the Muslim King of Seville, wife of his son Abu al Fatah al Ma'Mun, Emir of Cordoba, (d. 1091). Later Iberian Christian chroniclers call her Al Mutamid's daughter, but the Islamic chroniclers are considered more reliable. With the fall of Seville to the Almoravids, she fled to the protection of Alfonso VI of Castile, becoming his mistress, converting to Christianity and taking the baptismal name of Isabel.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49867", "revid": "36336112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49867", "title": "Almohad Caliphate", "text": "1121\u20131269 Berber empire in North Africa and Iberia\nThe Almohad Caliphate or Almohad Empire was a North African Berber Muslim empire founded in the 12th century. At its height, it controlled much of the Iberian Peninsula (Al-Andalus) and North Africa (the Maghreb).\nThe Almohad movement was founded by Ibn Tumart among the Berber Masmuda tribes, but the Almohad caliphate and its ruling dynasty, known as the Mu'minid dynasty, were founded after his death by Abd al-Mu'min. Around 1121, Ibn Tumart was recognized by his followers as the Mahdi, and shortly afterwards he established his base at Tinmel in the Atlas Mountains. Under Abd al-Mu'min (r. 1130\u20131163), they succeeded in overthrowing the ruling Almoravid dynasty governing the western Maghreb in 1147, when he conquered Marrakesh and declared himself caliph. They then extended their power over all of the Maghreb by 1159. Al-Andalus followed, and all of Muslim Iberia was under Almohad rule by 1172.\nThe turning point of their presence in the Iberian Peninsula came in 1212, when Almohad Caliph Muhammad al-Nasir (1199\u20131214) was defeated at the Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa in the Sierra Morena by an alliance of the Christian forces from Castile, Aragon and Navarre. Much of the remaining territories of al-Andalus were lost in the ensuing decades, with the cities of C\u00f3rdoba and Seville falling to the Christians in 1236 and 1248 respectively.\nThe Almohads continued to rule in Africa until the piecemeal loss of territory through the revolt of tribes and districts enabled the rise of their most effective enemies, the Marinids in 1215. The last representative of the line, Idris al-Wathiq, was reduced to the possession of Marrakesh, where he was murdered by a slave in 1269; the Marinids seized Marrakesh, ending the Almohad domination of the Western Maghreb.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe Almohad movement originated with Ibn Tumart, a member of the Masmuda, an Amazigh tribal confederation of the Atlas Mountains of southern Morocco. At the time, present-day Morocco, Mauritania, western Algeria and parts of Spain and Portugal (al-Andalus) were under the rule of the Almoravids, a Sanhaja Berber dynasty. Early in his life, Ibn Tumart went to Spain to pursue his studies, and thereafter to Baghdad to deepen them. In Baghdad, Ibn Tumart attached himself to the theological school of al-Ash'ari, and came under the influence of the teacher al-Ghazali. He soon developed his own system, combining the doctrines of various masters. Ibn Tumart's main principle was a strict unitarianism (\"tawhid\"), which denied the independent existence of the attributes of God as being incompatible with His unity, and therefore a polytheistic idea. Ibn Tumart represented a revolt against what he perceived as anthropomorphism in Muslim orthodoxy. His followers would become known as the \"al-Muwa\u1e25\u1e25id\u016bn\" (\"Almohads\"), meaning those who affirm the unity of God.\nAfter his return to the Maghreb c.\u00a01117, Ibn Tumart spent some time in various Ifriqiyan cities, preaching and agitating, heading riotous attacks on wine-shops and on other manifestations of laxity. He laid the blame for the latitude on the ruling dynasty of the Almoravids, whom he accused of obscurantism and impiety. He also opposed their sponsorship of the Maliki school of jurisprudence, which drew upon consensus (\"ijma\") and other sources beyond the Qur'an and Sunnah in their reasoning, an anathema to the stricter Zahirism favored by Ibn Tumart. His antics and fiery preaching led fed-up authorities to move him along from town to town. After being expelled from Bejaia, Ibn Tumart set up camp in Mellala, in the outskirts of the city, where he received his first disciples \u2013 notably, al-Bashir (who would become his chief strategist) and Abd al-Mu'min (a Zenata Berber of the Kumiya tribe who would later become his successor).\nIn 1120, Ibn Tumart and his small band of followers proceeded to Morocco, stopping first in Fez, where he briefly engaged the Maliki scholars of the city in debate. He even went so far as to assault the sister of the Almoravid emir Ali ibn Yusuf, in the streets of Fez, because she was going about unveiled, after the manner of Berber women. After being expelled from Fez, he went to Marrakesh, where he successfully tracked down the Almoravid emir Ali ibn Yusuf at a local mosque, and challenged the emir, and the leading scholars of the area, to a doctrinal debate. After the debate, the scholars concluded that Ibn Tumart's views were blasphemous and the man dangerous, and urged him to be put to death or imprisoned. But the emir decided merely to expel him from the city.\nIbn Tumart took refuge among his own people, the Hargha, in his home village of Igiliz (exact location uncertain), in the Sous valley. He retreated to a nearby cave, and lived out an ascetic lifestyle, coming out only to preach his program of puritan reform, attracting greater and greater crowds. At length, towards the end of Ramadan in late 1121, after a particularly moving sermon, reviewing his failure to persuade the Almoravids to reform by argument, Ibn Tumart 'revealed' himself as the true Mahdi, a divinely guided judge and lawgiver, and was recognized as such by his audience. This was effectively a declaration of war on the Almoravid state.\nOn the advice of one of his followers, Omar Hintati, a prominent chieftain of the Hintata, Ibn Tumart abandoned his cave in 1122 and went up into the High Atlas, to organize the Almohad movement among the highland Masmuda tribes. Besides his own tribe, the Hargha, Ibn Tumart secured the adherence of the Ganfisa, the Gadmiwa, the Hintata, the Haskura, and the Hazraja to the Almohad cause. Sometime around 1124, Ibn Tumart established his base at Tinmel, a highly defensible position in the valley of the Nfis in the High Atlas. Tinmal would serve both as the spiritual center and military headquarters of the Almohad movement. It became their (roughly 'place of retreat'), emulating the story of the \"hijra\" (journey) of Muhammad's to Medina in the 7th century.\nFor the first eight years, the Almohad rebellion was limited to a guerilla war along the peaks and ravines of the High Atlas. Their principal damage was in rendering insecure (or altogether impassable) the roads and mountain passes south of Marrakesh \u2013 threatening the route to all-important Sijilmassa, the gateway of the trans-Saharan trade. Unable to send enough manpower through the narrow passes to dislodge the Almohad rebels from their easily defended mountain strong points, the Almoravid authorities reconciled themselves to setting up strongholds to confine them there (most famously the fortress of Tasgh\u00eem\u00fbt that protected the approach to Aghmat, which was conquered by the Almohads in 1132), while exploring alternative routes through more easterly passes.\nIbn Tumart organized the Almohads as a commune, with a minutely detailed structure. At the core was the \"Ahl ad-d\u0101r\" (\"House of the Mahdi\"), composed of Ibn Tumart's family. This was supplemented by two councils: an inner Council of Ten, the Mahdi's privy council, composed of his earliest and closest companions; and the consultative Council of Fifty, composed of the leading \"sheikh\"s of the Masmuda tribes. The early preachers and missionaries (\"\u1e6dalaba\" and \"huff\u0101\u1e93\") also had their representatives. Militarily, there was a strict hierarchy of units. The Hargha tribe coming first (although not strictly ethnic; it included many \"honorary\" or \"adopted\" tribesmen from other ethnicities, e.g. Abd al-Mu'min himself). This was followed by the men of Tinmel, then the other Masmuda tribes in order, and rounded off by the black fighters, the \"\u02bbab\u012bd\". Each unit had a strict internal hierarchy, headed by a \"mohtasib\", and divided into two factions: one for the early adherents, another for the late adherents, each headed by a \"mizwar\" (or \"amzwaru\"); then came the \"sakkakin\" (treasurers), effectively the money-minters, tax-collectors, and bursars, then came the regular army (\"jund\"), then the religious corps \u2013 the muezzins, the \"hafidh\" and the \"hizb\" \u2013 followed by the archers, the conscripts, and the slaves. Ibn Tumart's closest companion and chief strategist, al-Bashir, took upon himself the role of \"political commissar\", enforcing doctrinal discipline among the Masmuda tribesmen, often with a heavy hand.\nIn early 1130, the Almohads finally descended from the mountains for their first sizeable attack in the lowlands. It was a disaster for their opponents. The Almohads swept aside an Almoravid column that had come out to meet them before Aghmat, and then chased their remnant all the way to Marrakesh. They laid siege to Marrakesh for forty days until, in April (or May) 1130, the Almoravids sallied from the city and crushed the Almohads in the bloody Battle of al-Buhayra (named after a large garden east of the city). The Almohads were thoroughly routed, with huge losses. Half their leadership was killed in action, and the survivors only just managed to scramble back to the mountains.\nCaliphate and expansion.\nIbn Tumart died shortly after, in August 1130. That the Almohad movement did not immediately collapse after such a devastating defeat and the death of their charismatic Mahdi, is likely due to the skills of his successor, Abd al-Mu'min. Ibn Tumart's death was kept a secret for three years, a period which Almohad chroniclers described as a \"ghayba\" or \"occultation\". This period likely gave Abd al-Mu'min time to secure his position as successor to the political leadership of the movement. Although a Zenata Berber from Tagra (Algeria), and thus an alien among the Masmuda of southern Morocco, Abd al-Mu'min nonetheless saw off his principal rivals and hammered wavering tribes back to the fold. Three years after Ibn Tumart's death he was officially proclaimed \"Caliph\".\nAfter 1133, Abd al-Mu'min quickly expanded Almohad control across the Maghreb, while the embattled Almoravids retained their capital in Marrakesh. Various other tribes rallied to the Almohads or to the Almoravids as the war between them continued. Initially, Almohad operations were limited to the Atlas mountains. In 1139, they expanded to the Rif mountains in the north. One of their early bases beyond the mountains was Taza, where Abd al-Mu\"min founded a citadel (\"ribat\") and a Great Mosque circa 1142.\nThe Almoravid ruler, Ali ibn Yusuf, died in 1143 and was succeeded by his son, Tashfin ibn Ali. The tide turned more definitively in favour of the Almohads from 1144 onwards, when the Zenata tribes in what is now western Algeria joined the Almohad camp, along with some of the previously Almoravid-aligned leaders of the Masufa tribe. This allowed them to defeat Tashfin decisively and capture Tlemcen in 1144. Tashfin fled to Oran, which the Almohads then attacked and captured, and he died in March 1145 while trying to escape. The Almohads pursued the defeated Almoravid army west to Fez, which they captured in 1146 after a nine-month siege. They finally captured Marrakesh in 1147, after an eleven-month siege. The last Almoravid ruler, Ishaq ibn Ali, was killed.\nIn 1151, Abd al-Mu'min launched an expedition to the east. This may have been encouraged by the Norman conquests along the coast of Ifriqiya, as fighting the Christian invaders here gave him a pretext for conquering the rest of the region. In August 1152, he captured B\u00e9ja\u00efa, the capital of the Hammadids. The last Hammadid ruler, Yahya ibn Abd al-Aziz, fled by sea. The Arab tribes of the region, the Banu Hilal and Banu Sulaym, reacted to the Almohad advance by gathering an army against them. The Almohads routed them in the Battle of S\u00e9tif in April 1153. Abd al-Mu'min nonetheless saw value in their military abilities. He persuaded them by various means \u2013 including taking some families as hostages to Marrakesh and more generous actions like offering them material and land incentives \u2013 to move to present-day Morocco and join the Almohad armies. These moves also had the corollary effect of advancing the Arabisation of future Morocco. They were specifically settled into the Atlantic plains of Morocco which was previously depopulated by the Almohads. Without the Almohad recruitment of Arabs and resettling into the Atlantic plains, Morocco would have avoided the rural Arabisation that came with the Hilalian migrations into the Maghreb. The settlement added to the ethnic complexity of the Maghreb and the Arabs became the most powerful force in the Moroccan plains when the Almohad army declined. The Berbers who previously inhabited these plains were either Arabized or displaced to nearby mountains. There was also a significant amount of Arab and Berber intermarriage which led to the spread of Arabic language and restructuring of tribal structures. These plains are inhabited today by the descendants of these Arab tribes known as the \"\u0295roubiya\" \u2013 a name that literally means \"Bedouins\".\nAbd al-Mu'min spent the mid-1150s organizing the Almohad state and arranging for power to be passed on through his family line. In 1154, he declared his son Muhammad as his heir. In order to neutralise the power of the Masmuda, he relied on his tribe of origin, the Kumiyas (from the central Maghreb), whom he integrated into the Almohad power structure and from whom he recruited some 40,000 into the army. They would later form the bodyguard of the caliph and his successors. In addition, Abd al-Mu'min relied on Arabs, the great Hilalian families that he had deported to Morocco, to further weaken the influence of the Masmuda sheikhs. These Arabs became embedded in the Almohad elite to the point that they became partners in giving the \"bay\u2018a\" to a new caliph. These Arabs formed the most important contingents in the Almohad military in Ifriqiya, al-Andalus and the provinces and they were used on a regular basis in larger military expeditions within the empire. According to Andalusian historian Ibn Sahib al-Salat, the Arabs had a higher rate of pay than other soldiers in the Almohad military.\nWith his son appointed as his successor, Abd al-Mu'min placed his other children as governors of the provinces of the caliphate. His sons and descendants became known as the \"sayyid\"s (\"nobles\"). To appease the traditional Masmuda elites, he appointed some of them, along with theirs sons and descendants, to act as important advisers, deputies, and commanders under the \"sayyid\"s. They became known as the or \"Sons of the Almohads\". Abd al-Mu'min also altered the Almohad structure set up by Ibn Tumart by making the \"huffaz\" or reciters of the Quran into a training school of the Almohad elite. They were no longer described as \"memorisers\" but as \"guardians\" who learned riding, swimming, archery, and received a general education of high standards.\nAbd al-Mu'min thus transformed the Almohads from an aristocratic Masmuda movement to a dynastic Mu'minid state. While most of the Almohad elites accepted this new concentration of power, it nonetheless triggered an uprising by two of Ibn Tumart's half-brothers, 'Abd al-'Aziz and 'Isa. Shortly after Abd al-Mu'min announced his heir, towards 1154\u20131155, they rebelled in Fez and then marched on Marrakesh, whose governor they killed. Abd al-Mu'min, who had been in Sal\u00e9, returned to the city, defeated the rebels, and had everyone involved executed.\nIn March 1159, Abd al-Mu'min led a new campaign to the east. He conquered Tunis by force when the local Banu Khurasan leaders refused to surrender. Mahdia was besieged soon after and surrendered in January 1160. The Normans there negotiated their withdrawal and were allowed to leave for Sicily. Tripoli, which had rebelled against the Normans two years earlier, recognized Almohad authority right after.\nIn the 1170s and 1180s, Almohad power in the eastern Maghreb was challenged by the Banu Ghaniya and by Qaraqush, an Ayyubid commander. Yaqub al-Mansur eventually defeated both factions and reconquered Ifriqiya in 1187\u20131188. In 1189\u20131190, the Ayyubid sultan Salah ad-Din (Saladin) requested the assistance of an Almohad navy for his fight against the crusaders, which al-Mansur declined.\nExpansion into al-Andalus.\nAl-Andalus followed the fate of North Africa. Between 1146 and 1173, the Almohads gradually wrested control from the Almoravids over the Muslim principalities in Iberia. The Almohads transferred the capital of Muslim Iberia from C\u00f3rdoba to Seville. They founded a great mosque there; its tower, the Giralda, was erected in 1184. The Almohads also built a palace there called Al-Muwarak on the site of the modern-day Alc\u00e1zar of Seville.\nThe successors of Abd al-Mumin, Abu Yaqub Yusuf (Yusuf I, ruled 1163\u20131184) and Abu Yusuf Yaqub al-Mansur (Ya\u02bbq\u016bb I, ruled 1184\u20131199), were both able men. Initially their government drove many Jewish and Christian subjects to take refuge in the growing Christian states of Portugal, Castile, and Aragon. Ultimately they became less fanatical than the Almoravids, and Ya'qub al-Mansur was a highly accomplished man who wrote a good Arabic style and protected the philosopher Averroes. In 1190\u20131191, he campaigned in southern Portugal and won back territory lost in 1189. His title of \"al-Man\u1e63\u016br\" (\"the Victorious\") was earned by his victory over Alfonso VIII of Castile in the Battle of Alarcos (1195). His rule as caliph for 15 years came upon his death in 1199, likely of an illness from natural causes during a campaign against Spanish Christian forces. \nFrom the time of Yusuf II, however, the Almohads governed their co-religionists in Iberia and central North Africa through lieutenants, their dominions outside Morocco being treated as provinces. When Almohad emirs crossed the Straits it was to lead a jihad against the Christians and then return to Morocco.\nHolding years.\nIn 1212, the Almohad Caliph Muhammad 'al-Nasir' (1199\u20131214), the successor of al-Mansur, after an initially successful advance north, was defeated by an alliance of the three Christian kings of Castile, Arag\u00f3n and Navarre at the Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa in the Sierra Morena. The battle broke the Almohad advance, but the Christian powers remained too disorganized to profit from it immediately.\nBefore his death in 1213, al-Nasir appointed his young ten-year-old son as the next caliph Yusuf II \"al-Mustansir\". The Almohads passed through a period of effective regency for the young caliph, with power exercised by an oligarchy of elder family members, palace bureaucrats and leading nobles. The Almohad ministers were careful to negotiate a series of truces with the Christian kingdoms, which remained more-or-less in place for next fifteen years (the loss of Alc\u00e1cer do Sal to the Kingdom of Portugal in 1217 was an exception).\nIn early 1224, the youthful caliph died in an accident, without any heirs. The palace bureaucrats in Marrakesh, led by the \"wazir\" Uthman ibn Jam'i, quickly engineered the election of his elderly grand-uncle, Abd al-Wahid I 'al-Makhlu', as the new Almohad caliph. But the rapid appointment upset other branches of the family, notably the brothers of the late al-Nasir, who governed in al-Andalus. The challenge was immediately raised by one of them, then governor in Murcia, who declared himself Caliph Abdallah al-Adil. With the help of his brothers, he quickly seized control of al-Andalus. His chief advisor, the shadowy Abu Zayd ibn Yujjan, tapped into his contacts in Marrakesh, and secured the deposition and assassination of Abd al-Wahid I, and the expulsion of the al-Jami'i clan.\nThis coup has been characterized as the pebble that finally broke al-Andalus. It was the first internal coup among the Almohads. The Almohad clan, despite occasional disagreements, had always remained tightly knit and loyally behind dynastic precedence. Caliph al-Adil's murderous breach of dynastic and constitutional propriety marred his acceptability to other Almohad \"sheikhs\". One of the recusants was his cousin, Abd Allah al-Bayyasi (\"the Baezan\"), the Almohad governor of Ja\u00e9n, who took a handful of followers and decamped for the hills around Baeza. He set up a rebel camp and forged an alliance with the hitherto quiet Ferdinand III of Castile. Sensing his greater priority was Marrakesh, where recusant Almohad \"sheikh\"s had rallied behind Yahya, another son of al-Nasir, al-Adil paid little attention to them.\nDecline in al-Andalus.\nIn 1225, Abd Allah al-Bayyasi's band of rebels, accompanied by a large Castilian army, descended from the hills, besieging cities such as Ja\u00e9n and And\u00fajar. They raided throughout the regions of Ja\u00e9n, C\u00f3rdoba and Vega de Granada and, before the end of the year, al-Bayyasi had established himself in the city of C\u00f3rdoba. Sensing a power vacuum, both Alfonso IX of Le\u00f3n and Sancho II of Portugal opportunistically ordered raids into Andalusian territory that same year. With Almohad arms, men and cash dispatched to Morocco to help Caliph al-Adil impose himself in Marrakesh, there was little means to stop the sudden onslaught. In late 1225, with surprising ease, the Portuguese raiders reached the environs of Seville. Knowing they were outnumbered, the Almohad governors of the city refused to confront the Portuguese raiders, prompting the disgusted population of Seville to take matters into their own hands, raise a militia, and go out in the field by themselves. The result was a veritable massacre \u2013 the Portuguese men-at-arms easily mowed down the throng of poorly armed townsfolk. Thousands, perhaps as much as 20,000, were said to have been slain before the walls of Seville. A similar disaster befell a similar popular levy by Murcians at Aspe that same year. But Christian raiders had been stopped at C\u00e1ceres and Requena. Trust in the Almohad leadership was severely shaken by these events \u2013 the disasters were promptly blamed on the distractions of Caliph al-Adil and the incompetence and cowardice of his lieutenants, the successes credited to non-Almohad local leaders who rallied defenses.\nBut al-Adil's fortunes were briefly buoyed. In payment for Castilian assistance, al-Bayyasi had given Ferdinand III three strategic frontier fortresses: Ba\u00f1os de la Encina, Salvatierra (the old Order of Calatrava fortress near Ciudad Real) and Capilla. But Capilla refused to surrender, forcing the Castilians to lay a long and difficult siege. The brave defiance of little Capilla, and the spectacle of al-Bayyasi's shipping provisions to the Castilian besiegers, shocked Andalusians and shifted sentiment back towards the Almohad caliph. A popular uprising broke out in C\u00f3rdoba \u2013 al-Bayyasi was killed and his head dispatched as a trophy to Marrakesh. But Caliph al-Adil did not rejoice in this victory for long \u2013 he was assassinated in Marrakesh in October 1227, by the partisans of Yahya, who was promptly acclaimed as the new Almohad caliph Yahya \"al-Mu'tasim\".\nThe Andalusian branch of the Almohads refused to accept this turn of events. Al-Adil's brother, then in Seville, proclaimed himself the new Almohad caliph Abd al-Ala Idris I 'al-Ma'mun'. He promptly purchased a truce from Ferdinand III in return for 300,000 \"maravedis\", allowing him to organize and dispatch the greater part of the Almohad army in Spain across the straits in 1228 to confront Yahya.\nThat same year, Portuguese and Leonese renewed their raids deep into Muslim territory, basically unchecked. Feeling the Almohads had failed to protect them, popular uprisings took place throughout al-Andalus. City after city deposed their hapless Almohad governors and installed local strongmen in their place. A Murcian strongman, Ibn Hud, who claimed descendance from the Banu Hud dynasty that had once ruled the old taifa of Saragossa, emerged as the central figure of these rebellions, systematically dislodging Almohad garrisons through central Spain. In October 1228, with Spain practically all lost, al-Ma'mun abandoned Seville, taking what little remained of the Almohad army with him to Morocco. Ibn Hud immediately dispatched emissaries to distant Baghdad to offer recognition to the Abbasid Caliph, albeit taking up for himself a quasi-caliphal title, 'al-Mutawwakil'.\nThe departure of al-Ma'mun in 1228 marked the end of the Almohad era in Spain. Ibn Hud and the other local Andalusian strongmen were unable to stem the rising flood of Christian attacks, launched almost yearly by Sancho II of Portugal, Alfonso IX of Le\u00f3n, Ferdinand III of Castile and James I of Aragon. The next twenty years saw a massive advance in the Christian reconquista \u2013 the old great Andalusian citadels fell in a grand sweep: M\u00e9rida and Badajoz in 1230 (to Leon), Mallorca in 1230 (to Aragon), Beja in 1234 (to Portugal), C\u00f3rdoba in 1236 (to Castile), Valencia in 1238 (to Aragon), Niebla-Huelva in 1238 (to Leon), Silves in 1242 (to Portugal), Murcia in 1243 (to Castile), Ja\u00e9n in 1246 (to Castile), Alicante in 1248 (to Castile), culminating in the fall of the greatest of Andalusian cities, the ex-Almohad capital of Seville, into Christian hands in 1248. Ferdinand III of Castile entered Seville as a conqueror on December 22, 1248.\nThe Andalusians were helpless before this onslaught. Ibn Hud had attempted to check the Leonese advance early on, but most of his Andalusian army was destroyed at the battle of Alange in 1230. Ibn Hud scrambled to move remaining arms and men to save threatened or besieged Andalusian citadels, but with so many attacks at once, it was a hopeless endeavor. After Ibn Hud's death in 1238, some of the Andalusian cities, in a last-ditch effort to save themselves, offered themselves once again to the Almohads, but to no avail. The Almohads would not return.\nWith the departure of the Almohads, the Nasrid dynasty (\"Ban\u016b Na\u1e63r\", ) rose to power in Granada. After the great Christian advance of 1228\u20131248, the Emirate of Granada was practically all that remained of old al-Andalus. Some of the captured citadels (e.g. Murcia, Jaen, Niebla) were reorganized as tributary vassals for a few more years, but most were annexed by the 1260s. Granada alone would remain independent for an additional 250 years, flourishing as the new center of al-Andalus.\nCollapse in the Maghreb.\nIn their African holdings, the Almohads encouraged the establishment of Christians even in Fez, and after the Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa they occasionally entered into alliances with the kings of Castile. The history of their decline differs from that of the Almoravids, whom they had displaced. They were not assailed by a great religious movement, but lost territories, piecemeal, by the revolt of tribes and districts. Their most effective enemies were the Banu Marin (Marinids) who founded the next dynasty. The last representative of the line, Idris al-Wathiq, was reduced to the possession of Marrakesh, where he was murdered by a slave in 1269.\nGovernment.\nThe Council of Ten was a group of Ibn Tumart's earliest and closest disciples, at the top of the hierarchy of the Almohad movement.\nCulture.\nLanguage.\nThe use of Berber languages was important in Almohad doctrine. Under the Almohads, the \"khu\u1e6dba\" (sermon) at Friday prayer was made to be delivered in Arabic and Berber, with the latter referred to as \"al-lis\u0101n al-gharb\u012b\" () by the Andalusi historian Ibn \u1e62\u0101\u1e25ib a\u1e63-\u1e62al\u0101t. For example, the \"kha\u1e6d\u012bb\", or sermon-giver, of al-Qarawiyy\u012bn Mosque in Fez, Mahd\u012b b. '\u012as\u0101, was replaced under the Almohads by Ab\u016b l-\u1e24asan b. 'A\u1e6diyya kha\u1e6d\u012bb because he was fluent in Berber.\nAs the Almohads rejected the status of \"Dhimma\", the Almohad conquest of al-Andalus caused the emigration of Andalusi Christians from southern Iberia to the Christian north, which had an impact on the use of Romance within Almohad territory. After the Almohad period, Muslim territories in Iberia were reduced to the Emirate of Granada, in which the percentage of the population that had converted to Islam reached 90% and Arabic-Romance bilingualism seems to have disappeared.\nThe French Orientalist Georges-S\u00e9raphin Colin\u2014based on a collection of Almohad-era texts heavily influenced by vernacular speech, edited by \u00c9variste L\u00e9vi-Proven\u00e7al\u2014identifies various points of contact and divergence between Andalusi Arabic and Maghrebi Arabic in the Almohad period.\nLiterature.\nThe Almohads worked to suppress the influence of the Maliki school of fiqh, even publicly burning copies of \"Muwatta Imam Malik\" and Maliki commentaries. They sought to disseminate ibn Tumart's beliefs; he was the author of the \"A\u02bfazzu M\u0101 Yu\u1e6dlab\", the \"Counterpart of the Muwatta\" (), and the \"Compendium of Sahih Muslim\" ().\nLiterary production continued despite the Almohad reforms's devastating effect on cultural life in their domain. Almohad universities continued the knowledge of preceding Andalusi scholars as well as ancient Greek and Roman writers; contemporary literary figures included Averroes, Hafsa bint al-Hajj al-Rukuniyya, ibn Tufayl, ibn Zuhr, ibn al-Abbar, ibn Amira and many more poets, philosophers, and scholars. The abolishment of the dhimmi status of religious minorities further stifled the once flourishing Golden age of Jewish culture in Spain; Maimonides went east and many Jews moved to Castillian-controlled Toledo.\nAccording to the research of Muhammad al-Manuni, there were 400 paper mills in Fez under the reign of Sultan Yaqub al-Mansur in the 12th century.\nTheology and philosophy.\nThe Almohad ideology preached by Ibn Tumart is described by Amira Bennison as a \"sophisticated hybrid form of Islam that wove together strands from Hadith science, Zahiri and Shafi'i \"fiqh\", Ghazalian social actions (\"hisba\"), and spiritual engagement with Shi'i notions of the imam and \"mahdi\"\". This contrasted with the highly orthodox or traditionalist Maliki school (\"maddhab\") of Sunni Islam which predominated in the region up to that point. Central to his philosophy, Ibn Tumart preached a fundamentalist or radical version of \"tawhid\" \u2013 referring to a strict monotheism or to the \"oneness of God\". This notion gave the movement its name: \"al\"-\"Muwa\u1e25\u1e25id\u016bn\" (), meaning roughly \"those who advocate \"tawhid\"\", which was adapted to \"Almohads\" in European writings. Ibn Tumart saw his movement as a revolutionary reform movement much as early Islam saw itself relative to the Christianity and Judaism which preceded it, with himself as its \"mahdi\" and leader.\nIn terms of Muslim jurisprudence, the state gave recognition to the Zahiri () school of thought, though Shafi'ites were also given a measure of authority at times. While not all Almohad leaders were Zahirites, quite a few of them were not only adherents of the legal school but also well-versed in its tenets. Additionally, all Almohad leaders \u2013 both the religiously learned and the laymen \u2013 were hostile toward the Malikite school favored by the Almoravids. During the reign of Abu Yaqub, chief judge Ibn Ma\u1e0d\u0101\u02be oversaw the banning of all religious books written by non-Zahirites; when Abu Yaqub's son Abu Yusuf took the throne, he ordered Ibn Ma\u1e0d\u0101\u02be to undertake the actual burning of such books.\nIn terms of Islamic theology, the Almohads were Ash'arites, their Zahirite-Ash'arism giving rise to a complicated blend of literalist jurisprudence and esoteric dogmatics. Some authors occasionally describe Almohads as heavily influenced by Mu'tazilism. Scholar Madeline Fletcher argues that while one of Ibn Tumart's original teachings, the \"murshida\"s (a collection of sayings memorized by his followers), holds positions on the attributes of God which might be construed as moderately Mu'tazilite (and which were criticized as such by Ibn Taimiyya), identifying him with Mu'tazilites would be an exaggeration. She points out that another of his main texts, the \"'aqida\" (which was likely edited by others after him), demonstrates a much clearer Ash'arite position on a number of issues.\nNonetheless, the Almohads, particularly from the reign of Caliph Abu Yusuf Ya'qub al-Mansur onward, embraced the use of logical reasoning as a method of validating the more central Almohad concept of \"tawhid\". This effectively provided a religious justification for philosophy and for a rationalist intellectualism in Almohad religious thought. Al-Mansur's father, Abu Ya'qub Yusuf, had also shown some favour towards philosophy and kept the philosopher Ibn Tufayl as his confidant. Ibn Tufayl in turn introduced Ibn Rush (Averroes) to the Almohad court, to whom Al-Mansur gave patronage and protection. Although Ibn Rushd (who was also an Islamic judge) saw rationalism and philosophy as complementary to religion and revelation, his views failed to convince the traditional Maliki \"ulema\", with whom the Almohads were already at odds. After the decline of Almohadism, Maliki Sunnism ultimately became the dominant official religious doctrine of the region. By contrast, the teachings of Ibn Rushd and other philosophers like him were far more influential for Jewish philosophers \u2013 including Maimonides, his contemporary \u2013 and Christian Latin scholars \u2013 like Thomas Aquinas \u2013 who later promoted his commentaries on Aristotle.\nEmblem.\nMost historical records indicate that the Almohads were recognized for their use of white banners, which were supposed to evoke their \"purity of purpose\". This began a long tradition of using white as main dynastic color in what is now Morocco for the later Marinids and Saadian sultanates. Whether these white banners contained any specific motifs or inscriptions is not certain. Historian \u1e24asan 'Ali \u1e24asan writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As for the flags of the Almohads, the main flag was white, and on one side was written during the reign of Ibn Tumart: \"The one Allah, Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, the Mahdi is the successor of Allah\", and on the other side: \"There is no god but Allah, and my success is only with Allah, and I entrust my affairs to Allah\", and the white color continued with the rest of the caliphs, even if they adopted other colored flags, red, yellow and other colors. There is no doubt that these flags in their different colors delighted and pleased the people.\nAccording to historian Amira Benninson, the caliphs usually left their capital Marrakesh for war in al-Andalus preceded by the white banner of the Almohads, the Quran of 'Uthman and Quran of Ibn Tumart. Egyptian historiographer Al-Qalqashandi (d. 1418) mentioned white flags in two places, the first being when he spoke about the Almohad flag in Tunisia, where he stated that: \"It was a white flag called the victorious flag, and it was raised before their sultan when riding for Eid prayers or for the movement of the makhzen slaves (which were the ordinary people of the country and the people of the markets)\". By the end of the Almohad reign, dissident movements would adopt black in recognition of the Abbasid caliphate and in rejection of the Almohad authority.\nThe \"Book of Knowledge of All Kingdoms\", written by a Franciscan friar in the 14th century (well after the end of the Almohad period), describes the flag of Marrakesh as being red with a black-and-white checkerboard motif at its center. Some authors have assumed this flag to be the former flag of the Almohads.\nIn modern times, Islamic al-Andalus in Andalusian collective memory allowed more awareness of the colors of the Andalusian flag, chosen in 1918 by Blas Infante, a founding figure of Andalusia. Infante has explained the design of its flag by indicating that green was the color of the Umayyads and white that of the Almohads, the caliphates which represented periods of \"greatness and power\" in this region.\nArt.\nCalligraphy and manuscripts.\nThe Almohad dynasty embraced a style of cursive Maghrebi script known today as \"Maghrebi thuluth\" as an official style used in manuscripts, coinage, documents, and architecture. However, the more angular Kufic script was still used, albeit in a reworked form in Qur'an epigraphy, and was seen detailed in silver in some colophons. The Maghrebi thuluth script, frequently written in gold, was used to give emphasis when standard writing, written in rounded Maghrebi mabs\u016bt script, was considered insufficient. Maghrebi mabs\u016bt of the al-Andalus region during the 12th to 14th centuries was characterized by elongated lines, stretched out curves, and the use of multiple colors for vocalizations, as derived from the people of Medina.\nScribes and calligraphers of the Almohad period also started to illuminate words and phrases in manuscripts for emphasis, using gold leaf and lapis lazuli. While much of the script was written in black or brown ink, the use of polychromy for diacritical text and vocalizations also marked a departure from previous caliphates' calligraphic styles. Blue dots were used to indicate elif, orange dots denoted hamza, and yellow semicircles to marked shaddah. Separate sets of verses were denoted by various medallions, with distinctive designs for each set. For example, sets of five verses were ended with bud-like medallions while sets of ten were marked by circular medallions, all of which were typically painted in gold. Manuscripts attributed to this caliphate were characterized by interlacing geometric or recti-curvilinear illuminations, and abstract vegetal artwork and large medallions were often present in the margins and as thumbnails. Composite floral finials were also frequently used in decorating the margins and corners of the page. Color schemes focused on primarily using gold, white, and blue, with accentuating elements in red or pink.\nDuring the Almohad dynasty, the act of bookbinding itself took on great importance, with a notable instance of the Almohad caliph Abd al-Mu'min bringing in artisans for a celebration of the binding of a Qur'an imported from C\u00f3rdoba. Books were most frequently bound in goatskin leather and decorated with polygonal interlacing, goffering, and stamping. The primary materials used for the pages were goat or sheep vellum. However, the Almohad dynasty also saw industrial advancements in the spread of paper mills in Seville and Marrakesh, leading to the introduction of paper for Qur'an manuscripts, illuminated doctrine books, and official documents. Most Qur'anic manuscripts were close to square-shaped, though other religious texts were typically vertically oriented. With the exception of a few large-scale Qur'ans, most were modestly sized, ranging from 11 centimenters to 22 centimeters on each side, with 19 to 27 lines of script each page. In contrast, large-sized Qur'ans were typically approximately 60 centimeters by 53 centimeters and had an average of five to nine lines of script to a page, typically in Maghrebi thuluth.\nHadith Bay\u0101\u1e0d wa Riy\u0101\u1e0d, the love story of Bayad and Riyad, is one of the few remaining illustrated manuscripts dated to 13th century Almohad caliphate. Its use of miniatures displays a clear connection with previous illustrated tradition from the eastern Islamic world. However, it deviates in its depictions of the frontispiece, interior, and teaching scenes, which show similarities to scientific manuscripts from the central Islamic world, typically considered to have consisted of the Arabian peninsula, northeast modern Iran, and the Fertile Crescent. Depictions of architecture specific to the Almohad caliphate are also evident in several places in the manuscript.The penultimate Almohad caliph, Abu Hafs al-Murtada, was a notable calligrapher in his own right and composed poems and copied Qur'ans. A known bibliophile, he frequently endowed books to madrasas and mosques and established the first public manuscript transcription center in Marrakesh. One of the large Qur'ans that he copied has been preserved in Marrakesh and is the oldest surviving example in the western Islamic world of a Qur'an personally produced by a sovereign ruler. The 10-volume tome is written on parchment and bound with a leather cover decorated with a geometric motif, exhibiting the first dated use of gold tooling on a manuscript binding. The verses are written in Maghrebi mabs\u016bt script and the end of each verse is marked by a gold circle divided into eight uniform segments. Using large Maghrebi script, there are five to 10 lines to a page, with relatively few words to each line. There is lavish use of gold, and this Qur'an, as with other Qur'ans of this size, was likely intended for court use.\nTextiles.\nThe Almohads initially eschewed the production of luxury textiles and silks, but eventually they too engaged in this production. Almohad textiles, like earlier Almoravid examples, were often decorated with a grid of roundels filled with ornamental designs or Arabic epigraphy. However, textiles produced by Almohad workshops used progressively less figural decoration than previous Almoravid textiles, in favour of interlacing geometric and vegetal motifs.\nOne of the best-known textiles traditionally attributed to the Almohads is the \"Las Navas de Tolosa Banner\", so-called because it was once thought to be a spoil won by Alfonso VIII at the Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa in 1212. More recent studies have proposed that it was actually a spoil won some years later by Ferdinand III. The banner was then donated to the Monastery of Santa Maria la Real de Huelgas in Burgos, where it remains today. The banner is richly designed and features blue Arabic inscriptions and white decorative patterns on a red background. The central motif features an eight-pointed star framed by a circle inside a larger square, with smaller motifs filling the bands of the frame and the corner spaces. This central design is surrounded on four sides by Arabic inscriptions in Naskhi script featuring Qur'anic verses (\"Surah\" 61: 10\u201312), and another horizontal inscription in the banner's upper part which praises God and Muhammad. Recent studies have argued that the banner is of 14th century origin rather than of Almohad origin, due to its similarities with captured Marinid banners kept at the Cathedral of Toledo and to its similarities with Nasrid motifs. It remains uncertain whether it was crafted either in Fez under the Marinids or in Granada under the Nasrids.\nMetalwork.\nThe French historian Henri Terrasse described al-Qarawiyyin's bronze grand chandelier, commissioned by Caliph Muhammad al-Nasir, as \"the largest and most beautiful chandelier in the Islamic world.\" The chandelier consists of a 12-sided cupola on top of which is mounted a large cone crowned around its sides with nine levels of candlesticks. The visible surfaces of the chandelier are carved and pierced with intricate floral arabesque motifs as well as Kufic Arabic inscriptions. The chandelier is now the oldest surviving chandelier in the western Islamic world, and it likely served as a model for the later and nearly equally famous Marinid chandelier in the Great Mosque of Taza.\nAnother important piece, the so-called Monz\u00f3n Lion, also dates from the Almohad period during the 12 or 13th century and is held in the Louvre Museum today. It is an example of figural bronze sculpture from al-Andalus that continues in the tradition of earlier objects such as the 11th-century Pisa Griffin (kept at the Cathedral Museum of Pisa) and the 10th-century Stag of C\u00f3rdoba made in Madinat al-Zahra (now kept at the Archeological Museum of C\u00f3rdoba). It was found in Monz\u00f3n, near Palencia, but it is not known where exactly in the Iberian Peninsula it was made. As Palencia was outside the Almohad realm, it may have been made by Andalusi craftsman for a Christian patron. The lion, which served as a fountainhead, is sculpted in a highly stylized manner and its articulated tail is adjustable. Its surface is covered in incised decoration consisting of tapestry-like motifs, and a broad Kufic inscription on its side features well-wishes for its owner.\nOther surviving metalwork objects from the Almohad period include a series of braziers and lamps discovered in C\u00f3rdoba and now kept at the Archeological Museum of C\u00f3rdoba. One of them, a hexagonal brazier, features both incised and pierced decoration. Along with prominent decorative Kufic inscriptions, it has an architectural motif of merlons resembling the decorative sawtooth-shaped merlons found along the tops of Moorish and Moroccan buildings of the same period.\nCeramics and tilework.\nJonathan Bloom cites the white and green glazed tiles on the minaret of the Kutubiyya Mosque, dating from the mid-12th century in the early Almohad period, as the earliest reliably-dated example of \"zellij\" in Morocco. The tiles currently installed on the minaret are modern reproductions of the original decoration, but some of the original tiles were preserved in a collection kept at the Badi Palace. The same collection has also preserved fragments of the original tile decoration on the minaret of the Kasbah Mosque, including fragments of a Kufic inscription which is no longer present on the minaret today. These latter fragments are also the earliest surviving example of \"cuerda seca\" tilework (a technique originating in al-Andalus) being used in an architectural context.\nPainted decoration.\nThe Kutubiyya Mosque's minaret in Marrakesh originally had polychrome painted decoration around the windows and blind arches on its exterior fa\u00e7ades, featuring a mix of geometric and vegetal arabesque motifs. In Seville, some Almohad-era houses have been excavated in various locations in the city, particularly on the site of the present-day cathedral. At least one of these excavations have revealed the remains of mural decoration featuring interlacing geometric decoration. Decorations of a hammam dating back to the Almohad period were uncovered in a bar in Seville during renovations in 2020. The decorations feature red ochre paintings of concave hexadecagons and eightfold rosettes on engraved white lime mortar in a pattern that fits the hammam's geometric skylight holes.\nArchitecture.\nAlong with the Almoravid period preceding it, the Almohad period is considered one of the most formative stages of Moroccan and Moorish architecture, establishing many of the forms and motifs that were refined in subsequent centuries. The main sites of Almohad architecture and art include Fez, Marrakesh, Rabat and Seville. In general, Almohad architecture was built mostly in rammed earth and brick rather than stone. These two materials were relatively cheap, readily available at most sites, and already widely used in the preceding centuries. Almohad architects refined both the manufacturing process of these materials and their on-site assembly, making the execution of numerous and ambitious construction projects possible. According to scholar Felix Arnold, during the Almohad period \"construction became an industry on a scale not seen since Roman times.\"\nCompared to the earlier Almoravid period and the Taifas or Caliphal period in al-Andalus, early Almohad architecture was much more restrained in its ornamentation, focusing its attention on overall architectural forms rather than on detailed surface decoration. In addition to continuing the integration of Moroccan and Andalusi artistic traditions, some currents in Almohad architecture may also reflect influences from Algeria and Tunisia (Ifriqiya). Some Almohad elements, such as polylobed arches, have their earliest precedents in Fatimid architecture in Ifriqiya and Egypt and had also appeared in Andalusi architecture such as the Aljaferia palace. In the Almohad period, this type of arch was further refined for decorative functions while horseshoe arches continued to be standard elsewhere. The decoration around \"mihrab\" arches inside mosques also evolved into richer and more monumental forms in the great ceremonial stone gates of Almohad architecture such as Bab Agnaou in Marrakesh and Bab Oudaia and Bab er-Rouah in Rabat. These gates employed varying decorative motifs arranged in concentric semi-circles around the arch of the gate, all of which was in turn framed inside an outer rectangular band with other motifs. This style remained evident in Marinid gateways (e.g. the main gate of Chellah) and in later Moroccan gateways.\nThe Almohad Kutubiyya and Tinmal mosques are often considered the prototypes of later Moroccan and Andalusi mosques, although the Great Mosque of Taza (later modified by the Marinids) is the oldest surviving Almohad mosque (begun in 1142). Like earlier mosques in the region, Almohad mosques have interiors consisting of large hypostyle halls divided by rows of arches that create a repetitive visual effect. However, the aisle or \"nave\" leading towards the \"mihrab\" (niche symbolizing the \"qibla\" in the southern/southeastern wall) and the aisle running along the qibla wall itself were usually wider than the others and were highlighted with distinctive arches and greater decoration. This layout, already present in Almoravid mosques, is often referred to as the \"T-plan\" by art historians (because the aisle running parallel to the \"qibla\" wall and the aisle leading to the \"mihrab\", perpendicular to it, form a \"T\" shape), and became standard in mosques of the region for centuries. The minarets of Almohad mosques also established the standard form and style of subsequent minarets in the region, with a square base and two-tiered shaft covered in polylobed arch and \"darj wa ktaf\" motifs. The minaret of the Kasbah Mosque of Marrakesh was particularly influential and set a style that was repeated, with minor elaborations, in the following Marinid period. The most famous minarets of this time, however, are the minarets of the Kutubiyya Mosque (begun in 1147 by Abd al-Mu'min but subsequently rebuilt before 1195), the Giralda of Seville (part of a Great Mosque begun in 1171 by Abu Ya'qub Yusuf), and the unfinished \"Hassan Tower\" of Rabat (part of a huge mosque begun by Abu Yusuf Ya'qub al-Mansur in 1191 but never completed).\nThe Almohads were also prolific builders of fortifications and forts across their realm. They were responsible for building (or rebuilding) the city walls of C\u00f3rdoba, Seville, Fez, and Taza, as well as many smaller forts and castles across Morocco and southern Spain and Portugal. In Rabat, Abd al-Mu'min built most of the current Kasbah of the Udayas in 1150\u20131151 (after having destroyed an earlier Almoravid \"ribat\" there), while Abu Yusuf Ya'qub al-Mansur embarked on the construction of a vast new capital and citadel on its south side called \"Ribat al-Fath\" (for which the enormous unfinished mosque of the Hassan Tower was also intended). While never finished, this project created the current outer walls of the historic center of Rabat, along with multiple gates such as Bab er-Rouah and the ceremonial main gate of the Kasbah of the Udayas. Al-Mansur also created the Kasbah of Marrakesh, a large royal citadel and palace complex to house the caliph's family and administration. The main public entrance of this kasbah was the ornamental gate of Bab Agnaou. In Seville, the Almohads built the Torre del Oro, a defensive tower on the shores of the Guadalquivir River which dates from 1220 to 1221 and remains a landmark of the city today. Likewise, the Calahorra Tower in C\u00f3rdoba is believed to be an originally Almohad structure designed to defend the river and the city's old bridge.\nThe Almohad caliphs also constructed multiple country estates just outside the main cities where they resided, continuing a tradition that existed under the Almoravids. The best-known examples of these estates were centered around large water basins or reservoirs that sustained orchards of fruit trees and other plants. Some of them are referred to as \"al-Bu\u1e25ayra\" (\"little sea\") in Arabic sources, likely in reference to these artificial lakes. Small palaces or pleasure pavilions were built on the edge of the reservoirs. In Marrakesh, the present-day Agdal and Menara gardens both developed from such Almohad creations. In Seville, the remains of the \"al-Bu\u1e25ayra\" garden, founded in 1171, were excavated and partly restored in the 1970s. A similar garden estate was also created in Rabat but has not been found by archaeologists. The Alc\u00e1zar Genil (originally called \"al-Qa\u1e63r as-Sayyid\") in Granada, created in the late Almohad period and later remodeled by the Nasrids, stood next to an enormous pool on the outskirts of the city. A small ribat, consisting of a square hall covered by a sixteen-sided dome on squinches, was built nearby at the same time and has been preserved today as a Christian hermitage. Sunken gardens were also part of Almohad palace architecture. In some cases the gardens were divided symmetrically into four parts, much like a \"riyad\" garden. Examples of these have been found in several courtyards in the Alc\u00e1zar of Seville, where former Almohad palaces once stood.\nStatus of Non-Muslims.\nThe Almohads had taken control of the Almoravid Maghribi and Andalusian territories by 1147. The Almohads rejected the mainstream Islamic doctrine that established the status of \"dhimmi\", a Non-Muslim resident of a Muslim country who was allowed to practice his religion on condition of submission to Muslim rule and payment of \"jizya\".\nThe treatment and persecution of Jews under Almohad rule was a drastic change. Prior to Almohad rule during the Caliphate of C\u00f3rdoba, Jewish culture experienced a Golden Age. Mar\u00eda Rosa Menocal, a specialist in Iberian literature at Yale University, has argued that \"tolerance was an inherent aspect of Andalusian society\", and that the Jewish \"dhimmi\"s living under the Caliphate, while allowed fewer rights than Muslims, were still better off than in Christian Europe. Many Jews migrated to \"al-Andalus\", where they were not just tolerated but allowed to practice their faith openly. Christians had also practiced their religion openly in C\u00f3rdoba, and both Jews and Christians lived openly in Morocco as well.\nThe first Almohad ruler, Abd al-Mumin, allowed an initial seven-month grace period. Then he forced most of the urban \"dhimmi\" population in Morocco, both Jewish and Christian, to convert to Islam. In 1198, the Almohad emir Abu Yusuf Yaqub al-Mansur decreed that Jews must wear a dark blue garb, with very large sleeves and a grotesquely oversized hat; his son altered the colour to yellow, a change that may have influenced Catholic ordinances some time later. Those who converted had to wear clothing that identified them as Jews since they were not regarded as sincere Muslims. Cases of mass martyrdom of Jews who refused to convert to Islam are recorded. The treatment and persecution of Christians under Almohad rule was a drastic change as well.\nMany of the conversions were superficial. Maimonides urged Jews to choose the superficial conversion over martyrdom and argued, \"Muslims know very well that we do not mean what we say, and that what we say is only to escape the ruler's punishment and to satisfy him with this simple confession.\" Abraham Ibn Ezra (1089\u20131164), who himself fled the persecutions of the Almohads, composed an elegy mourning the destruction of many Jewish communities throughout Spain and the Maghreb under the Almohads. Many Jews fled from territories ruled by the Almohads to Christian lands, and others, like the family of Maimonides, fled east to more tolerant Muslim lands. However, a few Jewish traders still working in North Africa are recorded.\nIdris al-Ma'mun, a late Almohad pretender (ruled 1229\u20131232 in parts of Morocco), renounced much Almohad doctrine, including the identification of Ibn Tumart as the Mahdi, and the denial of \"dhimmi\" status. He allowed Jews to practice their religion openly in Marrakesh and even allowed a Christian church there as part of his alliance with Castile. In Iberia, Almohad rule collapsed in the 1200s and was succeeded by several \"Taifa\" kingdoms, which allowed Jews to practice their religion openly.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49868", "revid": "946850261", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49868", "title": "Ummayad", "text": ""}
{"id": "49869", "revid": "494861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49869", "title": "Umayad dynasty", "text": ""}
{"id": "49871", "revid": "48535834", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49871", "title": "Eucalyptus", "text": "Genus of flowering plants\nA eucalyptus () is a plant in the genus \"Eucalyptus\", which consists of more than 700 species of flowering plants in the family Myrtaceae. Most species of eucalyptus are trees, often mallees, and a few are shrubs. Along with several other genera in the tribe Eucalypteae, including \"Corymbia\" and \"Angophora\", they are commonly known as eucalypts or \"gum trees\". Eucalyptuses have bark that is either smooth, fibrous, hard, or stringy and leaves that have oil glands. The sepals and petals are fused to form a \"cap\" or operculum over the stamens, hence the name from Greek \"e\u00fb\" (\"well\") and \"kalupt\u00f3s\" (\"covered\"). The fruit is a woody capsule commonly referred to as a \"gumnut\".\nMost species of eucalyptus are native to Australia, and every state and territory has representative species. About three-quarters of Australian forests are eucalypt forests. Many eucalypt species have adapted to wildfire, are able to resprout after fire, or have seeds that survive fire.\nA few species are native to islands north of Australia, and a smaller number are only found outside the continent. Eucalypts have been grown in plantations in many other countries because they are fast-growing, have valuable timber, or can be used for pulpwood, honey production, or essential oils. In some countries, however, they have been removed because of the danger of forest fires due to their high flammability.\nDescription.\nSize and habit.\nEucalypts vary in size and habit from shrubs to tall trees. Trees usually have a single main stem or trunk but many eucalypts are mallees that are multistemmed from ground level and rarely taller than . There is no clear distinction between a mallee and a shrub but in eucalypts, a shrub is a mature plant less than tall and growing in an extreme environment. \"Eucalyptus vernicosa\" in the Tasmanian highlands, \"E. yalatensis\" on the Nullarbor and \"E. surgens\" growing on coastal cliffs in Western Australia are examples of eucalypt shrubs.\nThe terms \"mallet\" and \"marlock\" are only applied to Western Australian eucalypts. A mallet is a tree with a single thin trunk with a steeply branching habit but lacks both a lignotuber and epicormic buds. \"Eucalyptus astringens\" is an example of a mallet. A marlock is a shrub or small tree with a single, short trunk, that lacks a lignotuber and has spreading, densely leafy branches that often reach almost to the ground. \"Eucalyptus platypus\" is an example of a marlock.\nEucalyptus trees, including mallets and marlocks, are single-stemmed and include \"Eucalyptus regnans\", the tallest known flowering plant on Earth. The tallest reliably measured tree in Europe, \"Karri Knight\", can be found in Coimbra, Portugal in Vale de Canas. It is a \"Eucalyptus diversicolor\" of 72.9 meters height and of 5.71 meters girth.\nTree sizes follow the convention of:\nBark.\nAll eucalypts add a layer of bark every year and the outermost layer dies. In about half of the species, the dead bark is shed exposing a new layer of fresh, living bark. The dead bark may be shed in large slabs, in ribbons or in small flakes. These species are known as \"smooth barks\" and include \"E. sheathiana\", \"E. diversicolor\", \"E. cosmophylla\" and \"E. cladocalyx\". The remaining species retain the dead bark which dries out and accumulates. In some of these species, the fibres in the bark are loosely intertwined (in stringybarks such as \"E. macrorhyncha\" or peppermints such as \"E. radiata\") or more tightly adherent (as in the \"boxes\" such as \"E. leptophleba\"). In some species (the \"ironbarks\" such as \"E. crebra\" and \"E. jensenii\") the rough bark is infused with gum resin.\nMany species are 'half-barks' or 'blackbutts' in which the dead bark is retained in the lower half of the trunks or stems\u2014for example, \"E. brachycalyx\", \"E. ochrophloia\", and \"E. occidentalis\"\u2014or only in a thick, black accumulation at the base, as in \"E. clelandii\". In some species in this category, for example \"E. youngiana\" and \"E. viminalis\", the rough basal bark is very ribbony at the top, where it gives way to the smooth upper stems. The smooth upper bark of the half-barks and that of the completely smooth-barked trees and mallees can produce remarkable colour and interest, for example \"E. deglupta\".\n\"E. globulus\" bark cells are able to photosynthesize in the absence of foliage, conferring an \"increased capacity to re-fix internal CO2 following partial defoliation\". This allows the tree to grow in less-than-ideal climates, in addition to providing a better chance of recovery from damage sustained to its leaves in an event such as a fire.\nDifferent commonly recognised types of bark include:\nLeaves.\nNearly all eucalyptuses are evergreen, but some tropical species lose their leaves at the end of the dry season. As in other members of the myrtle family, eucalyptus leaves are covered with oil glands. The copious oils produced are an important feature of the genus. Although mature eucalyptus trees may be towering and fully leafed, their shade is characteristically patchy because the leaves usually hang downwards.\nThe leaves on a mature eucalyptus plant are commonly lanceolate, petiolate, apparently alternate and waxy or glossy green. In contrast, the leaves of seedlings are often opposite, sessile and glaucous. But many exceptions to this pattern exist. Many species such as \"E. melanophloia\" and \"E. setosa\" retain the juvenile leaf form even when the plant is reproductively mature. Some species, such as \"E. macrocarpa\", \"E. rhodantha\", and \"E. crucis\", are sought-after ornamentals due to this lifelong juvenile leaf form. A few species, such as \"E. petraea\", \"E. dundasii\", and \"E. lansdowneana\", have shiny green leaves throughout their life cycle. \"Eucalyptus caesia\" exhibits the opposite pattern of leaf development to most eucalyptuses, with shiny green leaves in the seedling stage and dull, glaucous leaves in mature crowns. The contrast between juvenile and adult leaf phases is valuable in field identification.\nFour leaf phases are recognised in the development of a eucalyptus plant: the 'seedling', 'juvenile', 'intermediate', and 'adult' phases. However, no definite transitional point occurs between the phases. The intermediate phase, when the largest leaves are often formed, links the juvenile and adult phases.\nIn all except a few species, the leaves form in pairs on opposite sides of a square stem, consecutive pairs being at right angles to each other (decussate). In some narrow-leaved species, for example \"E. oleosa\", the seedling leaves after the second leaf pair are often clustered in a detectable spiral arrangement about a five-sided stem. After the spiral phase, which may last from several to many nodes, the arrangement reverts to decussate by the absorption of some of the leaf-bearing faces of the stem. In those species with opposite adult foliage the leaf pairs, which have been formed opposite at the stem apex, become separated at their bases by unequal elongation of the stem to produce the apparently alternate adult leaves.\nFlowers and fruits.\nThe most readily recognisable characteristics of eucalyptus species are the distinctive flowers and fruit (capsules or \"gumnuts\"). Flowers have numerous fluffy stamens which may be white, cream, yellow, pink, or red; in bud, the stamens are enclosed in a cap known as an operculum which is composed of the fused sepals or petals, or both. Thus, flowers have no petals, but instead decorate themselves with the many showy stamens. As the stamens expand, the operculum is forced off, splitting away from the cup-like base of the flower; this is one of the features that unites the genus. The woody fruits or capsules are roughly cone-shaped and have valves at the end which open to release the seeds, which are waxy, rod-shaped, about 1\u00a0mm in length, and yellow-brown in colour. Most species do not flower until adult foliage starts to appear; \"E. cinerea\" and \"E. perriniana\" are notable exceptions.\nTaxonomy.\nThe genus \"Eucalyptus\" was first formally described in 1789 by Charles Louis L'H\u00e9ritier de Brutelle who published the description in his book \"Sertum Anglicum, seu, Plantae rariores quae in hortis juxta Londinum\" along with a description of the type species, \"Eucalyptus obliqua\". The name \"eucalyptus\" is derived from the Ancient Greek words \"eu\" meaning 'well' and \"calyptos\" 'covered', referring to the operculum covering the flower buds.\nThe type specimen was collected in 1777 by David Nelson, the gardener-botanist on Cook's third voyage. He collected the specimen on Bruny Island and sent it to de Brutelle who was working in London at that time.\nHistory.\nAlthough eucalypts must have been seen by the very early European explorers and collectors, no botanical collections of them are known to have been made until 1770 when Joseph Banks and Daniel Solander arrived at Botany Bay with Captain James Cook. There they collected specimens of \"E. gummifera\" and later, near the Endeavour River in northern \"Queensland\", \"E. platyphylla\"; neither of these species was named as such at the time.\nIn 1777, on Cook's third expedition, David Nelson collected a eucalypt on Bruny Island in southern Tasmania. This specimen was taken to the British Museum in London, and was named \"Eucalyptus obliqua\" by the French botanist L'H\u00e9ritier, who was working in London at the time. He coined the generic name from the Greek roots \"eu\" and \"calyptos\", meaning \"well\" and \"covered\" in reference to the operculum of the flower bud which protects the developing flower parts as the flower develops and is shed by the pressure of the emerging stamens at flowering.\nThe name \"obliqua\" was derived from the Latin \"obliquus\", meaning \"oblique\", which is the botanical term describing a leaf base where the two sides of the leaf blade are of unequal length and do not meet the petiole at the same place.\n\"E. obliqua\" was published in 1788\u201389, which coincided with the European colonisation of Australia. Between then and the turn of the 19th century, several more species of eucalyptus were named and published. Most of these were by the English botanist James Edward Smith and most were, as might be expected, trees of the Sydney region. These include the economically valuable \"E. pilularis\", \"E. saligna\" and \"E. tereticornis\".\nThe first endemic Western Australian eucalyptus to be collected and subsequently named was the Yate (\"E. cornuta\") by the French botanist Jacques Labillardi\u00e8re, who collected in what is now the Esperance area in 1792.\nSeveral Australian botanists were active during the 19th century, particularly Ferdinand von Mueller, whose work on \"eucalypts\" contributed greatly to the first comprehensive account of the genus in George Bentham's \"Flora Australiensis\" in 1867. The account is the most important early systematic treatment of the genus. Bentham divided it into five series whose distinctions were based on characteristics of the stamens, particularly the anthers (Mueller, 1879\u201384), work elaborated by Joseph Henry Maiden (1903\u201333) and still further by William Faris Blakely (1934). The anther system became too complex to be workable and more recent systematic work has concentrated on the characteristics of buds, fruits, leaves and bark.\nSpecies and hybrids.\nOver 700 species of eucalyptus are known. Some have diverged from the mainstream of the genus to the extent that they are quite isolated genetically and are able to be recognised by only a few relatively invariant characteristics. Most, however, may be regarded as belonging to large or small groups of related species, which are often in geographical contact with each other and between which gene exchange still occurs. In these situations, many species appear to grade into one another, and intermediate forms are common. In other words, some species are relatively fixed genetically, as expressed in their morphology, while others have not diverged completely from their nearest relatives.\nHybrid individuals have not always been recognised as such on first collection and some have been named as new species, such as \"E. chrysantha\" (\"E. preissiana\" \u00d7 \"E. sepulcralis\") and \"E.\" \"rivalis\" (\"E. marginata\" \u00d7 \"E. megacarpa\"). Hybrid combinations are not particularly common in the field, but some other published species frequently seen in Australia have been suggested to be hybrid combinations. For example, \"Eucalyptus \u00d7 erythrandra\" is believed to be \"E. angulosa\" \u00d7 \"E. teraptera\" and due to its wide distribution is often referred to in texts.\nRenantherin, a phenolic compound present in the leaves of some eucalyptus species, allows chemotaxonomic discrimination in the sections renantheroideae and renantherae and the ratio of the amount of leucoanthocyanins varies considerably in certain species.\nRelated genera.\n\"Eucalyptus\" is one of three similar genera that are commonly referred to as \"eucalypts\", the others being \"Corymbia\" and \"Angophora\". Many species, though by no means all, are known as gum trees because they exude copious kino from any break in the bark (e.g., scribbly gum). The generic name is derived from the Greek words \u03b5\u03c5 (\"eu\") \"well\" and \u03ba\u03b1\u03bb\u03cd\u03c0\u03c4\u03c9 (\"kal\u00fdpto\") \"to cover\", referring to the operculum on the calyx that initially conceals the flower.\nDistribution.\nAccording to Plants of the World Online, there are more than 715 species of plants in the genus \"Eucalyptus\" and most are native to Australia; a very small number are found in adjacent areas of New Guinea and Indonesia. One species, \"Eucalyptus deglupta,\" ranges as far north as the Philippines. Of the 15 species found outside Australia, just nine are exclusively non-Australian. Species of eucalyptus are cultivated widely in the tropical and temperate world, including the Americas, Europe, Africa, the Mediterranean Basin, the Middle East, China, and the Indian subcontinent. However, the range over which many eucalypts can be planted in the temperate zone is constrained by their limited cold tolerance.\nAustralia is covered by of eucalypt forest, comprising three quarters of the area covered by native forest. The Blue Mountains of southeastern Australia have been a centre of eucalypt diversification; their name is in reference to the blue haze prevalent in the area, believed derived from the volatile terpenoids emitted by these trees.\nFossil record.\nThe oldest definitive eucalyptus fossils are from Patagonia in South America, where eucalypts are no longer native, though they have been introduced from Australia. The fossils are from the early Eocene (51.9 Mya), and were found in the Laguna del Hunco Formation in Chubut Province in Argentina. This shows that the genus had a Gondwanan distribution. Fossil leaves also occur in the Miocene of New Zealand, where the genus is not native today, but again have been introduced from Australia.\nDespite the prominence of eucalyptuses in modern Australia, estimated to contribute some 75% of the modern vegetation, the fossil record is very scarce throughout much of the Cenozoic, and suggests that this rise to dominance is a geologically more recent phenomenon. The oldest reliably dated macrofossil of the eucalyptus is a 21-million-year-old tree-stump encased in basalt in the upper Lachlan Valley in New South Wales. Other fossils have been found, but many are either unreliably dated or else unreliably identified.\nIt is useful to consider where eucalyptus fossils have not been found. Extensive research has gone into the fossil floras of the Paleocene to Oligocene of South-Eastern Australia, and has failed to uncover a single eucalyptus specimen. Although the evidence is sparse, the best hypothesis is that in the mid-Tertiary, the continental margins of Australia only supported more mesic noneucalypt vegetation, and that eucalypts probably contributed to the drier vegetation of the arid continental interior. With the progressive drying out of the continent since the Miocene, eucalypts were displaced to the continental margins, and much of the mesic and rainforest vegetation that was once there was eliminated.\nThe current superdominance of eucalyptus in Australia may be an artefact of human influence on its ecology. In more recent sediments, numerous findings of a dramatic increase in the abundance of eucalyptus pollen are associated with increased charcoal levels. Though this occurs at different rates throughout Australia, it is compelling evidence for a relationship between the artificial increase of fire frequency with the arrival of Aboriginals and increased prevalence of this exceptionally fire-tolerant genus.\nTall timber.\nSeveral eucalypt species are among the tallest trees in the world. \"Eucalyptus regnans\", the Australian 'mountain ash', is the tallest of all flowering plants (angiosperms); today, the tallest measured specimen named Centurion is tall. Coast Douglas-fir is about the same height; only coast redwood is taller, and they are conifers (gymnosperms). Six other eucalypt species exceed 80 metres in height: \"Eucalyptus obliqua\", \"Eucalyptus delegatensis\", \"Eucalyptus diversicolor\", \"Eucalyptus nitens\", \"Eucalyptus globulus\" and \"Eucalyptus viminalis\".\nFrost intolerance.\nMost eucalypts are not tolerant of severe cold. Eucalypts do well in a range of climates but are usually damaged by anything beyond a light frost of ; the hardiest are the snow gums, such as \"Eucalyptus pauciflora\", which is capable of withstanding cold and frost down to about . Two subspecies, \"E. pauciflora subsp. niphophila\" and \"E. pauciflora subsp. debeuzevillei\" in particular are even hardier and can tolerate even quite severe winters. Several other species, especially from the high plateau and mountains of central Tasmania such as \"Eucalyptus coccifera\", \"Eucalyptus subcrenulata\" and \"Eucalyptus gunnii\", have also produced extreme cold-hardy forms and it is seed procured from these genetically hardy strains that are planted for ornament in colder parts of the world.\nAnimal relationships.\nAn essential oil extracted from eucalyptus leaves contains compounds that are powerful natural disinfectants and can be toxic in large quantities. Several marsupial herbivores, notably koalas and some possums, are relatively tolerant of it. The close correlation of these oils with other more potent toxins called formylated phloroglucinol compounds (euglobals, macrocarpals and sideroxylonals) allows koalas and other marsupial species to make food choices based on the smell of the leaves. For koalas, these compounds are the most important factor in leaf choice.\nA wide variety of insects also feed exclusively on eucalyptus leaves, such as beetles in the genus \"Paropsisterna\".\nThe eusocial beetle \"Austroplatypus incompertus\" makes and defends its galleries exclusively inside eucalypts, including some species of eucalyptus and \"Corymbia\".\nDiseases on plants.\nFungal species \"Mycosphaerella\" and \"Teratosphaeria\" have been associated with leaf disease on various eucalyptus species.\n Several fungal species from Teratosphaeriaceae family are causal agents in leaf diseases and stem cankers of \"Eucalyptus\" in Uruguay, and Australia.\nAdaptation to fire.\nEucalypts originated between 35 and 50\u00a0million years ago, not long after Australia-New Guinea separated from Gondwana, their rise coinciding with an increase in fossil charcoal deposits (suggesting that fire was a factor even then), but they remained a minor component of the Tertiary rainforest until about 20\u00a0million years ago, when the gradual drying of the continent and depletion of soil nutrients led to the development of a more open forest type, predominantly \"Casuarina\" and \"Acacia\" species.\nThe two valuable timber trees, alpine ash \"E. delegatensis\" and Australian mountain ash \"E. regnans\", are killed by fire and only regenerate from seed. The same 2003 bushfire that had little impact on forests around Canberra resulted in thousands of hectares of dead ash forests. However, a small amount of ash survived and put out new ash trees as well.\nFire hazard.\nEucalyptus oil is highly flammable and at high enough temperatures the oil expands quickening the spread of wildfires. Bushfires can travel easily through the oil-rich air of the tree crowns. Eucalypts obtain long-term fire survivability from their ability to regenerate from epicormic buds situated deep within their thick bark, or from lignotubers, or by producing serotinous fruits.\nIn seasonally dry climates oaks are often fire-resistant, particularly in open grasslands, as a grass fire is insufficient to ignite the scattered trees. In contrast, a eucalyptus forest tends to promote fire because of the volatile and highly combustible oils produced by the leaves, as well as the production of large amounts of litter high in phenolics, preventing its breakdown by fungi and thus accumulating as large amounts of dry, combustible fuel. Consequently, dense eucalypt plantings may be subject to catastrophic firestorms. In fact, almost thirty years before the Oakland firestorm of 1991, a study of eucalyptuses in the area warned that the litter beneath the trees builds up very rapidly and should be regularly monitored and removed. It has been estimated that 70% of the energy released through the combustion of vegetation in the Oakland fire was due to eucalyptuses. In a National Park Service study, it was found that the fuel load (in tons per acre) of non-native eucalyptus woods is almost three times as great as native oak woodland.\nDuring World War II, one California town cut down their eucalyptus trees to \"about a third of their height in the vicinity of anti-aircraft guns\" because of the known fire-fueling qualities of the trees, with the mayor telling a newspaper reporter, \"If a shell so much as hits a leaf, it's supposed to explode.\"\nFalling branches.\nSome species of eucalyptus drop branches unexpectedly. In Australia, Parks Victoria warns campers not to camp under river red gums. Some councils in Australia such as Gosnells, Western Australia, have removed eucalypts after reports of damage from dropped branches, even in the face of lengthy, well publicised protests to protect particular trees. A former Australian National Botanic Gardens director and consulting arborist, Robert Boden, has been quoted referring to \"summer branch drop\". Dropping of branches is recognised in Australia literature through the fictional death of Judy in \"Seven Little Australians\". Although all large trees can drop branches, the density of eucalyptus wood is high due to its high resin content, increasing the hazard.\nCultivation and uses.\nEucalypts were introduced from Australia to the rest of the world following the Cook expedition in 1770. Collected by Sir Joseph Banks, botanist on the expedition, they were subsequently introduced to many parts of the world, notably California, southern Europe, Africa, the Middle East, South Asia and South America. About 250 species are under cultivation in California. In Portugal and also Spain, eucalypts have been grown in plantations for the production of pulpwood. Eucalyptuses are the basis for several industries, such as sawmilling, pulp, charcoal and others. Several species have become invasive and are causing major problems for local ecosystems, mainly due to the absence of wildlife corridors and rotations management.\nEucalypts have many uses which have made them economically important trees, and they have become a cash crop in poor areas such as Timbuktu, Mali and the Peruvian Andes, despite concerns that the trees are invasive in some environments like those of South Africa. Best-known are perhaps the varieties karri and yellow box. Due to their fast growth, the foremost benefit of these trees is their wood. They can be chopped off at the root and grow back again. They provide many desirable characteristics for use as ornament, timber, firewood and pulpwood. Eucalyptus wood is also used in a number of industries, from fence posts (where the oil-rich wood's high resistance to decay is valued) and charcoal to cellulose extraction for biofuels. Fast growth also makes eucalypts suitable as windbreaks and to reduce erosion.\nSome eucalyptus species have attracted attention from horticulturists, global development researchers, and environmentalists because of desirable traits such as being fast-growing sources of wood, producing oil that can be used for cleaning and as a natural insecticide, or an ability to be used to drain swamps and thereby reduce the risk of malaria. Eucalyptus oil finds many uses like in fuels, fragrances, insect repellence and antimicrobial activity. \"Eucalyptus\" trees show allelopathic effects; they release compounds which inhibit other plant species from growing nearby. Outside their natural ranges, eucalypts are both lauded for their beneficial economic impact on poor populations and criticised for being \"water-guzzling\" aliens, leading to controversy over their total impact.\nEucalypts draw a tremendous amount of water from the soil through the process of transpiration. They have been planted (or re-planted) in some places to lower the water table and reduce soil salination. Eucalypts have also been used as a way of reducing malaria by draining the soil in Algeria, Lebanon, Sicily, elsewhere in Europe, in the Caucasus (Western Georgia), and California. Drainage removes swamps which provide a habitat for mosquito larvae, but can also destroy ecologically productive areas. This drainage is not limited to the soil surface, because the \"Eucalyptus\" roots are up to in length and can, depending on the location, even reach the phreatic zone.\nPulpwood.\n\"Eucalyptus\" is the most common short fibre source for pulpwood to make pulp. The types most often used in papermaking are \"Eucalyptus globulus\" (in temperate areas) and the \"Eucalyptus urophylla\" x \"Eucalyptus grandis\" hybrid (in the tropics). The fibre length of \"Eucalyptus\" is relatively short and uniform with low coarseness compared with other hardwoods commonly used as pulpwood. The fibres are slender, yet relatively thick walled. This gives uniform paper formation and high opacity that are important for all types of fine papers. The low coarseness is important for high quality coated papers. \"Eucalyptus\" is suitable for many tissue papers as the short and slender fibres gives a high number of fibres per gram and low coarseness contributes to softness.\n\"Eucalyptus\" oil.\nEucalyptus oil is readily steam distilled from the leaves and can be used for cleaning and as an industrial solvent, as an antiseptic, for deodorising, and in very small quantities in food supplements, especially sweets, cough drops, toothpaste and decongestants. It has insect-repellent properties, and serves as an active ingredient in some commercial mosquito-repellents. Aromatherapists have adopted \"Eucalyptus\" oils for a wide range of purposes. \"Eucalyptus globulus\" is the principal source of \"Eucalyptus\" oil worldwide.\nMusical instruments.\nEucalypt wood is also commonly used to make didgeridoos, a traditional Australian Aboriginal wind instrument. The trunk of the tree is hollowed out by termites, and then cut down if the bore is of the correct size and shape.\nEucalypt wood is also being used as a tonewood and a fingerboard material for acoustic guitars, notably by the California-based Taylor company.\nDyes.\nAll parts of \"Eucalyptus\" may be used to make dyes that are substantive on protein fibres (such as silk and wool), simply by processing the plant part with water. Colours to be achieved range from yellow and orange through green, tan, chocolate and deep rust red.\nProspecting.\n\"Eucalyptus\" trees in the Australian outback draw up gold from tens of metres underground through their root system and deposit it as particles in their leaves and branches. A Maia detector for x-ray elemental imaging at the Australian Synchrotron clearly showed deposits of gold and other metals in the structure of \"Eucalyptus\" leaves from the Kalgoorlie region of Western Australia that would have been untraceable using other methods. The microscopic leaf-bound \"nuggets\", about 8 micrometres wide on average, are not worth collecting themselves, but may provide an environmentally benign way of locating subsurface mineral deposits.\n\"Eucalyptus\" as plantation species.\nIn the 20th century, scientists around the world experimented with \"Eucalyptus\" species. They hoped to grow them in the tropics, but most experimental results failed until breakthroughs in the 1960s-1980s in species selection, silviculture, and breeding programs \"unlocked\" the potential of eucalypts in the tropics. Prior to then, as Brett Bennett noted in a 2010 article, eucalypts were something of the \"El Dorado\" of forestry. Today, \"Eucalyptus\" is the most widely planted type of tree in plantations around the world, in South America (mainly in Brazil, Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay), South Africa, Australia, India, Galicia, Portugal and many more.\nNorth America.\nIn the 1850s, \"Eucalyptus\" trees were introduced to California by Australians during the California Gold Rush. Much of California is similar in climate to parts of Australia. By the early 1900s, thousands of acres of eucalypts were planted with the encouragement of the state government. It was hoped that they would provide a renewable source of timber for construction, furniture making and railway sleepers. It was soon found that for the latter purpose \"Eucalyptus\" was particularly unsuitable, as the ties made from \"Eucalyptus\" had a tendency to twist while drying, and the dried ties were so tough that it was nearly impossible to hammer rail spikes into them.\nThey went on to note that the promise of \"Eucalyptus\" in California was based on the old virgin forests of Australia. This was a mistake, as the young trees being harvested in California could not compare in quality to the centuries-old \"Eucalyptus\" timber of Australia. It reacted differently to harvest. The older trees didn't split or warp as the infant California crop did. There was a vast difference between the two, and this would doom the California \"Eucalyptus\" industry.\nThe species \"E. camaldulensis, E. tereticornis,\" and \"E. cladocalyx\" are all present in California, but the blue gum \"E. globulus\" makes up by far the largest population in the state. One way in which the \"Eucalyptus\", mainly the blue gum \"E. globulus\", proved valuable in California was in providing windbreaks for highways, orange groves, and farms in the mostly treeless central part of the state. They are also admired as shade and ornamental trees in many cities and gardens.\n\"Eucalyptus\" plantations in California have been criticised, because they compete with native plants and typically do not support native animals. \"Eucalyptus\" has historically been planted to replace California's coast live oak population, and the new \"Eucalyptus\" is not as hospitable to native flora and fauna as the oaks. In appropriately foggy conditions on the California Coast, \"Eucalyptus\" can spread at a rapid rate. The absence of natural inhibitors such as the koala or pathogens native to Australia have aided in the spread of California \"Eucalyptus\" trees. This is not as big of an issue further inland, but on the coast invasive eucalypts can disrupt native ecosystems. \"Eucalyptus\" may have adverse effects on local streams due to their chemical composition, and their dominance threatens species that rely on native trees. Nevertheless, some native species have been known to adapt to the \"Eucalyptus\" trees. Notable examples are herons, great horned owl, and the monarch butterfly using \"Eucalyptus\" groves as habitat. Despite these successes, eucalypts generally has a net negative impact on the overall balance of the native ecosystem.\nA heavy concern regarding Eucalypts in California is their status as a fire hazard. \"Eucalyptus\" trees were a catalyst for the spread of the 1923 fire in Berkeley, which destroyed 568 homes. The 1991 Oakland Hills firestorm, which caused US$1.5 billion in damage, destroyed almost 3,000 homes, and killed 25 people, was partly fueled by large numbers of eucalypts close to the houses.\nDespite these issues, there are calls to preserve the \"Eucalyptus\" plants in California. Advocates for the tree claim its fire risk has been overstated. Some even claim that the \"Eucalyptus's\" absorption of moisture makes it a barrier against fire. These experts believe that the herbicides used to remove the \"Eucalyptus\" would negatively impact the ecosystem, and the loss of the trees would release carbon into the atmosphere unnecessarily. There is also an aesthetic argument for keeping the \"Eucalyptus\"; the trees are viewed by many as an attractive and iconic part of the California landscape. Many say that although the tree is not native, it has been in California long enough to become an essential part of the ecosystem and therefore should not be attacked as invasive. These arguments have caused experts and citizens in California, especially in the San Francisco Bay Area, to debate the merits of \"Eucalyptus\" removal versus preservation. However, the general consensus remains that some areas urgently require \"Eucalyptus\" management to stave off potential fire hazards.\nEfforts to remove some of California's \"Eucalyptus\" trees have been met with a mixed reaction from the public, and there have been protests against removal. Removing \"Eucalyptus\" trees can be expensive and often requires machinery or the use of herbicides. The trees struggle to reproduce on their own outside of the foggy regions of Coastal California, and therefore some inland \"Eucalyptus\" forests are predicted to die out naturally. In some parts of California, eucalypt plantations are being removed and native trees and plants restored. Individuals have also illegally destroyed some trees and are suspected of introducing insect pests from Australia which attack the trees.\nCertain \"Eucalyptus\" species may also be grown for ornament in warmer parts of the Pacific Northwest\u2014western Washington, western Oregon and southwestern British Columbia.\nSouth America.\nIt was introduced in Argentina around 1870 by President Domingo F. Sarmiento, who had brought the seeds from Australia and it quickly became very popular. The most widely planted species were \"E. globulus\", \"E. viminalis\" and \"E. rostrata\". Currently, the Humid Pampas region has small forests and \"Eucalyptus\" barriers, some up to 80 years old, about 50 meters high and a maximum of one meter in diameter.\nAntonio Lussich introduced \"Eucalyptus\" into Uruguay in approximately 1896, throughout what is now Maldonado Department, and it has spread all over the south-eastern and eastern coast. There had been no trees in the area because it consisted of dry sand dunes and stones. Lussich also introduced many other trees, particularly \"Acacia\" and pines, but they have not expanded so extensively.\nUruguayan forestry crops using \"Eucalyptus\" species have been promoted since 1989, when the new National Forestry Law established that 20% of the national territory would be dedicated to forestry. As the main landscape of Uruguay is grassland (140,000\u00a0km2, 87% of the national territory), most of the forestry plantations would be established in prairie regions.\nThe planting of \"Eucalyptus\" sp. has been criticised because of concerns that soil would be degraded by nutrient depletion and other biological changes. During the last ten years, in the northwestern regions of Uruguay the \"Eucalyptus\" sp. plantations have reached annual forestation rates of 300%. That zone has a potential forested area of 1\u00a0million hectares, approximately 29% of the national territory dedicated to forestry, of which approximately 800,000 hectares are currently forested by monoculture of \"Eucalyptus\" spp. It is expected that the radical and durable substitution of vegetation cover leads to changes in the quantity and quality of soil organic matter. Such changes may also influence soil fertility and soil physical and chemical properties. The soil quality effects associated with \"Eucalyptus\" sp. plantations could have adverse effects on soil chemistry; for example: soil acidification, iron leaching, allelopathic activities and a high C:N ratio of litter. Additionally, as most scientific understanding of land cover change effects is related to ecosystems where forests were replaced by grasslands or crops, or grassland was replaced by crops, the environmental effects of the current Uruguayan land cover changes are not well understood. The first scientific publication on soil studies in western zone tree plantations (focused on pulp production) appeared in 2004 and described soil acidification and soil carbon changes, similar to a podzolisation process, and destruction of clay (illite-like minerals), which is the main reservoir of potassium in the soil. Although these studies were carried out in an important zone for forest cultivation, they cannot define the current situation in the rest of the land area under eucalyptus cultivation. Moreover, recently Jackson and Jobbagy have proposed another adverse environmental impact that may result from \"Eucalyptus\" culture on prairie soils\u2014stream acidification.\nThe \"Eucalyptus\" species most planted are \"E. grandis\", \"E. globulus\" and \"E. dunnii\"; they are used mainly for pulp mills. Approximately 80,000 ha of \"E. grandis\" situated in the departments of Rivera, Tacuaremb\u00f3 and Paysand\u00fa is primarily earmarked for the solid wood market, although a portion of it is used for sawlogs and plywood. The current area under commercial forest plantation is 6% of the total. The main uses of the wood produced are elemental chlorine free pulp mill production (for cellulose and paper), sawlogs, plywood and bioenergy (thermoelectric generation). Most of the products obtained from sawmills and pulp mills, as well as plywood and logs, are exported. This has raised the income of this sector with respect to traditional products from other sectors. Uruguayan forestry plantations have rates of growth of 30 cubic metres per hectare per year and commercial harvesting occurs after nine years.\nEucalypts were introduced to Brazil in 1910, for timber substitution and the charcoal industry. It has thrived in the local environment, and today there are around 7\u00a0million hectares planted. The wood is highly valued by the charcoal and pulp and paper industries. The short rotation allows a larger wood production and supplies wood for several other activities, helping to preserve the native forests from logging. When well managed, the plantation soils can sustain endless replanting. \"Eucalyptus\" plantings are also used as wind breaks. Brazil's plantations have world-record rates of growth, typically over 40 cubic metres per hectare per year, and commercial harvesting occurs after years 5. Due to continual development and governmental funding, year-on-year growth is consistently being improved. \"Eucalyptus\" can produce up to 100 cubic metres per hectare per year. Brazil has become the top exporter and producer of \"Eucalyptus\" round wood and pulp, and has played an important role in developing the Australian market through the country's committed research in this area.\nModern management systems for Eucalyptus plantations often involve careful selection of initial spacing and thinning regimes, which can significantly influence both wood yield and quality. Innovative approaches, such as coppice-with-standards silvicultural systems, have also been reviewed and implemented to optimize biomass production while maintaining sustainability and flexibility in wood uses. Pruning practices in Eucalyptus grandis \u00d7 Eucalyptus urophylla plantations have been shown to affect growth dynamics and wood quality, supporting their use in high-value timber, pulp, energy, and other wood-based products. The novelty of these management strategies lies in their adaptability to local conditions and market requirements, allowing for the production of wood suited for a range of uses, including bioenergy, construction, and industrial applications.\nAt the same time, local iron producers in Brazil rely heavily on sustainably grown \"Eucalyptus\" for charcoal; this has greatly pushed up the price of charcoal in recent years. The plantations are generally owned and operated for national and international industry by timber asset companies such as Thomson Forestry, Greenwood Management or cellulose producers such as Aracruz Cellulose and Stora Enso.\nOverall, South America was expected to produce 55% of the world's \"Eucalyptus\" round-wood by 2010. Many environmental NGOs have criticised the use of exotic tree species for forestry in Latin America.\nAfrica.\nIn the East of Angola, the Benguela railway company created eucalyptus plantations for firing its steam locomotives.\nEucalypts were introduced to Ethiopia in either 1894 or 1895, either by Emperor Menelik II's French advisor Mondon-Vidailhet or by the Englishman Captain O'Brian. Menelik II endorsed its planting around his new capital city of Addis Ababa because of the massive deforestation around the city for firewood. According to Richard R.K. Pankhurst, \"The great advantage of the eucalypts was that they were fast growing, required little attention and when cut down grew up again from the roots; it could be harvested every ten years. The tree proved successful from the onset\". Plantations of eucalypts spread from the capital to other growing urban centres such as Debre Marqos. Pankhurst reports that the most common species found in Addis Ababa in the mid-1960s was \"E. globulus\", although he also found \"E. melliodora\" and \"E. rostrata\" in significant numbers. David Buxton, writing of central Ethiopia in the mid-1940s, observed that eucalyptus trees \"have become an integral -- and a pleasing -- element in the Shoan landscape and has largely displaced the slow-growing native 'cedar' (\"Juniperus procera\").\"\nIt was commonly believed that the thirst of the \"Eucalyptus\" \"tended to dry up rivers and wells\", creating such opposition to the species that in 1913 a proclamation was issued ordering a partial destruction of all standing trees, and their replacement with mulberry trees. Pankhurst reports, \"The proclamation however remained a dead letter; there is no evidence of eucalypts being uprooted, still less of mulberry trees being planted.\" Eucalypts remain a defining feature of Addis Ababa.\nMuch of Madagascar's original native forest has been replaced with \"Eucalyptus\", threatening biodiversity by isolating remaining natural areas such as Andasibe-Mantadia National Park.\nNumerous \"Eucalyptus\" species have been introduced into South Africa, mainly for timber and firewood but also for ornamental purposes. They are popular with beekeepers for the honey they provide. However, in South Africa they are considered invasive, with their water-sucking capabilities threatening water supplies. They also release a chemical into the surrounding soil which kills native competitors.\n\"Eucalyptus\" seedlings are usually unable to compete with the indigenous grasses, but after a fire when the grass cover has been removed, a seed-bed may be created. The following \"Eucalyptus\" species have been able to become naturalised in South Africa: \"E. camaldulensis\", \"E. cladocalyx\", \"E. diversicolor\", \"E. grandis\" and \"E. lehmannii\".\nAs in South Africa, many \"Eucalyptus\" species have been introduced into Zimbabwe, mainly for timber and firewood, and \"E. robusta\" and \"E. tereticornis\" have been recorded as having become naturalised there.\nEurope.\nPortugal.\nEucalypts have been grown in Portugal since the mid 19th century, the first thought to be a specimen of \"E. obliqua\" introduced to Vila Nova de Gaia in 1829. First as an ornamental but soon after in plantations, these eucalypts are prized due to their long and upright trunks, rapid growth and the ability to regrow after cutting. These plantations now occupy around 800,000 hectares, 10% of the country's total land area, 90% of the trees being \"E. globulus\". As of the late 20th century, there were an estimated 120 species of \"Eucalyptus\" in Portugal. The genus has also been subject to various controversies. Despite representing a large part of the agricultural economy, eucalypt plantations have a negative impact on soil destruction, inducing resistance to water infiltration and increasing the risks of erosion and soil loss, they are highly flammable, aggravating the risk for wildfires. Various Portuguese laws on eucalypt plantations have been formed and reformed to better suit both sides.\nThere are various \"Eucalyptus\" species of public interest in Portugal, namely a Karri in Coimbra's Mata Nacional de Vale de Canas, considered to be Europe's tallest tree at high.\nItaly.\nIn Italy, the \"Eucalyptus\" only arrived at the turn of the 19th century and large scale plantations were started at the beginning of the 20th century with the aim of drying up swampy ground to defeat malaria. During the 1930s, Benito Mussolini had thousands of \"Eucalyptus\" planted in the marshes around Rome. This, their rapid growth in the Italian climate and excellent function as windbreaks, has made them a common sight in the south of the country, including the islands of Sardinia and Sicily. They are also valued for the characteristic smelling and tasting honey that is produced from them. The variety of \"Eucalyptus\" most commonly found in Italy is \"E. camaldulensis\".\nGreece.\nIn Greece, eucalypts are widely found, especially in southern Greece and Crete. They are cultivated and used for various purposes, including as an ingredient in pharmaceutical products (e.g., creams, elixirs and sprays) and for leather production. They were imported in 1862 by botanist Theodoros Georgios Orphanides. The principal species is \"E. globulus\".\nIreland.\n\"Eucalyptus\" has been grown in Ireland since trials in the 1930s and now grows wild in South Western Ireland in the mild climate.\nAsia.\n\"Eucalyptus\" seeds of the species \"E. globulus\" were imported into Palestine in the 1860s, but did not acclimatise well. Later, \"E. camaldulensis\" was introduced more successfully and it is still a very common tree in Israel. The use of \"Eucalyptus\" trees to drain swampy land was a common practice in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The German Templer colony of Sarona had begun planting \"Eucalyptus\" for this purpose by 1874, though it is not known where the seeds came from. Many Zionist colonies also adopted the practice in the following years under the guidance of the Mikveh Israel Agricultural School. \"Eucalyptus\" trees are now considered an invasive species in the region.\nIn India, the Institute of Forest Genetics and Tree Breeding, Coimbatore started a \"Eucalyptus\" breeding program in the 1990s. The organisation released four varieties of conventionally bred, high yielding and genetically improved clones for commercial and research interests in 2010.\n\"Eucalyptus\" trees were introduced to Sri Lanka in the late 19th century by tea and coffee planters, for wind protection, shade and fuel. Forestry replanting of \"Eucalyptus\" began in the 1930s in deforested mountain areas, and currently there are about 10 species present in the island. They account for 20% of major reforestation plantings. They provide railway sleepers, utility poles, sawn timber and fuelwood, but are controversial because of their adverse effect on biodiversity, hydrology and soil fertility. They are associated with another invasive species, the eucalyptus gall wasp, \"Leptocybe invasa\".\nPacific Islands.\nIn Hawaii, some 90 species of \"Eucalyptus\" have been introduced to the islands, where they have displaced some native species due to their higher maximum height, fast growth and lower water needs. Particularly noticeable is the rainbow eucalyptus (\"Eucalyptus deglupta\"), native to Indonesia and the Philippines, whose bark falls off to reveal a trunk that can be green, red, orange, yellow, pink and purple.\nNon-native \"Eucalyptus\" and biodiversity.\nDue to similar favourable climatic conditions, \"Eucalyptus\" plantations have often replaced oak woodlands, for example in California, Spain and Portugal. The resulting monocultures have raised concerns about loss of biological diversity, through loss of acorns that mammals and birds feed on, absence of hollows that in oak trees provide shelter and nesting sites for birds and small mammals and for bee colonies, as well as lack of downed trees in managed plantations. A study of the relationship between birds and \"Eucalyptus\" in the San Francisco Bay Area found that bird diversity was similar in native forest versus \"Eucalyptus\" forest, but the species were different. One way in which the avifauna (local assortment of bird species) changes is that cavity-nesting birds including woodpeckers, owls, chickadees, wood ducks, etc. are depauperate in \"Eucalyptus\" groves because the decay-resistant wood of these trees prevents cavity formation by decay or excavation. Also, those bird species that glean insects from foliage, such as warblers and vireos, experience population declines when \"Eucalyptus\" groves replace oak forest.\nBirds that thrive in \"Eucalyptus\" groves in California tend to prefer tall vertical habitat. These avian species include herons and egrets, which also nest in redwoods. The Point Reyes Bird Observatory observes that sometimes short-billed birds like the ruby-crowned kinglet are found dead beneath \"Eucalyptus\" trees with their nostrils clogged with pitch.\nMonarch butterflies use \"Eucalyptus\" in California for overwintering, but in some locations have a preference for Monterey pines.\n\"Eucalyptus\" as an invasive species.\n\"Eucalyptus\" trees are considered invasive to local ecosystems and negatively impact water resources in countries where they are introduced.\nSouth Africa\nIn South Africa, \"Eucalyptus\" tree species \"E. camaldulensis\", \"E. cladocalyx\", \"E. conferruminata\", \"E. diversicolor\", \"E. grandis\" and \"E. tereticornis\" are listed as Category 1b invaders in the National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act. This means most activities with regards to the species are prohibited (such as importing, propagating, translocating or trading) and it should be ensured that it does not spread beyond a plantation's domain.\n\"E. cladocalyx\" and \"E. diversicolor\" are considered Fynbos invaders, and use up to 20% more water than the native fynbos vegetation; with invasive species including \"Eucalyptus\" being cleared that reduce Cape Town's water resource by 55 billion litres or two months worth of water supply.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49877", "revid": "50839602", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49877", "title": "Areca nut", "text": "Fruit of the areca palm chewed as a stimulant\nThe areca nut ( or ) or betel nut () is the fruit of the areca palm (\"Areca catechu\"). The palm is originally native to the Philippines, but was carried widely through the tropics by the Austronesian migrations and trade since at least 1500 BCE due to its use in betel nut chewing. It is widespread in cultivation and is considered naturalized in much of the tropical Pacific (Melanesia and Micronesia), South Asia, Southeast Asia, and parts of east Africa. It is not to be confused with betel (\"Piper betle\") leaves that are often used to wrap it. The practice of betel nut chewing, often together with other herbs as a stimulant drug, dates back thousands of years, and continues to the present day in many countries.\nBetel nut chewing is addictive due to the presence of the stimulant arecoline and causes adverse health effects\u2014mainly oral and esophageal cancers, as well as cardiovascular disease. When chewed with additional tobacco in its preparation (like in gutka), there is an even higher risk, especially for oral and oropharyngeal cancers. With tobacco it also raises the risk of fatal coronary artery disease, fatal stroke, and adverse reproductive effects, including stillbirth, premature birth, and low birth weight.\nConsumption by hundreds of millions of people worldwide\u2014mainly of South/Southeast Asian origin\u2014has been described as a public health emergency.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"areca\" originated from Dravidian languages, cognates of which are:\nThe terms dates back to the 16th century, when Dutch and Portuguese sailors took the nut from India to Europe.\nDescription.\nThe areca nut is not a true nut, but rather the seed of a fruit categorized as a berry. It is commercially available in dried, cured, and fresh forms. When the husk of the fresh fruit is green, the nut inside is soft enough to be cut with a typical knife. In the ripe fruit, the husk becomes yellow or orange, and as it dries, the fruit inside hardens to a wood-like consistency. At that stage, the areca nut can only be sliced using a special scissors-like cutter.\nUsually, for chewing, a few slices of the nut are wrapped in a betel leaf along with calcium hydroxide (slaked lime) and may include clove, cardamom, catechu resin (\"kattha\"), or other spices for extra flavouring. Betel leaf has a fresh, peppery taste, but it can also be bitter to varying degrees, depending on the variety.\nAreca nuts are chewed for their effects as a mild stimulant, causing a warming sensation in the body and slightly heightened alertness, although the effects vary from person to person.\nThe first nut cultivation in the world was done in Kyasanuru Seeme area of Shimoga district in Karnataka state of India. Even today, the cultivators plant the same variety here. The Kyasanuru variety gives high yields and grows wild in all regions.\nIn parts of India, Sri Lanka, and southern China, areca nuts are not only chewed along with betel leaf, but are also used in the preparation of Ayurvedic and traditional Chinese medicines. Powdered areca nut is used as a constituent in some dentifrices. Other traditional uses include the removal of tapeworms and other intestinal parasites by swallowing a few teaspoons of powdered areca nut, drunk as a decoction, or by taking tablets containing the extracted alkaloids. According to traditional Ayurvedic medicine, chewing areca nut and betel leaf is a good remedy against bad breath. Diplomat Edmund Roberts noted that Chinese people would mix areca nut with \"Uncaria gambir\" during his visit to China in the 1830s. After chewing a betel nut, the red residue is generally spat out. Accordingly, places have banned chewing this nut to avoid eyesores.\nChemistry.\nThe major alkaloid in betel nut is arecoline. There are other compounds, such as arecaidine, guvacine, isoguvacine, and guvacoline. Tannins present in betel nut are mainly proanthocyanidins along with catechins and arecatannin. Two new alkaloids were recently discovered and named acatechu A and acatechu B. Several non-alkaloid compounds including benzenoids, terpenes, carboxylic acids, aldehydes, alcohols, and esters were also identified.\nToxicity.\nChewing areca nut increases the risk of multiple forms of cancer and cardiovascular disease, with or without added tobacco.\nBetel nut chewing causes an increased risk of head and neck cancers and esophageal cancer. Betel quid affects almost all parts of the human body, including the brain, heart, lungs, gastrointestinal tract and reproductive organs. It can cause myocardial infarction, cardiac arrhythmias, liver damage, asthma, type II diabetes, hyperlipidemia, metabolic syndrome, hypothyroidism, prostate hyperplasia and infertility. Habitual chewing of areca nuts increases the risk of cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. Chewing areca nuts is a cause of oral submucous fibrosis, a condition which may progress to mouth cancer. It has also been linked to throat cancer.\nWhen chewed with additional tobacco in its preparation (like in gutka), there is an even higher risk for cancer, especially for oral and oropharyngeal cancers. With tobacco, it also raises the risk of fatal coronary artery disease, fatal stroke and non-fatal ischemic heart disease\nThe harm caused by consumption of areca nuts worldwide was classified in 2017 as a \"neglected global public health emergency\".\nDuring pregnancy.\nWomen who chew areca nut formulations, such as \"paan\", during pregnancy significantly increase adverse outcomes for the baby. Betel quid chewing can cause stillbirth, premature birth, and low birth weight.\nUsing tobacco or areca nuts during pregnancy significantly increases adverse outcomes for the baby. The habit is associated with higher incidences of preterm birth and low birth weight and height. Biologically, these effects may be a consequence of the arecoline that is found in areca nuts. The habit also exposes the fetus to various other toxic components linked to cancer.\nProduction.\nIn 2023, world production of areca nuts was 2.3 million tonnes, with India providing 60% of the total and Bangladesh and Myanmar as major secondary producers (table).\nConsumption.\nSouth Asia.\nIn India (the largest consumer of areca nut) and the rest of the Indian subcontinent, the preparation of nut with or without betel leaf is commonly referred to as paan. It is available practically everywhere and is sold in ready-to-chew pouches called \"pan masala\" or \"supari\", which is the dried form of the areca nut, as a mixture of many flavours whose primary base is dried areca nut crushed into small pieces. Poor people, who may eat only every other day, use it to stave off hunger pangs. \"Pan masala\" with a small quantity of tobacco is called \"gutka\". The easily discarded, small plastic \"supari\" or \"gutka\" pouches are a ubiquitous pollutant of the South Asian environment. Some of the liquid in the mouth is usually disposed of by spitting, producing bright red spots wherever the expectorate lands.\nIn the Maldives, areca nut chewing is very popular, but spitting is frowned upon and regarded as an unrefined, repulsive way of chewing. Usually, people prefer to chew thin slices of the dry nut, which is sometimes roasted. \"Killi\", a mixture of areca nut, betel, cloves, cardamom and sugar is sold in small home-made paper pouches. Old people who have lost their teeth keep \"chewing\" by pounding the mixture of areca nut and betel with a small mortar and pestle.\nSoutheast Asia.\nIn Thailand, the consumption of areca nut has declined gradually in the last decades. The younger generation rarely chews the substance, especially in the cities. Most of the present-day consumption is confined to older generations, mostly people above 50. Even so, small trays of betel leaves and sliced tender areca nut are sold in markets and used as offerings in Buddhist shrines.\nIn the northern Philippines, particularly the Cordillera Administrative Region, betel nut chewing remains prominent to the point that restrictions and fines have been established in urban areas such as Baguio City in the Benguet province. These restrictions were made under the idea that \"momma\" or \"moma\" (betel nut) chewing and spitting are improper during public transportation drivers' work hours and are considered stains to the city roads and sidewalks. Despite these restrictions, betel nut thrives across the Cordilleran market. An example of its commerciality can be observed in Ifugao, one of the provinces of the Philippine Cordilleras, where betel nuts are high-demand products sourced from the province's different cities and municipalities.\nIn Bahasa Indonesia, the betel nut is known as \"makan pinang\", while in the Papua Province of Indonesia, it is known simply as \"pinang\". The Pinang scissor was developed specifically for cutting it.\nOceania.\nIn Papua New Guinea (PNG), betel nuts are referred to in Tok Pisin as \"buai\", and grow abundantly on the northern coast, in Wewak and Madang. A controversial ban on selling and chewing betel nut in public places in Port Moresby, introduced in 2014 by the governor, was lifted in 2017. Because the popular nut continued to be smuggled in, prices rose dramatically. Police enforced the ban rigorously, and in 2015 two betel nut sellers died in Hanuabada after police reservists fired on a crowd. The governor of Port Moresby introduced another ban on the nut, restricted to an area in the business district of the city in July 2023. However many people make a living out of selling betel nut, so are resistant to bans in their areas. On Manus Island, young men are exposed to piracy when they use small boats to travel to the northern coast to purchase betel nuts to trade, and several have disappeared.\nIn Australia, the importation, use, and sale of areca nut is banned, but it has been sold illegally in several South Asian supermarkets.\nEast Asia.\nIn Hainan and Hunan Province, China, where Xiangtan is a center of use and processing, a wide range of old and young people consume areca nut daily. Most, though, consume the dried variety of the nut by itself, without the betel leaves. Some people also consume the areca nut in its raw, fresh form with or without the betel leaves. Betel nuts are sold mostly by old women merchants, but the dried version can be found in shops that sell tea, alcohol, and cigarettes.\nIn Taiwan, bags of 20 to 40 areca nuts are purchased fresh daily by a large number of consumers. To meet the steady year-round demand, two kinds of betel-nut shops sell betel and nuts, as well as cigarettes and drinks, including beer: small mom and pop shops, often poorly maintained and with unassuming fa\u00e7ades, and shops which will often consist of nothing more than a single, free-standing room, or booth. The latter is usually elevated one meter above the street, and measures less than 3 by 2 m. Large picture windows comprise two or more of the walls, allowing those who pass by a complete view of the interior. The interior is often painted brightly. Within such a shop, a sexily dressed young woman, a \"betel nut beauty\", can be seen preparing betel and areca nuts. Shops are often identified by colorful (commonly green) LED lamps or neon lights that frame the windows or that are arranged radially above a store. Customers stop on the side of the road and wait for the girls to bring their betel and areca nut to their vehicles. The habit of chewing betel nut is often associated with blue-collar labor industries such as long-haul transportation, construction, or fishing. Workers in these labor-intensive industries use betel nut for its stimulating effect, but it also becomes a tool for socializing with coworkers. For example, studies have shown chewing betel nut is prevalent among taxi, bus and truck drivers, who rely on the stimulating effect of betel nut to cope with long work hours. For these reasons, oral cancer has been identified as a leading cause of death in professions with high betel nut-chewing rates.\nOther countries.\nIn the United States, areca nut is not a controlled or specially taxed substance and may be found in some Asian grocery stores. However, importation of areca nut in a form other than whole or carved kernels of nuts can be stopped at the discretion of US Customs officers on the grounds of food, agricultural, or medicinal drug violations.\nIn the United Kingdom the betel nut is legal.\nPossession of areca nut or betel leaf is banned in the UAE and is a punishable offence.\nIn culture.\nTraditional consumption.\nChewing the mixture of areca nut and betel leaf constitutes an important and popular cultural activity in many South Asian, Southeast Asian, East Asian and Oceanic countries. Why or when the areca nut and the betel leaf were first combined into one psychoactive drug is not known. Archaeological evidence from Thailand, Indonesia, and the Philippines suggests they have been used in tandem for at least 4,000 years.\nThe oldest unequivocal evidence of betel chewing is from the Philippines, specifically that of several individuals found in a burial pit in the Duyong Cave site of Palawan island dated to around 2680\u00b1250 BCE. The dentition of the skeletons is stained, typical of betel chewers. The grave also includes \"Anadara\" shells used as containers of lime, one of which still contained lime. Burial sites in Bohol dated to the first millennium CE also show the distinctive reddish stains characteristic of betel chewing. Based on linguistic evidence of how the reconstructed Proto-Austronesian term \"*buaq\" originally meaning \"fruit\" came to refer to \"areca nut\" in Proto-Malayo-Polynesian, it is believed that betel chewing originally developed somewhere within the Philippines shortly after the beginning of the Austronesian expansion (~3000 BCE). From the Philippines, it spread back to Taiwan, as well as onwards to the rest of Austronesia and in neighboring cultures through trade and migration.\nIn Vietnam, the areca nut and the betel leaf are such important symbols of love and marriage that in Vietnamese the phrase \"matters of betel and areca\" (\"chuy\u1ec7n tr\u1ea7u cau\") is synonymous with marriage. The tradition of chewing areca nuts starts the talk between the groom's parents and the bride's parents about the young couple's marriage. Therefore, the leaves and juices are used ceremonially in Vietnamese weddings. The folk tale explaining the origin of this Vietnamese tradition is a good illustration of the belief that the combination of areca nut and the betel leaf is ideal to the point they are practically inseparable, like an idealized married couple.\nFormerly, in both India and Sri Lanka, it was a custom of the royalty to chew areca nut with betel leaf. Kings had special attendants whose duty it was to carry a box with all the necessary ingredients for a good chewing session. There was also a custom for lovers to chew areca nut and betel leaf together, because of its breath-freshening and relaxant properties. A sexual symbolism thus became attached to the chewing of the nut and the leaf. The areca nut represented the male principle, and the betel leaf the female principle. Considered an auspicious ingredient in Hinduism and some schools of Buddhism, the areca nut is still used along with betel leaf in religious ceremonies, and also while honoring individuals in much of southern Asia.\nIn Assam, as well as most of its neighbouring Northeastern states, Areca Nut is preferably consumed in its fermented form, which is supposed to make the fruit harder and sweeter. The raw nut may also be eaten during certain seasons when the fermented variety becomes unavailable, although it has more of ritual importance. Standard sized pieces of the nut and leaf are usually consumed in combination with lime and a bit of tobacco. In Assam, betel nut and leaf has indispensable cultural value; offering betel leaf and nut, (together known as \"gua\") constitutes a part of social greeting and socialising. It is a tradition to offer \"pan-tamul\" (betel leaves and raw areca nut) to guests immediately upon arrival, and after tea or meals, served in a brass plate with stands called \"bota\". In traditional Assamese societies carrying a pouch of \"tamul-pan\" upon one's person during journeys or during farming activities, and sharing of the same, was an essential requirement. Among the Assamese, the areca nut also has a variety of uses during religious and marriage ceremonies, where it has the role of a fertility symbol. No religious ritual is complete without the offering of \"tamul-pan\" to the gods and spirits as well as to the assembled guests A tradition from Upper Assam is to invite guests to wedding receptions by offering a few areca nuts with betel leaves. During Bihu, the \"husori\" players are offered areca nuts and betel leaves by each household while their blessings are solicited.\nSpanish mariner \u00c1lvaro de Menda\u00f1a reported observing Solomon Islanders chewing the nut and the leaf with caustic lime, and the manner in which the habit stained their mouths red. He noted the friendly and genial chief Malope, on Santa Isabel Island, would offer him the combination as a token of friendship every time they met.\nIn Bhutan, the areca nut is called \"doma\". The soft and moist raw areca nut is very potent. When chewed it can cause palpitation and vasoconstriction. This form is eaten in the lower regions of Bhutan and in North Bengal, where the nut is cut into half and put into a local \"paan\" leaf with a generous amount of lime. In the rest of Bhutan the raw nut, with the husk on, is fermented such that the husk rots and is easy to extract. The fermented doma has a putrid odour, which can be smelled from miles. Traditionally, this fragrant nut is cut in half and placed on top of a cone made of local betel leaf, which has a dash of lime put into it. \"Myth has it that the inhabitants of Bhutan traditionally known as Monyul, the land of Monpas where Buddhism did not reach lived on raw flesh, drank blood, and chewed bones. After the arrival of Guru Rinpoche in the eighth century, he stopped the people from eating flesh and drinking blood and created a substitute which is betel leaf, lime and areca nut. Today, chewing doma has become a custom. Doma is served after meals, during rituals and ceremonies. It is offered to friends and is chewed at work places by all sections of society and has become an essential part of Bhutanese life and culture.\"\nThe addition of tobacco leaf to the chewing mixture is a relatively recent innovation, as tobacco was not introduced from the Americas until the colonial era.\nReasons for starting to consume areca nuts appears to involve complex psychosocial factors.\nConstruction fiber.\nThe husk, which is between 50 and 75 percent of the weight and volume of an areca fruit, serves as the source of fiber for the construction industry. Typically, these fibers are considered to be waste, but can be used to strengthen construction materials.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49884", "revid": "197953", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49884", "title": "Mexcico", "text": ""}
{"id": "49887", "revid": "2038644", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49887", "title": "Standard enthalpy of formation", "text": "Change of enthalpy during the formation of a compound from its elements\nIn chemistry and thermodynamics, the standard enthalpy of formation or standard heat of formation of a compound is the change of enthalpy during the formation of 1 mole of the substance from its constituent elements in their reference state, with all substances in their standard states. The standard pressure value \"p\"\u29b5 = 105 Pa (= 100 kPa = 1 bar) is recommended by IUPAC, although prior to 1982 the value 1.00 atm (101.325 kPa) was used. There is no standard temperature. Its symbol is \u0394f\"H\"\u29b5. The superscript Plimsoll on this symbol indicates that the process has occurred under standard conditions at the specified temperature (usually 25\u00a0\u00b0C or 298.15\u00a0K).\nStandard states are defined for various types of substances. For a gas, it is the hypothetical state the gas would assume if it obeyed the ideal gas equation at a pressure of 1 bar. For a gaseous or solid solute present in a diluted ideal solution, the standard state is the hypothetical state of concentration of the solute of exactly one mole per liter (1\u00a0M) at a pressure of 1\u00a0bar extrapolated from infinite dilution. For a pure substance or a solvent in a condensed state (a liquid or a solid) the standard state is the pure liquid or solid under a pressure of 1\u00a0bar.\nFor elements that have multiple allotropes, the reference state usually is chosen to be the form in which the element is most stable under 1\u00a0bar of pressure. One exception is phosphorus, for which the most stable form at 1\u00a0bar is black phosphorus, but white phosphorus is chosen as the standard reference state for zero enthalpy of formation.\nFor example, the standard enthalpy of formation of carbon dioxide is the enthalpy of the following reaction under the above conditions:\n&lt;chem&gt;C(s, graphite) + O2(g) -&gt; CO2(g)&lt;/chem&gt;\nAll elements are written in their standard states, and one mole of product is formed. This is true for all enthalpies of formation.\nThe standard enthalpy of formation is measured in units of energy per amount of substance, usually stated in kilojoule per mole (kJ\u00a0mol\u22121), but also in kilocalorie per mole, joule per mole or kilocalorie per gram (any combination of these units conforming to the energy per mass or amount guideline).\nAll elements in their reference states (oxygen gas, solid carbon in the form of graphite, etc.) have a standard enthalpy of formation of zero, as there is no change involved in their formation.\nThe formation reaction is a constant pressure and constant temperature process. Since the pressure of the standard formation reaction is fixed at 1 bar, the standard formation enthalpy or reaction heat is a function of temperature. For tabulation purposes, standard formation enthalpies are all given at a single temperature: 298\u00a0K, and are represented by the symbol \u0394f\"H\" (or \u0394\"H\").\nHess' law.\nFor many substances, the formation reaction may be considered as the sum of a number of simpler reactions, either real or fictitious. The enthalpy of reaction can then be analyzed by applying Hess' law, which states that the \"sum\" of the enthalpy changes for a number of individual reaction steps equals the enthalpy change of the overall reaction. This is true because enthalpy is a state function, whose value for an overall process depends only on the initial and final states and not on any intermediate states. Examples are given in the following sections.\nIonic compounds: Born\u2013Haber cycle.\nFor ionic compounds, the standard enthalpy of formation is equivalent to the sum of several terms included in the Born\u2013Haber cycle. For example, the formation of lithium fluoride,\n&lt;chem&gt;Li(s) + 1/2 F2(g) -&gt; LiF(s)&lt;/chem&gt;\nmay be considered as the sum of several steps, each with its own enthalpy (or energy, approximately): \nThe sum of these enthalpies give the standard enthalpy of formation (\u0394\"H\"f) of lithium fluoride:\nformula_1\nIn practice, the enthalpy of formation of lithium fluoride can be determined experimentally, but the lattice energy cannot be measured directly. The equation is therefore rearranged to evaluate the lattice energy:\nformula_2\nOrganic compounds.\nThe formation reactions for most organic compounds are hypothetical. For instance, carbon and hydrogen will not directly react to form methane (), so that the standard enthalpy of formation cannot be measured directly. However the standard enthalpy of combustion is readily measurable using bomb calorimetry. The standard enthalpy of formation is then determined using Hess's law. The combustion of methane:\n&lt;chem&gt;CH4 + 2 O2 -&gt; CO2 + 2 H2O&lt;/chem&gt;\nis equivalent to the sum of the hypothetical decomposition into elements followed by the combustion of the elements to form carbon dioxide () and water ():\n&lt;chem&gt;CH4 -&gt; C + 2H2&lt;/chem&gt;\n&lt;chem&gt;C + O2 -&gt; CO2&lt;/chem&gt;\n&lt;chem&gt;2H2 + O2 -&gt; 2H2O&lt;/chem&gt;\nApplying Hess's law, \nformula_3\nSolving for the standard of enthalpy of formation,\nformula_4\nThe value of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is determined to be \u221274.8\u00a0kJ/mol. The negative sign shows that the reaction, if it were to proceed, would be exothermic; that is, methane is enthalpically more stable than hydrogen gas and carbon.\nIt is possible to predict heats of formation for simple unstrained organic compounds with the heat of formation group additivity method.\nUse in calculation for other reactions.\nThe standard enthalpy change of any reaction can be calculated from the standard enthalpies of formation of reactants and products using Hess's law. A given reaction is considered as the decomposition of all reactants into elements in their standard states, followed by the formation of all products. The heat of reaction is then \"minus\" the sum of the standard enthalpies of formation of the reactants (each being multiplied by its respective stoichiometric coefficient, \u03bd) \"plus\" the sum of the standard enthalpies of formation of the products (each also multiplied by its respective stoichiometric coefficient), as shown in the equation below:\nformula_5\nIf the standard enthalpy of the products is less than the standard enthalpy of the reactants, the standard enthalpy of reaction is negative. This implies that the reaction is exothermic. The converse is also true; the standard enthalpy of reaction is positive for an endothermic reaction. This calculation has a tacit assumption of ideal solution between reactants and products where the enthalpy of mixing is zero.\nFor example, for the combustion of methane, &lt;chem&gt;CH4 + 2O2 -&gt; CO2 + 2H2O&lt;/chem&gt;:\nformula_6\nHowever &lt;chem&gt;O2&lt;/chem&gt; is an element in its standard state, so that formula_7, and the heat of reaction is simplified to \nformula_8\nwhich is the equation in the previous section for the enthalpy of combustion formula_9.\nExamples: standard enthalpies of formation at 25\u00a0\u00b0C.\nThermochemical properties of selected substances at 298.15\u00a0K and 1\u00a0atm\nInorganic substances.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49890", "revid": "91689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49890", "title": "Herring", "text": "Forage fish, mostly belonging to the family Clupeidae\nHerring are various species of forage fish, belonging to the order Clupeiformes.\nHerring often move in large schools around fishing banks and near the coast, found particularly in shallow, temperate waters of the North Pacific and North Atlantic Oceans, including the Baltic Sea, as well as off the west coast of South America. Three species of \"Clupea\" (the type genus of the herring family Clupeidae) are recognised, and comprise about 90% of all herrings captured in fisheries. The most abundant of these species is the Atlantic herring, which comprises over half of all herring capture. Fish called herring are also found in the Arabian Sea, Indian Ocean, and Bay of Bengal.\nHerring played an important role in the history of marine fisheries in Europe, and early in the 20th century, their study was fundamental to the development of fisheries science. These oily fish also have a long history as an important food fish, and are often salted, smoked, or pickled.\nHerring were also known as \"silver darlings\" in the United Kingdom.\nSpecies.\nA number of different species, most belonging to the family Clupeidae, are commonly referred to as herrings. The origins of the term \"herring\" is somewhat unclear, though it may derive from the same source as the Old High German \"heri\" meaning a \"host, multitude\", in reference to the large schools they form.\nThe type genus of the herring family Clupeidae is \"Clupea\". \"Clupea\" contains only two species: the Atlantic herring (the type species) found in the North Atlantic, and the Pacific herring mainly found in the North Pacific. Subspecific divisions have been suggested for both the Atlantic and Pacific herrings, but their biological basis remains unclear.\nIn addition, a number of related species, all in the Clupeidae, are commonly referred to as herrings. The table immediately below includes those members of the family Clupeidae referred to by FishBase as herrings which have been assessed by the International Union for Conservation of Nature.\nAlso, a number of other species are called herrings, which may be related to clupeids or just share some characteristics of herrings (such as the lake herring, which is a salmonid). Just which of these species are called herrings can vary with locality, so what might be called a herring in one locality might be called something else in another locality. Some examples:\nCharacteristics.\nThe species of \"Clupea\" belong to the larger family Clupeidae (herrings, shads, sardines, menhadens), which comprises some 200 species that share similar features. These silvery-coloured fish have a single dorsal fin, which is soft, without spines. They have no lateral line and have a protruding lower jaw. Their size varies between subspecies: the Baltic herring (\"Clupea harengus membras\") is small, 14 to 18\u00a0cm (about 5.5 to 7 inches); the proper Atlantic herring (\"Clupea harengus harengus\") can grow to about and weigh up ; and Pacific herring grow to about .\nLife cycle.\nAt least one stock of Atlantic herring spawns in every month of the year. Each spawns at a different time and place (spring, summer, autumn, and winter herrings). Greenland populations spawn in of water, while North Sea (bank) herrings spawn at down to in autumn. Eggs are laid on the sea bed, on rock, stones, gravel, sand or beds of algae. Females may deposit from 20,000 to 40,000 eggs, according to age and size, averaging about 30,000. In sexually mature herring, the genital organs grow before spawning, reaching about one-fifth of its total weight.\nThe eggs sink to the bottom, where they stick in layers or clumps to gravel, seaweed, or stones, by means of their mucous coating, or to any other objects on which they chance to settle.\nIf the egg layers are too thick they suffer from oxygen depletion and often die, entangled in a maze of mucus. They need substantial water microturbulence, generally provided by wave action or coastal currents. Survival is highest in crevices and behind solid structures, because predators feast on openly exposed eggs. The individual eggs are in diameter, depending on the size of the parent fish and also on the local race. Incubation time is about 40 days at , 15 days at , or 11 days at . Eggs die at temperatures above .\nThe larvae are long at hatching, with a small yolk sac that is absorbed by the time the larvae reach . Only the eyes are well pigmented. The rest of the body is nearly transparent, virtually invisible under water and in natural lighting conditions.\nThe dorsal fin forms at , the anal fin at about \u2014the ventral fins are visible and the tail becomes well forked at 30 to \u2014 at about , the larva begins to look like a herring.\nHerring larvae are very slender and can easily be distinguished from all other young fish of their range by the location of the vent, which lies close to the base of the tail; however, distinguishing clupeoids one from another in their early stages requires critical examination, especially telling herring from sprats.\nAt one year, they are about long, and they first spawn at three years.\nEcology.\nPrey.\nHerrings consume copepods, arrow worms, pelagic amphipods, mysids, and krill in the pelagic zone. Conversely, they are a central prey item or forage fish for higher trophic levels. The reasons for this success are still enigmatic; one speculation attributes their dominance to the huge, extremely fast cruising schools they inhabit.\nHerring feed on phytoplankton, and as they mature, they start to consume larger organisms. They also feed on zooplankton, tiny animals found in oceanic surface waters, and small fish and fish larvae. Copepods and other tiny crustaceans are the most common zooplankton eaten by herring. During daylight, herring stay in the safety of deep water, feeding at the surface only at night when the chance of being seen by predators is less. They swim along with their mouths open, filtering the plankton from the water as it passes through their gills.\nYoung herring mostly hunt copepods individually, by means of \"particulate feeding\" or \"raptorial feeding\", a feeding method also used by adult herring on larger prey items like krill. If prey concentrations reach very high levels, as in microlayers, at fronts, or directly below the surface, herring become filter feeders, driving several meters forward with wide open mouth and far expanded opercula, then closing and cleaning the gill rakers for a few milliseconds.\nCopepods, the primary zooplankton, are a major item on the forage fish menu. Copepods are typically long, with a teardrop-shaped body. Some scientists say they form the largest animal biomass on the planet. Copepods are very alert and evasive. They have large antennae (see photo below left). When they spread their antennae, they can sense the pressure wave from an approaching fish and jump with great speed over a few centimetres. If copepod concentrations reach high levels, schooling herrings adopt a method called ram feeding. In the photo below, herring ram feed on a school of copepods. They swim with their mouths wide open and their operculae fully expanded.\nThe fish swim in a grid where the distance between them is the same as the jump length of their prey, as indicated in the animation above right. In the animation, juvenile herring hunt the copepods in this synchronised way. The copepods sense with their antennae the pressure wave of an approaching herring and react with a fast escape jump. The length of the jump is fairly constant. The fish align themselves in a grid with this characteristic jump length. A copepod can dart about 80 times before it tires. After a jump, it takes it 60 milliseconds to spread its antennae again, and this time delay becomes its undoing, as the almost endless stream of herring allows a herring to eventually snap up the copepod. A single juvenile herring could never catch a large copepod.\nOther pelagic prey eaten by herring includes fish eggs, larval snails, diatoms by herring larvae below , tintinnids by larvae below , molluscan larvae, menhaden larvae, krill, mysids, smaller fishes, pteropods, annelids, \"Calanus\" spp., Centropagidae, and \"Meganyctiphanes norvegica\".\nHerrings, along with Atlantic cod and sprat, are the most important commercial species to humans in the Baltic Sea. The analysis of the stomach contents of these fish indicate Atlantic cod is the top predator, preying on the herring and sprat. Sprat are competitive with herring for the same food resources. This is evident in the two species' vertical migration in the Baltic Sea, where they compete for the limited zooplankton available and necessary for their survival. Sprat are highly selective in their diet and eat only zooplankton, while herring are more eclectic, adjusting their diet as they grow in size. In the Baltic, copepods of the genus \"Acartia\" can be present in large numbers. However, they are small in size with a high escape response, so herring and sprat avoid trying to catch them. These copepods also tend to dwell more in surface waters, whereas herring and sprat, especially during the day, tend to dwell in deeper waters.\nPredators.\nPredators of herring include seabirds, marine mammals such as dolphins, porpoises, whales, seals, and sea lions, predatory fish such as sharks, billfish, tuna, salmon, striped bass, cod, and halibut. Fishermen also catch and eat herring.\nThe predators often cooperate in groups, using different techniques to panic or herd a school of herring into a tight bait ball. Different predatory species then use different techniques to pick the fish off in the bait ball. The sailfish raises its sail to make it appear much larger. Swordfish charge at high speed through the bait balls, slashing with their swords to kill or stun prey. They then turn and return to consume their \"catch\". Thresher sharks use their long tails to stun the shoaling fish. These sharks compact their prey school by swimming around them and splashing the water with their tails, often in pairs or small groups. They then strike them sharply with the upper lobe of their tails to stun them. Spinner sharks charge vertically through the school, spinning on their axes with their mouths open and snapping all around. The sharks' momentum at the end of these spiraling runs often carries them into the air.\nSome whales lunge feed on bait balls. Lunge feeding is an extreme feeding method, where the whale accelerates from below the bait ball to a high velocity and then opens its mouth to a large gape angle. This generates the water pressure required to expand its mouth and engulf and filter a huge amount of water and fish. Lunge feeding by rorquals, a family of huge baleen whales that includes the blue whale, is said to be the largest biomechanical event on Earth.\nFisheries.\nAdult herring are harvested for their flesh and eggs, and they are often used as baitfish. The trade in herring is an important sector of many economies around the world. In Europe, the fish has been called the \"silver of the sea\", and its trade has been so significant to many countries that it has been regarded as the most commercially important fishery in history.\nAs food.\nHerring has been a staple food source since at least 3000 BC. The fish is served numerous ways, and many regional recipes are used: eaten raw, fermented, pickled, or cured by other techniques, such as being smoked as kippers.\nHerring are very high in the long-chain omega-3 fatty acids EPA and DHA. They are a source of vitamin D.\nWater pollution influences the amount of herring that may be safely consumed. For example, large Baltic herring slightly exceeds recommended limits with respect to PCB and dioxin, although some sources point out that the cancer-reducing effect of omega-3 fatty acids is statistically stronger than the carcinogenic effect of PCBs and dioxins. The contaminant levels depend on the age of the fish which can be inferred from their size. Baltic herrings larger than may be eaten twice a month, while herrings smaller than 17\u00a0cm can be eaten freely. Mercury in fish also influences the amount of fish that women who are pregnant or planning to be pregnant within the next one or two years may safely eat.\nHistory.\nThe herring has played a highly significant role in history both socially and economically. During the Middle Ages, herring prompted the founding of Great Yarmouth and Copenhagen and played a critical role in the medieval development of Amsterdam. In 1274, while on his deathbed at the monastery of Fossanova (south of Rome, Italy), when encouraged to eat something to regain his strength, Thomas Aquinas asked for fresh herring. In Scotland, the herring industry became an important part of the economy of North Sea coastal communities. It reached its peak in the late 19th century, when a herring boom saw Shetland and its town Lerwick become known as the \"herring capital of Europe\".\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49892", "revid": "50596879", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49892", "title": "Socratic method", "text": "Type of cooperative argumentative dialogue\nThe Socratic method (also known as Socratic debate, the Socratic dialectic, or the method of Elenchus) is a form of argumentative dialogue in which an individual probes a conversation partner on a topic with questions and clarifications, until the partner is pressed to come to a conclusion on their own, or else their reasoning breaks down and they are forced to admit ignorance. Socratic dialogues between characters employing this method feature in many of the works of the ancient Greek philosopher Plato, where a fictionalized version of his real-life teacher Socrates debates various philosophical issues with a partner.\nIn Plato's dialogue \"Theaetetus\", Socrates describes his method as a form of \"midwifery\" because it is employed to help his interlocutors develop their understanding in a way analogous to a child developing in the womb. The Socratic method begins with commonly held beliefs and scrutinizes them by way of questioning to determine their internal consistency and their coherence with other beliefs and so to bring everyone closer to the truth.\nIn modified forms, it is employed today in a variety of pedagogical contexts.\nDevelopment.\nIn the second half of the 5th century BC, sophists were teachers who specialized in using the tools of philosophy and rhetoric to entertain, impress, or persuade an audience to accept the speaker's point of view. Socrates promoted an alternative method of teaching, which came to be called the Socratic method.\nSocrates began to engage in such discussions with his fellow Athenians after his friend from youth, Chaerephon, visited the Oracle of Delphi, which asserted that no man in Greece was wiser than Socrates. Socrates saw this as a paradox, and began using the Socratic method to answer his conundrum. Diogenes La\u00ebrtius, however, wrote that Protagoras invented the \"Socratic\" method.\nPlato famously formalized the Socratic elenctic style in prose\u2014presenting Socrates as the curious questioner of some prominent Athenian interlocutor\u2014in some of his early dialogues, such as \"Euthyphro\" and \"Ion\", and the method is most commonly found within the so-called \"Socratic dialogues\", which generally portray Socrates engaging in the method and questioning his fellow citizens about moral and epistemological issues. But in his later dialogues, such as Theaetetus or Sophist, Plato had a different method to philosophical discussions, namely dialectic.\nMethod.\nElenchus () is the central technique of the Socratic method. The Latin form (plural ) is used in English as the technical philosophical term. The most common adjectival form in English is elenctic; elenchic and elenchtic are also current. This was also very important in Plato's early dialogues.\nSocrates (as depicted by Plato) generally applied his method of examination to concepts such as the virtues of piety, wisdom, temperance, courage, and justice. Such an examination challenged the implicit moral beliefs of the interlocutors, bringing out inadequacies and inconsistencies in their beliefs, and usually resulting in aporia. In view of such inadequacies, Socrates himself professed ignorance. Socrates said that his awareness of his ignorance made him wiser than those who, though ignorant, still claimed knowledge. This claim was based on a reported Delphic oracular pronouncement that no man was wiser than Socrates. While this belief seems paradoxical at first glance, in fact it allowed Socrates to discover his own errors. \nSocrates used this claim of wisdom as the basis of moral exhortation. He claimed that the chief goodness consists in the caring of the soul concerned with moral truth and moral understanding, that \"wealth does not bring goodness, but goodness brings wealth and every other blessing, both to the individual and to the state\", and that \"life without examination [dialogue] is not worth living\".\nSocrates rarely used the method to actually develop consistent theories, and he even made frequent use of creative myths and allegories. The Parmenides dialogue shows Parmenides using the Socratic method to point out the flaws in the Platonic theory of forms, as presented by Socrates; it is not the only dialogue in which theories normally expounded by Plato's Socrates are broken down through dialectic. Instead of arriving at answers, the method breaks down the theories we hold, to go \"beyond\" the axioms and postulates we take for granted. Therefore, myth and the Socratic method are not meant by Plato to be incompatible; they have different purposes, and are often described as the \"left hand\" and \"right hand\" paths to good and wisdom. \nScholarly debate.\nIn Plato's early dialogues, the elenchus is the technique Socrates uses to investigate, for example, the nature or definition of ethical concepts such as justice or virtue. According to Gregory Vlastos, it has the following steps:\nOne elenctic examination can lead to a new, more refined, examination of the concept being considered, in this case it invites an examination of the claim: \"Courage is wise endurance of the soul\". Most Socratic inquiries consist of a series of and typically end in puzzlement known as .\nMichael Frede points out Vlastos' conclusion in step No. 5 above makes nonsense of the aporetic nature of the early dialogues. Having shown a proposed thesis is false is insufficient to conclude some other competing thesis must be true. Rather, the interlocutors have reached aporia, an improved state of still not knowing what to say about the subject under discussion.\nThe exact nature of the elenchus is subject to a great deal of debate, in particular concerning whether it is a positive method, leading to knowledge, or a negative method used solely to refute false claims to knowledge. Some qualitative research shows that the use of the Socratic method within a traditional Yeshiva education setting helps students succeed in law school, although it remains an open question as to whether that relationship is causal or merely correlative.\nYet, W. K. C. Guthrie in \"The Greek Philosophers\" sees it as an error to regard the Socratic method as a means by which one seeks the answer to a problem, or knowledge. Guthrie claims that the Socratic method actually aims to demonstrate one's ignorance. Socrates, unlike the Sophists, did believe that knowledge was possible, but believed that the first step to knowledge was recognition of one's ignorance. Guthrie writes, \"[Socrates] was accustomed to say that he did not himself know anything, and that the only way in which he was wiser than other men was that he was conscious of his own ignorance, while they were not. The essence of the Socratic method is to convince the interlocutor that whereas he thought he knew something, in fact he does not.\"\nModern applications.\nSocratic seminar.\nA Socratic seminar (also known as a Socratic circle) is a pedagogical approach based on the Socratic method and uses a dialogic approach to understand information in a text. Its systematic procedure is used to examine a text through questions and answers founded on the beliefs that all new knowledge is connected to prior knowledge, that all thinking comes from asking questions, and that asking one question should lead to asking further questions. A Socratic seminar is not a debate. The goal of this activity is to have participants work together to construct meaning and arrive at an answer, not for one student or one group to \"win the argument\".\nThis approach is based on the belief that participants seek and gain deeper understanding of concepts in the text through thoughtful dialogue rather than memorizing information that has been provided for them. While Socratic seminars can differ in structure, and even in name, they typically involve a passage of text that students must read beforehand and facilitate dialogue. Sometimes, a facilitator will structure two concentric circles of students: an outer circle and an inner circle. The inner circle focuses on exploring and analysing the text through the act of questioning and answering. During this phase, the outer circle remains silent. Students in the outer circle are much like scientific observers watching and listening to the conversation of the inner circle. When the text has been fully discussed and the inner circle is finished talking, the outer circle provides feedback on the dialogue that took place. This process alternates with the inner circle students going to the outer circle for the next meeting and vice versa. The length of this process varies depending on the text used for the discussion. The teacher may decide to alternate groups within one meeting, or they may alternate at each separate meeting.\nThe most significant difference between this activity and most typical classroom activities involves the role of the teacher. In Socratic seminar, the students lead the discussion and questioning. The teacher's role is to ensure the discussion advances regardless of the particular direction the discussion takes.\nVarious approaches to Socratic seminar.\nTeachers use Socratic seminar in different ways. The structure it takes may look different in each classroom. While this is not an exhaustive list, teachers may use one of the following structures to administer Socratic seminar:\nNo matter what structure the teacher employs, the basic premise of the seminar/circles is to turn partial control and direction of the classroom over to the students. The seminars encourage students to work together, creating meaning from the text and to stay away from trying to find a correct interpretation. The emphasis is on critical and creative thinking.\nText selection.\nSocratic seminar texts.\nA Socratic seminar text is a tangible document that creates a thought-provoking discussion.\nThe text ought to be appropriate for the participants' current level of intellectual and social development. It provides the anchor for dialogue whereby the facilitator can bring the participants back to the text if they begin to digress. Furthermore, the seminar text enables the participants to create a level playing field \u2013 ensuring that the dialogical tone within the classroom remains consistent and pure to the subject or topic at hand. Some practitioners argue that \"texts\" do not have to be confined to printed texts, but can include artifacts such as objects, physical spaces, and the like.\nPertinent elements of an effective Socratic text.\nSocratic seminar texts are able to challenge participants' thinking skills by having these characteristics:\nTwo different ways to select a text.\nSocratic texts can be divided into two main categories:\nQuestioning methods.\nSocratic seminars are based upon the interaction of peers. The focus is to explore multiple perspectives on a given issue or topic. Socratic questioning is used to help students apply the activity to their learning. The pedagogy of Socratic questions is open-ended, focusing on broad, general ideas rather than specific, factual information. The questioning technique emphasizes a level of questioning and thinking where there is no single right answer.\nSocratic seminars generally start with an open-ended question proposed either by the leader or by another participant. There is no designated first speaker; as individuals participate in Socratic dialogue, they gain experience that enables them to be effective in this role of initial questioner.\nThe leader keeps the topic focused by asking a variety of questions about the text itself, as well as questions to help clarify positions when arguments become confused. The leader also seeks to coax reluctant participants into the discussion, and to limit contributions from those who tend to dominate. She or he prompts participants to elaborate on their responses and to build on what others have said. The leader guides participants to deepen, clarify, and paraphrase, and to synthesize a variety of different views.\nThe participants share the responsibility with the leader to maintain the quality of the Socratic circle. They listen actively to respond effectively to what others have contributed. This teaches the participants to think and speak persuasively using the discussion to support their position. Participants must demonstrate respect for different ideas, thoughts and values, and must not interrupt each other.\nQuestions can be created individually or in small groups. All participants are given the opportunity to take part in the discussion. Socratic circles specify three types of questions to prepare:\nChallenges and disadvantages.\nScholars such as Peter Boghossian acknowledge that the Socratic method can foster creative and critical thinking through the use of perplexity. However, Boghossian cautions against misapplications of the method that may inadvertently induce shame or humiliation. In his defence of Socratic pedagogy, he argues that while cognitive dissonance is essential to philosophical inquiry, educators must carefully distinguish between productive discomfort and harmful exposure, ensuring that students are not ridiculed or undermined in the process.\nSome have countered this thought by stating that the humiliation and ridicule is not caused by the method, rather it is due to the lack of knowledge of the student. Boghossian mentions that even though the questions may be perplexing, they are not originally meant for it, in fact such questions provoke the students and can be countered by employing counterexamples.\nPsychotherapy.\nThe Socratic method, in the form of Socratic questioning, has been adapted for psychotherapy, most prominently in classical Adlerian psychotherapy, logotherapy, rational emotive behavior therapy, cognitive therapy and reality therapy. It can be used to clarify meaning, feeling, and consequences, as well as to gradually unfold insight, or explore alternative actions.\nThe Socratic method has also recently inspired a new form of applied philosophy: Socratic dialogue, also called philosophical counseling. In Europe Gerd B. Achenbach is probably the best known practitioner, and Michel Weber has also proposed another variant of the practice.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49893", "revid": "358372", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49893", "title": "Elenchos", "text": ""}
{"id": "49894", "revid": "50335409", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49894", "title": "Kenneth Arrow", "text": "American economist (1921\u20132017)\nKenneth Joseph Arrow (August 23, 1921 \u2013 February 21, 2017) was an American economist, mathematician and political theorist. He received the John Bates Clark Medal in 1957, and the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences in 1972, along with John Hicks.\nIn economics, Arrow was a major figure in postwar neoclassical economic theory. Four of his students (Roger Myerson, Eric Maskin, John Harsanyi, and Michael Spence) went on to become Nobel laureates themselves. His contributions to social choice theory, notably his \"impossibility theorem\", and his work on general equilibrium analysis are significant. His work in many other areas of economics, including endogenous growth theory and the economics of information, was also foundational.\nEducation and early career.\nArrow was born on August 23, 1921, in New York City. Arrow's mother, Lilian (Greenberg), was from Ia\u0219i, Romania, and his father, Harry Arrow, was from nearby Podu Iloaiei. The family was of Romanian-Jewish descent, and very supportive of Kenneth's education. Growing up during the Great Depression, he embraced socialism in his youth. He would later move away from socialism, but his views retained a left-leaning philosophy.\nHe graduated from Townsend Harris High School and then earned a bachelor's degree in mathematics from the City College of New York in 1940, where he was a member of Sigma Phi Epsilon. He then attended Columbia University for graduate studies, obtaining a master's degree in mathematics in June 1941. At Columbia, Arrow studied under Harold Hotelling, who influenced him to switch fields to economics. He served as a weather officer in the United States Army Air Forces from 1942 to 1946.\nAcademic career.\nFrom 1946 to 1949 Arrow was a graduate student at Columbia, and also worked as a research associate at the Cowles Commission. During that time he also was an assistant professor of economics at the University of Chicago and worked at the RAND Corporation in California. He left Chicago to become an acting assistant professor of economics and statistics at Stanford University. In 1951, he earned his PhD from Columbia. He served in the government on the staff of the Council of Economic Advisers in the 1960s with Robert Solow. In 1968, he left Stanford for Harvard University, where he was appointed Professor of Economics; it was during his tenure there that he received the Nobel Prize in Economics.\nArrow returned to Stanford in 1979 and became the Joan Kenney Professor of Economics and Professor of Operations Research. He retired in 1991. As a Fulbright Distinguished Chair, in 1995 he taught economics at the University of Siena. He was also a founding member of the Pontifical Academy of Social Sciences and a member of the board at the Santa Fe Institute. At various stages in his career he was a Fellow of Churchill College, Cambridge.\nHe was one of the founding editors of the \"Annual Review of Economics\", which was first published in 2009.\nFour of his former students have gone on to become Nobel Prize winners, namely John Harsanyi, Eric Maskin, Roger Myerson, and Michael Spence.\nA collection of Arrow's papers is housed at the Rubenstein Library at Duke University.\nArrow's impossibility theorem.\nArrow's monograph \"Social Choice and Individual Values\" derives from his 1951 PhD thesis.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If we exclude the possibility of interpersonal comparisons of utility, then the only methods of passing from individual tastes to social preferences which will be satisfactory and which will be defined for a wide range of sets of individual orderings are either imposed or dictatorial.\nIn what he named the General Impossibility Theorem, he theorized that, unless we accept to compare the levels of utility reached by different individuals, it is impossible to formulate a social preference ordering that satisfies all of the following conditions:\nThe theorem has implications for welfare economics and theories of justice, and for voting theory (it extends the Condorcet paradox). Following Arrow's logical framework, Amartya Sen formulated the liberal paradox which argued that given a status of \"Minimal Liberty\" there was no way to obtain Pareto optimality, nor to avoid the problem of social choice of neutral but unequal results.\nGeneral equilibrium theory.\nWork by Arrow and G\u00e9rard Debreu and simultaneous work by Lionel McKenzie offered the first rigorous proofs of the existence of a market clearing equilibrium. For this work and his other contributions, Debreu won the 1983 Nobel Prize in Economics. Arrow went on to extend the model and its analysis to include uncertainty, the stability. His contributions to the general equilibrium theory were influenced by Adam Smith's \"Wealth of Nations\". Written in 1776, \"The Wealth of Nations\" is an examination of economic growth brought forward by the division of labor, by ensuring interdependence of individuals within society.\nIn 1974, The American Economic Association published the paper written by Kenneth Arrow, \"General Economic Equilibrium: Purpose, Analytic Techniques, Collective Choice\", where he states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;From the time of Adam Smith's \"Wealth of Nations\" in 1776, one recurrent theme of economic analysis has been the remarkable degree of coherence among the vast numbers of individual and seemingly separate decisions about the buying and selling of commodities. In everyday, normal experience, there is something of a balance between the amounts of goods and services that some individuals want to supply and the amounts that other, different individuals want to sell. Would-be buyers ordinarily count correctly on being able to carry out their intentions, and would-be sellers do not ordinarily find themselves producing great amounts of goods that they cannot sell. This experience of balance is indeed so widespread that it raises no intellectual disquiet among laymen; they take it so much for granted that they are not disposed to understand the mechanism by which it occurs.\nFundamental theorems of welfare economics.\nIn 1951, Arrow presented the first and second fundamental theorems of welfare economics and their proofs without requiring differentiability of utility, consumption, or technology, and including corner solutions.\nEndogenous-growth theory.\nArrow was one of the precursors of endogenous growth theory, which seeks to explain the source of technical change, which is a key driver of economic growth. Until this theory came to prominence, technical change was assumed to occur exogenously\u2014that is, it was assumed to occur outside economic activities, and was outside (exogenous) to common economic models. At the same time there was no economic explanation for \"why\" it occurred. Endogenous-growth theory provided standard economic reasons for why firms innovate, leading economists to think of innovation and technical change as determined by economic actors, that is endogenously to economic activities, and thus belong inside the model. Endogenous growth theory started with Paul Romer's 1986 paper, borrowing from Arrow's 1962 \"learning-by-doing\" model which introduced a mechanism to eliminate diminishing returns in aggregate output. A literature on this theory has developed subsequently to Arrow's work.\nInformation economics.\nIn other pioneering research, Arrow investigated the problems caused by asymmetric information in markets. In many transactions, one party (usually the seller) has more information about the product being sold than the other party. Asymmetric information creates incentives for the party with more information to cheat the party with less information; as a result, a number of market structures have developed, including warranties and third party authentication, which enable markets with asymmetric information to function. Arrow analysed this issue for medical care (a 1963 paper entitled \"Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care\", in the American Economic Review); later researchers investigated many other markets, particularly second-hand assets, online auctions and insurance.\nAwards and honors.\nArrow was awarded the John Bates Clark Medal in 1957 and was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1959. In 1968, he was elected to both the United States National Academy of Sciences and the American Philosophical Society. He was the joint winner of the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics with John Hicks in 1972 and the 1986 recipient of the von Neumann Theory Prize. He was one of the recipients of the 2004 National Medal of Science, the nation's highest scientific honor, presented by President George W. Bush for his contributions to research on the problem of making decisions using imperfect information and his research on bearing risk.\nHe has received honorary doctorates from the University of Chicago (1967), the University of Vienna (1971) the City University of New York (1972). On 2 June 1995 he received an honorary doctorate from the Faculty of Social Sciences at Uppsala University, Sweden. He was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 2006.\nHe was elected to the 2002 class of Fellows of the Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences. In 2007 he was the first Witten Lecturer at the Witten/Herdecke University as the awardee of the Witten Lectures in Economics and Philosophy.\nPersonal life and death.\nArrow was a brother to the economist Anita Summers, uncle to economist and former Treasury Secretary and Harvard President Larry Summers, and brother-in-law of the late economists Robert Summers and Paul Samuelson. In 1947, he married Selma Schweitzer, graduate in economics at the University of Chicago and psychotherapist, who died in 2015; they had two children, David Michael (b. 1962), an actor, and Andrew Seth (b. 1965), an actor/singer.\nArrow died in his Palo Alto, California, home on February 21, 2017, at the age of 95.\nPublications.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReprinted as: .\nAlso available as: \nand as: \nIncluding: Arrow, Kenneth J. \"Price-quantity adjustments in multiple markets with rising demands\", pp. 3\u201315.\nReprinted as: \nAlso reprinted as a http://\nReprinted as: \n\n\n\nAlso available online as: \nAlso available online as: \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49895", "revid": "34765295", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49895", "title": "Piety", "text": "Religious devotion or spirituality\nPiety is a virtue which may include religious devotion or spirituality. A common element in most conceptions of piety is a duty of respect. In a religious context, piety may be expressed through pious activities or devotions, which may vary among countries and cultures.\nEtymology.\nThe word piety comes from the Latin word , the noun form of the adjective (which means \"devout\" or \"dutiful\"). English literature scholar Alan Jacobs has written about the origins and early meaning of the term:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is not, in its origin, a Christian word. The Roman poet Virgil calls his hero , says that he is a , but we might well mislead readers were we to say \"pious Aeneas\" or a \"pious man.\" For his character is unmarked by the smarmy religiosity we typically associate with the word \"pious.\" Aeneas is devoted to his mission, is faithful to the call of the gods on his life. He is willing to sacrifice his own interests to those greater interests, especially to the founding of the great city of Rome. He binds his will and his heart to that task. This is what it means to be .\nClassical interpretation.\n in traditional Latin usage expressed a complex, highly valued Roman virtue; a man with respected his responsibilities to gods, country, parents, and kin. In its strictest sense it was the sort of love a son ought to have for his father. Aeneas's consistent epithet in Virgil and other Latin authors is , a term which connotes reverence toward the gods and familial dutifulness. At the fall of Troy, Aeneas carries to safety his father, the lame Anchises, and the Lares and Penates, the statues of the household gods.\nIn addressing whether children have an obligation to provide support for their parents, Aquinas quotes, Cicero, \"...piety gives both duty and homage\": \"duty\" referring to service, and \"homage\" to reverence or honor.\" Filial piety is central to Confucian ethics; reverence for parents is considered in Chinese ethics the prime virtue and the basis of all right human relations.\nAs a virtue.\nIn Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy, Lutheranism, and Anglicanism, piety is one of the seven gifts of the Holy Spirit. \"It engenders in the soul a filial respect for God, a generous love toward him, and an affectionate obedience that wants to do what he commands because it loves the one who commands.\" Pope Gregory I, in demonstrating the interrelationship among the gifts, said \"Through the fear of the Lord, we rise to piety, from piety then to knowledge...\"\nAquinas spoke of piety in the context of one's parents and country, and given the obligation to accord each what is rightfully due them, related it to the cardinal virtue of justice. (By analogy, rendering to God what is due him, Aquinas identified as the virtue of religion, also related to justice.) Professor Richard McBrien said piety \"is a gift of the Holy Spirit by which we are motivated and enabled to be faithful and respectful to those\u2014ultimately, God\u2014who have had a positive, formative influence on our lives and to whom we owe a debt of gratitude,\" and requires one to acknowledge, to the extent possible, the sources of those many blessings through words and gestures great and small.\nPiety belongs to the virtue of Religion, which theologians put among the moral virtues, as a part of the cardinal virtue Justice, since by it one tenders to God what is due to him. The gift of piety perfects the virtue of justice, enabling the individual to fulfill his obligations to God and neighbor, and to do so willingly and joyfully. By inspiring a person with a tender and filial confidence in God, the gift of piety makes them joyfully embrace all that pertains to His service.\nJohn Calvin said, \"I call \u2018piety\u2019 that reverence joined with love of God which the knowledge of his benefits induces. For until [people] recognize that they owe everything to God, that they are nourished by his fatherly care, that he is the Author of their every good, that they should seek nothing beyond him\u2014they will never yield him willing service.\" Bishop Pierre Whalon says that \"Piety, therefore, is the pursuit of an ever-greater sense of being in the presence of God.\"\nThe Gift of Piety is synonymous with of filial trust in God. Through piety, a person shows reverence for God as a loving Father, and respect for others as children of God.\nPope John Paul II defined piety as \"the gift of reverence for what comes from God,\" and related it to his earlier lectures on the Theology of the Body. In a General Audience in June 2014, Pope Francis said, \"When the Holy Spirit helps us sense the presence of the Lord and all of his love for us, it warms our heart and drives us almost naturally to prayer and celebration.\" \"Piety\", said Pope Francis, points up \"our friendship with God.\" It is a gift that enables people to serve their neighbor \"with gentleness and with a smile.\"\nPiety and devotion.\nExpressions of piety vary according to country and local tradition. \"Feast days\", with their preparations for various religious celebrations and activities, have forged traditions peculiar to communities. Many pious exercises are part of the cultic patrimony of particular Churches or religious families.\u00a7\u00a77, 20 Devotions help incorporate faith into daily life.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Popular piety \"...manifests a thirst for God which only the simple and poor can know. It makes people capable of generosity and sacrifice even to the point of heroism, when it is a question of manifesting belief. It involves an acute awareness of profound attributes of God: fatherhood, providence, loving and constant presence. It engenders interior attitudes rarely observed to the same degree elsewhere: patience, the sense of the cross in daily life, detachment, openness to others, devotion. By reason of these aspects, we readily call it \"popular piety,\" that is, religion of the people, rather than religiosity.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;They are the manifestation of a theological life nourished by the working of the Holy Spirit who has been poured into our hearts (cf. ).\u2014\u200a\nWhile acknowledging that Anglican piety took the forms of more frequent communion and liturgical observances and customs, Bishop Ronald Williams spoke for increased reading of the Bible.\nIn the Methodist Church, works of piety are a means of grace. They can be personal, such as reading, prayer, and meditation; or communal, such as sharing in the sacraments or Bible study. For Presbyterians, piety refers to a whole realm of practices\u2014such as worship, prayer, singing, and service\u2014that help shape and guide the way one's reverence and love for God are expressed; and \"the duty of the Christian to live a life of piety in accordance with God\u2019s moral law\".\nThe veneration of sacred images belongs to the nature of Catholic piety, with the understanding that \"the honour rendered to the image is directed to the person represented\".\u00a718\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49899", "revid": "50326953", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49899", "title": "Courage", "text": "Ability to deal with fear\nCourage (also called bravery, valour (British and Commonwealth English), or valor (American English)) is the choice and willingness to confront agony, pain, danger, uncertainty, or intimidation. Valor is courage or bravery, especially in battle.\nPhysical courage is bravery in the face of physical pain, hardship, even death, or threat of death; while moral courage is the ability to act rightly in the face of popular opposition, shame, scandal, discouragement, or personal loss.\nThe classical virtue of fortitude (, ) is also translated as \"courage\", but includes the aspects of perseverance and patience. In the Western tradition, notable thoughts on courage have come from philosophers Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Aquinas, and Kierkegaard; as well as Christian beliefs and texts.\nIn the Hindu tradition, mythology has given many examples of courage; with examples of both physical and moral courage exemplified. In the Eastern tradition, the Chinese text \"Tao Te Ching\" offers a great deal of thoughts on courage; both physical and moral.\nCharacteristics of courage.\nFear and confidence in relation to courage.\nAccording to Professor Daniel Putman, \"courage involves deliberate choice in the face of painful or fearful circumstances for the sake of a worthy goal\". With this realization, Putman concludes that \"there is a close connection between fear and confidence\".\nFear and confidence in relation to courage can determine the success of a courageous act or goal. They can be seen as independent variables in courage, and their relationship can affect how we respond to fear. The confidence that is being discussed here is self-confidence; confidence in knowing one's skills and abilities and being able to determine when to fight fear or when to flee it. Putman states that: \"The ideal in courage is not just a rigid control of fear, nor is it a denial of the emotion. The ideal is to judge a situation, accept the emotion as part of human nature and, we hope, use well-developed habits to confront the fear and allow reason to guide our behavior toward a worthwhile goal.\"\nAccording to Putman, Aristotle refers to an appropriate level of fear and confidence in courage. \"Fear, although it might vary from person to person, is not completely relative and is only appropriate if it 'matches the danger of the situation'\". The same goes for confidence in that there are two aspects to self-confidence in a dangerous situation:\nWithout an appropriate balance between fear and confidence when facing a threat, one cannot have the courage to overcome it. Professor Daniel Putman states \"if the two emotions are distinct, then excesses or deficiencies in either fear or confidence can distort courage\". Courage does not mean that you are not afraid, it means that you are willing to face the challenges that lay ahead of you.\nPossible distortions of courage.\nAccording to Putman, there are four possible ways courage could be distorted:\nThus, Putman identifies fear and courage as being deeply intertwined and that they rely on distinct perceptions: \"the danger of the situation\", \"the worthiness of the cause\", \"and the perception of one's ability\".\nTheories.\nAncient Greece.\nPlato's \"Laches\" discusses courage, but fails to come to a satisfactory conclusion on what courage is. Many definitions of courage are offered, including:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...a man willing to remain at his post and to defend himself against the enemy without running away...\n...a sort of endurance of the soul...\n...knowledge of the grounds of fear and hope...\nWhile many definitions are given in Plato's \"Laches\", all are refuted, giving the reader a sense of Plato's argument style. \"Laches\" is an early writing of Plato's, which may be a reason he does not come to a clear conclusion. In this early writing, Plato is still developing his ideas and shows influence from his teachers like Socrates.\nIn \"The Republic\", Plato describes courage as a sort of perseverance \u2013 \"preservation of the belief that has been inculcated by the law through education about what things and sorts of things are to be feared\". Plato explains this perseverance as being able to persevere through all emotions, like suffering, pleasure, and fear.\nAs a desirable quality, courage is discussed broadly by Aristotle in the context of soldiers in battle for a noble cause. In \"Nicomachean Ethics\", where its absence is the vice of cowardice and its excess the vice of recklessness, courage represents the mean between the two extremes.\nThucydides, a \u00a0BCE Greek historian, wrote, \"The bravest are surely those who have the clearest vision of what is before them, glory and danger alike, and yet notwithstanding, go out to meet it.\"\nAncient Rome.\nIn the Roman Empire, courage formed part of the universal virtue of . Roman philosopher and statesman Cicero (\u00a0BCE) lists the cardinal virtues but does not name them as such: \"Virtue may be defined as a habit of mind () in harmony with reason and the order of nature. It has four parts: wisdom (), justice, courage, temperance.\" However, Cicero held that \"a courageous spirit in a human who has not attained perfection and ideal wisdom is generally too impetuous\".\nWestern traditions.\nIn \"De Officiis Ministrorum\", Ambrose echoes Cicero in holding reservations regarding those who exhibit courage without yet having demonstrated a general moral balance. Ambrose held that fortitude without justice occasions injustice; since the stronger a man is the more ready to oppress the weaker.\nCourage is a natural virtue which Saint Augustine did not consider a virtue for Christians.\nEastern traditions.\nThe \"Tao Te Ching\" contends that courage is derived from love () translated as: \"From love one gains courage.\"\nIn Hindu tradition, Courage () / Bravery (), and Patience () appear as the first two of ten characteristics () of in the Hindu \"Manusm\u1e5bti\", alongside forgiveness (), tolerance (), honesty (), physical restraint (), cleanliness (), perceptiveness (), knowledge (), truthfulness (), and control of anger ().\nIslamic beliefs also present courage and self-control as a key factors in facing the Devil (both internally and externally). Many have this belief because of the courage the Prophets of the past displayed (through peace and patience), despite there being people who despised them.\nModern.\nPre-19th century.\nThomas Hobbes lists virtues into the categories of moral virtues and virtues of men in his work \"Man and Citizen\". Hobbes outlines moral virtues as virtues in citizens, that is virtues that without exception are beneficial to society as a whole. These moral virtues are justice (i.e. not violating the law) and charity. Courage as well as prudence and temperance are listed as the virtues of men. By this Hobbes means that these virtues are invested solely in the private good as opposed to the public good of justice and charity. Hobbes describes courage and prudence as strengths of mind as opposed to a goodness of manners. These virtues are always meant to act in the interests of individual while the positive and/or negative effects of society are merely a byproduct. This stems forth from the idea put forth in \"Leviathan\" that the state of nature is \"solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and short\" and self-preservation is the most fundamental aspect of behavior. According to Hobbes courage is a virtue of the individual in order to ensure a better chance of survival while the moral virtues address Hobbes's social contract which civilized men display (in varying degrees) in order to transcend the state of nature. Hobbes also uses the idea of fortitude as a virtue. Fortitude is \"to dare\" according to Hobbes, but also to \"resist stoutly in present dangers\". This is a more in-depth elaboration of Hobbes's concept of courage that is addressed earlier in .\nDavid Hume listed virtues into two categories in his work \"A Treatise of Human Nature\": artificial virtues and natural virtues. Hume categorized courage as a natural virtue. In the \"Treatise\"'s section \"Of Pride and Humility, Their Objects and Causes\", Hume wrote that courage is a cause of pride: \"Every valuable quality of the mind, whether of the imagination, judgment, memory or disposition; wit, good-sense, learning, courage, justice, integrity; all these are the cause of pride; and their opposites of humility\". \nHume also wrote that courage and joy have positive effects on the soul: \"...since the soul, when elevated with joy and courage, in a manner seeks opposition, and throws itself with alacrity into any scene of thought or action, where its courage meets with matter to nourish and employ it\". Along with courage nourishing and employing, Hume also wrote that courage defends humans in the \"Treatise\": \"We easily gain from the liberality of others, but are always in danger of losing by their avarice: Courage defends us, but cowardice lays us open to every attack\".\nHume considered what excessive courage does to a hero's character in the \"Treatise\"'s section \"Of the Other Virtues and Vices\": \"Accordingly we may observe, that an excessive courage and magnanimity, especially when it displays itself under the frowns of fortune, contributes in a great measure, to the character of a hero, and will render a person the admiration of posterity; at the same time, that it ruins his affairs, and leads him into dangers and difficulties, with which otherwise he would never have been acquainted\".\nOther understandings of courage that Hume offered can be derived from Hume's views on morals, reason, sentiment, and virtue from his work \"An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals.\"\n19th century onward.\nS\u00f8ren Kierkegaard opposed courage to angst, while Paul Tillich opposed an existential \"courage to be\" with non-being, fundamentally equating it with religion:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Courage is the self-affirmation of being in spite of the fact of non-being. It is the act of the individual self in taking the anxiety of non-being upon itself by affirming itself... in the anxiety of guilt and condemnation... every courage to be has openly or covertly a religious root. For religion is the state of being grasped by the power of being itself.\nJ.R.R. Tolkien identified in his 1936 lecture \"\" a \"Northern 'theory of courage'\" \u2013 the heroic or \"virtuous pagan\" insistence to do the right thing even in the face of certain defeat without promise of reward or salvation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is the strength of the northern mythological imagination that it faced this problem, put the monsters in the centre, gave them victory but no honor, and found a potent and terrible solution in naked will and courage. 'As a working theory absolutely impregnable.' So potent is it, that while the older southern imagination has faded forever into literary ornament, the northern has power, as it were, to revive its spirit even in our own times. It can work, as it did even with the \"go\u00f0lauss\" Viking, without gods: martial heroism as its own end.\nVirtuous pagan heroism or courage in this sense is \"trusting in your own strength\", as observed by Jacob Grimm in his \"Teutonic Mythology\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Men who, turning away in utter disgust and doubt from the heathen faith, placed their reliance on their own strength and virtue. Thus in the S\u00f4lar lio\u00f0 17 we read of V\u00eabogi and R\u00e2dey , \"in themselves they trusted\".\nErnest Hemingway famously defined courage as \"grace under pressure\".\nWinston Churchill stated, \"Courage is rightly esteemed the first of human qualities because it is the quality that guarantees all others.\"\nAccording to Maya Angelou, \"Courage is the most important of the virtues, because without courage you can't practice any other virtue consistently. You can practice any virtue erratically, but nothing consistently without courage.\" And C. S. Lewis wrote that \"Courage is not simply one of the virtues but the form of every virtue at the testing point, which means at the point of highest reality.\"\nIn \"Beyond Good and Evil\", Friedrich Nietzsche describes master\u2013slave morality, in which a noble man regards himself as a \"determiner of values\"; one who does not require approval, but passes judgment. Later, in the same text, he lists man's four virtues as courage, insight, sympathy, and solitude, and goes on to emphasize the importance of courage: \"The great epochs of our life are the occasions when we gain the courage to re-baptize our evil qualities as our best qualities.\"\nAccording to the Swiss psychologist Andreas Dick, courage consists of the following components:\nImplicit Theories of Courage.\nResearchers who want to study the concept and the emotion of courage have continued to come across a certain problem. While there are \"numerous definitions of courage\", they are unable to set \"an operational definition of courage on which to base sound explicit theories\". Rate \"et al.\" states that because of a lack of an operational definition, the advancement of research in courage is limited. So they conducted studies to try to find \"a common structure of courage\". Their goal from their research of implicit theories was to find \"people's form and content on the idea of courage\". Many researchers created studies on implicit theories by creating a questionnaire that would ask \"What is courage?\". In addition, in order to develop a measurement scale of courage, ten experts in the field of psychology came together to define courage. They defined it as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;the ability to act for a meaningful (noble, good, or practical) cause, despite experiencing the fear associated with perceived threat exceeding the available resources\nAlso, because courage is a multi-dimensional construct, it can be \"better understood as an exceptional response to specific external conditions or circumstances than as an attribute, disposition, or character trait\". Meaning that rather than being or an attribute, courage is a response to fear.\nFrom their research, they were able to find the \"four necessary components of people's notion of courage\". They are:\nWith these four components, they were able to define courage as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;a willful, intentional act, executed after mindful deliberation, involving objective substantial risk to the actor, primarily motivated to bring about a noble good or worthy end, despite, perhaps, the presence of the emotion of fear.\nTo further the discussion of the implicit theories of courage, the researchers stated that future research could consider looking into the concept of courage and fear and how individual's might feel fear, overcome it and act, and act despite it.\n\"Clinical courage\".\nThe term \"clinical courage\" came to light in relation to modern medicine in the 2000s, mostly in relation to the practice of medicine in remote or resource-limited settings. It has been described as the practice of medicine outside of a clinician's usual scope of practice, or relevant clinical guidelines, in order to provide essential medical care, where no alternative exists. It has been specifically discussed in relation to rural generalists, paramedics, general practitioners, and rural medicine. The opposing theory is that of \"clinical recklessness\", in which the actions of a clinician in stepping outside of their competence results in unprofessional behaviour, which exposes patients to risk or harm.\nSociety and symbolism.\nOne symbol often associated with courage is the lion. It is sometimes seen in the Catholic Church as a depiction of Christ's triumph over sin. It also is a symbol in some cultures as a savior of the people who live in a community with sin and corruption.\nFortitude.\nFortitude and courage are distinguishable in that fortitude is the mental or emotional strength that enables courage in the face of adversity. According to Presbyterian theologian William Swan Plumer, \"There is also, in strict propriety of language, a difference between courage and fortitude. Courage faces and resists danger; fortitude endures pain... Courage is for action; fortitude for suffering. In this sense, fortitude differs little from constancy and patient endurance.\"\nThomas Aquinas says that fortitude ranks third after prudence and justice among the cardinal virtues. He distinguishes fortitude from fearlessness, which can too easily become recklessness through short-sighted audacity with disastrous results. In both Catholicism and Anglicanism, fortitude is also one of the seven gifts of the Holy Spirit.\nAwards.\nSeveral awards claim to recognize courageous actions, including:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49900", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49900", "title": "Five cardinal virtues", "text": ""}
{"id": "49901", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49901", "title": "Virtue", "text": "Positive trait or quality deemed to be morally good\nA virtue () is a trait of excellence, including traits that may be moral, social, or intellectual. The cultivation and refinement of virtue is held to be the \"good of humanity\" and thus is valued as an end purpose of life or a foundational principle of being. In human practical ethics, a virtue is a disposition to choose actions that succeed in showing high moral standards: doing what is said to be right and avoiding what is wrong in a given field of endeavour, even when doing so may be unnecessary from a utilitarian perspective. When someone takes pleasure in doing what is right, even when it is difficult or initially unpleasant, they can establish virtue as a habit. Such a person is said to be virtuous through having cultivated such a disposition. The opposite of virtue is vice.\nOther examples of this notion include the concept of merit in Asian traditions as well as (Chinese ).\nEtymology.\nThe ancient Romans used the Latin word (derived from , their word for \"man\") to refer to all of the \"excellent qualities of men, including physical strength, valorous conduct, and moral rectitude\". The French words and came from this Latin root. The word \"virtue\" \"was borrowed into English in the 13th century\".\nHistory.\nAncient Egypt.\nMaat (or Ma'at) was the ancient Egyptian goddess of truth, balance, order, law, morality, and justice. The word was also used to refer to these concepts. Maat was also portrayed as regulating the stars, seasons, and the actions of both mortals and the deities. The deities set the order of the universe from chaos at the moment of creation. Her (ideological) counterpart was Isfet, who symbolized chaos, lies, and injustice.\nPlatonic virtue.\nThe four classic cardinal virtues are:\nThis enumeration is traced to Greek philosophy and was listed by Plato who also added piety (, ) and replaced prudence with wisdom. Some scholars consider either of the above four virtue combinations as mutually reducible and therefore not cardinal.\nIt is unclear whether Plato subscribed to a unified view of virtues. In \"Protagoras\" and \"Meno\" he states that the separate virtues cannot exist independently and offers as evidence the contradictions of acting with wisdom, yet in an unjust way; or acting with bravery (fortitude), yet without wisdom. The narrative in the \"Meno\" commences with the eponymous character asking about virtue, but when Socrates asks him \"What is virtue?\", he replies with a list of virtues displayed in different ways.\nAristotelian virtue.\nIn his \"Nicomachean Ethics\", Aristotle defined a virtue as a point between a deficiency and an excess of a trait. The point of greatest virtue lies not in the exact middle, but at a golden mean sometimes closer to one extreme than the other. This golden mean obtains at a desirable middle between excess and deficiency. For Aristotle, the desirableness of the trait at the golden mean\u2014that which makes it a virtue\u2014consists in its disposition to be \"chosen under the proper guidance of reason\". That is, in its disposition to foster human flourishing, a state defined with respect to human nature conceived teleologically, or as an end to be realized instead of a descriptive fact to be understood.\nHowever, the virtuous action is not simply the \"mean\" (mathematically speaking) between two opposite extremes. As Aristotle says in the \"Nicomachean Ethics\": \"at the right times, and on the right occasions, and towards the right persons, and with the right object, and in the right fashion, is the mean course and the best course, and these are characteristics of virtue.\" For example, generosity is a virtue between the two extremes of miserliness and being profligate. Further examples include courage between cowardice and foolhardiness and confidence between self-deprecation and conceit. In Aristotle's sense, a virtue is an excellence at being human.\nIntellectual virtues.\nAristotle also identifies the \"\" of knowledge, art, practical judgement, intuition, and wisdom.\nRoman virtues.\nThe term \"virtue\" itself is derived from the Latin (the personification of which was the deity Virtus), and had connotations of \"manliness\", \"honour\", worthiness of deferential respect, and civic duty as both citizen and soldier. This virtue was but one of many virtues which Romans of good character were expected to exemplify and pass on through the generations, as part of the ; ancestral traditions which defined \"Roman-ness\". Romans distinguished between the spheres of private and public life, and thus, virtues were also divided between those considered to be in the realm of private family life (as lived and taught by the paterfamilias) and those expected of an upstanding Roman citizen.\nMost Roman concepts of virtue were also personified as a numinous deity. The primary Roman virtues, both public and private, were:\nAncient India.\nWhile religious scriptures generally consider or (the Tamil term for virtue) as a divine virtue, Valluvar describes it as a way of life rather than any spiritual observance, a way of harmonious living that leads to universal happiness. For this reason, Valluvar keeps as the cornerstone throughout the writing of the Kural literature. Valluvar considered justice as a facet or product of . While many before his time opined that justice cannot be defined and that it was a divine mystery, Valluvar suggested that a divine origin is not required to define the concept of justice. In the words of V. R. Nedunchezhiyan, justice according to Valluvar \"dwells in the minds of those who have knowledge of the standard of right and wrong; so too deceit dwells in the minds which breed fraud\".\nChivalric virtues in medieval Europe.\nIn the \u00a0CE, upon the occasion of his coronation as Holy Roman Emperor, Charlemagne published a list of knightly virtues:\nReligious traditions.\nAbrahamic religions.\nBah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith.\nThe Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed teachings speak of a \"Greater Covenant\", being universal and endless, and a \"Lesser Covenant\" specific to each religion. Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds view Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h's revelation as a binding lesser covenant for his followers. In the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed writings being firm in the covenant is considered a virtue.\nChristianity.\nIn Christianity, the three theological virtues are faith, hope, and love, a list which comes from ( (faith), (hope), (love), ). The same chapter describes love as the greatest of the three, and further defines love as \"patient... kind... not envious, or boastful, or arrogant, or rude\" (the Christian virtue of love is sometimes called charity and at other times a Greek word is used to contrast the love of God and the love of humankind from other types of love such as friendship or physical affection).\nChristian scholars frequently add the four classic cardinal virtues (prudence, justice, temperance, and courage) to the theological virtues to give the seven heavenly virtues; for example, these seven are the ones described in the \"Catechism of the Catholic Church\", sections 1803\u20131829. In Christian tradition courage or fortitude is a gift of the Holy Spirit. \nIn \u00a0CE, Aurelius Prudentius Clemens listed seven \"heavenly virtues\" in his book \"Psychomachia\" (\"Battle of Souls\") which is an allegorical story of conflict between vices and virtues. Among the virtues were (faith), (chastity), (endurance), (humility), (hope), (sobriety), (reason), (devotion), (peace), (harmony), and (wisdom).\nThe medieval and renaissance periods saw a number of models of sin, listing the seven deadly sins and the seven capital virtues opposed to each.\nIslam.\nIn Islam, the Quran is believed to be the literal word of God, and the definitive description of virtue, and Muhammad is considered an ideal example of virtue in human form. The foundation of Islamic understanding of virtue was the understanding and interpretation of the Quran and the practices of Muhammad. Virtue is seen in the context of active submission to God performed by the community in unison.\nBelievers are to \"enjoin that which is virtuous and forbid that which is vicious\" () in all spheres of life (). Muslims teach that mankind has been granted the faculty to discern God's will and to abide by it.\nLater Muslim scholars expanded the religious ethics of the scriptures in detail.\nIn the Hadith (Islamic traditions), it is reported by An-Nawwas bin Sam'an:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The Prophet Muhammad said, 'Virtue is good manner, and sin is that which creates doubt and you do not like people to know it.'\"\u2014\u200a\nWabisah bin Ma'bad reported:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"I went to Messenger of God and he asked me: 'Have you come to inquire about virtue?' I replied in the affirmative. Then he said: 'Ask your heart regarding it. Virtue is that which contents the soul and comforts the heart, and sin is that which causes doubts and perturbs the heart, even if people pronounce it lawful and give you verdicts on such matters again and again.'\"\u2014\u200a\nVirtue, as seen in opposition to sin, is termed (spiritual merit or reward) but there are other Islamic terms to describe virtue such as (\"bounty\"), (\"piety\"), and (\"righteousness\"). According to Muslim beliefs, God will forgive individual sins but the bad treatment of people and injustice toward others can only be pardoned by the victims and not by God.\nJudaism.\nLoving God and obeying his laws, in particular the Ten Commandments, are central to Jewish conceptions of virtue. Wisdom is personified in the first eight chapters of the Book of Proverbs and is not only the source of virtue but is depicted as the first and best creation of God ().\nA classic articulation of the Golden Rule came from the first century Rabbi Hillel the Elder. Renowned in the Jewish tradition, he is associated with the development of the Mishnah and the Talmud and, as such, is one of the most important figures in Jewish history. Asked for a summary of the Jewish religion in the most concise terms, Hillel replied (reputedly while standing on one leg): \"That which is hateful to you, do not do to your fellow. That is the whole Torah. The rest is commentary; go and learn.\"\nEastern religions.\nBuddhism.\nBuddhist practice as outlined in the Noble Eightfold Path can be regarded as a progressive list of virtues.\nBuddhism's four (\"Divine States\") can be more properly regarded as virtues in the European sense. They are:\nThere are also the (\"perfections\"), which are the culmination of having acquired certain virtues. In Theravada Buddhism's canonical \"Buddhava\u1e43sa\" there are Ten Perfections (). In Mahayana Buddhism, the Lotus Sutra (\"Saddharmapundarika\"), there are Six Perfections; while in the Ten Stages (\"Dasabhumika\") Sutra, four more are listed.\nDaoism.\n\"Virtue\", translated from Chinese (), is also an important concept in Chinese philosophy, particularly Daoism. \"De\" () originally meant normative \"virtue\" in the sense of \"personal character; inner strength; integrity\", but semantically changed to moral \"virtue; kindness; morality\". Note the semantic parallel for English \"\", with an archaic meaning of \"inner potency; divine power\" (as in \"by virtue of\") and a modern one of \"moral excellence; goodness\".\nIn early periods of Confucianism, moral manifestations of \"virtue\" include (\"humanity\"), \"xiao\" (\"filial piety\"), and (\"proper behavior, performance of rituals\"). The notion of \u2014according to Simon Leys\u2014means \"humanity\" and \"goodness\". originally had the archaic meaning in the Confucian Book of Poems of \"virility\", but progressively took on shades of ethical meaning. Some scholars consider the virtues identified in early Confucianism as non-theistic philosophy.\nThe Daoist concept of , compared to Confucianism, is more subtle, pertaining to the \"virtue\" or ability that an individual realizes by following the (\"the Way\"). One important normative value in much of Chinese thinking is that one's social status should result from the amount of virtue that one demonstrates, rather than from one's birth. In the \"Analects\", Confucius explains as follows: \"He who exercises government by means of his virtue may be compared to the north polar star, which keeps its place and all the stars turn towards it.\" In later periods, particularly from the Tang dynasty period, Confucianism absorbed and melded its own concepts of virtues with those from Daoism and Buddhism.\nHinduism.\nVirtue is a much debated and an evolving concept in ancient scriptures of Hinduism. The essence, need and value of virtue is explained in Hindu philosophy as something that cannot be imposed, but something that is realized and voluntarily lived up to by each individual. For example, Apastamba explained it thus: \"virtue and vice do not go about saying \u2013 here we are!; neither the Gods, Gandharvas, nor ancestors can convince us \u2013 this is right, this is wrong; virtue is an elusive concept, it demands careful and sustained reflection by every man and woman before it can become part of one's life.\"\nVirtues lead to (, holy living) in Hindu literature; while vices lead to (, sin). Sometimes, the word is used interchangeably with virtue.\nThe virtues that constitute a dharmic life\u2014that is a moral, ethical, virtuous life\u2014evolved in vedas and upanishads. Over time, new virtues were conceptualized and added by ancient Hindu scholars: some replaced, others merged. For example, Manusamhita initially listed ten virtues necessary for a human being to live a dharmic life: (courage), (patience and forgiveness), (temperance), (Non-covetousness/Non-stealing), (inner purity), (control of senses), (reflective prudence), (wisdom), (truthfulness), and (freedom from anger). In later verses, this list was reduced to five virtues by the same scholar, by merging and creating a broader concept. The shorter list of virtues became: (Non-violence), (self restraint), (Non-covetousness/Non-stealing), (inner purity), and (truthfulness).\nThe Bhagavad Gita\u2014considered one of the epitomes of historic Hindu discussion of virtues and an allegorical debate on what is right and what is wrong\u2014argues some virtues are not necessarily always absolute, but sometimes relational. For example, it explains that a virtue such as must be re-examined when one is faced with war or violence from the aggressiveness, immaturity, or ignorance of others.\nJainism.\nIn Jainism, attainment of \"kaivalya\" is possible only if the seeker possesses certain virtues. All Jains are supposed to take up the five vows of (non violence), (truthfulness), (non stealing), (non attachment), and (celibacy) before becoming a monk. These vows are laid down by the . Other virtues which are supposed to be followed by both monks as well as laypersons include forgiveness, humility, self-restraint, and straightforwardness. These vows assist the seeker to escape from the karmic bondages thereby escaping the cycle of birth and death to attain liberation.\nSikhism.\nSikh ethics emphasize the congruence between spiritual development and everyday moral conduct. Its founder Guru Nanak summarized this perspective:Truth is the highest virtue, but higher still is truthful living.The Five Virtues of Sikhism are (truth), (compassion), (contentment), (humility), and (love).\nModern philosophers' views.\nRen\u00e9 Descartes.\nFor the Rationalist philosopher Ren\u00e9 Descartes, virtue consists in the correct reasoning that should guide our actions. Men should seek the sovereign good that Descartes, following Zeno, identifies with virtue, as this produces a blessedness or pleasure. For Epicurus the sovereign good was pleasure, and Descartes says that in fact this is not in contradiction with Zeno's teaching, because virtue produces a spiritual pleasure, that is better than bodily pleasure. Regarding Aristotle's opinion that happiness depends on the goods of fortune, Descartes does not deny that these goods contribute to happiness, but remarks that they are in great proportion outside one's own control, whereas one's mind is under one's complete control.\nFriedrich Nietzsche.\nFor Friedrich Nietzsche, the virtues of the strong are seen as vices by the weak and slavish, thus Nietzsche's virtue ethics is based on his distinction between master morality and slave morality. Nietzsche promotes the virtues of those he calls \"higher men\", people like Goethe and Beethoven. The virtues he praises in them are their creative powers (\"the men of great creativity, the really great men according to my understanding\"). According to Nietzsche these higher types are solitary, pursue a \"unifying project\", revere themselves and are healthy and life-affirming. Because mixing with the herd makes one base, the higher type \"strives instinctively for a citadel and a secrecy where he is saved from the crowd, the many, the great majority\u2026\". The \"Higher type\" also \"instinctively seeks heavy responsibilities\"944 in the form of an \"organizing idea\" for their life, which drives them to artistic and creative work and gives them psychological health and strength. The fact that the higher types are \"healthy\" for Nietzsche does not refer to physical health as much as a psychological resilience and fortitude. Finally, someone of the \"Higher type\" affirms life because he is willing to accept the eternal return of his life and affirm this forever and unconditionally.\nIn the last section of \"Beyond Good and Evil\", Nietzsche outlines his thoughts on the noble virtues and places solitude as one of the highest virtues:\nAnd to keep control over your four virtues: courage, insight, sympathy, solitude. Because solitude is a virtue for us, since it is a sublime inclination and impulse to cleanliness which shows that contact between people (\"society\") inevitably makes things unclean. Somewhere, sometime, every community makes people \u2013 \"base\".\u00a7284\nNietzsche also sees truthfulness as a virtue:\nGenuine honesty, assuming that this is our virtue and we cannot get rid of it, we free spirits \u2013 well then, we will want to work on it with all the love and malice at our disposal and not get tired of 'perfecting' ourselves in our virtue, the only one we have left: may its glory come to rest like a gilded, blue evening glow of mockery over this aging culture and its dull and dismal seriousness!\u00a7227\nBenjamin Franklin.\nThese are the virtues that Benjamin Franklin used to develop what he called \"moral perfection\". He had a checklist in a notebook to measure each day how he lived up to his virtues.\nThey became known through Benjamin Franklin's autobiography.\nContemporary views.\nVirtues as emotions.\nMarc Jackson in his book \"Emotion and Psyche\" identifies the virtues as what he calls the good emotions: \"The first group consisting of love, kindness, joy, faith, awe and pity is good.\" These virtues differ from older accounts of the virtues because they are not character traits expressed by action, but emotions that are to be felt and developed by feeling not acting.\nImmanuel Kant, in his \"Observations on the Feeling of the Beautiful and Sublime\", predicts and replies to Marc Johnson's view of emotions as virtues. To be goodhearted, benevolent, and sympathetic is not true virtue, for one acts merely episodically, motivated by appeasing those naturally limited feelings, such as in the presence, for example, of a needy person in the street: in such a case, we do not act for a universal motive but simply as a response to end a particular, individual, personal distress arisen in us by our own sentiments.\nIn modern psychology.\nChristopher Peterson and Martin Seligman, two leading researchers in positive psychology, recognizing the deficiency inherent in psychology's tendency to focus on dysfunction rather than on what makes a healthy and stable personality, set out to develop a list of \"Character Strengths and Virtues\". After three years of study, 24 traits (classified into six broad areas of virtue) were identified, having \"a surprising amount of similarity across cultures and strongly indicat[ing] a historical and cross-cultural convergence\".36 These six categories of virtue are courage, justice, humanity, temperance, transcendence, and wisdom. Some psychologists suggest that these virtues are adequately grouped into fewer categories; for example, the same 24 traits have been grouped into simply: Cognitive Strengths, Temperance Strengths, and Social Strengths.\nVice as opposite.\nThe opposite of a virtue is a vice. Vice is a habitual, repeated practice of wrongdoing. One way of organizing the vices is as the corruption of the virtues.\nAs Aristotle noted, however, the virtues can have several opposites. Virtues can be considered the mean between two extremes, as the Latin maxim dictates \u2014in the centre lies virtue. For instance, both cowardice and rashness are opposites of courage; contrary to prudence are both over-caution and insufficient caution; the opposites of pride (a virtue) are undue humility and excessive vanity. A more \"modern\" virtue, tolerance, can be considered the mean between the two extremes of narrow-mindedness on the one hand and over-acceptance on the other. Vices can therefore be identified as the opposites of virtues\u2014but with the caveat that each virtue could have many different opposites, all distinct from each other.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49902", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49902", "title": "Pope Leo XII", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1823 to 1829\nPope Leo XII (; born Annibale Francesco Clemente Melchiorre Girolamo Nicola della Genga; 2 August 1760\u00a0\u2013 10 February 1829) was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 28 September 1823 to his death in February 1829.\nLeo XII was in ill health from the time of his election to the papacy to his death less than six years later, though he was noted for enduring pain well. He was a deeply conservative ruler, who enforced many controversial laws, including one forbidding Jews to own property. Though he raised taxes, the Papal States remained financially poor.\nBiography.\nFamily.\nDella Genga was born in 1760 at the Castello della Genga in the territory of Fabriano to an old noble family from Genga, a small town in the March of Ancona, part of the Papal States. He was the sixth of ten children born to Count Ilario della Genga and Maria Luisa Periberti di Fabriano, and he was the uncle of Gabriele della Genga Sermattei, who in the 19th century was the only nephew of a pope to be elevated to cardinal.\nEducation and ordination.\nDella Genga studied theology at the Collegio Campana in Osimo from 1773 to 1778 and later at the Collegio Piceno in Rome until 1783 when he commenced studies at the Pontifical Academy of Ecclesiastical Nobles. He later received the subdiaconate in 1782 and then the diaconate and was ordained to the priesthood on 14 June 1783; he received the latter two from Cardinal Marcantonio Colonna.\nPapal nuncio and episcopate.\nIn 1790 the attractive and articulate della Genga attracted favourable attention by a tactful oration commemorative of the late Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor. In 1794 Pope Pius VI made him a canon of Saint Peter's Basilica, and in 1793 created him Titular Archbishop of Tyre. He was consecrated in Rome in 1794 after the appointment and was despatched to Lucerne as the Apostolic Nuncio to Switzerland. In 1794 he was transferred to the Apostolic Nunciature to Cologne, but owing to the war had to make his residence in Augsburg. At this time, he believed it would be his last post and organized the construction of tombs for his mother and for himself.\nDuring the dozen or more years he spent in Germany he was entrusted with several honourable and difficult missions, which brought him into contact with the courts of Dresden, Vienna, Munich and Stuttgart, as well as with Napoleon. It is charged, however, that during this period his finances were disordered, and his private life was not above suspicion.\nAfter the Napoleonic abolition of the States of the Church (1798), he lived for some years at Monticelli Abbey, solacing himself with music and with bird-shooting, pastimes which he continued even after his election as Pope.\nCardinal.\nIn 1814 della Genga was chosen to carry Pope Pius VII's congratulations to Louis XVIII of France upon his restoration.\nOn 8 March 1816 he was created Cardinal-Priest of Santa Maria in Trastevere and he received his red zucchetto on 11 March and his titular church on 29 April 1816. Later he was appointed as the Archpriest of the Basilica di Santa Maria Maggiore, and appointed to the episcopal see of Sinigaglia, which he resigned in 1818 for health reasons. He resigned without ever having entered his diocese.\nOn 9 May 1820, Pope Pius VII gave him the distinguished post of Vicar-General of His Holiness for the Diocese of Rome.\nPontificate.\nPapal election.\nPope Pius VII died in 1823 after yet another long pontificate that spanned over two decades. In the conclave of 1823, della Genga was the candidate of the zelanti faction and in spite of the active opposition of France, he was elected as the new pope by the cardinals on 28 September 1823, taking the name of Leo XII.\nHis election had been facilitated because he was thought to be close to death, but he unexpectedly rallied. He had even remarked about his own health to the cardinals, saying that they would be electing \"a dead man\". It was said in the conclave that he lifted his robes to show the cardinals a pair of swollen and ulcerated legs to deter them, but that made them even more eager to elect him. Before the conclave opened, the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies indicated that it objected to five candidates in the election which included della Genga. While della Genga did not receive a single vote in the first and second ballots, he received seven in the third and then four in the fifth. While it seemed that Cardinal Antonio Gabriele Severoli would prevail on 21 September since he had just below the needed amount, Cardinal Giuseppe Albani interposed the veto on the behalf of the Austrian Empire against Severoli. While it was later indicated that the French court would not be amenable to the election of della Genga, Severoli's voting bloc decided to cast their votes for della Genga, seeing him receive 34 votes to become pope.\nLeo XII was 63 at the time of his election and frequently fell victim to infirmities. He was tall and thin with an ascetic look and a melancholic countenance. At this time Vincent Strambi served as bishop for the remainder of the pontificate of Pope Pius VII before his successor Pope Leo XII accepted Strambi's resignation and summoned him to Rome as his advisor. But the sudden illness of the pope \u2013 which seemed likely to prove fatal \u2013 prompted Strambi to offer his own life to God so that the pope could live. Leo XII rallied to great surprise but Strambi died of a stroke within the week.\nSo Leo XII fell ill after his coronation but after his recovery, he showed surprising endurance in carrying out his work. Leo XII devoted himself to his work and was simple in his mode of life. He had a passion for shooting birds and was rumored to have killed a peasant with whom he argued about sporting rights.\nThe cardinal protodeacon Fabrizio Ruffo crowned him as pontiff on 5 October 1823.\nForeign policy.\nPius VII's Cardinal Secretary of State, Ercole Consalvi, who had been della Genga's rival in the conclave, was immediately dismissed, and Pius' policies rejected. Leo XII's foreign policy, entrusted at first to the octogenarian Giulio Maria della Somaglia and then to the more able Tommaso Bernetti, negotiated certain concordats very advantageous to the papacy. Personally most frugal, Leo XII reduced taxes, made justice less costly, and was able to find money for certain public improvements, yet he left the Church's finances more confused than he had found them, and even the elaborate jubilee of 1825 did not really mend financial matters.\nWith regard to the Spanish American Wars of Independence, he initially displayed a cautious stance of neutrality between the Spanish Empire and the Spanish American Republics, not recognizing them diplomatically, but allowing the priestly Ordination of clergy sympathetic to the independence movements, seeking to avoid explicit declarations against the independentists for fear of anti-clerical policies by the Liberadores in response, as well as an abuse of the patronato real in Spain to pressure the Pope to increase his hostility. But after receiving representatives of the Spanish Court (supported in turn by the Holy Alliance) and also envoys from Gran Colombia proposing a Concordat, he issued opinions against the latter in order to \"restore tranquility and order to his subjects in those domains\", influencing the rejection of the Holy See to the patriotic Armies that they affirm liberal ideologies and the Modernist errors of the Enlightenment (perceived by the Church as heresies) contrary to natural law and the Thomistic Conception of Politics (citing as an example its application in the Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution), as well as considering that the cause of the socio-political disorder in Latin America came from the insurgents with their rebellions against the Legitimate authority and seeking to force the practice of the voluntaristic doctrines of the Social Contract, a work condemned in the Index librorum prohibitorum, which prevented a pacification of the continent in a situation of anarchy since the Napoleonic invasion (This criticism, despite popular rumors, was not influenced by papal sympathies for the traditional Monarchy or any pressure from the Congress of Verona). It was thus that he proclaimed the encyclical Etsi Liam Diu, in continuity with the previous pro-royalist encyclical, Etsi longissimo terrarum, in which he exhorted the Hispanic American clergy \"to advise and insist among the faithful to obedience and submission to the legitimate sovereign and mother country,\" that is, to maintain the Pact with the Hispanic Monarchy intact by inspiring the common population to be faithful vassals and to abjure the \"new ideas\" of the Hispanic American Enlightenment and its Secularism (especially the threat that nation-states would claim to be the new socio-political rector of the destinies of society, to the detriment of the spiritual supremacy of the Church according to political Augustinianism), as well as to achieve a Reconciliation between Hispanic Americans involved in a fratricidal civil war that threatened to fragment the political ties of Hispanicity. However, due to logistical problems, the document was not delivered to the Spanish Americans until after the Battle of Ayacucho (the wars of independence having already ended in royalist defeat) and the Creole and liberal elites, once they learned of its existence, took the opportunity to accuse the document of being a Spanish forgery (a historiographical controversy that would be resolved with the release of the Vatican Archives by Leo XIII at the end of the century, revealing the original copy).\nDomestic policy.\nLeo XII's domestic policy was one of extreme conservatism: \"He was determined to change the condition of society, bringing it back to the utmost of his power to the old usages and ordinances, which he deemed to be admirable; and he pursued that object with never flagging zeal.\" He condemned the Bible societies, and under Jesuit influence reorganised the educational system, placing it entirely under priestly control through his bull \"Quod divina sapientia\" and requiring that all secondary instruction be carried out in Latin, as he required of all court proceedings, also now entirely in ecclesiastical hands. All charitable institutions in the Papal States were put under direct supervision.\nLaws such as that forbidding Jews to own property and allowing them only the shortest possible time in which to sell what they owned, and that requiring all Roman residents to listen to Catholic catechism commentary, led many of Rome's Jews to emigrate, to Trieste, Lombardy and Tuscany.\n\"The results of his method of governing his states soon showed themselves in insurrections, conspiracies, assassinations and rebellion, especially in Umbria, the Marches and Romagna; the violent repression of which, by a system of espionage, secret denunciation, and wholesale application of the gibbet and the galleys, left behind it to those who were to come afterwards a very terrible, rankling and long-enduring debt of party hatreds, of political and social demoralisation, and\u00a0\u2013 worst of all\u00a0\u2013 a contempt for and enmity to the law, as such.\" In a regime that saw the division of the population into Carbonari and Sanfedisti, he hunted down the Carbonari and the Freemasons with their liberal sympathisers.\nLeo XII made himself unpopular with the people due to the fact that he constrained them to endless rules that concerned private life and public affairs. He decreed that a dressmaker who sold low or transparent dresses would incur ipso facto excommunication. The pope also denied the Jews the right to possess material possessions and allowed them the shortest time to sell their belongings. He revived the regulations of the Middle Ages in regard to segregation and marks for identification.\nWhile often considered an archconservative Leo XII held a high opinion of the liberal Catholic priest Lamennais having a portrait of him hung in his private chambers. When the latter visited Rome in 1824 Leo offered him a Vatican apartment and in 1828 a cardinalate. According to Cardinal Nicholas Wiseman before the full consistory he said that Lamennais was \" a distinguished writer, whose works had not only rendered eminent services to religion, but rejoiced and astonished Europe.\" However some believe that the quote was actually about the historian John Lingard.\nLeo XII had a fascination with archeology. When Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Champollion deciphered the Egyptian hieroglyphs, Leo XII invited him to Rome to study its obelisks. Leo XII later printed and engraved Champollion's work at his personal expense. Champollion later wrote to Cardinal Wiseman that \"It is a\nreal service which His Holiness renders to science, and I shall be happy if you will be good enough to place at his feet the homage of my profound acknowledgment.\nVaccination controversy.\nAccording to some contemporary authors such as G. S. Godkin, Leo XII was also said to have prohibited vaccination. More recent scholarship has been unable to find any ban or any suggestion of a ban by Leo XII and his administration. Donald J. Keefe traced a quote by Leo XII which strongly condemned vaccination to \"an unverified citation\" by Dr. Pierre Simon in \"Histoire et philosophie du contr\u00f4le des naissances\". The response of the Papacy to the arrival of vaccination in Italy has been documented in \"Pratique de la vaccination antivariolique dans les provinces de l\u2019\u00c9tat pontifical au 19\u00e8me si\u00e8cle\", an article written by Yves-Marie Berc\u00e9 and Jean-Claude Otteni for Revue d\u2019Histoire Eccl\u00e9siastique. According to Berc\u00e9 and Otteni, the biographers and contemporaries of Leo XII do not mention any interdict. The authors credit the origin of the mythical vaccination ban of Leo XII to the personality of Cardinal della Genga when he became pope in 1823. His intransigence and piety alienated liberal opinion very quickly. His austere spirituality made him the target of criticisms and mocking remarks. English travelers visiting the peninsula and many of the diplomats established in Rome remarked on the severity of the pontiff.\nThe absence of a prohibition is evidenced by the fact that in 1828 the Medical-Surgical Society of Bologna was able to implement a vaccination campaign.\nActivities.\nBeatifications and canonizations.\nLeo XII beatified a number of individuals in his pontificate, which totaled at 15. He beatified Angelina di Marsciano and Bernardo Scammacca (8 March 1825), Hippolytus Galantini (29 June 1825), Angelus of Gualdo Tadino (3 August 1825), and Angelus of Acri (18 December 1825). He also beatified in 1825 Julian of Saint Augustine, Alphonsus Rodriguez and Jakob Griesinger. He beatified Imelda Lambertini (20 December 1826) and also confirmed the cultus of Jordan of Saxony in 1826. He also beatified Yolanda of Poland and Maddalena Panattieri on 26 September 1827, as well as Giovanna Soderini (1827) and Elena Duglioli and Juana de Aza (the mother of Saint Dominic) in 1828.\nLeo XII also created Peter Damian a Doctor of the Church on 27 September 1828 in addition to the formal canonization he presided over.\nSaint Vincenzo Strambi.\nHe collaborated with Vincent Strambi (future saint)\u00a0\u2013 who served as his advisor. When he was on the brink of death in 1825, Strambi offered himself to God for the survival of the pope. The pope rallied from his ailment, but Strambi died.\nReligious congregations.\nThe pope also approved the Missionary Oblates of Mary Immaculate on 17 February 1826 when he gave the congregation official recognition.\nJubilee.\nLeo XII celebrated the jubilee in 1825 in an event that saw more than half a million pilgrims travel to Rome to participate in the solemnities. To mark the event, Leo XII issued the encyclical \"Quod hoc ineunte\" on 24 May 1825 that proclaimed the jubilee.\nConsistories.\nHe held 8 consistories in which he elevated 25 new cardinals into the cardinalate. This included Cardinal Bartolomeo Alberto Cappellari \u2013 the future Pope Gregory XVI \u2013 on 13 March 1826. In addition, Leo XII nominated three cardinals whom he reserved \"in pectore\" but later revealed.\nFor the December 1824 allocations, Leo XII considered elevating F\u00e9licit\u00e9 de La Mennais despite knowing about his crude character and extreme social and moral positions. Nevertheless, the nomination never occurred, however, other sources allege that he declined the pope's invitation. For the October 1826 allocation, Leo XII had nominated one cardinal \"in pectore\" whom he later revealed in 1828, however, several subsequent sources indicate that the renowned English historian John Lingard was also created a cardinal \"in pectore\" and simply never announced. In the 1828 consistory, the Bishop of Osimo e Cingoli Timoteo Maria Ascensi was to be made a cardinal but died nine days before the consistory occurred.\nDeath and legacy.\nOn 5 February 1829, after a private audience with the new Cardinal Secretary of State, Tommaso Bernetti, he was suddenly taken ill and he seemed to know that his end was near. On 8 February, he asked for and received the Viaticum and was anointed. On 9 February, he lapsed into unconsciousness and on the next morning, he died. The minister to Rome for French King Charles X, Fran\u00e7ois-Ren\u00e9 de Chateaubriand, who was near to the events, wrote: \"The pope died of that haemorrhoidal condition to which he was subject. The blood, being carried to the bladder, occasioned a retention which they tried to relieve by means of an incision. It is thought His Holiness was injured by the operation. However it may be, after four days of suffering, Leo XII died this morning at nine as I was arriving at the Vatican, where an agent of the Embassy had spent the night.\" He was buried in a monument of him in Saint Peter's Basilica on 15 February 1829. His remains were transferred and buried before the altar of Pope Leo I on 5 December 1830.\nLeo XII is considered to have been a man of noble character, with a passion for order and efficiency, but one who lacked insight into the temporal developments of his time. His rule was unpopular in Rome and in the Papal States, and by various measures of his reign he diminished greatly for his successors their chances of solving the new problems that confronted them.\nRumors of a liaison.\nIt was alleged that Leo XII had a liaison as a young prelate with the wife of a Swiss Guard (known as Pfiffer). The allegation was brought to the attention of Pope Pius VI, who met with the prelate to discern the truth of the matter. He refuted all claims to the pope and the matter was dropped then and there save for the fact that della Genga affirmed he was close to Pfiffer.\nBibliography.\nLeo XII issued at least 6 encyclicals during his reign.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49904", "revid": "48609037", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49904", "title": "Scoti", "text": "Latin name for the Gaels\nScoti or Scotti is a Latin name for the Gaels, first attested in the late 3rd century. It originally referred to all Gaels, first those in Ireland and then those who had settled in Great Britain as well; it later came to refer only to Gaels in northern Britain. The kingdom to which their culture spread became known as \"Scotia\" or Scotland, and eventually all its inhabitants came to be known as Scots.\nHistory.\nAn early use of the word can be found in the \"Nomina Provinciarum Omnium\" (Names of All the Provinces), which dates to about AD 312. This is a short list of the names and provinces of the Roman Empire. At the end of this list is a brief list of tribes deemed to be a growing threat to the Empire, which included the \"Scoti\", as a new term for the Irish. There is also a reference to the word in St Prosper's chronicle of AD 431 where he describes Pope Celestine sending St Palladius to Ireland to preach \"ad Scotti in Christum\" (\"to the Scots who believed in Christ\").\nThereafter, periodic raids by Scoti are reported by several later 4th and early 5th century Latin writers, namely Pacatus, Ammianus Marcellinus, Claudian and the Chronica Gallica of 452. Two references to Scoti have been identified in Greek literature (as \u03a3\u03ba\u03cc\u03c4\u03c4\u03bf\u03b9), in the works of Epiphanius, Bishop of Salamis, writing in the 370s. The fragmentary evidence suggests an intensification of Scoti raiding from the early 360s, culminating in the so-called \"barbarian conspiracy\" of 367\u2013368, and continuing up to and beyond the end of Roman rule c. 410. The location and frequency of attacks by Scoti remain unclear, as do the origin and identity of the Gaelic population-groups who participated in these raids.\nBy the 5th century, the Gaelic or \"Scottish\" kingdom of D\u00e1l Riata had emerged in the area of modern Scotland that is now Argyll. Although this kingdom was destroyed and subjugated by the Pictish kingdom of the 8th century under Angus I, the convergence of Pictish and Gaelic languages over several centuries resulted in the English labelling Pictland under Constantine II as \"Scottish\" in the early 10th century, first attested in AD 920, viewing the Picts as speaking a Gaelic tongue. The growing influence of the English and Scots languages from the 12th century with the introduction of Norman-French knights and southerly expansion of Scotland's borders by David I saw the terms \"Scot\", \"Scottish\" and \"Scotland\" also begin to be used commonly by natives of that country.\nEtymology.\nThe etymology of Late Latin \"Scoti\" is unclear. It is not a Latin derivation, nor does it correspond to any known Goidelic (Gaelic) term the Gaels used to name themselves as a whole or a constituent population group. Several derivations have been conjectured, but none has gained general acceptance in mainstream scholarship. \nIn the 19th century, Aonghas MacCoinnich proposed that \"Scoti\" came from Gaelic \"sgaothaich\", meaning \"crowd\" or \"horde\".\nCharles Oman (1910) derived it from Gaelic \"scuit\", meaning someone cut off. He believed it referred to bands of outcast Gaelic raiders, suggesting that the Scots were to the Gaels what the Vikings were to the Norse.\nMore recently, Philip Freeman (2001) has speculated on the likelihood of a group of raiders adopting a name from an Indo-European root, *\"skot\", citing the parallel in the Ancient Greek \"skotos\" (\u03c3\u03ba\u03cc\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2), meaning \"darkness, gloom\".\nLinguist Kim McCone (2013) derives it from the Old Irish noun \"scoth\" meaning \"pick\", as in \"the pick\" of the population, the nobility, from an Archaic Irish reconstruction \"*skot\u012b\".\nAn origin has also been suggested in a word related to the English \"scot\" (\"tax\") and Old Norse \"skot\"; this referred to an activity in ceremonies whereby ownership of land was transferred by placing a parcel of earth in the lap of a new owner, whence 11th-century King Olaf, one of Sweden's first known rulers, may have been known as a \"scot king\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49905", "revid": "1316935229", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49905", "title": "Basel-Landschaft", "text": "Canton of Switzerland\nCanton of Basel-Landschaft or Basel-Country, informally known as Baselland or Baselbiet (; ; ; ; ), is one of the 26 cantons forming the Swiss Confederation. It is composed of five districts and its capital city is Liestal. It is traditionally considered a \"half-canton\", the other half being Basel-Stadt, its urban counterpart.\nBasel-Landschaft is one of the northernmost cantons of Switzerland. It lies essentially south of the Rhine and north of the Jura Mountains. The canton shares borders with the canton of Basel-Stadt to the north, the canton of Aargau to the east, the canton of Solothurn to the south and the canton of Jura to the west. It shares international borders as well with France and Germany to the north.\nTogether with Basel-Stadt, Basel-Landschaft was part of the canton of Basel, which joined the Old Swiss Confederacy in 1501. Political quarrels and armed conflict led to the partition of the canton in 1833.\nHistory.\nBasel-Landschaft, together with Basel-Stadt, formed the historic Canton of Basel until they separated following the uprising of 1833 (Battle of the H\u00fclftenschanz near Frenkendorf).\nIn Roman times, the area of Basel was a centre of Roman activity. There are well-preserved remains at the site of \"Augusta Raurica\" in the canton of Basel-Landschaft. Around 200 AD there were about 20,000 people living in this city, now part of the much smaller Augst. The remains are on display in an open-air museum. The museum attracts over 140,000 visitors per year. Many of these visitors are schoolchildren from other parts of Switzerland. The site of Augusta Raurica includes the best-preserved amphitheatre north of the Alps, and a reconstructed Roman villa.\nThe lands of the canton Basel-Landschaft are part of the lands acquired by the city of Basel. Until the end of the 16th century, most of the canton's land belonged to the city of Basel. After Napoleon's visit in 1798, the country achieved equality with the city. The country was economically dependent on the city, most probably because of the cost and difficulty in transporting agricultural goods to further markets, the financing of land transactions and crop production by city-based merchants. Low levels of education and literacy in the agricultural areas of Europe was typical in that era. The best students would be sponsored and sent away for higher learning. The city of Basel remained the cultural and economic centre of both Basel half cantons until then. Castles and residences of Basel merchants dominated much of the landscape in Basel-Landschaft.\nAfter 1830 there were political quarrels and armed conflict in the canton of Basel. Some of these were concerned with the rights of the population in the agricultural areas. They ultimately led to the separation of the canton Basel-Landschaft from the city of Basel on 26 August 1833. Since then, there has been a movement for reunification. This movement gained momentum after 1900 when many parts of Basel-Landschaft became industrialized. The two half cantons agreed in principle to merge, but in 1969 the people of Basel-Landschaft voted down a referendum on this proposal in favour of retaining their independence. It is thought that the closing economic gap between the two cantons was the main reason why the population changed their attitude.\nThat vote was not the end of a close relationship between the two Basels. The two half cantons have since signed a number of agreements to co-operate. The contribution of Basel-Landschaft to the University of Basel since 1976 is just one example.\nGeography.\nThe canton of Basel-Landschaft lies in the northwestern corner of Switzerland just south of the canton of Basel-Stadt.\nWith a few exceptions, it includes the towns of the Laufental along the river Birs, the Birseck and the Leimental, as well as the towns along the Ergolz and its tributaries. The shape of the canton is very irregular, and its borders cut across several towns.\nIn terms of size, it is one of the smaller cantons of Switzerland (18th of 26). However, it is number 10 in terms of population.\nBasel-Landschaft borders on the east and north with the canton of Aargau and the Rhine, which forms the border with Germany (state of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg). On the northwest, it borders with France (department of Haut-Rhin).\nOn the south, it borders on the canton of Solothurn, with a few exclaves of that canton within its western area. In the extreme southwest, it borders on the canton of Jura.\nThe Jura mountain chain traverses the canton. The rivers Ergolz and Birs drain the lands of the canton.\nThe thirty rivers of Baselland are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPolitics.\nSince the decision to remain independent from Basel-Stadt in 1969 there have been a number of requests in the parliament for Basel-Landschaft to become a \"full\" canton. In 1988 the canton of Basel-Landschaft had this aim written into its constitution. The aim remains to change the Swiss constitution to recognize the two cantons of Basel as full members.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^a FDP before 2009, FDP.The Liberals after 2009\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^b \"*\" indicates that the party was not on the ballot in this canton.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^c Part of the GPS\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^d CVP and BDP merged to form The Centre party.\nPolitical subdivisions.\nThe nine municipalities of the \"Arlesheim\" district used to belong to the diocese of Basel. In 1792 French troops occupied the district and in 1793 the lands were annexed by France, which explains the linguistic switch of the Family of the House of Basel's name from \"von Basel\" to \"de B\u00e2le\", since Arlesheim holds their manor. In 1815 at the Congress of Vienna the district joined Basel.\nThe district of \"Laufental\" has the same history as that of \"Arlesheim\". The important difference is that in 1815 Laufental joined Bern rather than Basel. When the canton of Jura was created in 1979, the district of Laufental became an enclave of the canton of Bern. It was allowed self- determination and in 1980 the people decided to join the canton of Basel-Landschaft. This led to \"Laufental\" joining the canton of Basel-Landschaft on 1 January 1994 after a lengthy administrative process.\nDistricts.\nThere are 5 areas (Bezirke) in Basel-Landschaft (as of 2021[ [update]]):\nMunicipalities.\nThere are 86 municipalities in the canton (As of 2009[ [update]]).\nDemographics.\nThe population is predominantly German-speaking. Protestantism is the main religion in the canton (43% as of 2000[ [update]]), while about one-third of the population (32%) is Roman Catholic. The Swiss Reformed Church and Christian Catholic Church of Switzerland are recognized as state churches. Between 1959 and 1970 the canton was Switzerland's fastest-growing, as the population almost doubled from 108,000 to 205,000. In 2021, the canton had a population of . As of 2007[ [update]], the population included 48,719 foreign residents, who made up 18.1% of the population.\nHistorical population.\nThe historical population is given in the following table:\nEconomy.\nAgriculture in the canton includes fruit growing, dairy farming and cattle breeding. Important industries include textiles, metals and chemicals.\nThe canton of Basel-Landschaft is part of the economic region around Basel that includes parts of France and Germany as well as both half cantons of Basel. Since the 1960s there are agreements in force to strengthen contacts within the so-called \"Regio Basiliensis\". This economic co-operation is often considered as the most intensive in Europe.\nFrom the 17th century until the beginning of the 20th century silk weaving was important in Basel-Landschaft. Factories were established as early as 1850, following the finding of salt in underground deposits, founding industries such as the chemical industry in \"Schweizerhalle\". The chemical industry means that Basel is one of the richer parts of Switzerland.\nAir travel is served by EuroAirport Basel Mulhouse Freiburg.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49906", "revid": "1503734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49906", "title": "Norman Granz", "text": "American jazz musician and producer (1918\u20132001)\nNorman Granz (August 6, 1918\u00a0\u2013 November 22, 2001) was an American jazz record producer and concert promoter. He founded the record labels Clef, Norgran, Down Home, Verve, and Pablo and the Jazz at the Philharmonic concert series. Granz was acknowledged as \"the most successful impresario in the history of jazz\". He was also a champion of racial equality, insisting, for example, on integrating audiences at concerts he promoted.\nBiography.\nBorn in Boyle Heights, Los Angeles, Granz was the son of Jewish immigrants from Tiraspol (now in Moldova). After school, he began work as a stock clerk on the Los Angeles stock exchange. When America joined the Second World War, he was drafted into the U.S. Army Air Force. Subsequently, he was posted to the Morale branch, the department charged with troops' entertainment.\nHe then emerged into the public view when he organised desegregated jam sessions at the Trouville Club in Los Angeles, which he later expanded when he staged a memorable concert at the Philharmonic Auditorium in Los Angeles on Sunday, July 2, 1944, under the heading of \"Jazz at the Philharmonic\".\nThe title of the concert, \"A Jazz Concert at the Philharmonic Auditorium\", had been shortened by the printer of the advertising supplements to \"Jazz at the Philharmonic\". Only one copy of the first concert program is known to exist. Norman Granz had organised the first Jazz at the Philharmonic concert with about $300 of borrowed money. Later known as JATP, the ever-changing group recorded and toured extensively, with Granz producing some of the first live jam session recordings to be distributed to a wide market.\nAfter several JATP concerts in Los Angeles in 1944 and 1945, Granz began producing JATP concert tours, from late fall of 1945 to 1957 in USA and Canada, and from 1952 in Europe. They featured swing and bop musicians and were among the first high-profile performances to feature racially integrated bands. Granz actually cancelled some bookings rather than have the musicians perform for segregated audiences. He recorded many of the JATP concerts, and from 1945 to 1947 sold/leased the recordings to Asch/Disc/Stinson Records (record producer Moses Asch's labels).\nIn 1948, Granz signed an agreement with Mercury Records for the promotion and the distribution of the JATP recordings and other recordings. After the agreement expired in 1953 he issued the JATP recordings and other recordings on Clef Records (founded 1946) and Norgran Records (founded 1953). Down Home Records was intended for traditional jazz works. In 1956, Granz also signed an agreement with the A&amp;R Ben Selvin to showcase several JATP recordings within the RCA Thesaurus library, including performances by such jazz luminaries as Count Basie, Roy Eldridge, Ella Fitzgerald, Stan Getz, Gene Krupa, Oscar Peterson, and Art Tatum. Jazz at the Philharmonic ceased touring the United States and Canada after the JATP concerts in the fall of 1957, apart from a North American Tour in 1967.\nPersonal life.\nGranz married three times. In 1950, he married Loretta (n\u00e9e Snyder) Sullivan from Michigan; they had a daughter together, Stormont Granz, who was disabled due to lack of oxygen during the birth. Loretta was previously married and had a child, Sydney Sullivan Hamed, whom Granz adopted. They separated in 1953 and divorced in 1955. In 1965, he married Hannelore Granz, a former airline stewardess from Germany. In 1974, he married Grete Lyngby from Denmark.\nGranz was also interested in art, developing a friendship with Pablo Picasso, whom he met in 1968.\nGranz died of cancer on November 22, 2001, at the age of 83, in Geneva, Switzerland.\nRacial equality efforts.\nNorman Granz opposed racism and fought many battles for his artists, many of whom were black. In 1955, in Houston, he removed signs that previously designated \"White\" and \"Negro\" restrooms outside the auditorium where two concerts were to be performed by Ella Fitzgerald and Dizzy Gillespie. Between the two shows, Fitzgerald and Gillespie and Illinois Jacquet were shooting small-stakes dice in the dressing room to kill time, when the local police barged in and arrested them. After some negotiations, the artists were allowed to perform the second show and later were formally released on $50 bail. Granz was incensed by the incident and insisted on fighting the charges in court, which was successful but cost him over $2,000.\nOscar Peterson recounted how Granz once insisted that white cabdrivers take his black artists as customers, while a policeman pointed a loaded pistol at his stomach. Granz also was among the first to pay white and black artists the same salary, and to give them equal treatment even in minor details such as dressing rooms. He insisted on equal treatment for singer Ella Fitzgerald, in both pay and hotel accommodations.\nGranz also spearheaded the fight to desegregate the hotels and casinos in Las Vegas, arguing that it was unfair that black artists could perform on the stages, but could not stay or gamble at the hotels, or even enter through the front doors.\nRecordings.\nMany top-flight talents in jazz history recorded for one of Norman Granz's labels, including Louis Armstrong, Count Basie, Louie Bellson, Benny Carter, Buck Clayton, Buddy DeFranco, Roy Eldridge, Herb Ellis, Tal Farlow, Ella Fitzgerald, Slim Gaillard, Stan Getz, Dizzy Gillespie, Lionel Hampton, Coleman Hawkins, Johnny Hodges, Billie Holiday, Illinois Jacquet, Hank Jones, Gene Krupa, Anita O'Day, Charlie Parker, Joe Pass, Oscar Peterson, Flip Phillips, Bud Powell, Buddy Rich, Mort Sahl, Sonny Stitt, Art Tatum, Ben Webster, and Lester Young.\nGranz saw to it that his musicians were well paid. In the segregated society of the 1940s, he insisted on equal pay and accommodation for white and Black musicians. He refused to take his hugely popular concerts to places that were segregated, even if he had to cancel concerts, thereby sacrificing considerable sums of money.\nIn 1944, Granz and Gjon Mili produced the jazz film \"Jammin' the Blues\", which starred Lester Young, Illinois Jacquet, Barney Kessel, Harry Edison, Jo Jones, Sidney Catlett, Marlowe Morris, and Marie Bryant, and was nominated for an Academy Award.\nIt was in 1956 that Granz created Verve Records to distribute albums by Ella Fitzgerald, his new client. Granz had recently become her manager, and unified his recording activities including back catalogue of his previous labels Clef and Norgran under the common Verve imprint. Granz would manage Fitzgerald for the rest of her career. Fitzgerald's memorable series of eight \"Songbooks\", together with the duet series (notably Armstrong-Peterson, Fitzgerald-Basie, Fitzgerald-Pass and Getz-Peterson) achieved wide popularity and brought acclaim to the label and to the artists. Granz was also the manager of Oscar Peterson, another lifelong friend.\nIn 1959, Norman Granz moved to Switzerland. In December 1960, Verve Records was sold to Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer.\nGranz founded his last label, Pablo Records, in 1973. He sold Pablo to Fantasy Records in 1989.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49907", "revid": "6766874", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49907", "title": "Caracalla", "text": "Roman emperor from 198 to 217 \nMarcus Aurelius Antoninus (born Lucius Septimius Bassianus, 4 April 188\u00a0\u2013 8 April 217), better known by his nickname Caracalla (; ), was Roman emperor from 198 to 217 AD, first serving as nominal co-emperor under his father and then ruling alone after 211 AD. He was a member of the Severan dynasty, the elder son of Emperor Septimius Severus and Empress Julia Domna. Severus proclaimed Caracalla co-ruler in 198, doing the same with his other son Geta in 209. The two brothers briefly shared power after their father's death in 211, but Caracalla soon had Geta murdered by the Praetorian Guard and became sole ruler of the Roman Empire. Julia Domna had a significant share in governance, since Caracalla found administration to be mundane. His reign featured domestic instability and external invasions by the Germanic peoples.\nCaracalla issued the Antonine Constitution (), also known as the Edict of Caracalla, which granted Roman citizenship to all free men throughout the Roman Empire. The edict gave all the enfranchised men Caracalla's adopted praenomen and nomen: \"Marcus Aurelius\". Other landmarks of his reign were the construction of the Baths of Caracalla, the second-largest bathing complex in the history of Rome, the introduction of a new Roman currency named the \"antoninianus\", a sort of double \"denarius\", and the massacres he ordered, both in Rome and elsewhere in the empire. In 216, Caracalla began a campaign against the Parthian Empire. He did not see this campaign through to completion due to his assassination by a disaffected soldier in 217. Macrinus succeeded him as emperor three days later.\nThe ancient sources portray Caracalla as a cruel tyrant; his contemporaries Cassius Dio (c. 155 \u2013 c. 235) and Herodian (c. 170 \u2013 c. 240) present him as a soldier first and an emperor second. In the 12th century, Geoffrey of Monmouth started the legend of Caracalla's role as king of Britain. Later, in the 18th century, the works of French painters revived images of Caracalla due to apparent parallels between Caracalla's tyranny and that ascribed to king Louis XVI (r.\u20091774\u00a0\u2013\u00a01792). Modern works continue to portray Caracalla as an evil ruler, painting him as one of the most tyrannical of all Roman emperors.\nNames.\nCaracalla's name at birth was Lucius Septimius Bassianus. He was renamed Marcus Aurelius Antoninus at the age of seven as part of his father's attempt at union with the families of Antoninus Pius and Marcus Aurelius. According to the 4th-century historian Aurelius Victor in his \"Epitome de Caesaribus\", he became known by the agnomen \"Caracalla\" after a Gallic hooded tunic that he habitually wore and made fashionable. He may have begun wearing it during his campaigns on the Rhine and Danube. Cassius Dio, who was still writing his \"Historia romana\" during Caracalla's reign, generally referred to him as \"Tarautas\", after a famously diminutive and violent gladiator of the time, though he also calls him \"Caracallus\" on various occasions.\nEarly life.\nCaracalla was born in Lugdunum, Gaul (now Lyon, France), on 4April 188 to Septimius Severus (r.\u2009193\u00a0\u2013\u00a0211) and Julia Domna, thus giving him Punic paternal ancestry and Arab maternal ancestry. He had a slightly younger brother, Geta, with whom Caracalla briefly ruled as co-emperor. Caracalla was five years old when his father was acclaimed \"Augustus\" on 9 April 193.\n\"Caesar\".\nIn early 195, Caracalla's father Septimius Severus had himself adopted posthumously by the deified emperor (\"divus\") Marcus Aurelius (r.\u2009161\u00a0\u2013\u00a0180); accordingly, in 195 or 196 Caracalla was given the imperial rank of \"Caesar\", adopting the name Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Caesar, and was named \"imperator destinatus\" (or ) in 197, possibly on his birthday, 4 April, and certainly before 7 May. He thus technically became a part of the well-remembered Antonine dynasty.\nCo-\"augustus\".\nCaracalla's father appointed Caracalla, aged 9, joint \"Augustus\" and full emperor from 28 January 198. This was the day Septimius Severus's triumph was celebrated, in honour of his victory over the Parthian Empire in the Roman\u2013Persian Wars; he had successfully sacked the Parthian capital, Ctesiphon, after winning the Battle of Ctesiphon, probably in October 197. He was also awarded tribunician power and the title of \"imperator\". In inscriptions, Caracalla is given from 198 the title of the chief priesthood, \"pontifex maximus\". His brother Geta was proclaimed \"nobilissimus caesar\" on the same day, and their father Septimius Severus was awarded the victory name \"Parthicus Maximus\".\nIn 199, he was inducted into the Arval Brethren. By the end of 199, at age 11, he was entitled \"pater patriae\". In 202, he was Roman consul, having been named \"consul designatus\" the previous year. His colleague was his father, serving his own third consulship.\nIn 202, Caracalla was forced to marry the daughter of Gaius Fulvius Plautianus, Fulvia Plautilla, whom he hated, though for what reason is unknown. The wedding took place between the 9 and the 15 April, just after he turned 14.\nIn 205, Caracalla was consul for the second time, in company with Geta \u2013 his brother's first consulship. By 205, aged 16, Caracalla had got Plautianus executed for treason, though he had probably fabricated the evidence of the plot. It was then that he banished his wife, whose later killing might have been carried out under Caracalla's orders.\nOn 28 January 207, at age 18, Caracalla celebrated his \"decennalia\", the tenth anniversary of the beginning of his reign. The year 208 was the year of his third and Geta's second consulship.\"\" Geta was himself granted the rank of \"Augustus\" and tribunician powers in September or October 209.\nDuring the reign of his father, Caracalla's mother Julia Domna had played a prominent public role, receiving titles of honour such as \"Mother of the camp\", but she also played a role behind the scenes helping her husband administer the empire. Described as ambitious, Julia Domna surrounded herself with thinkers and writers from all over the empire. While Caracalla was mustering and training troops for his planned Persian invasion, Julia remained in Rome, administering the empire. Julia's growing influence in state affairs was the beginning of a trend of emperors' mothers having influence, which continued throughout the Severan dynasty.\nReign as senior emperor.\nGeta as co-\"augustus\".\nOn 4February 211, Septimius Severus died at Eboracum (present-day York, England) while on campaign in Caledonia, to the north of Roman Britain.\nThis left his two sons and co-\"augusti\", Caracalla and his brother, Geta, as joint inheritors of their father's throne and empire. Caracalla adopted his father's \"cognomen\", Severus, and assumed the chief priesthood as \"pontifex maximus\". His name became \"Imperator Caesar Marcus Aurelius Severus Antoninus Pius Augustus\".\nCaracalla and Geta ended the Roman invasion of Caledonia after concluding a peace with the Caledonians that returned the border of Roman Britain to the line demarcated by Hadrian's Wall. During the journey back from Britain to Rome with their father's ashes, Caracalla and his brother continuously argued with one another, making relations between them increasingly hostile. Caracalla and Geta considered dividing the empire in half along the Bosphorus to make their co-rule less hostile. Caracalla was to rule in the west and Geta was to rule in the east. They were persuaded not to do this by their mother.\nGeta's murder.\nOn 26 December 211, at a reconciliation meeting arranged by their mother, Geta was assassinated by members of the Praetorian Guard loyal to the 23-year-old Caracalla. Geta died in his mother's arms. It is widely accepted, and clearly most likely, that Caracalla ordered the assassination himself, as the two had never been on favourable terms with one another, much less after succeeding their father.\nCaracalla then persecuted and executed most of Geta's supporters and ordered a \"damnatio memoriae\" pronounced by the Senate against his brother's memory. Geta's image was removed from all paintings, coins were melted down, statues were destroyed, his name was struck from papyrus records, and it became a capital offence to speak or write Geta's name. In the aftermath of the \"damnatio memoriae\", an estimated 20,000 people were massacred. Those killed were Geta's inner circle of guards and advisers, friends, and other military staff under his employ.\nReign as sole emperor.\nWhen Geta died in 211, Julia Domna's responsibilities increased, because Caracalla found administrative tasks to be mundane. She may have taken on one of the more important civil functions of the emperor; receiving petitions and answering correspondence. The extent of her role in this position, however, is probably overstated. She may have represented her son and played a role in meetings and answering queries; however, the final authority on legal matters was Caracalla. The emperor filled all of the roles in the legal system as judge, legislator, and administrator.\n\"Constitutio Antoniniana\".\nThe \"Constitutio Antoniniana\" (lit. \"Constitution of Antoninus\", also called \"Edict of Caracalla\" or \"Antonine Constitution\") was an edict issued in 212 by Caracalla declaring that all free men in the Roman Empire were to be given full Roman citizenship, with the exception of the \"dediticii\", people who had become subject to Rome through surrender in war, and freed slaves.\nBefore 212, the majority of Roman citizens had been inhabitants of Roman Italia, with about 4\u20137% of all peoples in the Roman Empire being Roman citizens at the time of the death of Augustus in AD 14. Outside Rome, citizenship was restricted to Roman coloniae\u00a0\u2013 Romans, or their descendants, living in the provinces, the inhabitants of various cities throughout the Empire\u00a0\u2013 and small numbers of local nobles such as kings of client countries. Provincials, on the other hand, were usually non-citizens, although some magistrates and their families and relatives held the Latin Right.\nDio maintains that one purpose for Caracalla issuing the edict was the desire to increase state revenue; at the time, Rome was in a difficult financial situation and needed to pay for the new pay raises and benefits that were being conferred on the military. The edict widened the obligation for public service and gave increased revenue through the inheritance and emancipation taxes that only had to be paid by Roman citizens. However, few of those that gained citizenship were wealthy, and while it is true that Rome was in a difficult financial situation, it is thought that this could not have been the sole purpose of the edict. The provincials also benefited from this edict because they were now able to think of themselves as equal partners to the Romans in the empire.\nAnother purpose for issuing the edict, as described within the papyrus upon which part of the edict was inscribed, was to appease the gods who had delivered Caracalla from conspiracy. The conspiracy in question was in response to Caracalla's murder of Geta and the subsequent slaughter of his followers; fratricide would only have been condoned if his brother had been a tyrant. The \"damnatio memoriae\" against Geta and the large payments Caracalla had made to his own supporters were designed to protect himself from possible repercussions. After this had succeeded, Caracalla felt the need to repay the gods of Rome by returning the favour to the people of Rome through a similarly grand gesture. This was done through the granting of citizenship.\nAnother purpose for issuing the edict might have been related to the fact that the periphery of the empire was now becoming central to its existence, and the granting of citizenship may have been simply a logical outcome of Rome's continued expansion of citizenship rights.\nAlamannic war.\nIn 213, about a year after Geta's death, Caracalla left Rome, never to return. He went north to the German frontier to deal with the Alamanni, a confederation of Germanic tribes who had broken through the \"limes\" in Raetia. During the campaign of 213\u2013214, Caracalla successfully defeated some of the Germanic tribes while settling other difficulties through diplomacy, though precisely with whom these treaties were made remains unknown. While there, Caracalla strengthened the frontier fortifications of Raetia and Germania Superior, collectively known as the Agri Decumates, so that it was able to withstand any further barbarian invasions for another twenty years.\nProvincial tour.\nIn spring 214, Caracalla departed for the eastern provinces, travelling through the Danubian provinces and the Anatolian provinces of Asia and Bithynia. He spent the winter of 214/215 in Nicomedia. By 4 April 215 he had left Nicomedia, and in the summer he was in Antioch on the Orontes. By December 215 he was in Alexandria in the Nile Delta, where he stayed until March or April 216.\nWhen the inhabitants of Alexandria heard of Caracalla's claims that he had killed his brother Geta in self-defence, they produced a satire mocking this as well as Caracalla's other pretensions. Caracalla responded to this insult by slaughtering the unsuspecting deputation of leading citizens that had assembled before the city to greet his arrival in December 215, before setting his troops against Alexandria for several days of looting and plunder.\nIn spring 216 he returned to Antioch and before 27 May had set out to lead his Roman army against the Parthians. During the winter of 215/216 he was in Edessa. Caracalla then moved east into Armenia. By 216 he had pushed through Armenia and south into Parthia.\nBaths.\nConstruction on the Baths of Caracalla in Rome began in 211 at the start of Caracalla's rule. The \"thermae\" are named for Caracalla, though it is most probable that his father was responsible for their planning. In 216, a partial inauguration of the baths took place, but the outer perimeter of the baths was not completed until the reign of Severus Alexander.\nThese large baths were typical of the Roman practice of building complexes for social and state activities in large densely populated cities. The baths covered around 50 acres (or 202,000 square metres) of land and could accommodate around 1,600 bathers at any one time. They were the second largest public baths built in ancient Rome and were complete with swimming pools, exercise yards, a stadium, steam rooms, libraries, meeting rooms, fountains, and other amenities, all of which were enclosed within formal gardens. The interior spaces were decorated with colourful marble floors, columns, mosaics, and colossal statuary.\nCaracalla and Serapis.\nAt the outset of his reign, Caracalla declared imperial support for the Graeco-Egyptian god of healing Serapis. The Iseum and Serapeum in Alexandria were apparently renovated during Caracalla's co-rule with his father Septimius Severus. The evidence for this exists in two inscriptions found near the temple that appear to bear their names. Additional archaeological evidence exists for this in the form of two papyri that have been dated to the Severan period and also two statues associated with the temple that have been dated to around 200AD. Upon Caracalla's ascension to being sole ruler in 212, the imperial mint began striking coins bearing Serapis' image. This was a reflection of the god's central role during Caracalla's reign. After Geta's death, the weapon that had killed him was dedicated to Serapis by Caracalla. This was most likely done to cast Serapis into the role of Caracalla's protector from treachery.\nCaracalla also erected a temple on the Quirinal Hill in 212, which he dedicated to Serapis. A fragmented inscription found in the church of Sant' Agata dei Goti in Rome records the construction, or possibly restoration, of a temple dedicated to the god Serapis. The inscription bears the name \"Marcus Aurelius Antoninus\", a reference to either Caracalla or Elagabalus, but more likely to Caracalla due to his known strong association with the god. Two other inscriptions dedicated to Serapis, as well as a granite crocodile similar to one discovered at the Iseum et Serapeum, were also found in the area around the Quirinal Hill.\nMonetary policy.\nThe expenditures that Caracalla made with the large bonuses he gave to soldiers prompted him to debase the coinage soon after his ascension. At the end of Severus' reign and early into Caracalla's, the Roman \"denarius\" had an approximate silver purity of around 55%, but by the end of Caracalla's reign the purity had been reduced to about 51%.\nIn 215 Caracalla introduced the \"antoninianus\", a coin intended to serve as a double \"denarius\". This new currency, however, had a silver purity of about 52% for the period between 215 and 217 and an actual size ratio of 1\"antoninianus\" to 1.5denarii. This in effect made the \"antoninianus\" equal to about 1.5\"denarii.\" The reduced silver purity of the coins caused people to hoard the old coins that had higher silver content, aggravating the inflation problem caused by the earlier devaluation of the \"denarii\".\nMilitary policy.\nDuring his reign as emperor, Caracalla raised the annual pay of an average legionary from 2000 \"sesterces\" (500 \"denarii\") to 2700\u20133000 \"sesterces\" (675\u2013750 \"denarii\"). He lavished many benefits on the army, which he both feared and admired, in accordance with the advice given by his father on his deathbed always to heed the welfare of the soldiers and ignore everyone else. Caracalla needed to gain and keep the trust of the military, and he did so with generous pay raises and popular gestures. He spent much of his time with the soldiers, so much so that he began to imitate their dress and adopt their manners.\nAfter Caracalla concluded his campaign against the Alamanni, it became evident that he was inordinately preoccupied with emulating Alexander the Great. He began openly mimicking Alexander in his personal style. In planning his invasion of the Parthian Empire, Caracalla decided to arrange 16,000 of his men in Macedonian-style phalanxes, despite the Roman army having made the phalanx an obsolete tactical formation. The historian Christopher Matthew mentions that the term \"Phalangarii\" has two possible meanings, both with military connotations. The first refers merely to the Roman battle line and does not specifically mean that the men were armed with pikes, and the second bears similarity to the 'Marian Mules' of the late Roman Republic who carried their equipment suspended from a long pole, which were in use until at least the 2nd century AD. As a consequence, the \"phalangarii\" of Legio II Parthica may not have been pikemen, but rather standard battle line troops or possibly \"triarii\".\nCaracalla's mania for Alexander went so far that he visited Alexandria while preparing for his Persian invasion and persecuted philosophers of the Aristotelian school based on a legend that Aristotle had poisoned Alexander. This was a sign of Caracalla's increasingly erratic behaviour.\nParthian war.\nIn 216, Caracalla pursued a series of aggressive campaigns in the east against the Parthians, intended to bring more territory under direct Roman control. He offered the king of Parthia, Artabanus IV of Parthia, a marriage proposal between himself and the king's daughter. Artabanus refused the offer, realizing that the proposal was merely an attempt to unite the kingdom of Parthia under the control of Rome. In response, Caracalla used the opportunity to start a campaign against the Parthians. That summer Caracalla began to attack the countryside east of the Tigris in the Parthian war of Caracalla. In the following winter, Caracalla retired to Edessa, modern \u015eanl\u0131urfa in south-east Turkey, and began making preparations to renew the campaign by spring.\nDeath.\nAt the beginning of 217, Caracalla was still based at Edessa before renewing hostilities against Parthia. On 8April 217 Caracalla, who had just turned 29, was travelling to visit a temple of the moon god Sin, while on the road from Edessa to Carrhae, now Harran in southern Turkey, where in 53BC the Romans had suffered a defeat at the hands of the Parthians. After stopping briefly to urinate, Caracalla was approached by a soldier, Justin Martialis, and stabbed. A Scythian bodyguard of Caracalla killed Martialis with his lance. The two Praetorian tribunes rushed to the emperor, as if to help him, and completed the assassination.\nMartialis had been incensed by Caracalla's refusal to grant him the position of centurion, and the praetorian prefect Macrinus, Caracalla's successor, saw the opportunity to use Martialis to end Caracalla's reign. In the immediate aftermath of Caracalla's death, his murderer, Martialis, was killed as well. When Caracalla was murdered, Julia Domna was in Antioch sorting out correspondence, removing unimportant messages from the bunch so that when Caracalla returned, he would not be overburdened with duties. Three days later, Macrinus declared himself emperor with the support of the Roman army.\nPortraiture.\nCaracalla's official portrayal as sole emperor marks a break from the detached images of the philosopher-emperors who preceded him: his close-cropped haircut is that of a soldier, his pugnacious scowl a realistic and threatening presence. This rugged soldier-emperor, an iconic archetype, was adopted by most of the following emperors, such as Maximinus Thrax, who were dependent on the support of the troops to rule the empire.\nHerodian describes Caracalla as having preferred northern European clothing, \"Caracalla\" being the name of the short Gaulish cloak that he made fashionable, and he often wore a blond wig. Dio mentions that when Caracalla was a boy, he had a tendency to show an angry or even savage facial expression.\nThe way Caracalla wanted to be portrayed to his people can be seen through the many surviving busts and coins. Images of the young Caracalla cannot be clearly distinguished from his younger brother Geta. On the coins, Caracalla was shown laureate after becoming \"augustus\" in 197; Geta is bareheaded until he became \"augustus\" himself in 209. Between 209 and their father's death in February211, both brothers are shown as mature young men who were ready to take over the empire.\nBetween the death of the father and the assassination of Geta towards the end of 211, Caracalla's portrait remains static with a short full beard while Geta develops a long beard with hair strains like his father. The latter was a strong indicator of Geta's effort to be seen as the true successor to their father, an effort that came to naught when he was murdered. Caracalla's presentation on coins during the period of his co-reign with his father, from 198 to 210, are in broad terms in line with the third-century imperial representation; most coin types communicate military and religious messages, with other coins giving messages of \"saeculum aureum\" and virtues.\nDuring Caracalla's sole reign, from 212 to 217, a significant shift in representation took place. The majority of coins produced during this period made associations with divinity or had religious messages; others had non-specific and unique messages that were only circulated during Caracalla's sole rule.\nLegacy.\nDamnatio memoriae.\nCaracalla was not subject to a proper \"damnatio memoriae\" after his assassination; while the Senate disliked him, his popularity with the military prevented Macrinus and the Senate from openly declaring him to be a \"hostis\". Macrinus, in an effort to placate the Senate, instead ordered the secret removal of statues of Caracalla from public view. After his death, the public made comparisons between him and other condemned emperors and called for the horse race celebrating his birthday to be abolished and for gold and silver statues dedicated to him to be melted down. These events were, however, limited in scope; most erasures of his name from inscriptions were either accidental or occurred as a result of re-use. Macrinus had Caracalla deified and commemorated on coins as \"Divus Antoninus\". There does not appear to have been any intentional mutilation of Caracalla in any images that were created during his reign as sole emperor.\nClassical portrayal.\nCaracalla is presented in the ancient sources of Cassius Dio, Herodian, and the \"Historia Augusta\" as a cruel tyrant and savage ruler. This portrayal of Caracalla is only further supported by the murder of his brother Geta and the subsequent massacre of Geta's supporters that Caracalla ordered. Alongside this, these contemporary sources present Caracalla as a \"soldier-emperor\" for his preference of the soldiery over the senators, a depiction that made him even less popular with the senatorial biographers. Dio explicitly presented Caracalla as an emperor who marched with the soldiers and behaved like a soldier. Dio also often referred to Caracalla's large military expenditures and the subsequent financial problems this caused. These traits dominate Caracalla's image in the surviving classical literature. The Baths of Caracalla are presented in classical literature as unprecedented in scale, and impossible to build if not for the use of reinforced concrete. The Edict of Caracalla, issued in 212, however, goes almost unnoticed in classical records.\nThe \"Historia Augusta\" is considered by historians as the least trustworthy for all accounts of events, historiography, and biographies among the ancient works and is full of fabricated materials and sources. The works of Herodian of Antioch are, by comparison, \"far less fantastic\" than the stories presented by the \"Historia Augusta\". Historian Andrew G. Scott suggests that Dio's work is frequently considered the best source for this period. However, historian Clare Rowan questions Dio's accuracy on the topic of Caracalla, referring to the work as having presented a hostile attitude towards Caracalla and thus needing to be treated with caution. An example of this hostility is found in one section where Dio notes that Caracalla is descended from three different races and that he managed to combine all of their faults into one person: the fickleness, cowardice, and recklessness of the Gauls, the cruelty and harshness of the Africans, and the craftiness that is associated with the Syrians. Despite this, the outline of events as presented by Dio are described by Rowan as generally accurate, while the motivations that Dio suggests are of questionable origin. An example of this is his presentation of the Edict of Caracalla; the motive that Dio appends to this event is Caracalla's desire to increase tax revenue. Olivier Hekster, Nicholas Zair, and Rowan challenge this presentation because the majority of people who were enfranchised by the edict would have been poor. In her work, Rowan also describes Herodian's depiction of Caracalla: more akin to a soldier than an emperor.\nMedieval legends.\nGeoffrey of Monmouth's pseudohistorical \"History of the Kings of Britain\" makes Caracalla a king of Britain, referring to him by his actual name \"Bassianus\", rather than by the nickname Caracalla. In the story, after Severus' death the Romans wanted to make Geta king of Britain, but the Britons preferred Bassianus because he had a British mother. The two brothers fought until Geta was killed and Bassianus succeeded to the throne, after which he ruled until he was overthrown and killed by Carausius. However, Carausius' revolt actually happened about seventy years after Caracalla's death in 217.\nEighteenth-century artworks and the French Revolution.\nCaracalla's memory was revived in the art of late eighteenth-century French painters. His tyrannical career became the subject of the work of several French painters such as Greuze, Julien de Parme, David, Bonvoisin, J.-A.-C. Pajou, and Lethi\u00e8re. Their fascination with Caracalla was a reflection of the growing discontent of the French people with the monarchy. Caracalla's visibility was influenced by the existence of several literary sources in French that included both translations of ancient works and contemporary works of the time. Caracalla's likeness was readily available to the painters due to the distinct style of his portraiture and his unusual soldier-like choice of fashion that distinguished him from other emperors. The artworks may have served as a warning that absolute monarchy could become the horror of tyranny and that disaster could come about if the regime failed to reform. Art historian Susan Wood suggests that this reform was for the absolute monarchy to become a constitutional monarchy, as per the original goal of revolution, rather than the republic that it eventually became. Wood also notes the similarity between Caracalla and his crimes leading to his assassination and the eventual uprising against, and death of, King Louis XVI: both rulers had died as a result of their apparent tyranny.\nModern portrayal.\nCaracalla has had a reputation as being among the worst of Roman emperors, a perception that survives even into modern works. The art and linguistics historian John Agnew and the writer Walter Bidwell describe Caracalla as having an evil spirit, referring to the devastation he wrought in Alexandria. The Roman historian David Magie describes Caracalla, in the book \"Roman Rule in Asia Minor\", as brutal and tyrannical and points towards psychopathy as an explanation for his behaviour. The historian Clifford Ando supports this description, suggesting that Caracalla's rule as sole emperor is notable \"almost exclusively\" for his crimes of theft, massacre, and mismanagement.\n18th-century historian Edward Gibbon, author of \"The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire\", takes Caracalla's reputation, which he had received for the murder of Geta and subsequent massacre of Geta's supporters, and applied it to Caracalla's provincial tours, suggesting that \"every province was by turn the scene of his rapine and cruelty\". Gibbon compared Caracalla to emperors such as Hadrian who spent their careers campaigning in the provinces and then to tyrants such as Nero and Domitian whose entire reigns were confined to Rome and whose actions only impacted upon the senatorial and equestrian classes residing there. Gibbon then concluded that Caracalla was \"the common enemy of mankind\", as both Romans and provincials alike were subject to \"his rapine and cruelty\".\nThis representation is questioned by the historian Shamus Sillar, who cites the construction of roads and reinforcement of fortifications in the western provinces, among other things, as being contradictory to the representation made by Gibbon of cruelty and destruction. The history professors Molefi Asante and Shaza Ismail note that Caracalla is known for the disgraceful nature of his rule, stating that \"he rode the horse of power until it nearly died of exhaustion\" and that though his rule was short, his life, personality, and acts made him a notable, though likely not beneficial, figure in the Roman Empire.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49908", "revid": "32646554", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49908", "title": "Pat Robertson", "text": "American media mogul and minister (1930\u20132023)\nMarion Gordon \"Pat\" Robertson (March 22, 1930 \u2013 June 8, 2023) was an American media mogul, televangelist, political commentator, presidential candidate, and charismatic minister. Robertson advocated a conservative Christian ideology and was known for his involvement in Republican Party politics. He was associated with the Charismatic movement within Protestant evangelicalism. He served as head of Regent University and of the Christian Broadcasting Network (CBN).\nRobertson's career spanned over five decades, and was the founder of several organizations, including CBN, Regent University, Operation Blessing International Relief and Development Corporation, the International Family Entertainment Inc. (ABC Family Channel/Freeform), the American Center for Law &amp; Justice (ACLJ), the Founders Inn and Conference Center, and the Christian Coalition. Robertson was also a best-selling author and the host of \"The 700 Club\", a Christian News and TV program broadcast live weekdays on Freeform (formerly ABC Family) from CBN studios, as well as on channels throughout the United States, and on CBN network affiliates worldwide. Robertson retired from \"The 700 Club\" in October 2021.\nThe son of U.S. Senator A. Willis Robertson, Robertson was a Southern Baptist and was active as an ordained minister with that denomination for many years, but held to a charismatic theology not traditionally common among Southern Baptists. He unsuccessfully campaigned to become the Republican nominee in the 1988 presidential election. As a result of his seeking political office, he never again served in an official role for any church. \nRobertson remained a controversial figure, especially known for evangelical religiocentrism. While he became a recognized and influential public voice for conservative Christianity in the U.S. and around the world, his opposition to various progressive causes, including LGBTQ rights, feminism, and the right to abortion, was frequently criticized.\nEarly life.\nMarion Gordon Robertson was born on March 22, 1930, in Lexington, Virginia, into a prominent political family, the younger of two sons. His parents were Absalom Willis Robertson (1887\u20131971), a conservative Democratic Senator, and Gladys Churchill (n\u00e9e Willis; 1897\u20131968), a housewife and a musician. At a young age, Robertson was nicknamed 'Pat' by his six-year-old brother, Willis Robertson Jr., who enjoyed patting him on the cheeks when he was a baby while saying \"pat, pat, pat\". Later, Robertson thought about which first name he would like people to use. He considered \"Marion\" to be effeminate, and \"M. Gordon\" to be affected, so he opted for his childhood nickname \"Pat\".\nWhen he was eleven, Robertson was enrolled in the preparatory McDonogh School outside Baltimore, Maryland. From 1940 until 1946, he attended The McCallie School in Chattanooga, Tennessee, where he graduated with honors. He gained admission to Washington and Lee University, where he earned a B.A. in History, graduating magna cum laude. He was also a member of Phi Beta Kappa, the nation's most prestigious academic honor society. He joined Sigma Alpha Epsilon fraternity. Robertson said, \"Although I worked hard at my studies, my real major centered around lovely young ladies who attended the nearby girls schools.\"\nIn 1948, the draft was reinstated and Robertson was given the option of joining the U.S. Marine Corps or being drafted into the U.S. Army; he opted for the former. Robertson described his military service as follows: \"We did long, grueling marches to toughen the men, plus refresher training in firearms and bayonet combat.\" In the same year, he transferred to Korea, \"I ended up at the headquarters command of the First Marine Division,\" says Robertson. \"The Division was in combat in the hot and dusty, then bitterly cold portion of North Korea just above the 38th Parallel later identified as the 'Punchbowl' and 'Heartbreak Ridge'.\" For Robertson's service in the Korean War, he was awarded three Battle Stars.\nIn 1986, former Republican Congressman Paul \"Pete\" McCloskey Jr., who served with Robertson in Camp Pendleton, wrote a public letter challenging Robertson's record in the military. Robertson filed a libel suit against McCloskey but he dropped the case in 1988 in order to devote \"his full time and energies toward the successful attainment of the Republican nomination for the president of the United States.\"\nRobertson was promoted to First Lieutenant in 1952 upon his return to the United States. He then went on to receive a law degree from Yale Law School in 1955, near the top of his class. However, he failed his first and only attempt at the New York bar exam. Shortly thereafter he underwent a religious conversion and decided against pursuing a career in business. Instead, Robertson attended The Biblical Seminary in New York, where he received a Master of Divinity degree in 1959. He became a born again Christian while having dinner at a restaurant in Philadelphia with author and World War II veteran, Cornelius Vanderbreggen. After his conversion, Robertson left the corporate world and went into ministry.\nCareer.\nChristian Broadcasting Network.\nIn 1956, Robertson met Dutch missionary Cornelius Vanderbreggen, who impressed Robertson both with his lifestyle and his message. Vanderbreggen quoted Proverbs (3:5, 6), \"Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge Him, and He shall direct thy paths\", which Robertson considered being the \"guiding principle\" of his life. In 1961, he was ordained as a Southern Baptist minister by Freemason Street Baptist Church in Norfolk, Virginia.\nIn 1960, Robertson established the Christian Broadcasting Network in Virginia Beach, Virginia, by buying the license of a defunct UHF station in nearby Portsmouth. The station, with the call sign WYAH-TV, first broadcast on October 1, 1961. The network became known for producing the long-running TV series \"The 700 Club\", starting in 1966, which Robertson served as a long time co-host. On April 29, 1977, CBN launched a religious cable network, the CBN Satellite Service, which eventually became The Family Channel. It was the first satellite television channel in America to connect to cable systems across the country. The venture became extremely lucrative, so Robertson spun off The Family Channel as a commercial entity that was sold to News Corporation for $1.9 billion in 1997.\nIn 1994, he endorsed the document \"Evangelicals and Catholics Together\". Robertson announced his retirement at the age of 91 from \"The 700 Club\" in October 2021, on the sixtieth anniversary of the first telecast on October 1, 1961, of what eventually became CBN.\nRegent University.\nRobertson founded CBN University, a private Christian university, in 1977 on CBN's Virginia Beach campus. Since its founding, the university has established eight academic schools and offers associate, bachelor's, master's, and doctoral degrees in over 150 areas of study. It was renamed Regent University in 1990. According to the school's catalog, \"a regent is one who represents Christ, our Sovereign, in whatever sphere of life he or she may be called to serve Him.\"\nWith more than 11,000 current students, Regent University has ranked the #1 Best Online Bachelor's Program in Virginia for ten years in a row by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" 2022, as well as 2023 Best Graduate Schools-Law, Best Graduate Schools \u2013 Social Sciences and Humanities Doctoral Programs \u2013 Psychology, 2023 Best Graduate Schools \u2013 Public Affairs, and 2023 Best Education Schools by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\". Robertson served as its chancellor and CEO.\nRobertson was also founder and president of the American Center for Law &amp; Justice, a public interest law firm headquartered in Washington, D.C., associated with Regent University School of Law in Virginia Beach, Virginia, which defends constitutional freedoms and conservative Christian ideals. Critics have characterized Robertson as an advocate of dominionism.\nOperation Blessing.\nRobertson's Operation Blessing organization sent medical teams to developing countries to help people who had no access to medical care. In 1994, in the aftermath of the Rwandan genocide, Robertson solicited donations to provide medical supplies to refugees in neighboring Zaire (present-day Congo), where Robertson also had exploratory diamond mining operations. According to a 1999 article in The Virginian-Pilot, two Operation Blessing pilots who were interviewed alleged that the organization's planes were used to haul diamond-mining equipment to Robertson's mines in Zaire. Robertson denied the pilots' accounts.\nIn its 2021 ranking of \"100 Largest Charities\", Forbes ranked Operation Blessing/CBN at #44, with a fundraising efficiency of 93% (percentage of donations left after fundraising expenses) and charitable commitment of 87% (percentage of expenses paid toward the stated mission compared to other costs).\nPolitical career and activism.\nRobertson was a past president of the Council for National Policy. In 1982, he served on the Victims of Crime Task Force for U.S. President Ronald Reagan. In Virginia, he served on the Board of the Virginia Economic Development Partnership and on the Governor's Council of Economic Advisors. After his unsuccessful presidential campaign, Robertson started the Christian Coalition, a 1.7-million-member Christian right organization that campaigned mostly for conservative candidates. Billy McCormack, a Southern Baptist pastor in Shreveport, Louisiana, served as one of the four directors of the coalition as well as its vice president. The coalition was sued by the Federal Election Commission \"for coordinating its activities with Republican candidates for office in 1990, 1992 and 1994 and failing to report its expenditures,\" yet the complaint was dismissed by a federal judge. In March 1986, he told \"Israeli Foreign Affairs\" that South Africa was a major contributor to the Reagan administration's efforts to help the anti-Sandinista forces.\nIn 1994, the Coalition was fined for \"improperly [aiding] then Representative Newt Gingrich (R-GA) and Oliver North, who was then the Republican Senate nominee in Virginia.\"\nRobertson was a governing member of the Council for National Policy (CNP) and served on its Board of Governors in 1982, was the President of its Executive Committee from 1985 to 1986, and a member in 1984, 1988, and 1998.\nOn November 7, 2007, Robertson announced that he was endorsing Rudy Giuliani to be the Republican nominee in the 2008 Presidential election. Some social conservatives criticized Robertson's endorsement of Giuliani, a pro-choice candidate who supported gay rights.\nWhile usually associated with the political right, Robertson endorsed environmental causes. He appeared in a commercial with Al Sharpton, joking about this, and urging people to join the \"We Can Solve It\" campaign against global warming.\nIn January 2009, on a broadcast of \"The 700 Club\", Robertson stated that he was \"adamantly opposed\" to the division of Jerusalem between Israel and the Palestinians. He also stated that Armageddon was \"not going to be fought at Megiddo\" but would be the \"battle of Jerusalem,\" when \"the forces of all nations come together and try to take Jerusalem away from the Jews. Jews are not going to give up Jerusalem\u00a0\u2013 they shouldn't\u00a0\u2013 and the rest of the world is going to insist they give it up.\" Robertson added that Jerusalem is a \"spiritual symbol that must not be given away\" because \"Jesus Christ the Messiah will come down to the part of Jerusalem that the Arabs want,\" and this would be \"not good.\"\nRobertson repeatedly called for the legalization of cannabis, saying that it should be treated in a manner analogous to the regulation of alcoholic beverages and tobacco. Robertson stated that \"I just think it's shocking how many of these young people wind up in prison and they get turned into hard-core criminals because they had a possession of a very small amount of controlled substance. The whole thing is crazy.\" In 2014, he turned against the legalization of cannabis, citing a need to protect children, whom he claimed were using cannabis at a higher rate in Colorado following legalization there.\n1988 presidential bid.\nIn September 1986, Robertson announced his intention to seek the Republican nomination for President of the United States. Robertson said he would pursue the nomination only if three million people signed up to volunteer for his campaign by September 1987. Three million responded, and by the time Robertson announced he would be running in September 1987, he also had raised millions of dollars for his campaign fund. He surrendered his ministerial credentials and turned leadership of CBN over to his son, Tim. In 1987, he left the Southern Baptist Convention to run.\nRobertson ran on a standard conservative platform, and as a candidate he embraced the same policies as Ronald Reagan: lower taxes, a balanced budget, and a strong defense.\nRobertson's campaign achieved a strong second-place finish in the Iowa caucuses, ahead of Bush. He did poorly in the subsequent New Hampshire primary, however, and was unable to be competitive once the multiple-state primaries began. Robertson ended his campaign before the primaries were finished. His best finish was in Washington, winning the majority of caucus delegates.\nOther ventures.\nRobertson was the founder and chairman of The Christian Broadcasting Network (CBN) Inc., and founder of International Family Entertainment Inc., Regent University, Operation Blessing International Relief and Development Corporation, American Center for Law and Justice, The Flying Hospital, Inc., and several other organizations and broadcast entities. Robertson was the founder and co-chairman of International Family Entertainment Inc. (IFE).\nFormed in 1990, IFE produced and distributed family entertainment and information programming worldwide. IFE's principal business was The Family Channel, a satellite delivered cable-television network with 63 million U.S. subscribers. IFE, a publicly held company listed on the New York Stock Exchange, was sold in 1997 to Fox Kids Worldwide, Inc. for $1.9billion, whereupon it was renamed Fox Family Channel. Disney acquired FFC in 2001 and its name was changed again, to ABC Family. The network was renamed to Freeform on January 12, 2016, though Robertson's sale of the channel continues to require Freeform to carry four hours of CBN/\"700 Club\" programming per weekday, along with CBN's yearly telethon.\nRobertson was a global businessman with media holdings in Asia, the United Kingdom, and Africa. He struck a deal with Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania-based General Nutrition Center to produce and market a weight-loss shake he created and promoted on \"The 700 Club\".\nIn 1999, Robertson entered into a joint venture with the Bank of Scotland to provide financial services in the United States. However, the venture fell through as it was met with criticism from civil rights groups in the UK, owing to Robertson's controversial views on homosexuality. The Bank was forced to cancel the deal when Robertson described Scotland as a \"dark land overrun by homosexuals\".\nWhile some have estimated his wealth to have been between$200million and $1 billion, Robertson claimed that these estimates were not based on any facts and were incorrect.\nA June 2, 1999, article in \"The Virginian-Pilot\" alleged that Robertson had business dealings with Liberian president Charles Taylor, with whom Robertson, according to the article, negotiated a multimillion-dollar contract for gold mining operations in Liberia. Robertson denied any business dealings with Taylor, and he also denied ever speaking to President George W. Bush about Taylor's alleged activities. On February 4, 2010, at his war crimes trial in the Hague, Taylor testified that Robertson was his main political ally in the U.S., while Robertson has denied ever meeting or speaking to Charles Taylor.\nBeginning in the latter part of the 1990s, Robertson raced thoroughbred horses under the \"nom de course\" Tega Farm. His gelding named Tappat won the 1999 Walter Haight Handicap at Laurel Park and the 2000 Pennsylvania Governor's Cup Handicap at Penn National Race Course. Following this success, Robertson paid $520,000 for a colt he named Mr. Pat. Trained by John Kimmel, Mr. Pat was not a successful runner. He was nominated for, but did not run in, the 2000 Kentucky Derby.\nControversies.\nAs a commentator and minister, Robertson's statements frequently generated controversy.\nRobertson's service as a minister included the belief in the healing power of God. He cautioned believers that some Protestant denominations may harbor the spirit of the Antichrist; denounced Hinduism as \"demonic\" and Islam as \"Satanic\".\nRobertson denounced left-wing views of feminism, activism regarding homosexuality, abortion, and liberal college professors. Critics claim Robertson had business dealings in Africa with former president of Liberia and convicted war criminal Charles Taylor, and former Zaire president Mobutu Sese Seko, both of whom had been globally denounced for claims of human rights violations. Robertson was criticized worldwide for his call for Hugo Ch\u00e1vez's assassination, and for his remarks concerning Ariel Sharon's ill health as an act of God.\nDuring the week of September 11, 2001, Robertson interviewed Jerry Falwell, who expressed his own opinion that \"the ACLU has to take a lot of blame for this\" in addition to \"the pagans, and the abortionists, and the feminists, and the gays, and the lesbians [who have] helped [the terror attacks of September 11th] happen.\" Robertson replied, \"I totally concur\". Both evangelists were seriously criticized by President George W. Bush for their comments, for which Falwell later issued an apology.\nLess than two weeks after Hurricane Katrina killed 1,836 people, Robertson implied on the September 12, 2005, broadcast of \"The 700 Club\" that the storm was God's punishment in response to America's abortion policy. He suggested that the September 11 attacks and the disaster in New Orleans \"could[...] be connected in some way\".\nIn 2006, Robertson claimed to have leg pressed 2,000 lbs three years earlier at the age of 73. Strength training experts reacted with skepticism. CBN attributed Robertson's energy and vitality to his \"age-defying protein shake.\"\nIn 2009, Robertson said that Islam is \"a violent political system bent on the overthrow of the governments of the world and world domination\". He went on to elaborate that \"you're dealing with not a religion, you're dealing with a political system, and I think we should treat it as such, and treat its adherents as such as we would members of the communist party, members of some fascist group\".\nRobertson's response to the 2010 Haiti earthquake also sparked worldwide condemnation. Robertson claimed that Haiti's founders had sworn a \"pact to the Devil\" in order to liberate themselves from the French slave owners and indirectly attributed the earthquake to the consequences of the Haitian people being \"cursed\" for doing so. CBN later issued a statement saying that Robertson's comments \"were based on the widely-discussed 1791 slave rebellion led by Dutty Boukman at Bois Ca\u00efman, where the slaves allegedly made a famous pact with the devil in exchange for victory over the French\". Various figures in mainline and evangelical Christianity have on occasion disavowed some of Robertson's remarks.\nIn March 2015, Robertson compared Buddhism to a disease on \"The 700 Club\". The American Center for Law and Justice (ACLJ), a conservative Christian watchdog group Robertson founded to promote Christian prayer in public schools, called for a multi-pronged attack on mindfulness programs because \"they appear to be similar to Buddhist religious practices. Proponents of secular mindfulness say mindfulness is not a Buddhist practice; it is a contemplative practice used in religious traditions around the world by many different names.\"\nPersonal life.\nMarriage and family.\nIn 1954, Robertson married Adelia \"Dede\" Elmer, a fashion model and beauty queen in the Miss Ohio State contest, who was studying for her masters in nursing at Yale University. She had also been a nursing student at Ohio State University in Columbus, Ohio. They remained married until her death in 2022, and had four children, among them Gordon P. Robertson.\nIllness and death.\nOn August 11, 2017, Robertson was hospitalized after sustaining minor injuries in a fall from a horseback riding incident.\nOn February 2, 2018, Robertson suffered an embolic stroke at his home in Virginia Beach. A member of his family noticed his symptoms and alerted emergency medical personnel. He was then taken to the nearest stroke center where he was administered the clot-busting drug tPA. Robertson was responsive, awake, and moving all of his limbs about eighty minutes after his stroke began. He was discharged two days later and recovered at home. Following this incident, Robertson and his family thanked the paramedics and medical staff for their \"extraordinary care and rapid response.\" They also urged people to learn about stroke, its symptoms and treatments. Robertson resumed his hosting duties on \"The 700 Club\" on February 12, 2018.\nIn June 2019, Robertson was absent from \"The 700 Club\" for several days after he broke three ribs in a fall. Upon his return, Robertson described the experience as very painful but said \"Us old guys are tough, and we try to stay in there and keep on going.\" He then thanked viewers for their prayers.\nOn June 8, 2023, Robertson died at his home in Virginia Beach, Virginia, at the age of 93.\nPublications.\nRobertson's book \"The New World Order\" (1991) became a \"New York Times\" best seller. A review by Ephraim Radner, an Episcopalian professor of theology, stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In his published writings, especially his 1991 book \"The New World Order\", Pat Robertson has propagated theories about a worldwide Jewish conspiracy. Michael Land raised the issue in February in \"The New York Times Book Review\", and in April Jacob Heilbrun, writing in \"The New York Review of Books\", cited chapter and verse of Robertson's borrowings from well-known anti-Semitic works. In October 2003, Robertson was interviewed by author Joel Mowbray about his book \"Dangerous Diplomacy\", a book critical of the United States Department of State. Robertson said that Americans could change American diplomacy by ridding America of a large part of the State Department.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49909", "revid": "37982794", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49909", "title": "Amazons River", "text": ""}
{"id": "49911", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49911", "title": "Archeology", "text": ""}
{"id": "49914", "revid": "5383404", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49914", "title": "Alba (disambiguation)", "text": "Alba is the Scottish Gaelic name for Scotland.\nAlba or ALBA may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "49917", "revid": "1290290729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49917", "title": "The Last Man", "text": "1826 novel by Mary Shelley\nThe Last Man is an apocalyptic, dystopian science fiction novel by Mary Shelley, first published in 1826. The narrative concerns Europe in the late 21st century, ravaged by the rise of a bubonic plague pandemic that rapidly sweeps across the entire globe, ultimately resulting in the near-extinction of humanity. It also includes discussion of the British state as a republic, for which Shelley sat in meetings of the House of Commons to gain insight to the governmental system of the Romantic era. The novel includes many fictive allusions to her husband Percy Bysshe Shelley, who drowned in a shipwreck four years before the book's publication, as well as their close friend Lord Byron, who had died two years previously.\n\"The Last Man\" is one of the first pieces of dystopian fiction published. It was critically savaged and remained largely obscure at the time of its publication. It was not until the 1960s that the novel resurfaced for the public.\nCharacters.\nLionel Verney: The Last Man. The orphan son of an impoverished nobleman, Lionel is originally lawless, self-willed, and resentful of the nobility for casting aside his father. When he is befriended by Adrian, however, he embraces civilization and particularly scholarship. Verney is largely an autobiographical figure for Mary Shelley.\nAdrian, Earl of Windsor: Son of the last King of England, Adrian embraces republican principles. He is motivated by philosophy and philanthropy, rather than ambition. He is based on Percy Bysshe Shelley.\nLord Raymond: An ambitious young nobleman, Raymond becomes famous for his military efforts on behalf of Greece against the Turks, but eventually chooses love over his ambition to become King of England. He instead becomes Lord Protector of England before returning to Greece. Raymond is motivated by passion and ambition rather than principle. He is based on Lord Byron.\nPerdita: Lionel's sister, and Raymond's wife. Growing up an orphan, Perdita was independent, distrustful, and proud, but she is softened by love for Raymond, to whom she is fiercely loyal.\nIdris: Adrian's sister, and Lionel's wife. She is loving, maternal, and self-sacrificing.\nCountess of Windsor: Mother of Adrian and Idris, an Austrian princess and former Queen of the United Kingdom. She is haughty and ambitious, scheming to restore the monarchy through her children.\nEvadne Zaimi: A Greek princess with whom Adrian falls in love, but who loves Raymond. She is devoted and proud, even when she becomes impoverished.\nClara: Daughter of Raymond and Perdita.\nAlfred and Evelyn: Sons of Lionel and Idris.\nRyland: Leader of the popular democratic party, Ryland has grand plans for the abolition of nobility before the plague, but is unwilling to govern England during the plague.\nMerrival: An astronomer who is oblivious to the plague, instead speculating about the condition of the Earth in six thousand years, until his family dies. Broken by his tragedy, he dies not long afterwards.\nLucy Martin: A young woman who chose to marry a repulsive suitor rather than wait for her true love, to provide for her ageing mother. Her devotion to her mother almost leads to her being left behind in England after the exile.\nThe Imposter: Unnamed \u2013 a false prophet (from ambition, rather than fanaticism) who creates a radical religious sect in opposition to Adrian while in France.\nJuliet: A young noblewoman who joins the Imposter's party to support her baby, but is later killed revealing his imposture.\nPlot summary.\nIntroduction.\nMary Shelley states that in 1818 she discovered, in a cave near Naples, prophetic writings painted on leaves by the Cumaean Sibyl. She says she has edited these writings into the narrative of a man living at the end of the 21st century, commencing in 2073 and concluding in 2100.\nVolume 1.\nLionel's father was a friend of the king before he was cast away because of his gambling. Lionel's father left to take his life, but before he did so he left a letter for the king to take care of his family after his death. After Lionel's father died the letter was never delivered. Lionel and his sister grow up with no parental influence and become uncivilised. Lionel develops a hatred of the royal family, and Perdita grows to enjoy her isolation from society.\nWhen the king leaves the throne, the monarchy comes to an end and a republic is created. When the king dies, the Countess attempts to raise their son, Adrian, to reclaim the throne. However, Adrian opposes his mother and refuses to take the throne. He moves to Cumberland where Lionel, who bears a grudge against Adrian and his family for the neglect of the Verney family, intends to confront Adrian. He is mollified by Adrian's good nature and his explanation that he only recently discovered the letter. The two become close friends, and Lionel becomes civilised under Adrian's influence. Adrian assists Lionel in pursuing political endeavours in Vienna which Lionel accepts and leaves for 2 years but chooses to return to England because he has not heard from either Adrian or his sister.\nLionel returns to England to face the personal turmoil amongst his acquaintances. Lord Raymond, who came to be renowned for his exploits in a war between Greece and Turkey, has returned to England searching for a political position. Perdita and Evadne soon fall in love with him. On discovering that his beloved, Evadne, is in love with Raymond, Adrian goes into exile, presumably mad. Raymond intends to marry Idris (with whom Lionel is in love) as a first step towards becoming king, with the help of the Countess. However, he ultimately chooses his love for Perdita over his ambition, and the two marry. Under Lionel's care, Adrian recovers but remains physically weak. On learning of the love between Idris and Lionel, the Countess schemes to drug Idris, bring her to Austria, and force her to make a politically motivated marriage. Idris discovers the plot and flees to Lionel, who marries her soon after. The Countess leaves for Austria, resentful of her children and of Lionel.\nAdrian and the others live happily together until Raymond runs for Lord Protector and wins. Perdita adjusts to her newfound social position, while Raymond becomes well-beloved as an administrator. He discovers, however, that Evadne, after the political and financial ruin of her husband (on account of her own political schemes) lives in poverty in London, unwilling to plead for assistance. Raymond attempts to support Evadne by employing her artistic skills in secrecy, and later nursing her in illness, but Perdita learns of the relationship and suspects infidelity. Her suspicions arouse Raymond's proud nature, and the two separate. Raymond resigns his position and leaves to rejoin the war in Greece, accompanied by Adrian. Shortly after a wounded Adrian returns to England, rumours arise that Raymond has been killed. Perdita, loyal nonetheless, convinces Lionel to bring her and Clara to Greece to find him.\nVolume 2.\nArriving in Athens, Lionel learns that Raymond had been captured by the Ottomans, and negotiates his return to Greece. Shortly after this, Lionel and Raymond return to the Greek army and fight their way to Constantinople. After a decisive battle near Constantinople's gates, Lionel discovers Evadne, who was wounded while fighting in the war. Before dying, Evadne prophesies Raymond's death, a prophecy which confirms his own suspicions. Raymond's intention to enter Constantinople causes dissension and desertion amongst the army because of reports of the plague. Raymond goes alone to find that Constantinople has been seemingly deserted and soon dies in an explosion, the result of a trap laid by the Turks. He is taken to a site near Athens for burial. Perdita refuses to leave Greece, but Lionel drugs her and brings her aboard a steamship, believing it to be in the best interests of Clara. Perdita awakens and, distraught at Raymond's death, throws herself overboard and drowns.\nIn 2092, while Lionel and Adrian attempt to return their lives to normality, the plague continues to spread across Europe and the Americas. The appearance of a black sun causes panic throughout the world, and storm surges flood coastal towns across Europe. At first, England is thought to be safe, but soon the plague reaches it. Ryland, recently elected Lord Protector, is unprepared for the plague, and flees northward, later dying alone amidst a stockpile of provisions. Adrian takes command and is largely effective at maintaining order, although the plague rages on summer after summer. Ships arrive in Ireland carrying survivors from America, who lawlessly plunder Ireland and Scotland before invading England. Adrian raises a military force against them and ultimately manages to resolve the situation peacefully.\nVolume 3.\nThe few remaining survivors decide to abandon England, looking for an easier climate. On the eve of their departure to Dover, Lionel receives a letter from Lucy Martin, who could not join the exiles because of her mother's illness. Lionel and Idris travel through a snowstorm to assist Lucy. Idris, weak from years of stress and maternal fears, dies along the way during the fierce weather. Lionel brings her body to Windsor Castle, interring her in St George's Chapel, and is met by the Countess, who reconciles with Lionel at Idris' tomb. Lionel recovers Lucy (whose mother has died), and the party reaches Dover en route to France.\nIn France, Adrian learns the earlier emigrants have divided into factions, amongst them a fanatical religious sect led by a false messiah who claims his followers will be saved from disease. Adrian unites most of the factions, but the fanatics declare their opposition to Adrian. Lionel sneaks into Paris, where the cult has settled, to try to rescue Juliet. She refuses to leave because the impostor has her baby but helps Lionel escape after the impostor's followers imprison him. Later, when her baby sickens, Juliet discovers the impostor has been hiding the effects of the plague from his followers. She is killed warning the other followers. The impostor commits suicide, and his followers return to the main body of exiles at Versailles.\nThe exiles travel towards Switzerland, hoping to spend the summer in a colder climate less favourable to the plague. By the time they reach Switzerland, however, all but four (Lionel, Adrian, Clara, and Evelyn) have died. They spend a few relatively happy seasons at Switzerland, Milan, and Como before Evelyn dies of typhus. The survivors attempt to sail across the Adriatic Sea from Venice to Greece, but a storm destroys the boat and drowns Clara and Adrian. Lionel swims to shore at Ravenna. Fearing to be the last human left on Earth, Lionel follows the Apennine Mountains to Rome, befriending a sheepdog along the way. A year passes without anyone else entering Rome, and Lionel resolves to leave with his dog and live the rest of his life as a wanderer of the depopulated continents of Africa and Asia looking for other survivors. The story ends in the year 2100.\nThemes.\nBiographical elements.\nMany of the central characters are wholly or partially based upon Shelley's acquaintances. Shelley had been forbidden by her father-in-law, Sir Timothy Shelley, from publishing a biography of her husband, so she memorialised him, amongst others, in \"The Last Man\". The utopian Adrian, Earl of Windsor, who leads his followers in search of a natural paradise and dies when his boat sinks in a storm, is a fictional portrait of Percy Bysshe Shelley, although other minor characters such as Merrival bear traces of Percy as well.\nLord Raymond, who leaves England to fight for the Greeks and dies in Constantinople, is based on Lord Byron. The novel expresses Mary Shelley's pain at the loss of her community of the \"Elect\", as she called them, and Lionel Verney has been seen as an outlet for her feelings of loss and boredom following their deaths and the deaths of her children.\nIt appears that Shelley found inspiration for the title of her novel in Jean-Baptiste Cousin de Grainville's \"Le Dernier Homme\" (1805), translated into English in 1806 as \"Omegarus and Syderia\".\nFailure of romantic political ideals.\n\"The Last Man\" not only laments the loss of Shelley's friends, but also questions the Romantic political ideals for which they stood. In a sense, the plague is metaphorical, since the revolutionary idyll of the \u00e9lite group is corroded from within by flaws of human nature. As literary scholar Kari Lokke writes, \"in its refusal to place humanity at the center of the universe, its questioning of our privileged position in relation to nature, then, \"The Last Man\" constitutes a profound and prophetic challenge to Western humanism.\" Specifically, Mary Shelley, in making references to the failure of the French Revolution and the Godwinian, Wollstonecraftian, and Burkean responses to it, \"attacks Enlightenment faith in the inevitability of progress through collective efforts\".\nIsolation.\nHugh Luke argues, \"By ending her story with the picture of the Earth's solitary inhabitant, she has brought nearly the whole weight of the novel to bear upon the idea that the condition of the individual being is essentially isolated and therefore ultimately tragic\" (xvii). Shelley shares this theme of tragic isolation with the poetry of Lord Byron and William Wordsworth.\nScience and medicine.\nJust as her earlier and better-known novel \"Frankenstein\" (1818) engaged with scientific questions of electromagnetism, chemistry, and materialism, \"The Last Man\" finds Shelley again attempting to understand the scope of scientific inquiry. Unlike the earlier novel's warnings about Faustian over-reaching, this novel's devastating apocalypse strongly suggests that medicine had become too timid and ultimately come too late. The ineffectual astronomer Merrival, for example, stands in stark contrast to the frighteningly productive Victor Frankenstein. Shelley's construction of Lionel Verney's immunity remains a subject of significant critical debate, but the novel certainly demonstrates a deep understanding of the history of medicine, specifically the development of the smallpox vaccine and the various nineteenth-century theories about the nature of contagion.\nPolitics.\nEileen Hunt Botting of the University of Notre Dame has stated that the novel \"saw that the disaster of a pandemic would be driven by politics,\" and that the \"spiraling health crisis would be caused by what people and their leaders had done and failed to do on the international stage\u2014in trade, war and the interpersonal bargains, pacts and conflicts that precede them.\" Botting has further described the novel as identifying \"three patterns of modern democratic corruption, which would be exposed and exacerbated by a pandemic:\n&lt;poem&gt;1. slow yet steady institutional erosion of norms and practices of trust and equality;\n2. authoritarian forms of populism that betray the people who bring an executive leader to power; and\n3. patriarchal and religious forms of populism that manipulate the people's beliefs through fear and disinformation.&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe novel also comments on the racism expressed by imperial European nations towards the rest of the world. According to Olivia Murphy of the University of Sydney, the novel shows that \"this sense of racial superiority and immunity is unfounded: all people are united in their susceptibility to the fatal disease.\"\nPublication history.\n\"The Last Man\" followed several other last-man themed works including a French narrative () (1805), Byron's poem \"Darkness\" (1816), and Thomas Campbell's poem \"The Last Man\" (1824). (Campbell claimed Byron had taken his own poem from Campbell's idea.)\nTwo editions of \"The Last Man\" were published by Henry Colburn in London on 23 January 1826, and one edition in Paris in 1826 by Galignani. A pirated edition was printed in the United States of America in 1833. \nThe novel was not reprinted until 1965.\nReception.\nContemporary reception.\n\"The Last Man\" received the worst reviews of all of Mary Shelley's novels: most reviewers derided the very theme of lastness, which had become a common one in the previous two decades. Individual reviewers labelled the book \"sickening\", criticised its \"stupid cruelties\", and called the author's imagination \"diseased\". The reaction startled Mary Shelley, who promised her publisher a more popular book next time. Nonetheless, she later spoke of \"The Last Man\" as one of her favourite works.\nLater reception.\nIn the 20th century it received new critical attention, perhaps because the notion of lastness had become more relevant.\nThe novel received a further surge in attention in the 2020s. Rebecca Barr of the University of Cambridge wrote that the novel was \"an astonishing work\" that \"resonates with contemporary feelings of climate grief as well as the sense of helplessness as we confront COVID-19.\" Eileen Hunt Botting of the University of Notre Dame described the book as Shelley's \"second great work of science fiction,\" saying that it provided \"an existential mind-set for collectively dealing with the threat of a global man-made disaster.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49922", "revid": "14965160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49922", "title": "The Transmigration of Timothy Archer", "text": "1982 novel by Philip K. Dick\nThe Transmigration of Timothy Archer is a 1982 novel by American writer Philip K. Dick. As his final work, the book was published shortly after his death in March 1982, although it was written the previous year.\nThe novel draws on autobiographical details of Dick's friendship with the controversial Episcopal bishop James Pike, on whom the title character is loosely based. It continues Dick's investigation into the religious and philosophical themes of \"VALIS\".\nThe novel was nominated for the Nebula Award for Best Novel in 1982.\nPlot.\nSet in the late 1960s and 1970s, the story describes the efforts of Episcopal bishop Timothy Archer, who must cope with the theological and philosophical implications of the newly discovered Gnostic Zadokite scroll fragments. The character of Bishop Archer is loosely based on the controversial, iconoclastic Episcopal bishop James Pike, who in 1969 died of exposure while exploring the Judean Desert near the Dead Sea in the West Bank.\nAs the novel opens, it is 1980. On the day that John Lennon is shot and killed, Angel Archer visits the houseboat of Edgar Barefoot, (a guru based on Alan Watts), and reflects on the lives of her deceased relatives. During the sixties, she was married to Jeff Archer, son of the Episcopal Bishop of California Timothy Archer. She introduced Kirsten Lundborg, a friend, to her father-in law, and the two began an affair. Kirsten has a son, Bill, from a previous relationship, who has schizophrenia, although he is knowledgeable as an automobile mechanic. Tim is already being investigated for his allegedly heretical views about the Holy Ghost.\nJeff commits suicide due to his romantic obsession with Kirsten. However, after poltergeist activity, he manifests to Tim and Kirsten at a seance, also attended by Angel. Angel is skeptical about the efficacy of astrology, and believes that the unfolding existential situation of Tim and Kirsten is akin to Friedrich Schiller's German Romanticism era masterpiece, the Wallenstein trilogy (insofar as their credulity reflects the loss of rational belief in contemporary consensual reality).\nThe three are told that Kirsten and Tim will die. As predicted, Kirsten loses her remission from cancer, and also commits suicide after a barbiturate overdose. Tim travels to Israel to investigate whether or not a psychotropic mushroom was associated with the resurrection, but his car stalls, he becomes disoriented, falls from a cliff, and dies in the desert.\nOn the houseboat, Angel is reunited with Bill, Kirsten's son who has schizophrenia. He claims to have Tim's reincarnated spirit within him, but is soon institutionalized. Angel agrees to care for Bill, in return for a rare record (\"Koto Music\" by Kimio Eto) that Edgar offers her.\n\"The Transmigration of Timothy Archer\" is one of Dick's most overtly philosophical and intellectual works. While Dick's novels usually employ multiple narrators or an omniscient perspective, this story is told in the first person by a single narrator: Angel Archer, Bishop Archer's daughter-in-law.\nOther works.\n\"The Transmigration of Timothy Archer\" is thematically related to Dick's unfinished VALIS trilogy of novels:\nThe novel has been included in several omnibus editions of the trilogy as a stand-in for the unwritten final volume. \"The Transmigration of Timothy Archer\" was not intended by Dick to be part of the trilogy; however, the book fits with the two finished volumes and Dick himself called the three novels a trilogy, saying \"the three do form a trilogy constellating around a basic theme.\"\nThe book was originally titled \"Bishop Timothy Archer\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49923", "revid": "40561892", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49923", "title": "Ukonline", "text": "Defunct web portal of the UK government\nUkonline was a \"portal\" website of the Government of the United Kingdom linking to public sector information, and was originally called me.gov. The site was launched in 2001 and maintained by the Office of the e-Envoy (later the e-Government Unit, part of the Cabinet Office). It replaced the earlier single online government website, the Government Information Service (GIS) hosted at open.gov.uk, which had been established in November 1994. The need for an updated single government website had been identified in a 1999 Portal Feasibility Study prepared by PA Consulting for the Central IT Unit (CITU) in the Cabinet Office.\nThe site featured news, links, and search facilities connecting together much of the government's web presence, though later this pan-government search facility was removed. Visitors to the site were able to search for information on a variety of topics (for example, agriculture, finance and health) and retrieve a list of government departments that were able to provide them with more information. It was also possible to do such things as apply for a passport, buy a television licence, register to vote or complete and send a Tax Self Assessment form, but only if users left the website, as they could not actually perform the transaction on UKonline.\nThe site was replaced in 2004 by the service Directgov, which was then replaced in 2012 by the service Gov.uk.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49928", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49928", "title": "Palmae", "text": ""}
{"id": "49931", "revid": "11104410", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49931", "title": "Elizabeth Jennings (poet)", "text": "British poet (1926\u20132001)\nElizabeth Joan Jennings (18 July 1926 \u2013 26 October 2001) was a British poet. She won the Somerset Maugham Award in 1955 for her second poetry collection, \"A Way of Looking\".\nLife and career.\nElizabeth Jennings was born at The Bungalow, Tower Road, Skirbeck, Boston, Lincolnshire, younger daughter of physician Henry Cecil Jennings (1893\u20131967), MA, BSc (Oxon.), MB BS (Lond.), DPH, medical officer of health for Oxfordshire, and (Helen) Mary, n\u00e9e Turner. When Elizabeth was seven years old, her family moved to Oxford, where she remained for the rest of her life. There, she later attended St Anne's College. After graduation, she became a writer.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\nIt was a yellow voice, a high, shrill treble in the nursery\nWhite always and high, I remember it so,\nWhite cupboard, off-white table, mugs, dolls' faces\nAnd I was four or five. The garden could have been\nMiles away. We were taken down to the green\nAsparagus beds, the cut lawn, and the smell of it\nComes each summer after rain when white returns. Our bird,\nA canary called Peter, sang behind bars. The black and white cat\nCurled and snoozed by the fire and danger was far away.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nFrom https://&lt;br&gt; in \"Collected Poems\" (Carcanet, 1987)\nJennings's early poetry was published in journals such as \"Oxford Poetry\", \"New English Weekly\", \"The Spectator\", \"Outposts\" and \"Poetry Review\", but her first book of poems was not published until she was 27. The lyrical poets she cited as having influenced her were Gerard Manley Hopkins, W. H. Auden, Robert Graves and Edwin Muir. Her second book, \"A Way of Looking\" (1955), won the Somerset Maugham Award and marked a turning point, as the prize money allowed her to spend nearly three months in Rome, which was a revelation. It brought a new dimension to her religious belief and inspired her imagination.\nRegarded as traditionalist rather than an innovator, Jennings is known for her lyric poetry and mastery of form. Her work displays a simplicity of metre and rhyme shared with Philip Larkin, Kingsley Amis and Thom Gunn, all members of the 1950s group of English poets known as The Movement. She always made it clear that, while her life, which included a spell of severe mental illness, contributed to the themes contained within her work, she did not write explicitly autobiographical poetry. Her deeply held Roman Catholicism coloured much of her work.\nShe had difficulty managing the practical aspects of her career and life. She became impoverished and struggled with mental health, and her personal difficulties tarnished her critical reputation. When she was honoured by the queen in 1992, Jennings wore a \"knitted hat, duffle coat, and canvas shoes\". The tabloid newspapers mocked her as \"the bag-lady of the sonnets\", and the unfortunate description stayed with her.\nJennings spent the later years of her life in various short-term lodgings and in Unity House (8 St Andrew's Lane) in Old Headington. She died in a care home in Bampton, Oxfordshire, at the age of 75. She is buried in Wolvercote Cemetery, Oxford.\nHer life and career were reviewed in 2018 by Dana Gioia, who said: \"Despite her worldly failures, her artistic career was a steady course of achievement. Jennings ranks among the finest British poets of the second half of the twentieth century. She is also England's best Catholic poet since Gerard Manley Hopkins.\"\nThe first biography of Jennings was published by Oxford University Press in 2018, entitled \"Elizabeth Jennings: The Inward War\", written by Dana Greene.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49938", "revid": "50651115", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49938", "title": "Anarcho-syndicalism", "text": "Anarchist organisational model for trade unions\nAnarcho-syndicalism is an anarchist organisational model that centres trade unions as a vehicle for class conflict. Drawing from the theory of libertarian socialism and the practice of syndicalism, anarcho-syndicalism sees trade unions as both a means to achieve immediate improvements to working conditions and to build towards a social revolution in the form of a general strike, with the ultimate aim of abolishing the state and capitalism. Anarcho-syndicalists consider trade unions to be the prefiguration of a post-capitalist society and seek to use them in order to establish workers' control of production and distribution. An anti-political ideology, anarcho-syndicalism rejects political parties and participation in parliamentary politics, considering them to be a corrupting influence on the labour movement. In order to achieve their material and economic goals, anarcho-syndicalists instead practice direct action in the form of strike actions, boycotts and sabotage. Anarcho-syndicalists also attempt to build solidarity among the working class, in order to unite workers against the exploitation of labour and build workers' self-management.\nThe foundations of anarcho-syndicalism were laid by the anti-authoritarian faction of the International Workingmen's Association (IWMA) and developed by the French General Confederation of Labour (CGT). Anarcho-syndicalism was constituted as a specific tendency following the International Anarchist Congress of Amsterdam in 1907, which led to anarcho-syndicalism becoming the dominant form of trade union organisation in Europe and Latin America. After facing suppression during the Revolutions of 1917\u20131923, anarcho-syndicalists established the International Workers' Association (IWA) in 1922. Anarcho-syndicalism reached its apex during the Spanish Revolution of 1936, when the National Confederation of Labour (CNT) established an anarcho-syndicalist economy throughout much of the Spanish Republic. Anarcho-syndicalism went into decline after the defeat of the anarchists in the Spanish Civil War in 1939. The movement split into two factions: the \"orthodox\" faction, which held to traditional syndicalist principles in spite of changing material conditions; and the \"revisionist\" faction, which aimed to achieve a mass base and work within the framework of newly established welfare states. By the end of the 20th century, the rise of neoliberalism and the collapse of the Eastern Bloc had led to a revival in anarcho-syndicalism, with syndicalist unions once again being established throughout the globe.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe history of anarcho-syndicalism can be traced back to the anarchist faction of the International Workingmen's Association (IWA), which called for trade unions to overthrow the state in a general strike. This syndicalist model of trade union organisation was adopted by anarchists in Spain, Cuba, Mexico and the United States, where syndicalism became the dominant organisational form. Elsewhere, the development of reformist tendencies such as social democracy sidelined anarchists within trade unions. But tensions between rank-and-file trade unionists and their social-democratic leadership eventually gave way to the development of revolutionary syndicalism, which called for workers themselves to take direct action in order to improve their own material conditions.\nGrowth of syndicalism.\nRevolutionary syndicalism was first propagated in France, where the \"Bourses du Travail\" () were established to provide mutual aid to workers and organise strike actions. By the 20th century, the \"bourses\" had joined together to establish the General Confederation of Labour (CGT), which rose to include 60% of French workers within its ranks. But after the CGT launched a general strike, which won French workers the eight-hour day and the weekend, the union turned away from revolutionary syndicalism towards reformism. However, by this time, revolutionary syndicalism had already spread throughout Europe, with syndicalist unions being established in the Netherlands, Italy, Portugal, Germany and Sweden. The concurrent development of industrial unionism led to the establishment of the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) in countries throughout the English-speaking world. By the 1910s, syndicalism had spread throughout every country in Europe and anarchist tendencies started to develop within the movement.\nDevelopment of anarcho-syndicalism.\nAlthough anarchists widely participated in the syndicalist movement, syndicalists were divided into separate tendencies, many of which rejected the ideological prescriptions of anarchism. At the International Anarchist Congress of Amsterdam, convened by the anarcho-syndicalist Christiaan Cornelissen in 1907, a conflict between the two tendencies broke out; while the syndicalist Pierre Monatte and the anarchist Errico Malatesta debated their respective ideologies, Am\u00e9d\u00e9e Dunois attempted to synthesise the two into a \"workers' anarchism\". Anarcho-syndicalism soon became the dominant form of trade union organisation in Spain, Argentina, Brazil, Mexico, Paraguay, Uruguay and many other Latin American countries, where anarcho-syndicalists organised a series of general strikes for the eight-hour day. Attempts to establish international links between these anarcho-syndicalist organisations culminated in the convocation of a revolutionary syndicalist congress in 1913, although further movements towards the creation of an international organisation were halted by the outbreak of world war.\nWar and Revolution.\nThe outbreak of World War I split anarcho-syndicalists into internationalist and defencist camps; the former declared themselves against both sides of the war, while the latter supported the Allies against the Central Powers. The conflict ultimately demonstrated the inability of the international syndicalist movement to prevent war and discredited \"neutral syndicalism\" in the eyes of many workers, causing revolutionary sentiments to once again begin rising within the workers' movement. When the Revolutions of 1917\u20131923 spread throughout Europe, anarcho-syndicalists became keen participants in the revolutionary wave, during which they faced rising political repression. Anarcho-syndicalists in Europe, Latin America and Asia organised general strikes, sometimes reaching revolutionary proportions, but were ultimately suppressed by nationalist or communist dictatorships.\nApex.\nFollowing the suppression of their movements and the rising influence of Marxism-Leninism throughout the world, anarcho-syndicalists moved to establish their own international organisation: the International Workers' Association (IWA). Theoretical discussions within the IWA led to debates on the issues of platformism, insurrectionism, industrialism and reformism, while the Spanish National Confederation of Labour (CNT) rose to prominence in the Spanish Republic. With the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War, the CNT led the defeat of the Nationalists in Catalonia, where they ignited an anarcho-syndicalist revolution that collectivised three-quarters of the Republican economy. The CNT's decision to join the Republican government caused controversy within the IWA and the social revolution was eventually suppressed by the government. The Republicans ultimately lost the war and the Spanish anarcho-syndicalists were imprisoned, killed or forced into exile by the victorious Francoist dictatorship.\nPost-war decline.\nDuring World War II, anarcho-syndicalists initially adopted an \"internationalist\" position, taking up the slogan \"Neither Fascism, nor Antifascism.\" But following the Nazi occupation of Europe and the subsequent suppression of their organisations, anarcho-syndicalists throughout Europe reorientated themselves towards anti-fascism and joined the anti-fascist resistance. After the war, anarcho-syndicalism experienced a rapid decline, as anarcho-syndicalist unions were either marginalised by rising social corporatism or repressed by newly established authoritarian states. Anarcho-syndicalists proved unable to keep up with the changes in the post-war capitalist system, which hastened the decline of the anarcho-syndicalist movement and forced its organisations to choose between marginalisation, reform or dissolution. Despite the economic changes, the IWA chose to reaffirm traditional anarcho-syndicalist principles, causing its Dutch and Swedish sections to split from it. The SAC chose to revise its principles in order to adapt to the new Swedish welfare state, within which they aimed to establish workers' control over welfare and the democratisation of the economy. The IWA declined to its lowest point during the 1960s, as its membership became increasingly preoccupied with theory.\nContemporary revival.\nThe anarcho-syndicalist movement began to experience a revival in the wake of the protests of 1968 and the Spanish transition to democracy. While the Spanish CNT experienced a rapid growth, new anarcho-syndicalist organisations were established throughout Europe. As globalisation and neoliberalism led to the dismantling of welfare states in the West, while the Eastern Bloc collapsed, anarcho-syndicalists once again began to present libertarian socialism as a necessary alternative to the state and capitalism. By the turn of the 21st century, anarcho-syndicalism had experienced a resurgence, as anarcho-syndicalist organisations re-emerged throughout the globe. Existing anarcho-syndicalist unions once again began taking direct action and organising strikes, while new anarcho-syndicalist unions established large support bases and achieved social reforms.\nTheory.\nThe political theory of anarcho-syndicalism is based on the foundations of libertarian socialism, as formulated by the anti-authoritarian faction of the International Workingmen's Association, while its organisational forms were adopted from revolutionary syndicalism, which was first put into practice by the French labour movement in the early 20th century.\nAnarcho-syndicalism is distinguished from other forms of syndicalism by its anarchist political philosophy, whereas other syndicalist tendencies distance themselves from anarchism or even deny any political alignment. Other varieties of syndicalism include: the \"neutral\" revolutionary syndicalism, which separates itself from other political theories; Daniel De Leon's conception of industrial unionism, which infused it with a Marxist influence; and an authoritarian form of syndicalism developed by Georges Sorel, which advocates for vanguardism and mythmaking to drive the masses towards a general strike.\nAnarcho-syndicalism also distinguishes itself from other forms of anarchism, due to its favourability towards industrialisation and organisation. While other forms of anarchism reject economic centralisation and the division of labour, considering the ideal of a stateless society to be one of decentralised, small-scale social units, anarcho-syndicalism foresees trade unions as taking over a large-scale and centralised industrial economy. Anarcho-syndicalists believe that the establishment of a syndicalist system could lead to the withering away of the state and as such to anarchy and communism. Some support the temporary establishment of a collectivist system of distribution \"to each according to their contribution\", until a state of post-scarcity is achieved, at which point it would give way to an anarchist communist system of distribution \"from each according to their ability, to each according to their needs\".\nIn the contemporary period, anarcho-syndicalism is divided into two main factions: the \"orthodox\" faction, which rejects any diversity of tactics or collaboration with statist forces, in favour of waiting for the right conditions for a revolutionary situation; and the \"revisionist\" faction, which is open to participation in systems of social welfare and pursues gradual reforms towards the democratisation of the economy.\nAnti-politics.\nAnarcho-syndicalism is an apolitical or anti-political ideology, opposed to the formation of socialist political parties and participation in parliamentary politics. Anarcho-syndicalists argue that socialist participation in politics, rather than moving society closer to socialism, has damaged the labour movement by substituting self-help for representation. They have further criticised socialist parties for abandoning anti-capitalism in favour of nationalism, which they believe to have resulted in the reinforcement of capitalism and the integration of the labour movement into the nation state. To anarcho-syndicalists, political careerism corrupted socialist politicians, while electoralism transformed socialism from a constructive project into a reformist one. Anarcho-syndicalists are thus opposed to unions affiliating with political parties and attempt to prevent the capture of unions by party politicians. From this position, anarcho-syndicalists have denounced Bolshevism as a vehicle for authoritarianism and state capitalism, and criticised social democrats for bureaucratic inaction.\nTrade unionism.\nAnarcho-syndicalists see trade unions not only as a means by which workers can organise for immediate improvements to their living and working conditions; but also as a means of training workers for management, with the goal of establishing workers' control over production and the creation of a socialist economy. Anarcho-syndicalists believe that trade unions are better suited for these tasks than socialist political parties, as workers often still require trade unions to protect their rights even under socialist governments. Anarcho-syndicalists consider trade unions to be the vanguard of the labour movement; they believe workers' power resides in the economic sphere, as they are responsible for producing the wealth that society relies upon. For anarcho-syndicalists, trade unions represent the prefiguration of a future socialist economy, the foundation that a new syndicalist society will be built on. Workers' education is therefore at the centre of anarcho-syndicalism, which aims to use trade unions to prepare workers to take over management of the industrial economy.\nFederalism.\nAnarcho-syndicalism organises itself according to the principles of federalism and free association, in which the self-determination of each individual is upheld. Anarcho-syndicalists are staunchly opposed to centralised, hierarchical forms of organisation, which they believe stifle independent initiative with bureaucracy. In anarcho-syndicalist organisations, individual unions carry out their activities on a voluntary basis; for any larger-scale activity that requires delegation, representatives are typically elected for single terms and are paid the same amount as the workers they represent. Anarcho-syndicalists believe that centralism weakens and inhibits workers' capacity to take independent action and make decisions, and that centralised organisations inevitably tend towards inertia and stagnation. In contrast, they believe that federalist organisations provide workers with both the means to take rapid action in individual struggles and also connections that could allow them to establish workers' control of the economy and society in a social revolution.\nAccording to the anarcho-syndicalist model, federal organisations are built from the bottom-up, on both a territorial and industrial basis: first, workers join together in independent trade unions; the trade unions in a given city or district then combine into a cartel, which act as centres for popular education and build solidarity between workers of different trades; the cartels then group together on a regional basis, up to the national level, providing larger-scale coordination between its member organisations. Under this model, each trade union is also federatively linked with other unions of the same trade and related trades in industrial unions, which allow workers a greater scope of solidarity actions in struggles relevant to their economic sector. Anarcho-syndicalists see this federative form of industrial organisation as the nucleus for the reorganisation of the economy and society, as it would be able to take over the management of production in every economic sector. In such a revolutionary situation, cartels would take over production in their communities, determine the needs of their local population and organise the economy to meet those needs. A national federation would likewise be able to organise production throughout a given country to meet the needs of the entire populace nationwide, while the industrial unions established workers' control over the means of production and transportation.\nPractice.\nIn contrast to political parties that seek to enhance the political power of states over society, anarcho-syndicalists aim to restrict the ability of the state to act and influence society. Anarcho-syndicalism also seeks to abolish capitalism and replace it with socialism, which it does by lowering the profit margins of business owners and raising the workers' share in the product of their own labour. Anarcho-syndicalists consider the state to be a result of class stratification, established and maintained in order to protect the monopoly of capitalists over the economy. As such, anarcho-syndicalists predict that the dissolution of the state will be an inevitable consequence of the abolition of capitalism. While moving towards this, they also consider it necessary to protect the civil and political rights that workers have achieved from political reaction.\nAnarcho-syndicalism is driven by the practice of direct action, which eschews legalistic methods in favour of workers forcing their employers to make concessions. Methods of direct action include boycotts, sabotage and strike actions, the latter of which syndicalists framed as a \"revolutionary drill\" to prepare workers for the overthrow of capitalism and the state.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49940", "revid": "50197585", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49940", "title": "Aaron's rod", "text": "Staves carried by Moses's brother, Aaron, in the Torah\nAaron's rod () refers to any of the walking sticks carried by Moses' brother, Aaron, in the Torah. The Bible tells how, along with Moses's rod, Aaron's rod was endowed with miraculous power during the Plagues of Egypt that preceded the Exodus. Later, his rod miraculously sprouted blossoms and almonds to symbolize God's choice of Aaron and his tribe for holy service.\nThe flowering staff of Aaron in the biblical narrative may be an etiology of the asherah cultic object. Aaron\u2019s rod, originally associated with priestly and magical powers, may have been later transferred to Moses in various biblical accounts, demonstrating his authority and divine empowerment.\nBiblical references.\nIn Israelite culture, the rod ( \"ma\u1e6d\u1e6deh\") was a natural symbol of authority, as the tool used by the shepherd to correct and guide his flock. Moses, in fact, initially carried his rod while tending his sheep, and later it became his symbol of authority over the Israelites.\nThe rods of both Moses and Aaron were endowed with miraculous power during the Plagues of Egypt. God commanded Moses to raise his rod over the Red Sea when it was to be split and in prayer over Israel in battle; at Meribah Moses brought forth water from a stone using his rod.\nAaron's rod \u2013 perhaps a different rod \u2013 reappears in . Here Korah's rebellion against Moses's proclamation of the tribe of Levi as the priesthood has been quashed and the entire congregation's ensuing rebellion has resulted in a plague, ended only by the intercession of Moses and Aaron. In order to \"stop the complaints\" of the Israelites, God commands that each of the Twelve Tribes provide a rod; and only that of the tribe chosen to become priests will miraculously sprout overnight. Aaron provides his rod to represent the tribe of Levi, and \"it put forth buds, produced blossoms, and bore ripe almonds\", as an evidence of the exclusive right to the priesthood of the tribe of Levi. In commemoration of this decision, it was commanded that the rod be stored \"before the testimony\".\nAaron's rod is cited as exhibiting miraculous power on its own, when not physically held by its owner. In , Aaron \"cast down his rod\" and it became a serpent. When he does so, the Pharaoh's sorcerers counter by similarly casting down their own rods, which also become serpents, but Aaron's rod swallowed them all. Similarly, in it sprouted blossoms when not being held.\nIn Rabbinical literature.\nRabbinic midrash described attributes of Aaron's rod beyond those in the Biblical text.\nIt is reported that the rod was made of sapphire, weighed forty seahs (a seah = 10.70 pounds), and bore the inscription \u05d3\u05e6\u05f4\u05da \u05e2\u05d3\u05f4\u05e9 \u05d1\u05d0\u05d7\u05f4\u05d1 (the initials of the Hebrew names of the Ten Plagues).\nGod created it in the twilight of the sixth day of Creation, and delivered it to Adam when the latter was driven from paradise. After it had passed through the hands of Shem, Enoch, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob successively, it came into the possession of Joseph. On Joseph's death the Egyptian nobles stole some of his belongings, and, among them, Jethro appropriated the staff. Jethro planted the staff in his garden, when its marvelous virtue was revealed by the fact that nobody could withdraw it from the ground (compare \"the sword in the stone\"); even to touch it was fraught with danger to life. This was because the Ineffable Name of God was engraved upon it. When Moses entered Jethro's household he read the Name, and by means of it was able to draw up the rod, for which service Zipporah, Jethro's daughter, was given to him in marriage. Her father had sworn that she should become the wife of the man who should be able to master the miraculous rod and of no other.\nAaron's rod, together with its blossoms and fruit, was preserved in the Ark. King Josiah, who foresaw the impending national catastrophe, concealed the Ark and the objects stored with it (Aaron's rod, a vial of manna, and the holy anointing oil). Their whereabouts will remain unknown until, in the Messianic age, the prophet Elijah shall reveal them.\nThe length of the rod can be determined by the size of the ark of the covenant as stated in Exodus 37:1 or a length of 2.5 cubits, a depth of 1.5 cubits, and a height of 1.5 cubits. Thus, presuming an ark with two-dimensional walls of zero thickness, in which a staff's length can fit within the confines of an interior corner, the maximum staff length would be the hypotenuse of the hypotenuses of length v depth and depth v height, or formula_1 cubits. The cubit was not defined in either SI or Imperial units. However, the average of the two lengths given by Rav Avraham Chaim Naeh or Chazon Ish would put a cubit at roughly 1.7 feet, putting the maximum length of the staff at 6.1' (6'1.2\" or 1.9m).\nAs discussed, the Bible ascribes similar miraculous powers to rods of Aaron and Moses. One midrash goes a step further, and identifies them as being the same rod:\nThe rod with which Jacob crossed the Jordan () is the same rod which was in Judah's hand (), which was in Moses's hand (), which was in Aaron's hand (), which was in David's hand (). which was in the hand of each king until the destruction of the Temple, when it was hidden. When the Messiah comes it will be given to him for a scepter in token of his authority over the nations.\nAccording to one midrash, Moses split a tree trunk into twelve portions, and gave one portion to each tribe. When the Rod of Aaron produced blossoms, the Israelites could not but acknowledge the significance of the token. This opinion seemingly assumes that the rod in Korach's rebellion was separate from the rod used for the plagues.\nChristian use.\n states that Aaron's rod was kept in the Ark of the Covenant.\nThe account of the blossoming of Aaron's rod contained in Clement's first letter to the Corinthians (ep. 43) is in haggadic-midrashic style, and may probably be ascribed to Jewish or, more strictly speaking, Jewish-Hellenistic sources. According to that account, Moses placed upon each of the twelve staffs the corresponding seal of the head of a tribe. The doors of the sanctuary were similarly sealed, to prevent anyone from having access to the rods at night.\nThe miraculous flowering of the rod was also considered a type of the Incarnation of Christ and his Virgin Birth, and appears in scenes of the Annunciation to Mary.\nIn the Ethiopian fourteenth-century text of the Kebra Nagast, Aaron's rod is broken in three and probably a symbol of the Trinity: \"The rod of Aaron which sprouted after it had become withered though no one watered it with water, and one had broken it in two places, and it became three rods being [originally only] one rod.\"\nIslamic literature.\nAccounts of Aaron's rod appear in Islamic literature. A depiction from al-Tha'labi's (d. 1035, AH 427) Stories of the Prophets depicts Harun (Aaron) leaning on his rod, while his brother Musa's (Moses) staff miraculously turned into a snake-dragon to defeat Pharaoh's magicians.\nIn modern literature.\nD. H. Lawrence entitled a novel \"Aaron's Rod\" in 1922. This book describes a flautist, Aaron Sissons, and his experiences as he journeys through a Europe exhausted by the First World War. The biblical eponymous reference, with the flute representing a magic rod, is intended to be ironic.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49942", "revid": "50181603", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49942", "title": "Theurgy", "text": "Magic used to invoke divine presence\nTheurgy (; , ), also known as divine magic, is one of two major branches of the magical arts, the other being practical magic or thaumaturgy. Theurgy describes the ritual practices associated with the invocation or evocation of the presence of one or more deities, especially with the goal of achieving henosis (uniting with the divine) and perfecting oneself.\nNeoplatonism.\n\"Theurgy\" means \"divine working\". The first recorded use of the term is found in the mid-second-century neoplatonist work the \"Chaldean Oracles\" (Fragment 153 des Places (Paris, 1971): 'For the theourgo\u00ed do not fall under the fate-governed herd'). The source of Western theurgy can be found in the philosophy of late neoplatonists, especially Iamblichus. Although the neoplatonists are often considered pagan polytheists, they embraced a form of monism.\nIn late neoplatonism, the spiritual universe is regarded as a series of emanations from the One. From the One emanated the Divine Mind (Nous) and in turn from the Divine Mind emanated the World Soul (Psyche). Neoplatonists insisted that the One is absolutely transcendent and in the emanations nothing of the higher was lost or transmitted to the lower, which remained unchanged by the lower emanations.\nFor Plotinus and Porphyry the emanations are as follows:\nPlotinus urged contemplations for those who wished to perform theurgy, the goal of which was to reunite with the Divine (called henosis). Therefore, his school resembles a school of meditation or contemplation.\nIamblichus.\nIamblichus, a student of Anatolius and associate of Porphyry (who had studied under Plotinus), developed a more elaborate and ritual-centered form of theurgy. His system emphasized invocation, ritual action, and the use of symbolic materials to engage the divine. In his major work, \"On the Mysteries of the Egyptians, Chaldeans, and Assyrians\", Iamblichus described theurgy as a kind of ritualized cosmogony\u2014a reenactment of the divine creative process\u2014through which the embodied soul participates in the maintenance and restoration of cosmic order.\nIamblichus' analysis was that the transcendent cannot be grasped with mental contemplation because the transcendent is supra-rational. Theurgy is a series of rituals and operations aimed at recovering the transcendent essence by retracing the divine 'signatures' through the layers of being. Education is important for comprehending the scheme of things as presented by Aristotle, Plato, and Pythagoras. The theurgist works 'like with like': at the material level, with physical symbols; at the higher level, with mental and purely spiritual practices. Starting with correspondences of the divine in matter, the theurgist eventually reaches the level where the soul's inner divinity unites with the One.\nEmperor Julian.\nThe Emperor Julian (332-363) embraced neoplatonic philosophy and worked to replace Christianity with a version of neoplatonic paganism. Because of his untimely death and the hold mainstream Christianity had over the empire at the time, this was ultimately unsuccessful, but he did produce several works of philosophy and theology, including a popular hymn to the sun. In his theology, Helios, the sun, was the ideal example of the perfection of the gods and light, a symbol of divine emanation. He also held the mother goddess Cybele in high esteem.\nJulian favored ritual theurgy, with an emphasis on sacrifice and prayer. He was heavily influenced by Iamblichus' ideas.\nIn Western esotericism.\nEsoteric Christianity.\nEsoteric Christianity accepts theurgy as a tradition that could greatly benefit a person. The main feat of Esoteric Christianity is to learn the mysteries of God (see Raziel) and to rise to higher consciousness in the understanding of God's relationship to individual consciousness. Theurgy, in the esoteric tradition, uses this knowledge to heighten one's own spiritual nature. Some branches of Esoteric Christianity hold that if an Esoteric Christian, Rosicrucian, or Theosopher practices it they could potentially rise to the degree of Magus or Adept after a certain level of spiritual attainment. In a traditional and magical sense, theurgy is seen as the opposite of Goetia, even though many argue that they overlap.\nRadical orthodoxy.\nJohn Milbank, founder of radical orthodoxy, asserts that theology \"encourages a theurgy which aims at a liberation of nature from terror and distress and at a fully harmonious and beautiful interaction between humans and the natural world\". He continues by stating that theology equally \"encourages a theurgy which is a social work of maximising democratic participation and socialist sharing\".\nHermetic Order of the Golden Dawn.\nSome organizations, such as the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, teach a type of theurgy that would help one ascend spiritually as well as understand the true nature of the self and its relation to the Divine and the Universe. This tradition holds that theurgists are usually solitary practitioners who seek the divine light alone. Theurgy in this hermetic sense stresses the need for the individual to separate and analyze the individual components that constitute everyday consciousness and reunite them in a way that changes one's personal awareness into a state that understands and partakes in spiritual grace.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49943", "revid": "8289", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49943", "title": "Michael Bakunin", "text": ""}
{"id": "49945", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49945", "title": "William Vickrey", "text": "Canadian-American economist and Nobel Laureate (1914\u20131996)\nWilliam Spencer Vickrey (21 June 1914 \u2013 11 October 1996) was a Canadian-American professor of economics. He was a lifelong faculty member at Columbia University. A theorist who worked on public economics and mechanism design, Vickrey primarily discussed public policy problems. He originated the Vickrey auction, introduced the concept of congestion pricing in networks, formalized arguments for marginal cost pricing, and contributed to optimal income taxation. James Tobin described him as \"an applied economist's theorist, as well as a theorist's applied economist.\"\nVickrey was awarded the 1996 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences with James Mirrlees for their research into the economic theory of incentives under asymmetric information. Vickrey never personally received the Prize; it was announced just three days prior to his death.\nEarly years.\nVickrey was born in Victoria, British Columbia to Charles Vernon Vickrey, a Congregationalist minister, and Ada Eliza Spencer. The family moved to New York City in William's childhood, where his father was General Secretary of the American Committee for Armenian and Syrian Relief, one of the nation's first humanitarian assistance organizations.\nVickrey attended high school at Phillips Academy in Andover, Massachusetts. After obtaining his B.S. in Mathematics at Yale University in 1935, he went on to complete his M.A. at Columbia University in 1937. He stayed at Columbia for a PhD, which he completed 1948 with a 500-page dissertation entitled \"An Agenda for Progressive Taxation.\" Vickrey's doctoral work was interrupted by World War II, when he was enlisted to work for the U.S. National Resources Planning Board and later the Treasury Department's Division of Tax Research.\nCareer.\nVickrey remained at Columbia for his entire career. His students included the economists Jacques Dr\u00e8ze, Harvey J. Levin, and Lynn Turgeon.\nContributions.\nVickrey was the first to use the tools of game theory to explain the dynamics of auctions. In his seminal paper, Vickrey derived several auction equilibria, and provided an early revenue-equivalence result. The revenue equivalence theorem remains the centrepiece of modern auction theory. The Vickrey auction is named after him.\nVickrey worked on congestion pricing, the notion that roads and other services should be priced so that users see the costs that arise from the service being fully used when there is still demand. Congestion pricing gives a signal to users to adjust their behavior or to investors to expand the service in order to remove the constraint. The theory was later partially put into action in London.\nIn public economics, Vickrey extended the marginal cost pricing approach of Harold Hotelling and showed how public goods should be provided at marginal cost. He contended that efficient funding for public utilities and transportation systems required short-run marginal pricing, or pricing responsive to current demand.\nAlongside marginal cost pricing, Vickrey argued that the land value tax was necessary to efficiently fund city services. He wrote that replacing taxes on production and labor (\"including property taxes on improvements\") with fees for holding valuable land sites \"would substantially improve the economic efficiency of the jurisdiction\". Vickrey further argued that land value tax had no adverse effects and that replacing existing taxes in this way would increase local productivity enough that land prices would rise instead of fall. He also made an ethical argument for Georgist value capture, noting that owners of valuable locations still take (exclude others from) local public goods, even if they choose not to use them, so without land value tax, land users have to pay twice for those public services (once in tax to government and once in rent to holders of land title).\nVickrey's economic philosophy was influenced by John Maynard Keynes and Henry George. He was sharply critical of the Chicago school of economics and was vocal in opposing the political focus on achieving balanced budgets and fighting inflation, especially in times of high unemployment. Working under General MacArthur, Vickrey helped accomplish radical land reform in Japan.\nNobel Prize award and death.\nVickrey's Nobel Prize in Economics was announced on October 8, 1996. He became the only Nobel laureate born in British Columbia.\nVickrey died three days later while traveling to a conference of Georgist academics that he helped found. His Columbia University economics department colleague C. Lowell Harriss accepted the posthumous prize on his behalf. There are only three other cases where a Nobel Prize has been presented posthumously: Erik Axel Karlfeldt (Literature 1931), Dag Hammarskj\u00f6ld (Peace 1961) and Ralph Steinman (Physiology or Medicine 2011).\nPersonal life.\nVickrey married Cecile Thompson in 1951. He was a Quaker and a member of Scarsdale Friends Meeting. He died in Harrison, New York in 1996 from heart failure.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49946", "revid": "2340490", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49946", "title": "Gododdin", "text": "Sub-Roman kingdom of Northern Britain\nThe Gododdin () were a Brittonic people of north-eastern Britannia, the area known as the Hen Ogledd or Old North (modern south-east Scotland and north-east England), in the sub-Roman period. Descendants of the Votadini, they are best known as the subject of the 6th-century Welsh poem \"Y Gododdin\", which memorialises the Battle of Catraeth and is attributed to Aneirin.\nThe name \"Gododdin\" is the Modern Welsh form, but the name appeared in Old Welsh as \"Guotodin\" and derived from the tribal name \"Votadini\" recorded in Classical sources, such as in Greek texts from the Roman period.\nKingdom.\nIt is not known exactly how far the kingdom of the Gododdin extended, possibly from the Stirling area to the kingdom of \"Bryneich\" (Bernicia), and including what are now the Lothian and Borders regions of eastern Scotland. It was bounded to the west by the Brittonic Kingdom of Strathclyde, and to the north by the Picts. Those living around Clackmannanshire were known as the Manaw Gododdin. According to tradition, local kings of this period lived at both Traprain Law and Din Eidyn (Edinburgh, whose English name is ultimately a calque, with the Old English ' corresponding to the Welsh '; in Scottish Gaelic it is still known as '), and probably also at ' (Dunbar, Scottish Gaelic \"\"). Gododdin included districts such as Manaw Gododdin and Eidyn south of the Firth of Forth.\nCunedda, legendary founder of the Kingdom of Gwynedd in north Wales, is supposed to have been a Manaw Gododdin warlord who migrated southwest during the 5th century.\nLater history.\nIn the 6th century, Bryneich was invaded by the Angles and became known as Bernicia. The Angles continued to press north. In around 600 the Gododdin raised a force of about 300 men to assault the Angle stronghold of Catraeth, perhaps Catterick, North Yorkshire. The battle, which ended disastrously for the Britons, was memorialised in the poem \"Y Gododdin\".\nIn 638, Eidyn, modern Edinburgh, was under siege and fell to the Angles, for the Gododdin seem to have come under the rule of Bernicia around this time. To what extent the native population was replaced or assimilated is unknown. Bernicia became part of Northumbria. \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49949", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49949", "title": "Bra (disambiguation)", "text": "A bra is a woman's undergarment designed to support the breasts.\nBra may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "49952", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49952", "title": "Prudence", "text": "Ability of a person to regulate themselves with the use of reason\nPrudence (, contracted from meaning \"seeing ahead, sagacity\") is the ability to govern and discipline oneself by the use of reason. It is classically considered to be a virtue - in particular, one of the four cardinal virtues of Ancient Greek philosophy and one of the seven heavenly virtues of Christianity. Prudentia is an allegorical female personification of the virtue, whose attributes are a mirror and snake, and who is frequently depicted as a pair with Justitia, the Roman goddess of Justice.\nThe word derives from the 14th-century Old French word , which, in turn, derives from the Latin meaning \"foresight, sagacity\". It is often associated with wisdom, insight, and knowledge. The virtue of prudence is the ability to judge between virtuous and vicious actions, not only in a general sense, but with regard to appropriate actions at a given time and place. Although prudence does not itself perform outward actions, and is concerned solely with internal discrimination and choice, all other virtues are regulated by it. For example, to distinguish the virtuous mean of courage from the vicious extremes of recklessness (excess) and cowardice (deficiency) is to be prudent.\nIn modern English, the word \"prudence\" has become closely associated with cautiousness. In this sense, prudence is a virtue that involves taking calculated risks, but excessive caution can become the vice of cowardice.\nIn the \"Nicomachean Ethics\", Aristotle gives a lengthy account of the virtue ()\u2014traditionally translated as \"prudence\", although this has become problematic as the modern usage of that word has changed. More recently has been translated by such terms as \"practical wisdom\", \"practical judgment\", or \"rational choice\".\nAs the \"mother\" of all virtues.\nPrudence was considered by the ancient Greeks and later by Christian philosophers, most notably Thomas Aquinas, as the cause, measure, and form of all virtues. It is considered to be the or the charioteer of the virtues. It is mentioned in the fifth of the Principal Doctrines of Epicurus, and in his Letter to Menoeceus, where he says: \"Prudence is the foundation of all these things and is the greatest good. Thus it is more valuable than philosophy and is the source of every other excellence.\"\nPrudence is foundational to virtues, which are understood to be perfected abilities of the human spirit. This perfection is achieved when virtues are founded on prudence, or the ability to make the right decisions. For instance, a person can live temperately when he has acquired the habit of deciding correctly the actions to take in response to his instinctual cravings.\nPrudence provides guidance on the appropriate course of action in specific situations. It does not \"will\" the good that it discerns. Prudence has a directive capacity with regard to the other virtues. It lights the way and measures the arena for their exercise. Without prudence, bravery becomes foolhardiness, mercy sinks into weakness, free self-expression and kindness into censure, humility into degradation and arrogance, selflessness into corruption, and temperance into fanaticism. The purpose of prudence is to consider the circumstances of time, place, and manner that are relevant in any given situation, known as \"medium rationis\" in the Scholastic tradition. So while it qualifies the intellect and not the will, it is nevertheless a moral virtue.\nPrudence provides a model of ethically good actions. \"The work of art is true and real by its correspondence with the pattern of its prototype in the mind of the artist. In similar fashion, the free activity of man is good by its correspondence with the pattern of prudence.\" (Josef Pieper)\nAccording to Greek and Scholastic philosophy, 'form' is the unique characteristic of a thing that makes it what it is. In this sense, prudence gives other virtues their specific character as virtues, by providing a standard against which they can be judged. For example, not all acts of telling the truth are considered virtuous, but those that are done with prudence would be considered expressions of the virtue of honesty. \nVersus imprudence, cunning and false prudence.\nIn Christian understanding, the difference between prudence and cunning lies in the intent with which a decision to act is made. The Christian understanding of the world includes the existence of God, the natural law, and moral implications of human actions. In this context, prudence is different from cunning in that it takes into account the supernatural good. For instance, the decision of persecuted Christians to be martyred rather than deny their faith is considered prudent.\nAccording to Thomas Aquinas, judgments that take a reasonable form, but are aimed at evil ends or that use evil means, are considered to be examples of \"cunning\" and \"false prudence\".\nThe Ancient Greek term for prudence is synonymous with \"forethought\". People, the Ancient Greeks believed, must have enough prudence to prepare for worshiping the Olympian gods.\nIntegral parts.\nPrudence is the application of universal principles to particular situations. \"Integral parts\" of virtues, in Scholastic philosophy, are the elements that must be present for any complete or perfect act of the virtue. The following are the integral parts of prudence:\nPrudential judgment.\nIn ethics, a \"prudential judgment\" is one where the circumstances must be weighed to determine the correct action. This applies to situations in which two people could weigh the circumstances differently and \"ethically\" come to different conclusions.\nFor instance, in the theory of just war, the government of a nation must weigh whether the harms they suffer are more than the harms that would be produced by their going to war against another nation that is harming them; the decision whether to go to war is therefore a prudential judgment.\nAs another example, a patient with a terminal illness may hear of an experimental treatment with no conventional alternatives. They would have to weigh, on the one hand, the cost, time commitment, potential lack of benefit, and possible pain, disability, and hastened death, and on the other hand, the potential benefit and the benefits to others that could be gained from what could be learned from their case.\nIn rhetoric.\n, or practical wisdom, holds an important place in rhetorical theory as a central aspect of judgment and practice. Aristotle's notion of fits with his treatise on rhetoric because neither, in his estimation, could be reduced to an or a , and both deal with the ability to deliberate about contingent, variable, or indeterminate matters.\nCicero defined as a rhetorical norm in \"De Oratore\", \"De officiis\", \"De Inventione\", and \"De re publica\". He contrasts the term with , young men failing to consider the consequences before they act. The , or those who had prudence, knew when to speak and when to stay silent. Cicero maintained that prudence was gained only through experience, and while it was applied in everyday conversation, in public discourse it was subordinated to the broader term for wisdom, .\nIn the modern era, rhetorical scholars have tried to recover a robust meaning for the term. They have maintained consistency with the ancient orators, contending that prudence is an embodied persuasive resource. Although sets of principles or rules can be constructed in a particular culture, prudence cannot be derived from a set of timeless principles. Instead, through gauging the situation and through reasoned deliberation, a speaker should determine the set of values and morals by which to base his or her actions. The capacity to take into account the particularities of the situation is vital to prudential practice. For example, as rhetorical scholar Lois Self explains, \"both rhetoric and are normative processes in that they involve rational principles of choice-making; both have general applicability but always require careful analysis of particulars in determining the best response to each specific situation; both ideally take into account the wholeness of human nature; and finally, both have social utility and responsibility in that both treat matter of the public good\". Robert Hariman, in his examination of Malcolm X, adds that \"aesthetic sensibility, imitation of a performative ideal, and improvisation upon conventions of presentation\" are also components of practical reasoning.\nRhetorical scholars differ on definitions of the term and methods of analysis. Hans-Georg Gadamer asserted that prudence materializes through the application of principles and can be evaluated accordingly. Jasinski argues that Andrew Cuomo's speech to the Catholic Church of Notre Dame cannot be judged solely on the basis of its consequences, since prudence is not reducible to \"episteme\" (knowledge or understanding) or \"techne\" (technique or art). Rather, he contends, it should be judged based on its embodied rhetorical performance \u2014 that is, how it is perceived by those who experience it. So, for example, one might evaluate the speech based on how persuasive it was, how emotionally moving it was, or how well it captured the audience's attention. Thus, while Gadamer judges prudence based on a set of principles, Jasinski emphasizes the artistry of communication and its reception by its audience. For Jasinski, communication should balance compromise and courage, rather than merely achieving a specific result.\nIn his study of Machiavelli, examining the relationship between prudence and moderation, rhetorician Eugene Garver holds that there is a middle ground between \"an ethics of principles, in which those principles univocally dictate action\" and \"an ethics of consequences, in which the successful result is all\". His premise stems from Aristotle's theory of virtue as an \"intermediate\", in which moderation and compromise embody prudence. Yet, because elevating moderation is not an active response, prudence entails the \"transformation of moderation\" into a fitting response, making it a flexible situational norm. Garver also asserts that prudential reasoning differs from \"algorithmic\" and \"heuristic\" reasoning because it is rooted in a political community, the context in which common problems regarding stability and innovation arise and call for prudential reasoning.\nIn economics.\nEconomists describe a consumer as \"prudent\" if he or she saves more when faced with riskier future income. This additional saving is called precautionary saving.\nIf a risk-averse consumer has a utility function formula_1 over consumption formula_2, and if formula_1 is differentiable, then the consumer is not prudent unless the third derivative of utility is positive, that is, formula_4.\nThe strength of the precautionary saving motive can be measured by absolute prudence, which is defined as\nformula_5. Similarly, relative prudence is defined as absolute prudence, multiplied by the level of consumption. These measures are closely related to the concepts of absolute and relative risk aversion developed by Kenneth Arrow and John W. Pratt.\nIn accounting.\nIn accounting, prudence was historically regarded as a fundamental principle for determining the appropriate timing of revenue recognition. The rule of prudence means that gains should not be anticipated unless their realisation was highly probable. However, recent developments in Generally Accepted Accounting Principles have led academic critics to accuse the International Standard-Setting Body, IASB, of abandoning prudence. In the British reporting standard FRS 18, prudence, along with consistency, was relegated to a \"desirable\" quality of financial information rather than fundamental concept. Prudence was rejected for IFRS because it was seen as compromising accounts' neutrality.\nIn a 2011 report on the 2008 financial crisis, the British House of Lords bemoaned the demotion of prudence as a governing principle of accounting and audit. However, their comments were disputed by prominent practitioners.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49955", "revid": "44220063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49955", "title": "Jean-Marie Le Pen", "text": "French politician (1928\u20132025)\nJean Louis Marie Le Pen (20 June 1928 \u2013 7 January 2025), commonly known as Jean-Marie Le Pen (), was a French politician, lawyer and activist. He founded the far-right National Front (now National Rally) party and served as the party's president from 1972 to 2011 and as its honorary president from 2011 to 2015.\nBorn in Brittany, Le Pen focused on issues related to immigration to France, the European Union, traditional culture and values, law and order, and France's high rate of unemployment. His progression in the 1980s is known as the \" of minds\" due to its noticeable effect on mainstream political opinion. His controversial speeches and his integration into public life made him a figure who polarized opinion. He was convicted of statements downplaying the Holocaust, and fined for incitement to discrimination regarding remarks made about Muslims in France. He was expelled from the party by his daughter Marine in 2015 after making controversial statements.\nLe Pen's longevity in politics and his five attempts to become president of France made him a major figure in French political life. His unexpected progress to the second round in the 2002 presidential election\u2014when he was beaten in a landslide by incumbent Jacques Chirac\u2014left its mark on French public life, and the \"21st of April\" is now a frequently used expression in France. He served three terms in the National Assembly and was a member of the European Parliament (MEP) from 1984 to 2019.\nLife and career.\nEarly life.\nJean Louis Marie Le Pen was the only son of Jean Le Pen (1901\u20131942). Jean Le Pen was born in Brittany, like his ancestors, and had started work at the age of 13 on a transatlantic vessel. He was the president of the Association des Anciens Combattants, a fisherman, and a municipal councillor of La Trinit\u00e9-sur-Mer, a small seaside village in Brittany. Jean-Marie Le Pen's mother, Anne-Marie Herv\u00e9 (1904\u20131965), was a seamstress and also of local ancestry. His mother was a speaker of the Breton language, and Le Pen would say in his old age that his only regret was not to learn the language.\nLe Pen was born in La Trinit\u00e9-sur-Mer on 20 June 1928. He was orphaned as an adolescent (Ward of the Nation, brought up by the state), when his father's boat \"La Pers\u00e9v\u00e9rance\" was blown up by a mine in 1942. He was raised as a Roman Catholic and studied at the Jesuit Coll\u00e8ge Saint-Fran\u00e7ois-Xavier in Vannes, then at the Lyc\u00e9e Dupuy-de-L\u00f4me in Lorient.\nIn November 1944, aged 16, Le Pen was turned down (because of his age) by Colonel Henri de La Vaissi\u00e8re (then representative of the Communist Youth) when he attempted to join the French Forces of the Interior (FFI). He then entered the faculty of law in Paris, and started to sell the monarchist \"Action Fran\u00e7aise\"'s newspaper, \"Aspects de la France\", in the street. He was repeatedly convicted of assault and battery (\"coups et blessures\").\nLe Pen started his political career as the head of the student union in Toulouse. He became president of the \"Association Corporative des \u00e9tudiants en droit\", an association of law students whose main occupation was to engage in street brawls against the \"cocos\" (communists). He was excluded from this organisation in 1951.\nAfter his time in the military, Le Pen studied political science and law at Panth\u00e9on-Assas University. His graduate thesis, submitted in 1971 by him and Jean-Loup Vincent, was titled \"Le courant anarchiste en France depuis 1945\" (\"The anarchist movement in France since 1945\").\nMilitary service.\nAfter receiving his law degree, Le Pen enlisted in the Foreign Legion. He arrived in French Indochina after the 1954 battle of Dien Bien Phu, which France had lost and which prompted Prime Minister Pierre Mend\u00e8s France to put an end to the Indochinese war at the Geneva Conference. Le Pen then was sent to the Suez in 1956, but arrived only after the cease-fire.\nIn 1953, a year before the beginning of the Algerian War, he contacted President Vincent Auriol, who approved Le Pen's proposed volunteer disaster relief project after a flood in the Netherlands. Within two days, there were 40 volunteers from his university, a group that would later help victims of an earthquake in Italy. In Paris in 1956, he was elected to the National Assembly as a member of Pierre Poujade's populist UDCA party. Le Pen often presented himself as the youngest member of the Assembly, but a young communist, Andr\u00e9 Ch\u00e8ne, 27 years old and half a year younger, was elected in the same year.\nIn 1957, Le Pen became the general secretary of the National Front of Combatants, a veterans' organization. The next year, following his break with Poujade, he was re-elected to the National Assembly as a member of the Centre National des Ind\u00e9pendants et Paysans (CNIP) party, led by Antoine Pinay.\nLe Pen claimed that he had lost his left eye when he was savagely beaten during the 1958 election campaign. Testimonies suggest that he was only wounded in the right eye and did not lose it. He lost the sight in his left eye years later, due to an illness. (Popular belief was that he wore a glass eye.) During the 1950s, Le Pen took a close interest in the Algerian War (which lasted from 1954 to 1962) and the French defence budget.\nElected to parliament under the Poujadist banner, Le Pen voluntarily reengaged himself for two to three months in the Foreign Legion. He was then sent to Algeria in 1957 as an intelligence officer. He was accused of having engaged in torture. Le Pen denied these accusations, although he admitted knowing of its use. Le Pen also criticised President Charles de Gaulle for granting Algeria independence, accusing him of \"helping make France small\".\nFar-right politics.\nHe directed the 1965 presidential campaign of far-right candidate Jean-Louis Tixier-Vignancour, who obtained 5.19% of the votes. Le Pen insisted on the rehabilitation of the Collaborationists, declaring that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn 1962, Le Pen lost his seat in the Assembly. In 1963, he created the \"Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 d'\u00e9tudes et de relations publiques\" (Serp), a company involved in the music industry that specialized in historical recordings and sold recordings of the choir of the CGT trade union and songs of the Popular Front, as well as Nazi marches.\nNational Front.\nIn 1972, Le Pen founded the Front National (FN) party. He then ran in the 1974 presidential election, obtaining 0.74% of the vote. In 1976, his Parisian apartment was blown up with dynamite (he had been living at that time in his mansion of Montretout in Saint-Cloud). The crime was never solved. Le Pen then failed to obtain the 500 signatures from \"grand electors\" (\"grands \u00e9lecteurs\", mayors, etc.) necessary to present himself in the 1981 presidential election, won by the candidate of the Socialist Party (PS), Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand.\nCriticising immigration and taking advantage of the economic crisis striking France and the world since the 1973 oil crisis, Le Pen's party managed to increase its support in the 1980s, starting in the municipal elections of 1983. His popularity was higher in the south and east of France. The FN obtained 16 seats in the 1984 European elections. A total of 35 FN deputies \u2013 including Le Pen, who was elected for Paris \u2013 entered the National Assembly after the 1986 elections (the only legislative elections held under proportional representation). \nIn 1984, Le Pen won a seat in the European Parliament and was consistently reelected since then. In 1988 he lost his reelection bid for the National Assembly in Bouches-du-Rh\u00f4ne's 8th constituency when he was defeated in the second round by Socialist Marius Masse. In 1991 Le Pen's invitation to London by Conservative MPs was militantly protested by large numbers coordinated by the Campaign Against Fascism in Europe (CAFE), which led to a surge of anti-fascist groups and activity across Europe. In 1992 and 1998 he was elected to the Regional Council of Provence-Alpes-C\u00f4te d'Azur.\nLe Pen ran in the presidential elections in 1974, 1988, 1995, 2002, and 2007. As noted above, he was not able to run for office in 1981, as he failed to gather the necessary 500 signatures of elected officials. In the presidential elections of 2002, Le Pen obtained 16.86% of the votes in the first round of voting, obtaining second place after incumbent President Jacques Chirac. This was enough to qualify him for the second round, as a result of the poor showing by the center-left PS candidate and incumbent prime minister Lionel Jospin and the scattering of votes between 15 other candidates. This was a major political event, both nationally and internationally, as it was the first time someone with such far-right views had qualified for the second round of a French presidential election. There was a widespread stirring of national public opinion as virtually the entire French political spectrum from the centre-right to the left united in fierce opposition to Le Pen's ideas. More than one million people in France took part in street rallies; slogans such as \"A crook is better than a fascist\" (\"Un escroc mieux qu'un facho\") and \"Graft rather than hate, Chirac rather than Le Pen\" (\"L'arnaque plut\u00f4t que la haine, Chirac plut\u00f4t que Le Pen\") were heard in opposition to Le Pen. Le Pen was then defeated by a large margin in the second round, in which President Chirac obtained 82% of the votes, thus securing the biggest majority in the history of the Fifth Republic.\nIn the 2004 regional elections, Le Pen intended to run for office in the Provence-Alpes-C\u00f4te d'Azur region but was prevented from doing so because he did not meet the conditions for being a voter in that region: he neither lived there nor was registered as a taxpayer there. However, he was planned to be the FN's top candidate in the region for the 2010 regional elections.\nLe Pen again ran in the 2007 presidential election and finished fourth. His 2007 campaign, at the age of 78 years and 9 months, made him the oldest presidential candidate in French history.\nLe Pen was a vocal critic of the European Reform Treaty (formally known as the Treaty of Lisbon) which was signed by EU member states on 13 December 2007 and entered into force on 1 December 2009. In October 2007, Le Pen suggested that he would personally visit Ireland to assist the \"No\" campaign but finally changed his mind, fearing that his presence would be more of a hindrance than a benefit to the campaign. Ireland finally refused to ratify the treaty. Ireland was the only EU country that held a citizen referendum. All other EU states, including France, ratified the treaty by parliamentary vote, despite a previous citizen referendum where over 55% of French voters rejected the European Reform Treaty (although that vote was on a different draft of the Treaty in the form of the Constitutional Treaty). After the Irish \"No\" vote, Le Pen addressed the French President Nicolas Sarkozy in the European Parliament, accusing him of furthering the agenda of a \"cabal of international finance and free market fanatics\". Ireland later accepted the treaty in a second Lisbon referendum.\nAfter Le Pen left office in January 2011, his daughter Marine Le Pen was elected by the adherents of the party over Bruno Gollnisch. He became honorary chairman of the party and won his seat again at the European elections in 2014.\nOn 4 May 2015, Le Pen was suspended from the party after refusing to attend his disciplinary hearing for repeating his description of the Nazi gas chambers used in concentration camps during the Holocaust, as a \"detail\" of World War II and speaking favorably of Nazi collaborator Marshal Philippe P\u00e9tain. He had originally been fined 183,200 euros for saying in 1987 that \"I'm not saying the gas chambers didn't exist. I haven't seen them myself. I haven't particularly studied the question. But I believe it's just a detail in the history of World War II.\" In 1996, he stated that \"If you take a 1,000-page book on World War II, the concentration camps take up only two pages and the gas chambers 10 to 15 lines. This is what one calls a detail,\" and he made similar statements before the European Parliament in 2008 and 2009.\nLe Pen dismissed the hearing as a 'mockery' and an 'ambush' and accused Ms. Le Pen of pulling the strings from afar. 'It's dirty to kill your own daddy, so she didn't kill daddy directly, she did it through her henchman,' Mr. Le Pen told French radio at the time. The elder Le Pen was a persistent problem for his daughter as she tried to smooth over the overt racism and xenophobia of the party's past. The final straw came in April when he rehashed familiar comments about the gas chambers and said France should get along with Russia to save the 'white world'. Ms. Le Pen then openly split with her father, saying he was committing 'political suicide'. But he vowed to 'reconquer' the party he founded in 1972.\nA French court decided in June 2015 to cancel his suspension; although the members of the party were to hold a vote to accept or reject a whole series of measures aiming at changing the National Front's status, including Le Pen's honorary presidency. On 10 July another French court ruled to suspend the vote two days beforehand and urged the party to organize an in-person Congress, as Le Pen sued the National Front again. The party decided to appeal against both of these decisions. The FN then decided, on 29 July, to count the votes on the suppression of Le Pen's Honorary Presidency, which showed that 94% of the members were in favour of this decision. However, due to the legal challenges to the FN's removal of Le Pen as its honorary president, he continued to officially hold the position.\nIn August 2015, Le Pen was expelled from the National Front after a special party congress. He later founded the Comit\u00e9s Jeanne.\nBlue, White and Red Rally.\nBlue, White and Red Rally () is a French nationalist political association founded by Le Pen on 5 September 2015 after his August expulsion from the FN. He told supporters in the city: 'You will not be orphans. We can act in a similar way to the FN, even if we are not part of it.'\nHe confirmed he would support his granddaughter Marion Mar\u00e9chal-Le Pen for the next regional elections and that he wanted to influence the National Front's ideology with his association. He also praised Marine Le Pen's speech in Marseille on 6 September 2015, describing it as \"lep\u00e9niste\".\nPersonal life, wealth, and security.\nLe Pen's marriage to Pierrette Le Pen from 29 June 1960 to 18 March 1987 produced three daughters, who gave him eight grandchildren. The break-up of the marriage was somewhat dramatic, with his ex-wife posing nude, to ridicule him, in the French edition of \"Playboy\". Marie-Caroline, one of his daughters, broke with Le Pen, following her husband to join Bruno M\u00e9gret, who split from the FN to found the rival Mouvement National R\u00e9publicain (MNR, National Republican Movement). The youngest of Le Pen's daughters, Marine Le Pen, is leader of the National Rally. On 31 May 1991, Jean-Marie Le Pen married Jeanne-Marie Paschos (\"Jany\"), of Greek descent, in a civil ceremony. Born in 1933, Paschos was previously married to Belgian businessman Jean Garnier. The two married again in a religious marriage in 2021, in a ceremony presided by traditionalist Catholic priest Philippe Lagu\u00e9rie.\nIn 1977, Le Pen inherited a fortune from Hubert Lambert (1934\u20131976), son of the cement industrialist Leon Lambert (1877\u20131952), one of three sons of Lambert Cement founder Hilaire Lambert. Hubert Lambert was a political supporter of Le Pen and a monarchist as well. Lambert's will provided 30 million francs () to Le Pen, as well as his opulent three-storey 11-room mansion at 8 Parc de Montretout, Saint-Cloud, in the western suburbs of Paris. The home had been built by Napoleon III for his chief of staff Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Mocquard. With his wife, he also owned a two-storey townhouse on the Rue Hortense in Rueil-Malmaison and another house in his hometown of La Trinit\u00e9-sur-Mer in Brittany.\nIn the early 1980s, Le Pen's personal security was assured by KO International Company, a subsidiary of VHP Security, a private security firm, and an alleged front organisation for SAC, the \"Service d'Action Civique\" (Civic Action Service), a Gaullist organisation. SAC allegedly employed figures with organized crime backgrounds and from the far-right movement.\nIn April 2024, Jean-Marie Le Pen was placed \"under legal protection\" at the request of his family.\nIllness and death.\nLe Pen was briefly hospitalized after a minor stroke on 2 February 2022. He was hospitalized again on 15 April 2023, after suffering a \"mild heart attack\" and was discharged from the hospital on 3 May.\nIn April 2024, Le Pen experienced another heart attack. In November 2024, he was hospitalized for two weeks for medical examinations related to old age and his family expressed concerns about his general state of health.\nLe Pen died at a care facility in Garches, Hauts-de-Seine, on 7 January 2025, aged 96. He had been in failing health due to complications from the heart attack he suffered in 2024.\nLe Pen's daughter Marine, who succeeded him at the helm of the National Front, learned about his death from journalists on a stopover in Nairobi, Kenya, while travelling from Mayotte to Paris. The announcement of her father's death had first been made to Agence France-Presse (AFP) by the Le Pen family.\nLe Pen was buried in a private ceremony following a Mass in his hometown, La Trinit\u00e9-sur-Mer, on 11 January. A public memorial ceremony was held at the Notre-Dame du Val-de-Gr\u00e2ce church in Paris on 16 January.\nPresident Emmanuel Macron said that history would decide the legacy of Le Pen, while prime minister Fran\u00e7ois Bayrou said \"We knew, by fighting him, what a fighter he was\". Left-winger Jean-Luc M\u00e9lenchon said that respect for the dead and the bereaved could not excuse \"the hatred, racism, Islamophobia and anti-Semitism that he spread\". In Belgium, Vlaams Belang leader Tom Van Grieken praised a \"founding father\" of European nationalism.\nCrowds estimated in the hundreds, in several French cities, celebrated in the street to mark the death of Le Pen. These parties were condemned by French government ministers including Bruno Retailleau and S\u00e9bastien Lecornu. Later, his cemetery was vandalized, which also caused condemnation from French politicians.\nIssues and policy positions.\nDeath penalty.\nLe Pen supported bringing back the death penalty in France.\nControversial statements.\nLe Pen was accused and convicted several times in France and abroad of xenophobia and antisemitism. A Paris court found in February 2005 that his verbal criticisms, such as remarks disparaging Muslims in a 2003 \"Le Monde\" interview, were \"inciting racial hatred\", and he was fined \u20ac10,000 and ordered to pay an additional \u20ac5,000 in damages to the \"Ligue des droits de l'homme\" (League for Human Rights). The conviction and fines were upheld by the Court of Cassation in 2006.\nArguing that his party includes people of various ethnic or religious origins like Jean-Pierre Cohen, Farid Smahi or Huguette Fatna, he attributed some anti-Semitism in France to the effects of Muslim immigration to Europe, and suggested that some part of the Jewish community in France might eventually come to appreciate National Front ideology. Le Pen denied man-made climate change and linked climate science with communism.\nHe also infamously compared gay people to soup with salt, saying \"it's like salt with soup: if there is not enough, it's too bland, and if it's too much, it's undrinkable\", and compared pedophilia with \"the exaltation of homosexuality\".\nProsecution concerning Holocaust denial.\nLe Pen made several provocative statements concerning the Holocaust, which were legally ruled to be Holocaust denial. He was convicted of racism or inciting racial hatred at least six times. For example, on 13 September 1987, he said, \"I ask myself several questions. I'm not saying the gas chambers didn't exist. I haven't seen them myself. I haven't particularly studied the question. But I believe it's just a detail in the history of World War II.\" For Le Pen, the French deportation of 76,000 Jews from France to Nazi concentration camps, where they were killed, is a trivial matter, and he denies that 6 million Jews were killed, saying \"I don't think there were that many deaths. There weren't 6\u00a0million ... There weren't mass murders as it's been said.\" He was eventually condemned under the Gayssot Act to pay 1.2\u00a0million francs (\u20ac183,200).\nIn 1997, the European Parliament, of which Le Pen was then a member, removed his parliamentary immunity so that Le Pen could be tried by a German court for comments he made at a December 1996 press conference before the German Republikaner party. Echoing his 1987 remarks in France, Le Pen stated: \"If you take a 1,000-page book on World War II, the concentration camps take up only two pages and the gas chambers 10 to 15 lines. This is what one calls a detail.\" In June 1999, a Munich court found this statement to be \"minimizing the Holocaust, which caused the deaths of six million Jews,\" and convicted and fined Le Pen for his remarks. Le Pen retorted sarcastically: \"I understand now that it's the Second World War which is a detail of the history of the gas chambers.\"\nPublic image.\nPublic perception.\nLe Pen was often nicknamed the \"Menhir\", due to his \"granitic nature\" as he was perceived as someone who did not give way to pressure or who could not be easily knocked down. It also connected him to France's Celtic origins. Le Pen was often described as one of the most flamboyant and charismatic orators in Europe, whose speech blended folksy humour, crude attacks and rhetorical finesse.\nLe Pen was a polarizing figure in France: opinions regarding him tend to be quite strong. A 2002 Ipsos poll showed that while 22% of the electorate had a good or very good opinion of Le Pen, and 13% an unfavorable opinion, 61% had a very unfavorable opinion. Critics called him \"The Devil of the Republic\".\nLe Pen and the National Front were described by much of the media and nearly all commentators as extreme far right. Le Pen himself and the rest of his party disagreed with this label; earlier in his political career, Le Pen described his position as \"neither right, nor left, but French\" (\"ni droite, ni gauche, fran\u00e7ais\"). He later described his position as right-wing and opposed to the \"socialo-communists\" and other right-wing parties, which he deemed are not real right-wing parties. At other times, for example during the 2002 election campaign, he declared himself \"socially left-wing, economically right-wing, nationally French\" (\"socialement \u00e0 gauche, \u00e9conomiquement \u00e0 droite, nationalement fran\u00e7ais\"). He further contended that most of the French political and media class are corrupt and out of touch with the real needs of the common people, and that they conspired to exclude Le Pen and his party from mainstream politics. Le Pen criticized the other political parties as the \"establishment\" and lumped all major parties (Communist, Socialist, Union for French Democracy (UDF) and Rally for the Republic (RPR)) into the \"Gang of Four\" (\"la bande des quatre\"\u00a0\u2013 an allusion to the Gang of Four during China's Cultural Revolution).\nRelations with other groups.\nSome of Le Pen's statements led other far-right groups, such as the Austrian Freedom Party, and some National Front supporters, to distance themselves from him. Controversial Dutch anti-Islam lawmaker Geert Wilders, who has often been accused of being far-right, also criticized Le Pen, stating \"we'll never join up with the fascists and Mussolinis of Italy\". Bruno M\u00e9gret left the National Front to found his own party (the National Republican Movement, MNR), claiming that Le Pen kept the Front away from the possibility of gaining power. M\u00e9gret wanted to emulate Gianfranco Fini's success in Italy by making it possible for right-wing parties to ally themselves with the Front, but claimed that Le Pen's attitude and outrageous speech prevented this.\nLe Pen's daughter Marine leads an internal movement of the Front that wants to \"normalize\" the National Front, \"de-enclave\" it, have a \"culture of government\" etc.; however, relations with Le Pen and other supporters of the hard line are complex. Le Pen's National Front electoral successes along with the party gaining wider public prominence led to suggestions for the renewal of the pan-European alliance of extreme-right parties with Le Pen as its figurehead, a suggestion that eventually did indeed bring about the establishment of the Europe of Nations and Freedom group in the European Parliament, chaired by Le Pen's daughter Marine.\nOn 22 March 2018, Le Pen joined the Alliance for Peace and Freedom. In October 2021, he endorsed \u00c9ric Zemmour for the 2022 French presidential election over his daughter Marine.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nNews articles and videos\nCriticism"}
{"id": "49958", "revid": "47604297", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49958", "title": "Malay", "text": "Malay may refer to: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "49959", "revid": "48137699", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49959", "title": "Balinese", "text": "Balinese may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "49960", "revid": "40144701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49960", "title": "Manfred Winkelhock", "text": "German racing driver (1951\u20131985)\nManfred Winkelhock (6 October 1951 \u2013 12 August 1985) was a German racing driver, who competed in Formula One between and . \nBorn and raised in Waiblingen, Winkelhock was the older brother of Joachim and Thomas. Winkelhock participated in 56 Formula One Grands Prix for Arrows, ATS, Brabham and RAM, with a best finish of fifth at the 1982 Brazilian Grand Prix. \nDuring the 1985 1000 km of Mosport, Winkelhock died following a single-vehicle collision with a concrete barrier, driving the Porsche 962C for Kremer. His son Markus went on to also compete in Formula One at the 2007 European Grand Prix for Spyker, and won the FIA GT1 World Championship in 2012 with M\u00fcnnich.\nRacing career.\nBorn in Waiblingen on 6 October 1951, Winkelhock was the older brother of Joachim and Thomas. He began racing in Formula Two in 1978 and survived a major crash at N\u00fcrburgring Nordschleife circuit. The front wing of his March 802, still made of metal at that time, got bent early in the race, suffering some loss of downforce. Despite driving carefully, in the fourth lap, when going over the very steep rise of Quiddelbacher H\u00f6he before Flugplatz corner, the car suddenly lifted its nose, went airborne, somersaulted backwards and then sideways.\nWinkelhock along with Herv\u00e9 Poulain and Marcel Mignot drove a BMW M1 Group 4 racing version that was painted by pop artist Andy Warhol for the 1979 24 Hours of Le Mans. They came in 6th overall and 2nd in their class.\nWinkelhock's first attempt at qualifying for a Formula One Grand Prix race was in Italy, when he stood in for the injured Jochen Mass at Arrows. He was able to land a drive with ATS in . As BMW became the team's engine supplier in , he qualified well on several occasions in 1983 and , but the car was rarely reliable, so there were few results and a lot of accidents.\nHis son, Markus Winkelhock, is also a racing driver. He participated in only one F1 race, the European GP at the N\u00fcrburgring in 2007, and led for six laps due to rain.\nDeath.\nAt the same time, Winkelhock was a regular sports car and touring car driver, winning the 1000km Monza with Marc Surer in 1985. He was killed in the summer of 1985 when he crashed heavily at the fearsome Turn 2 at Mosport Park of Bowmanville near Toronto, Ontario, Canada, during the Budweiser 1000\u00a0km World Endurance Championship event, driving a Porsche 962C for Kremer Racing with co-driver Marc Surer. The crash was Sunday, 11 August and he succumbed to injuries the next day while at the Sunnybrook Medical Center in Toronto. \nAt the time of Winkelhock's death, he was a driver for the Skoal Bandit sponsored RAM Racing team in Formula One, though it had been a frustrating season with a best finish of 12th in the 1985 French Grand Prix at Paul Ricard. His death saw him replaced by Northern Irish driver Kenny Acheson, though lack of money saw the team fold before the end of the season.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49961", "revid": "2308770", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49961", "title": "Diego de Nicuesa", "text": "Spanish conquistador and royal governor of Panama\nDiego de Nicuesa (; died 1511) was a Spanish conquistador and explorer. He was the first governor of Veragua, a region stretching from Panama to northern Nicaragua, during the Spanish colonial period.\nBackground.\nDiego arrived Santo Domingo in April 1502, with Nicol\u00e1s de Ovando y C\u00e1ceres' flotilla.\nIn 1506, Nicuesa was given the job of governing Costa Rica, but ran aground off the coast of Panama. He made his way north overland, against resistance from the native population. The combination of guerrilla warfare and tropical disease killed half his expedition before he gave up.\nIn 1508, Diego de Nicuesa received a land grant at Veragua from Ferdinand\u00a0II of Aragon, the Spanish monarch. He became founder and governor of Castilla de Oro, in what is now Panama, one of the first two Spanish settlements on the American mainland.\nFinal events and disappearance.\nIn 1510 he founded the colony of Nombre de Dios. The colony suffered from hunger, hostile natives, and illness, and was ultimately saved by the arrival of Colmenares, a companion who was coming after with supplies. The party abandoned the colony to sail to the more prosperous colony of Santa Mar\u00eda la Antigua del Dari\u00e9n, which had been established by the conquistador Vasco N\u00fa\u00f1ez de Balboa without the knowledge of Nicuesa. Informed by Colmenares of the new colony established within the borders of his territory, he headed to the colony to punish the colonists and take possession of it. But the colonists of Santa Maria were warned of the governor's intent and denied him entry. While most of Nicuesa's men were granted the right to stay in Balboa's colony, Nicuesa and 17 loyal followers were put out to sea. Nicuesa headed for the \"Santo Domingo\", but the ship disappeared and he was never seen again.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "49963", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49963", "title": "Giant redwood", "text": ""}
{"id": "49965", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49965", "title": "Bartholomaeus Nigrinus", "text": "Bartholomaeus Schwartz (latinised to Bartholomaeus Nigrinus) (1595\u00a0\u2013 12 October 1646) was a German protestant theologian, pastor of the St. Peter and St. Paul's Church in Danzig (Gda\u0144sk), Royal Prussia (now Poland).\nBiography.\nBartholomaeus Schwartz was born in 1595 in B\u0105k\u00f3w, of Socinian parents. He might be related to (1588-1638), a German philosopher.\nHaving converted to Lutheranism, he later became a Calvinist minister at Gda\u0144sk. The famous poet Martin Opitz, a friend, lodged at pastor Nigrinus' place, while visiting Gda\u0144sk. Both Opitz and Nigrinus corresponded with Robert Fludd. Fludd was connected to the Rosicrucian movement and the Gda\u0144sk edition of the Rosicrucian manifesto \"Fama Fraternitatis\" was published by the printer Andreas H\u00fcnefeld (\"Huenefeldt\" or \"Hunsfeldus\") (1609-1652), a friend of Nigrinus. Nigrinus was also a friend and disciple of the Czech philosopher John Amos Comenius, who has often been linked to the Rosicrucian movement.\nAfter the death of Opitz, Nigrinus and two of his associates edited his poems (Gda\u0144sk: H\u00fcnefeld, 1639).\nLater in his life, Nigrinus converted to Catholicism. His conversion was not publicized until 1642. After his conversion, he was appointed confidential secretary to W\u0142adys\u0142aw IV.\nNigrinus maintained, before the king and several bishops, that it would be possible to unite all Christian churches by means of a friendly discussion between some chosen doctors of the different confessions. The king adopted the advice of Nigrinus, and resolved to call to a friendly meeting (\"Colloquium Charitativum\"), a number of divines of all the Christian confessions. He communicated his idea to the primate Maciej \u0141ubie\u0144ski and Pope Innocent X, and ordered, as a preparatory step for the intended meeting, the convocation of a Roman Catholic synod, which was held at Warsaw towards the end of the year 1643. The meeting was finally called to convene at Toru\u0144, on October 10, 1644. The date was later extended to August 28, 1645; but when it convened it was soon made evident that a union of Protestants and Catholics was out of the question, the latter refusing to give up communion under one kind, the former to accept papal supremacy; and after several protests had been made on both sides, the inutility of continuing the discussions became evident, and the \"colloquium\" was closed on November 21 with much less solemnity than it had been opened. Instead of producing, as had been hoped, a reconciliation of the adverse confessions, or even an approximation to it, the \"colloquium\" rather increased their mutual acrimony; and each party published pamphlets, charging its opponents with the ill success of the congress. After this we hear no more of Nigrinus."}
