{"id": "50877", "revid": "1318231675", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50877", "title": "Politics of Madagascar", "text": " \nThe politics of Madagascar take place in a framework of a semi-presidential representative democratic republic, with a pluralist multi-party system. The President of Madagascar is head of state and the Prime Minister of Madagascar is head of government. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the bicameral parliament, which is composed of the Senate and the National Assembly. The Judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.\nPolitical history.\nMadagascar's first President, Philibert Tsiranana, was elected when his Social Democratic Party gained power at independence in 1960 and was reelected without opposition in March 1972. However, he resigned only 2 months later in response to massive anti-government demonstrations. The unrest continued, and Tsiranana's successor, Gen. Gabriel Ramanantsoa, resigned on February 5, 1975, handing over executive power to Lt. Col. Richard Ratsimandrava, who was assassinated 6 days later. A provisional military directorate then ruled until a new government was formed in June 1975, under Didier Ratsiraka.\nDuring the 16 subsequent years of President Ratsiraka's rule, Madagascar continued under a government committed to revolutionary socialism based on the 1975 Constitution establishing a highly centralized state. During this period a strategy of nationalization of private enterprises, centralization of the economy and \"Malgasization\" of the education system crippled the economy, leaving traces even today of a highly centralized economic system and a high level of illiteracy. National elections in 1982 and 1989 returned Ratsiraka for a second and third 7-year presidential term. For much of this period, only limited and restrained political opposition was tolerated, with no direct criticism of the president permitted in the press.\nWith an easing of restrictions on political expression, beginning in the late 1980s, the Ratsiraka regime came under increasing pressure to make fundamental changes. In response to a deteriorating economy, Ratsiraka relaxed socialist economic policies and instituted some liberal, private-sector reforms. These, along with political reforms like the elimination of press censorship in 1989 and the formation of more political parties in 1990, were insufficient to placate a growing opposition movement known as Hery Velona (\"Active Forces\"). A number of already existing political parties and their leaders, among them Albert Zafy and Manandafy Rakotonirina, anchored this movement which was especially strong in Antananarivo and the surrounding high plateau.\nIn response to largely peaceful mass demonstrations and crippling general strikes, Ratsiraka replaced his prime minister in August 1991 but suffered an irreparable setback soon thereafter when his troops fired on peaceful demonstrators marching on Iavoloha, the suburban presidential palace, killing more than 30.\nIn an increasingly weakened position, Ratsiraka acceded to negotiations on the formation of a transitional government. The resulting \"Panorama Convention\" of October 31, 1991, stripped Ratsiraka of nearly all of his powers, created interim institutions, and set an 18-month timetable for completing a transition to a new form of constitutional government. The High Constitutional Court was retained as the ultimate judicial arbiter of the process.\nIn March 1992, a widely representative National Forum organized by the FFKM (Malagasy Christian Council of Churches) drafted a new Constitution. Troops guarding the proceedings clashed with pro-Ratsiraka \"federalists\" who tried to disrupt the forum in protest of draft constitutional provisions preventing the incumbent president from running again. The text of the new Constitution was put to a nationwide referendum in August 1992 and approved by a wide margin, despite efforts by federalists to disrupt balloting in several coastal areas.\nPresidential elections were held on November 25, 1992, after the High Constitutional Court had ruled, over Hery Velona objections, that Ratsiraka could become a candidate. Runoff elections were held in February 1993, and the leader of the Hery Velona movement, Albert Zafy, defeated Ratsiraka. Zafy was sworn in as President on March 27, 1993. After President Zafy's impeachment by the National Assembly in 1996 and the short quasi-presidency of Norbert Ratsirahonana, the 1997 elections once again pitted Zafy and Ratsiraka, with Ratsiraka this time emerging victorious. A National Assembly dominated by members of President Ratsiraka'a political party AREMA subsequently passed the 1998 Constitution, which considerably strengthened the presidency.\nIn December 2001, a presidential election was held in which both major candidates claimed victory. The Ministry of the Interior declared incumbent Ratsiraka of the AREMA party victorious. Marc Ravalomanana contested the results and claimed victory. A political crisis followed in which Ratsiraka supporters cut major transport routes from the primary port city to the capital city, a stronghold of Ravalomanana support. Sporadic violence and considerable economic disruption continued until July 2002 when Ratsiraka and several of his prominent supporters fled to exile in France. In addition to political differences, ethnic differences played a role in the crisis and continue to play a role in politics. Ratsiraka is from the coastal Betsimisaraka tribe and Ravalomanana comes from the highland Merina tribe.\nAfter the end of the 2002 political crisis, President Ravalomanana began many reform projects, forcefully advocating \"rapid and durable development\" and the launching of a battle against corruption. December 2002 legislative elections gave his newly formed TIM (Tiako-I-Madagasikara) (I Love Madagascar) Party a commanding majority in the National Assembly. November 2003 municipal elections were conducted freely, returning a majority of supporters of the president, but also significant numbers of independent and regional opposition figures.\nFollowing the crisis of 2002, the President replaced provincial governors with appointed PDSs (Presidents des Delegations Speciales). Subsequent legislation established a structure of 22 regions to decentralize administration. In September 2004, the Government named 22 Regional Chiefs, reporting directly to the President, to implement its decentralization plans. Financing and specific powers for the regional administrations remain to be clarified.\nAfter being re-elected in 2006, Ravalomanana's government was dissolved in March 2009, in a militarily-backed uprising led by Andry Rajoelina. Rajoelina formed a High Transitional Authority of which he was the 'Transitional Head of State'. So far he has held a referendum, in November 2010, to update the constitution. Despite an alleged coup during, this was approved, and new elections were scheduled to be held in July 2013.\nThe second round of the postponed presidential elections was held in December 2013 and the results were announced in January 2014. The winner and the next president was Hery Rajaonarimampianina. He was backed by Rajoelina who led the 2009 coup and still was very influential political figure.\nIn 2018 the first round of the presidential election was held on 7 November and the second round was held on 10 December. Three former presidents and the most recent president were the main candidates of the elections. Former president Andry Rajoelina won the second round of the elections. He was previously president from 2009 to 2014. Former president Marc Ravalomana lost the second round and he did not accept the results because of allegations of fraud. Ravalomana was president from 2002 to 2009. The most recent president Hery Rajaonarimampianina received very modest support in the first round. In January 2019 the High Constitutional Court declared Rajoelina as the winner of the elections and the new president. In June 2019 parliamentary elections the party of president Andry Rajoelina won absolute majority of the seats of the National Assembly. It received 84 seats and the supporters of former president Ravalomana got only 16 seats of 151 seats of the National Assembly. 51 seats of deputies were independent or represented small parties. President Rajoelina could rule as a strongman.\nIn November 2023, Andry Rajoelina was re-elected to another term with 58.95% of the vote in the first round of the election. Turnout was 46.36%, the lowest in a presidential election in the country's history.\nOn 11 October 2025, following weeks of protests against the government, the CAPSAT unit of the Malagasy army launched a coup d'\u00e9tat. Rajoelina fled the country and was impeached. On 17 October 2025, Colonel Michael Randrianirina was sworn in as the new president of Madagascar.\nExecutive branch.\nThe president is elected by direct universal suffrage for a 5-year term, renewable twice.\nA Prime Minister and council of ministers carries out day-to-day management of government. The President appoints the Prime Minister. The Prime Minister and members of Parliament initiate legislation and the government executes it. The President can dissolve the National Assembly. For its part, the National Assembly can pass a motion of censure and require the Prime Minister and council of ministers to step down. The Constitutional Court approves the constitutionality of new laws.\nLegislative branch.\nThe Parliament has two chambers. The National Assembly (\"Antenimieram-Pirenena/Assembl\u00e9e Nationale\") has 160 members, elected for a five-year term in single-member and two-member constituencies. The Senate (\"S\u00e9nat\") has 33 members; 22 are indirectly elected, one from each of the 22 regions of Madagascar, and 11 are appointed by the President.\nAdministrative divisions.\nTerritorial administration is to be determined by legislation. In an effort to decentralize administration, the constitution calls for the six provinces (faritany) to become autonomous. The provinces are Antananarivo, Antsiranana, Fianarantsoa, Mahajanga, Toamasina, Toliara.\nInternational organization participation.\nACCT, ACP, AfDB, ECA, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, InOC, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO (correspondent), ITU, NAM, OAU, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WCO, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50878", "revid": "602857", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50878", "title": "Economy of Madagascar", "text": "The economy of Madagascar is US$19.38 billion by gross domestic product as of 2025, being a market economy and is supported by an agricultural industry and emerging tourism, textile and mining industries. Malagasy agriculture produces tropical staple crops such as rice and cassava, as well as cash crops such as vanilla and coffee.\nMadagascar's status as a developing nation exempts Malagasy exports from customs protocol in some areas, notably the United States and the European Union. These exemptions have supported the growth of the Malagasy textile industry. Despite natural resources and developing industries, the 2009 Malagasy political crisis\u2014considered by the international community to be an illegal coup\u2014deterred foreign investments in Madagascar and caused the Malagasy economy to decline. Foreign investments have resumed following the resumption of elections in early 2014. Madagascar is a least developed country according to United Nations.\nHistory.\nOver the years, successive French colonial and independence-era governments have sought to modernize Madagascar's economy. The first modern land use projects were established by French settlers or Creole immigrants from the Mascarene Islands in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. They introduced cash crops such as coffee, sugarcane, vanilla, cloves, and sisal for export. They also built small-scale mines to exploit the island's graphite, chromite, and uranium resources. To facilitate the processing and marketing of these commodities, the immigrants established a number of financial and commercial enterprises and built a small, modern railroad system. They then brought some Malagasy into this modern sector of the economy, either as wage laborers and sharecroppers on the foreign-owned plantations, or as low-level employees in the civil service or business enterprises. The foreign owners and managers, however, retained almost all of the benefits from these operations.\nAfter independence the Philibert Tsiranana regime did little to change the French domination of the modern sector of the economy, despite increasing outrage at this continued economic dependence. This anger, together with growing concern over an unequal distribution of wealth that left the southern and western parts of the island in relative poverty, caused the ouster of Tsiranana in 1972 and a shift in economic policy. The new military regime led by Gabriel Ramanantsoa cut most ties with France and began to Malagachize the economy. Slow progress toward this goal, however, helped to precipitate the end of the Ramanantsoa regime in mid-1975. Only with the rise of Didier Ratsiraka to the presidency later that year did the takeover of formerly French-dominated enterprises begin in earnest.\nRatsiraka's policy of \"revolution from above\" went beyond confiscating or buying out foreign firms and turning them over to Malagasy ownership; he intended to socialize the economy by nationalizing major enterprises. The state acquired majority or minority ownership in nearly all large financial, transportation, marketing, mining, and manufacturing enterprises. Firms left under private control were required to buy and sell at state-controlled prices, and the state closely monitored the repatriation of profits. In the rural sector, Ratsiraka aimed to establish local farming cooperatives. Almost as important as this institutional reform was the regime's intention, announced in an economic plan for the 1978-80 period, to increase dramatically the level of government capital investment in all sectors of the economy in order to improve the availability of goods and services to all.\nBy the start of the 1980s, however, Ratsiraka's attempt to fashion viable socialist institutions and to stimulate the economy through increased investment had failed to improve economic production and welfare. Economic growth throughout the 1970s had not kept pace with the expanding population. Despite the availability of significant agricultural and mineral resources, the economy was less productive than at the start of the decade when the average per capita income was already among the lowest in the world. The only apparent effect of the enhanced level of investment, which reached all-time highs in the 1978-80 period, was to put the country deeply in debt to foreign creditors and, therefore, pave the way for a series of structural adjustment agreements signed with the IMF and the World Bank during the 1980s and the early 1990s. Such agreements were necessary because as a 1993 World Bank study pointed out, between 1971 and 1991 the per capita income of Malagasy dropped 40 percent.\nEventually admitting that adoption of the socialist model of economic centralization and state control was a mistake, the Ratsiraka regime in 1980 initiated a return to a more classic liberal economic model that the Albert Zafy regime wholeheartedly adopted following its inauguration in 1993. The post-1980 Ratsiraka and Zafy regimes have overseen the privatization of parastatals, the disbanding of agricultural marketing boards, the ratification of more liberal investment codes favoring foreign investment, the privatization of the banking industry, diversification of traditional, primary-product exports, and greater investment in food production. The Zafy regime has made reinvigoration of the Malagasy economy its number-one priority.\nAs of 1994, the majority of Malagasy continued to earn their livelihoods in ways fundamentally unchanged from those of their ancestors \u2014 small-scale farms supporting traditional irrigated rice cultivation, dryland farming of cassava and other foods, zebu cattle herding, or the raising of cash crops.\nOn April 2, 2025, Donald Trump declared \"reciprocal tariffs\" of 47% on Madagascar. Madagascar produces around 80% of the world's vanilla, and such export was put at risk by Trump's new policy towards Madagascar exporters.\nAgriculture.\nMadagascar produced, in 2018:\nIn addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products, like coffee (57 thousand tons), clove (23 thousand tons), cocoa (11 thousand tons), cashew (7 thousand tons) and vanilla (3 thousand tons).\nAgriculture, including fishing and forestry, is Madagascar's largest industry and employs 82% of its labor force. Madagascar's varied climate, ranging from tropical along the coasts, moderate in the highlands and arid in the south, allows for the cultivation of tropical crops such as rice, cassava, beans and bananas. In 2011, agricultural products\u2014especially cloves, vanilla, cacao, sugar, pepper, and coffee\u2014accounted for Madagascar's top twelve exports by value. Madagascar produces the largest vanilla harvest in the world and Malagasy vanilla accounts for 80-85% of the global vanilla market. Madagascar's vanilla market in the US was put at risk in April 2025 following Donald Trump's declaration of \"reciprocal tariffs\" amounting to 47%.\nFishing.\nThe fishing industry is present with 66 industrial fishing vessels. Fees &amp; taxes for fishing licences are estimated at 3.6 billion Ariary (US$80 million) for 2023.\nTextiles.\nExports from Madagascar's Export Processing Zones, located around Antananarivo and Antsirabe, account for the majority of garment exports and are largely exempt from customs restrictions in the United States under the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) and in the European Union under the Everything but Arms (EBA) agreement. \nMining.\nA small but growing part of the economy is based on mining of ilmenite, with investments emerging in recent years, particularly near Tulear and Fort Dauphin. Mining corporation Rio Tinto started production at its Fort Dauphin Mandena mine in January 2009, following several years of preparation. The mining project is highly controversial, with Friends of the Earth and other environmental organizations filing reports to detail their concerns about the mine's effect on the environment and local communities. Gemstone mining is also an important part of Madagascar's economy.\nSeveral major projects are underway in the mining and oil and gas sectors that, if successful, will give a significant boost. In the mining sector, these include the development of coal at Sakoa and nickel near Tamatave. The Ambatovy mine (nickel &amp; cobalt - Sherrit International 40%, Sumitomo 27.5%, Korea Resources 27.5%, SNC-Lavalin 5%) is a huge operation and has cost US$4.76 million to date and is due to start production in 2011. In oil, Madagascar Oil is developing the massive onshore heavy oil field at Tsimiroro and ultra heavy oil field at Bemolanga.\nInvestment climate.\nFollowing the 2002 political crisis, the government attempted to set a new course and build confidence, in coordination with international financial institutions and donors. Madagascar developed a recovery plan in collaboration with the private sector and donors and presented it at a \"Friends of Madagascar\" conference organized by the World Bank in Paris in July 2002. Donor countries demonstrated their confidence in the new government by pledging $1 billion in assistance over five years. The Malagasy Government identified road infrastructure as its principal priority and underlined its commitment to public-private partnership by establishing a joint public-private sector steering committee.\nThe Madagascar-U.S. Business Council was formed as a collaboration between the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) and Malagasian artisan producers in Madagascar in 2002. The U.S.-Madagascar Business Council was formed in the United States in May 2003, and the two organisations continue to explore ways to work for the benefit of both groups.\nThe government of former President Marc Ravalomanana was aggressively seeking foreign investment and had planned to tackle many of the obstacles to such investment, including combating corruption, reforming land-ownership laws, encouraging study of American and European business techniques, and active pursuit of foreign investors. President Ravalomanana rose to prominence through his agro-foods TIKO company, and is known for attempting to apply many of the lessons learned in the world of business to running the government. Prior to Ravalomanana's resignation, concerns had arisen about the conflict of interest between his policies and the activities of his firms. Most notable among them the preferential treatment for rice imports initiated by the government in late 2004 when responding to a production shortfall in the country.\nMadagascar's appeal to investors stems from its competitive, trainable work force. More than 200 investors, particularly garment manufacturers, were organized under the country's export processing zone (EPZ) system since it was established in 1989. The absence of quota limits on textile imports to the European market under the Lom\u00e9 Convention helped stimulate this growth.\nGrowth in output in 1992\u201397 averaged less than the growth rate of the population. Growth has been taken away by a decline in world coffee demand, and the erratic commitment of the government to economic reform.\nDuring a period of solid growth from 1997 to 2001, poverty levels remained stubbornly high, especially in rural areas. A six-month political crisis triggered by a dispute over the outcome of the presidential elections held in December 2001 virtually halted economic activity in much of the country in the first half of 2002. Real GDP dropped 12.7% in 2002, inflows of foreign investment dropped sharply, and the crisis tarnished Madagascar's budding reputation as an AGOA standout and a promising place to invest. After the crisis, the economy rebounded with GDP growth of over 10% in 2003. Currency depreciation and rising inflation in 2004 hampered economic performance, but growth for the year reached 5.3%, with inflation reaching around 25% at the end of the year. In 2005, inflation was brought under control by tight monetary policy of raising the \"Taux Directeur\" (central bank rate) to 16% and tightening reserve requirements for banks. Thus growth was expected to reach around 6.5% in 2005.\nDuring Ravalomanana's presidency, the government adopted a series of business laws and regulations, including the commercial companies law (2003), labor law (2003), regulations on the application of commercial companies law (2004), public procurement law (2004), competition law (2005), foreign exchange law (2006), investment law (2007), and free zones and free enterprises law (2007).\nFood security, vulnerability and risk management.\nDespite a wealth of abundant and diverse natural resources, Madagascar is one of the world's poorest countries. Madagascar holds great potential for agricultural development, mainly due to the large variety of soil types and climatic diversity. Nevertheless, natural hazards (cyclones, drought, locust invasions) combined with old-fashioned farming practices limit production.\nThe standard of living of the Malagasy population has been declining dramatically over the past 25 years. The country has gone from being a net exporter of agricultural products in the 1960s to a net importer since 1971. Inappropriate traditional agricultural methods cause soil to erode and soil quality to decline, and the basis of survival for Madagascar's people is under serious threat.\nEnergy.\nAs of 2018, only 15% of the population of Madagascar has access to electricity. By 2023, this has increased to 34%. Madagascar has a technically feasible hydropower potential of about 180,000 GWh. Less than 1% has been developed so far, with 162 MW of installed hydro capacity producing 61% of the country's electricity. The country has enormous potential for exploiting solar power, but general infrastructure is still lacking.\nPoverty reduction.\nIn 2000, Madagascar embarked on the preparation of a Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) under the Heavily indebted poor countries (HIPC) Initiative. The boards of the IMF and of the World Bank concurred in December 2000 that the country was eligible under the HIPC Initiative, and Madagascar reached the decision point for debt relief. On March 1, 2001, the IMF Board granted the country $103 million for 2001\u201303 under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGR). Resources were intended for improving access to health, education, rural roads, water, and direct support to communities. In addition, on March 7, 2001, the Paris Club approved a debt cancellation of $161 million. On February 28, 2001, the African Development Bank (ADB) approved under the HIPC a debt cancellation of $71.46 million and granted in June 2001 an additional credit of $20 million to fight against AIDS and poverty.\nPartly as a result of these credits but also as a result of previous reforms, average GDP growth exceeded the population growth rate of 2.8% in 1997 (3.5%), 1998 (3.9%), 1999 (4.7%) and 2000 (4.8%).\nIn October 2004, the boards of the IMF and the World Bank determined that Madagascar had reached the completion point under the enhanced HIPC Initiative.\nFacts and figures.\nMain indicators.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132023.\nOther data.\nHousehold income or consumption by percentage share:\n&lt;br&gt;\"lowest 10%:\"\n2.3%\n&lt;br&gt;\"highest 10%:\"\n34.9% (1993)\nIndustrial production growth rate:\n5% (1999 est.)\nElectricity\u00a0\u2013 production:\n1.35 billion kWh (2009 est.)\nElectricity\u00a0\u2013 production by source:\n&lt;br&gt;\"fossil fuel:\"\n69.5%\n&lt;br&gt;\"hydro:\"\n30.5%\n&lt;br&gt;\"nuclear:\"\n0%\n&lt;br&gt;\"other:\"\n0% (2009)\nElectricity\u00a0\u2013 consumption:\n1.256 billion kWh (2009 est.)\nElectricity\u00a0\u2013 exports:\n0 kWh (2010)\nElectricity\u00a0\u2013 imports:\n0 kWh (2010)\nExchange rates:\nMalagasy ariary (MGA) per US dollar -\n2,195 (2012 est.)\n2,025.1 (2011 est.)\n2,090 (2010 est.)\n1,956.2 (2009)\n1,654.78 (2008)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nThe population below the poverty line is 50 percent."}
{"id": "50879", "revid": "1317109467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50879", "title": "Communications in Madagascar", "text": " \nCommunications in Madagascar include newspapers, radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, cinema, and the Internet.\nWidespread poverty and illiteracy severely limit the penetration of television, print media, and the Internet, making radio by far the most important communications medium in the country.\nNewspapers.\nPress freedom.\nWhile the constitution provides for freedom of the press, the ability of the press to criticize the regime is severely limited. In particular the absence of a communications code protecting press freedoms allows authorities to prosecute journalists under libel law and the criminal code whenever the content of their reporting offends the facto regime.\nIn November 2012 the de facto minister of communications stated that assertions harming the \"general interest\" were banned from public media. Gendarmes interrogated the editor-in-chief of \"Le Courrier de Madagascar\" for several hours in April 2012 after he ran a story entitled, \"Governance--the Brothel Takes Hold at High Levels.\" Investigative journalists are often targets of threats and harassment from authorities. In May 2012 police stopped a journalist from \"La Verite\", a pro-regime newspaper, on his way to cover an event in Antananarivo. Police reportedly beat him and broke his arm. All journalists released on bail remained subject to rearrest at any time.\nRadio and television.\nFormer president, Marc Ravalomanana, and current leader Andry Rajoelina own broadcasting outlets.\nMedia restrictions.\nAlthough the law provides for freedom of speech, authorities severely restrict freedom of speech by intimidating opponents and resorting to imprisonment or violence when threats fail to dissuade critics. The de facto minister of communications targeted those who expressed dissent, sending official warning letters to news outlets whose coverage displeased the regime. From 2010 through 2012 an estimated 80 radio and television station licenses withdrawn and the stations ordered suspend broadcasting immediately. By the end of 2012 they had not been authorized to reopen. In September 2012 the editor of the national television station was suspended, reportedly for having opposition politicians on the air. Authorities also suspend journalists who continue to broadcast despite government warnings. To maintain access to sources and remain safe, journalists widely practiced self-censorship.\nOn 2 May 2012, authorities imprisoned the editors of the private radio station Free FM, Lalatiana Rakotondrazafy and Fidel Razara Pierre, for a two-day investigation following a libel suit brought by Mamy Ravatomanga, a well-known backer of the de facto regime. Following a series of public rallies that same month marking the first anniversary of Free FM and calling for greater press freedom, the radio's editors were charged with provoking outrage against the regime, destruction of public goods, mounting opposition to security forces, and holding a public demonstration without authorization. On 22 July 2012, authorities closed the radio station, and the two journalists and another colleague went into hiding. By the end of 2012 Free FM remained closed. But after a deal consented with the two journalists and the regime, initiated by Mamy Ravatomanga, Lalatiana Rakotondrazafy is free and become the allied of the Rajoelina's regime.\nShortwave relay stations.\nIn 2013, the government of Madagascar and Malagasy Global Business S.A. signed an agreement to operate the Madagascar relay station in Talata-Volonondry. Among its customers are Radio Netherlands Worldwide, NHK World-Japan, BBC World Service, Deutsche Welle, Vatican Radio, Adventist World Radio and Free Press Unlimited.\nInternet.\nInternet censorship and surveillance.\nThere are generally no restrictions on access to the Internet, or reports that the de facto government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms. However, the de facto minister of communication made several statements throughout 2012 about restricting the Internet.\nPolitical groups, parties, and activists use the Internet extensively to advance their agendas, share news, and criticize other parties. Although there have been allegations of technical sabotage of some Web sites, the Internet is considered among the more reliable sources of information, as many Internet servers were outside the country and cannot be regulated by the regime.\nThe constitution and law provide for freedom of speech and press, but the de facto regime and military actors actively and systematically impeded the exercise of freedoms of expression and of the press. The law prohibits arbitrary Interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence, but homes and workplaces of opposition groups are subject to arbitrary searches without warrants. Regime security personnel also punished family members for alleged offenses committed by individuals.\nPredator Files.\nIn October 2023, \"Mediapart\" newspaper revealed that the Malagasy presidency acquired the Predator spyware in 2021 illegally and used it to spy on several political opponents, including the opposition newspaper, Roland Rasoamaharo, who was subsequently imprisoned. According to two technical investigations, Predator was also used by the Malagasy government during the 2023 elections.\nAn investigation by the Central Office for the Fight against Crimes Against Humanity, Genocides and War Crimes (OCLCH) established that the leaders of Nexa and Intellexa exported equipment and software to hack phones to the Malagasy presidency, without any authorization.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50880", "revid": "43252809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50880", "title": "Transport in Madagascar", "text": "Paved and unpaved roadways, as well as railways, provide the main forms of transport in Madagascar. Madagascar has approximately of paved roads and 836 km of rail lines. In 2010, Madagascar had of navigable waterways. \nRailways.\nIn 2018, Madagascar reported 836 km of rail lines. There are several rail lines and stations in Madagascar. Antananarivo is connected to Toamasina, Ambatondrazaka and Antsirabe by rail, and another rail line connects Fianarantsoa to Manakara. The northern railway (TCE) is concessioned to Madarail. The southern line, Fianarantsoa-C\u00f4te-Est railway (FCE), is a parastatal line. \nWaterways.\nThe relatively short rivers of Madagascar are typically of local importance only; isolated streams and small portions of Lakandranon' Ampangalana (Canal des Pangalanes) are navigated by pirogue. Coastal inter-city transport routes are found along the west coast.\nMadagascar has 600 km of waterways, 432 km of which are navigable.\nPorts and harbors.\nThe most important seaport in Madagascar is located on the east coast at Toamasina. Ports at Toliara, Mahajanga, and Antsiranana are significantly less used because of their remoteness. The island's newest port at Port d'Ehola, constructed in 2008 and privately managed by Rio Tinto, will come under state control upon completion of the company's mining project near T\u00f4lanaro around 2038. The country's principal cargo port is Toamasina Autonomous Port.\nAirports.\nThe main international airport in Madagascar is Ivato International Airport in Antananarivo. Air Madagascar services the island's many small regional airports, which offer the only practical means of access to many of the more remote regions during rainy season road washouts. There are 26 airports with paved runways and 57 airports with unpaved runways. In 2018, Madagascar carried 544,458 air passengers. \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50881", "revid": "50344519", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50881", "title": "Madagascar Armed Forces", "text": "Combined military forces of Madagascar\nThe Madagascar Armed Forces (, ) is the national military of Madagascar. The IISS detailed the armed forces in 2012 as including an Army of 12,500+, a Navy of 500, and a 500-strong Air Force.\nThe armed forces were involved in the 2009 Malagasy political crisis and the 2025 Malagasy protests, playing a central role in the subsequent 2025 Malagasy mutiny. During World War II, Malagasy troops fought in France, Morocco, and Syria.\nHistory.\nThe rise of centralized kingdoms among the Sakalava, Merina and other ethnic groups produced the island's first standing armies, first equipped with spears, but later with muskets, cannons and other firearms. King Ralambo (1575\u20131612) raised the first standing army in the highland Kingdom of Imerina with a handful of guns, although for at least two centuries the armies of the Sakalava were much larger and better equipped, possessing thousands of muskets obtained principally through trade with European partners. By the early 19th century, however, the army of the Kingdom of Imerina was able to bring much of the island under Merina control.\nMerina Queen Ranavalona, like her predecessors, utilized the tradition of \"fanampoana\" (service due to the sovereign in lieu of taxes) to conscript a large portion of the population of Imerina into military service, enabling the queen to raise a standing army that was estimated at 20,000 to 30,000 soldiers.\nBy the late 19th century French plans to colonize Madagascar were gaining momentum, leading British mercenaries to provide training to the queen's army in an unsuccessful bid to repel the French troops. Madagascar was colonized in 1896, and during World War II over 46,000 Malagasy soldiers were drafted to fight with the Allies, over 2,000 of whom died fighting for France.\nMadagascar gained political independence and sovereignty over its military in 1960. Since this time Madagascar has never engaged in an armed conflict, whether against another state or within its own borders. As such the armed forces of Madagascar have primarily served a peacekeeping role. However, the military has occasionally intervened to restore order during periods of political unrest. When President Philibert Tsiranana was forced to step down in 1972, a military directorate ensured an interim government before appointing one of its own, Admiral Didier Ratsiraka, to lead the country into its socialist Second Republic. He launched a strategy of obligatory national armed or civil service for all young citizens regardless of gender. The majority were channeled into civil service, including agriculture and education programs for rural development based on the socialist Soviet model. Ratsiraka would also mobilize elements of the military to pacify unarmed protesters, occasionally using violent means. His order to fire upon unarmed protesters in 1989 was the catalyst for transition to the democratic Third Republic in 1992. The military remained largely neutral during the protracted standoff between incumbent Ratsiraka and challenger Marc Ravalomanana in the disputed 2001 presidential elections. By contrast, in 2009 a segment of the army defected to the side of Andry Rajoelina, then-mayor of Antananarivo, in support of his attempt to force President Ravalomanana from power. It is widely believed that payoffs were involved in persuading these military personnel to change camps in support of the \"coup d'\u00e9tat\".\nAs of 2010, the military of Madagascar is composed of the 8,100 paramilitary of the National Gendarmerie and the 13,500 members of the Armed Forces. According to the International Institute of Strategic Studies' Military Balance 2010, the latter includes an Army of 12,500, a Navy of 500 and a 500-strong Air Force, while the CIA Factbook describes the Armed Forces as consisting of the Intervention Force, Aeronaval Force (navy and air) and the Development Force. Military service is voluntary and limited to males aged 18 to 25; every citizen of either gender is required to perform either military or civil service for a minimum of 18 months. However, because of a lack of up-to-date census data, this requirement is not currently enforced. The Gendarmerie recruits Malagasy citizens between the ages of 20 and 30 (or 35 if the recruit has prior military service). Military expenses constituted just over one percent of GDP. Under Ravalomanana, military expenditure doubled from 54 million USD in 2006 to 103 million USD in 2008.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50883", "revid": "38205273", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50883", "title": "United Nations Commission on Human Rights", "text": "Defunct functional commission of the United Nations\nThe United Nations Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) was a functional commission within the overall framework of the United Nations from 1946 until it was replaced by the United Nations Human Rights Council in 2006. It was a subsidiary body of the UN Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC), and was also assisted in its work by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (UNOHCHR). \nIt was the UN's principal mechanism and international forum concerned with the promotion and protection of human rights. The UNCHR successfully introduced the Universal Declaration of Human Rights of 1948. The body's reputation became controversial over time, as many observers saw it as highly politicized and vulnerable to outside pressure. Scholars have found that states with a poor human rights record were more likely to be elected to the body than countries with good records.\nOn March 15, 2006, the UN General Assembly voted overwhelmingly to replace UNCHR with the UN Human Rights Council.\nHistory.\nThe UNCHR was established in 1946 by ECOSOC, and was one of the first two \"Functional Commissions\" set up within the early UN structure (the other being the Commission on the Status of Women). It was a body created under the terms of the United Nations Charter (specifically, under \"Article 68\") to which all UN member states are signatories.\nIt met for the first time in January 1947 and established a drafting committee for the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which was adopted by the United Nations on December 10, 1948.\nThe body went through two distinct phases. From 1947 to 1967, it concentrated on promoting human rights and helping states elaborate treaties, but not on investigating or condemning violators. It was a period of strict observance of the sovereignty principle.\nIn 1967, the Commission adopted interventionism as its policy. The context of the decade was of Decolonization of Africa and Asia, and many countries of the continent pressed for a more active UN policy on human rights issues, especially in light of massive violations in apartheid South Africa. The new policy meant that the Commission would also investigate and produce reports on violations.\nTo allow better fulfillment of this new policy, other changes took place. In the 1970s, the possibility of geographically oriented workgroups was created. These groups would specialize in investigating violations in a particular region or even a single country, as was the case with Chile. With the 1980s came the creation of theme-oriented workgroups, which would specialize in specific types of abuses.\nNone of these measures, however, were able to make the Commission as effective as desired, mainly because of the presence of human rights violators and the politicization of the body. During the following years until its extinction, the UNCHR became increasingly discredited among activists and governments alike.\nThe Commission held its final meeting in Geneva on March 27, 2006, and was replaced by the United Nations Human Rights Council in the same year.\nMandate.\nThe Commission on Human Rights was intended to examine, monitor and publicly report on human rights situations in specific countries or territories (known as country mechanisms or mandates) as well as on major phenomena of human rights violations worldwide (known as thematic mechanisms or mandates). The Human Rights division of the U.N. is also expected to uphold and protect the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.\nStructure.\nAt the time it was extinguished, the Commission consisted of representatives drawn from 53 member states, elected by the members of ECOSOC. There were no permanent members: each year (usually in May), approximately a third of its seats would come up for election and those chosen would be appointed for a three-year term.\nSeats on the Commission were apportioned by region, using the mechanism of the United Nations Regional Groups. During its last year of service in 2005, the representation by region was as follows.\nThe Commission would meet each year in regular session for six weeks during March and April in Geneva, Switzerland. In January 2004, Australia was elected as chair of the 60th Session. In January 2005, Indonesia was elected chair of the 61st Session. Peru was elected chair of the 62nd Session in January 2006. The Commission held its final meeting in Geneva on March 27, 2006.\nSub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights.\nOriginally known as the \"Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities\", this sub-commission became the \"Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights\" in 1999. The sub-commission was the main subsidiary body of the Commission on Human Rights. It was composed of twenty-six experts whose responsibility was to undertake studies, particularly in light of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and make recommendations to the Commission concerning the prevention of discrimination of any kind relating to human rights and fundamental freedoms and the protection of racial, national, religious and linguistic minorities. Membership was selected with regard to equitable geographical distribution.\nThe Sub-Commission established seven Working Groups to investigate specific human rights concerns, including:\nThe United Nations Human Rights Council assumed responsibility for the Sub-Commission when it replaced the Commission on Human Rights in 2006.\nSpecial procedures.\nThe Commission on Human Rights established 30 special procedures, or mechanisms, to address specific country situations or thematic issues such as freedom of expression and opinion, torture, the right to food, and the right to education.\nIndividuals with expertise in particular areas of human rights were appointed by the chair of the Commission to serve as Special Rapporteurs for a maximum of six years. They are unpaid, independent experts who receive personnel and logistical support from the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights for their work. Their main activities are to examine, monitor, advise and publicly report on human rights situations in specific countries or territories. They are able to write to governments about reported violations and conduct fact-finding visits to countries that invite them.\nThe special mechanisms are categorised according to thematic and country mandates.\nSpecial procedures also include working groups made up of up to five experts who monitor and investigate specific human rights concerns. Three groups were established by the Commission:\nThe special procedures are now under the direction of the United Nations Human Rights Council.\nCriticism.\nThe Commission was repeatedly criticized for the composition of its membership. In particular, several of its member countries themselves had dubious human rights records, including states whose representatives had been elected to chair the Commission. Countries with records of human rights abuses like torture, extrajudicial killings, political imprisonment, and disappearances likely sought election to the Commission to project a positive international image. Commission membership also provided some political shelter from criticism of these abuses.\nAnother criticism was that the Commission did not engage in constructive discussion of human rights issues, but was a forum for politically selective finger-pointing and criticism. The desire of states with problematic human rights records to be elected to the Commission was viewed largely as a way to defend themselves from such attacks.\nActivist groups had long expressed concern over the memberships of the China, Zimbabwe, Russia, Saudi Arabia, and Pakistan, and the past memberships of Algeria, Syria, Libya, Uganda, and Vietnam on the Commission. These countries had extensive records of human rights violations, and one concern was that by working against resolutions on the Commission condemning human rights violations, they indirectly promoted despotism and domestic repression.\nOn May 4, 2004, United States Ambassador Sichan Siv walked out of the Commission following the uncontested election of Sudan to the commission and called it an \"absurdity\" in light of Sudan's ethnic cleansing in Darfur. One major consequence of the election of Sudan to the Commission was the lack of willingness of some countries to work through the Commission. For example, on July 30, 2004, it was the United Nations Security Council, not the Commission, that passed a resolution\u2014by 13\u20130, with China and Pakistan abstaining, threatening Sudan with unspecified sanctions if the situation in the Darfur region did not improve within the following 30 days. The reasons given for the action were the attacks by the Janjaweed Arab militias of Sudan on the non-Arab African Muslim population of Darfur, a region in western Sudan.\nThe Commission had also come under repeated criticism from the United States for its unwillingness to address other human rights concerns. In 2001, the United States was voted off the Commission by the other member states, many of which have been criticized for their human rights violations, and in 2003, Syria put forward a proposal to discuss US war crimes in Iraq. However, the American journalist Anne Applebaum wrote that \"the European Union and the United States aren't exempt from blame, either.\" She cited their hesitance in voting to criticize Russia's actions in Chechnya.\nIsrael.\nThe Commission was also criticized by advocates of Israel for bias against Israel. In 2002, Anne Bayefsky, a professor of international law at York University in Toronto, wrote that \"commission members seek to avoid directly criticizing states with human rights problems, frequently by focusing on Israel, a state that, according to analysis of summary records, has for over 30 years occupied 15 percent of commission time and has been the subject of a third of country-specific resolutions\". On April 15, 2002, the Commission approved a resolution affirming the \"legitimate right of the Palestinian people to resist the Israeli occupation in order to free its land and be able to exercise its right of self-determination\". In so doing, the Palestinian people was declared \"fulfilling its mission, one of the goals and purposes of the United Nations\". Of the 53-member commission, 40 countries voted yes, five voted no, and seven abstained. Although widely reported that the resolution condoned resistance to Israel by \"all available means, including armed struggle\", the resolution itself does not contain those words. Alfred Moses, a former United States ambassador to the Commission who is now the chairman of the monitoring group UN Watch, said, \"A vote in favour of this resolution is a vote for Palestinian terrorism.\" In a letter to the Commission on November 15, 2002, following an attack by Palestinians on Israelis in the town of Hebron, Nabil Ramlawi, the Permanent Observer for Palestine at the UN, appealed to the resolution as justification for the attack.\nHuman rights and mental health.\nIn 1977, the Commission formed a \"Sub-Commission to study, with a view to formulating guidelines, if possible, the question of the protection of those detained on the grounds of mental ill-health against treatment that might adversely affect the human personality and its physical and intellectual integrity.\" The sub-commission was charged with \"determin[ing] whether adequate grounds existed for detaining persons on the grounds of mental ill-health.\" The guidelines that resulted, UN Principles for the Protection of Persons with Mental Illness and for the Improvement of Mental Health Care, have been criticized for ignoring and failing to protect the rights of involuntary patients.\nGenocide.\nThe United Nations Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) passed a number of resolutions concerning genocide: UNCHR Decision 9 (XXXV); 1986/18; 1987/25; 1988/28; 1989/16; 1990/19; \"Fiftieth Anniversary of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide\", 1998/10; and \"Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide\", 1999/67.\nIn 1978 the UNCHR endorsed the recommendation of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities to distribute widely the Ruhashyankiko Report.\nIn August 1992, the UNCHR \"condemn[ed] absolutely the concept and practice of 'ethnic cleansing'\" in the former Yugoslavia but did not describe it as genocide. The Commission's resolution was endorsed by the UNCHR parent body, the United Nations Economic and Social Council. In November 1992, the UNCHR \"call[ed] upon all States to consider the extent to which the acts committed in Bosnia ... and in Croatia constitute genocide in accordance with [the Genocide Convention]\".\nAt the request of Canada in May 1994, an emergency meeting was convened to deal with the ongoing genocide in Rwanda. Ren\u00e9 Degni-Segui was appointed as a Special Rapporteur, immediately visited Rwanda and promptly issued a report on the scope of the genocide.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50884", "revid": "9755426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50884", "title": "Chelicerata", "text": "Subphylum of arthropods\nThe subphylum Chelicerata (from Neo-Latin, from fr \" ch\u00e9lic\u00e8re\", from grc \" ' ()\"\u00a0'claw, chela' and \" ' ()\"\u00a0'horn') constitutes one of the major subdivisions of the phylum Arthropoda. Chelicerates include the sea spiders, horseshoe crabs, and arachnids (including harvestmen, scorpions, spiders, solifuges, ticks, and mites, among many others), as well as a number of extinct lineages, such as the eurypterids (sea scorpions) and chasmataspidids.\nChelicerata split from Mandibulata by the mid-Cambrian, as evidenced by stem-group chelicerates like Habeliida and \"Mollisonia\" present by this time. The surviving marine species include the four species of xiphosurans (horseshoe crabs), and possibly the 1,300\u00a0species of pycnogonids (sea spiders), if the latter are indeed chelicerates. On the other hand, there are over 77,000\u00a0well-identified species of air-breathing chelicerates, and there may be about 500,000\u00a0unidentified species.\nLike all arthropods, chelicerates have segmented bodies with jointed limbs, all covered in a cuticle made of chitin and proteins. The chelicerate body plan consists of two tagmata, the prosoma and the opisthosoma \u2013 excepting the mites, which have lost any visible division between these sections. The chelicerae, which give the group its name, are the only appendages that appear before the mouth. In most sub-groups, they are modest pincers used to feed. However, spiders' chelicerae form fangs that most species use to inject venom into prey. The group has the open circulatory system typical of arthropods, in which a tube-like heart pumps blood through the hemocoel, which is the major body cavity. Marine chelicerates have gills, while the air-breathing forms generally have both book lungs and tracheae. In general, the ganglia of living chelicerates' central nervous systems fuse into large masses in the cephalothorax, but there are wide variations and this fusion is very limited in the Mesothelae, which are regarded as the oldest and most basal group of spiders. Most chelicerates rely on modified bristles for touch and for information about vibrations, air currents, and chemical changes in their environment. The most active hunting spiders also have very acute eyesight.\nChelicerates were originally predators, but the group has diversified to use all the major feeding strategies: predation, parasitism, herbivory, scavenging and eating decaying organic matter. Although harvestmen can digest solid food, the guts of most modern chelicerates are too narrow for this, and they generally liquidize their food by grinding it with their chelicerae and pedipalps and flooding it with digestive enzymes. To conserve water, air-breathing chelicerates excrete waste as solids that are removed from their blood by Malpighian tubules, structures that also evolved independently in insects.\nWhile the marine horseshoe crabs rely on external fertilization, air-breathing chelicerates use internal but usually indirect fertilization. Many species use elaborate courtship rituals to attract mates. Most lay eggs that hatch as what look like miniature adults, but all scorpions and a few species of mites keep the eggs inside their bodies until the young emerge. In most chelicerate species the young have to fend for themselves, but in scorpions and some species of spider the females protect and feed their young.\nThe evolutionary origins of chelicerates from the early arthropods have been debated for decades. Although there is considerable agreement about the relationships between most chelicerate sub-groups, the inclusion of the Pycnogonida in this taxon has been questioned, and the exact position of scorpions is still controversial, though they were long considered the most basal of the arachnids.\nVenom has evolved three times in the chelicerates; spiders, scorpions and pseudoscorpions, or four times if the hematophagous secretions produced by ticks are included. In addition there have been unverified descriptions of venom glands in Solifugae. Chemical defense has been found in whip scorpions, shorttailed whipscorpions, harvestmen, beetle mites and sea spiders.\nAlthough the venom of a few spider and scorpion species can be very dangerous to humans, medical researchers are investigating the use of these venoms for the treatment of disorders ranging from cancer to erectile dysfunction. The medical industry also uses the blood of horseshoe crabs as a test for the presence of contaminant bacteria. Mites can cause allergies in humans, transmit several diseases to humans and their livestock, and are serious agricultural pests.\nDescription.\nTrilobitomorpha\nA\nL\nL\nL\nL\nL\nL\nChelicerata\nx\nC\nP\nL\nL\nL\nL\nCi\nCrustacea\nA\nA\nMnd\nMx\nMx\nL\nL\nL\nL\nL\nTracheata\nA\nx\nMnd\nMx\nMx\nL\nL\nL\nL\n acron \n segments contributing to the head \n body segments \nx \n lost during development \n eyes \n nephridia \nO \n nephridia lost during development \nA \n Antenna\nL \n Leg\nC \n Chelicera\nP \n Pedipalp\nCi \n Chilarium\nMnd \n Mandible\nMx \n Maxilla\nFormation of anterior segments across arthropod taxa based on previous hypothesis. Note the antenna-bearing somite 1 was thought to be lost in Chelicerata.\nSegmentation and cuticle.\nThe Chelicerata are arthropods as they have: segmented bodies with jointed limbs, all covered in a cuticle made of chitin and proteins; heads that are composed of several segments that fuse during the development of the embryo; a much reduced coelom; a hemocoel through which the blood circulates, driven by a tube-like heart. Chelicerates' bodies consist of two tagmata, sets of segments that serve similar functions: the foremost one, called the prosoma or cephalothorax, and the rear tagma is called the opisthosoma or abdomen. However, in the Acari (mites and ticks) there is no visible division between these sections.\nThe prosoma is formed in the embryo by fusion of the ocular somite (referred as \"acron\" in previous literatures), which carries the eyes and labrum, with six post-ocular segments (somite 1 to 6), which all have paired appendages. It was previously thought that chelicerates had lost the antennae-bearing somite 1, but later investigations reveal that it is retained and corresponds to a pair of chelicerae or chelifores, small appendages that often form pincers. Somite 2 has a pair of pedipalps that in most sub-groups perform sensory functions, while the remaining four cephalothorax segments (somite 4 to 6) have pairs of legs. In basal forms the ocular somite has a pair of compound eyes on the sides and four pigment-cup ocelli (\"little eyes\") in the middle. The mouth is between somite 1 and 2 (chelicerae and pedipalps).\nThe opisthosoma consists of thirteen or fewer segments, may or may not end with a telson. In some taxa such as scorpion and eurypterid the opisthosoma is divided into two groups, \"mesosoma\" and \"metasoma\". The abdominal appendages of modern chelicerates are missing or heavily modified \u2013 for example in spiders the remaining appendages form spinnerets that extrude silk, while those of horseshoe crabs (Xiphosura) form gills.\nLike all arthropods, chelicerates' bodies and appendages are covered with a tough cuticle made mainly of chitin and chemically hardened proteins. Since this cannot stretch, the animals must molt to grow. In other words, they grow new but still soft cuticles, then cast off the old one and wait for the new one to harden. Until the new cuticle hardens the animals are defenseless and almost immobilized.\nChelicerae and pedipalps.\nChelicerae and pedipalps are the two pairs of appendages closest to the mouth; they vary widely in form and function and the consistent difference between them is their position in the embryo and corresponding neurons: chelicerae are deutocerebral and arise from somite 1, ahead of the mouth, while pedipalps are tritocerebral and arise from somite 2, behind the mouth.\nThe chelicerae (\"claw horns\") that give the sub-phylum its name normally consist of three sections, and the claw is formed by the third section and a rigid extension of the second. However, spiders' have only two sections, and the second forms a fang that folds away behind the first when not in use. The relative sizes of chelicerae vary widely: those of some fossil eurypterids and modern harvestmen form large claws that extended ahead of the body, while scorpions' are tiny pincers that are used in feeding and project only slightly in front of the head.\nIn basal chelicerates, the pedipalps are unspecialized and subequal to the posterior pairs of walking legs. However, in sea spider and arachnids, the pedipalps are more or less specialized for sensory or prey-catching function \u2013 for example scorpions have pincers and male spiders have bulbous tips that act as syringes to inject sperm into the females' reproductive openings when mating.\n\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 Nervous system\n\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 Digestive &amp; excretory\nsystem\n\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 Circulatory system\n\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 Respiratory system\n\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 Reproductive system\n\u00a0\u00a01 Chelicera\n\u00a0\u00a02 Venom gland\n\u00a0\u00a03 Brain\n\u00a0\u00a04 Pumping stomach\n\u00a0\u00a05 Forward aorta branch\n\u00a0\u00a06 Digestive cecum\n\u00a0\u00a07 Heart\n\u00a0\u00a08 Midgut\n\u00a0\u00a09 Malphigian tubules\n10 Stercoral pocket\n11 Rear aorta\n12 Spinneret\n13 Silk gland\n14 Trachea\n15 Ovary (female)\n16 Book lung\n17 Nerve cord\n18 Legs\n19 Pedipalp\nSpider's main organs\nBody cavities and circulatory systems.\nAs in all arthropods, the chelicerate body has a very small coelom restricted to small areas round the reproductive and excretory systems. The main body cavity is a hemocoel that runs most of the length of the body and through which blood flows, driven by a tubular heart that collects blood from the rear and pumps it forward. Although arteries direct the blood to specific parts of the body, they have open ends rather than joining directly to veins, and chelicerates therefore have open circulatory systems as is typical for arthropods.\nRespiratory systems.\nThese depend on individual sub-groups' environments. Modern terrestrial chelicerates generally have both book lungs, which deliver oxygen and remove waste gases via the blood, and tracheae, which do the same without using the blood as a transport system. The living horseshoe crabs are aquatic and have book gills that lie in a horizontal plane. For a long time it was assumed that the extinct eurypterids had gills, but the fossil evidence was ambiguous. However, a fossil of the long eurypterid \"Onychopterella\", from the Late Ordovician period, has what appear to be four pairs of vertically oriented book gills whose internal structure is very similar to that of scorpions' book lungs.\nFeeding and digestion.\nThe guts of most modern chelicerates are too narrow to take solid food. All scorpions and almost all spiders are predators that \"pre-process\" food in preoral cavities formed by the chelicerae and the bases of the pedipalps. However, one predominantly herbivore spider species is known, and many supplement their diets with nectar and pollen. Many of the Acari (ticks and mites) are blood-sucking parasites, but there are many predatory, herbivore and scavenger sub-groups. All the Acari have a retractable feeding assembly that consists of the chelicerae, pedipalps and parts of the exoskeleton, and which forms a preoral cavity for pre-processing food.\nHarvestmen are among the minority of living chelicerates that can take solid food, and the group includes predators, herbivores and scavengers. Horseshoe crabs are also capable of processing solid food, and use a distinctive feeding system. Claws at the tips of their legs grab small invertebrates and pass them to a food groove that runs from between the rearmost legs to the mouth, which is on the underside of the head and faces slightly backwards. The bases of the legs form toothed gnathobases that both grind the food and push it towards the mouth. This is how the earliest arthropods are thought to have fed.\nExcretion.\nHorseshoe crabs convert nitrogenous wastes to ammonia and dump it via their gills, and excrete other wastes as feces via the anus. They also have nephridia (\"little kidneys\"), which extract other wastes for excretion as urine. Ammonia is so toxic that it must be diluted rapidly with large quantities of water. Most terrestrial chelicerates cannot afford to use so much water and therefore convert nitrogenous wastes to other chemicals, which they excrete as dry matter. Extraction is by various combinations of nephridia and Malpighian tubules. The tubules filter wastes out of the blood and dump them into the hindgut as solids, a system that has evolved independently in insects and several groups of arachnids.\nNervous system.\nChelicerate nervous systems are based on the standard arthropod model of a pair of nerve cords, each with a ganglion per segment, and a brain formed by fusion of the ganglia just behind the mouth with those ahead of it. If one assume that chelicerates lose the first segment, which bears antennae in other arthropods, chelicerate brains include only one pair of pre-oral ganglia instead of two. However, there is evidence that the first segment is indeed available and bears the cheliceres.\nThere is a notable but variable trend towards fusion of other ganglia into the brain. The brains of horseshoe crabs include all the ganglia of the prosoma plus those of the first two opisthosomal segments, while the other opisthosomal segments retain separate pairs of ganglia. In most living arachnids, except scorpions if they are true arachnids, \"all\" the ganglia, including those that would normally be in the opisthosoma, are fused into a single mass in the prosoma and there are no ganglia in the opisthosoma. However, in the Mesothelae, which are regarded as the most basal living spiders, the ganglia of the opisthosoma and the rear part of the prosoma remain unfused, and in scorpions the ganglia of the cephalothorax are fused but the abdomen retains separate pairs of ganglia.\nSenses.\nAs with other arthropods, chelicerates' cuticles would block out information about the outside world, except that they are penetrated by many sensors or connections from sensors to the nervous system. In fact, spiders and other arthropods have modified their cuticles into elaborate arrays of sensors. Various touch and vibration sensors, mostly bristles called setae, respond to different levels of force, from strong contact to very weak air currents. Chemical sensors provide equivalents of taste and smell, often by means of setae.\nLiving chelicerates have both compound eyes (only in horseshoe crabs, as the compound eye in the other clades has been reduced to a cluster of no more than five pairs of ocelli), mounted on the sides of the head, plus pigment-cup ocelli (\"little eyes\"), mounted in the middle. These median ocelli-type eyes in chelicerates are assumed to be homologous with the crustacean nauplius eyes and the insect ocelli. The eyes of horseshoe crabs can detect movement but not form images. At the other extreme, jumping spiders have a very wide field of vision, and their main eyes are ten times as acute as those of dragonflies, able to see in both colors and UV-light.\nReproduction.\nHorseshoe crabs use external fertilization; the sperm and ova meet outside the parents' bodies. Despite being aquatic, they spawn on land in the intertidal zone on the beach. The female digs a depression in the wet sand, where she will release her eggs. The male, usually more than one, then releases his sperm onto them. Their trilobite-like larvae have full sets of appendages and eyes. Initially the horseshoe crab larvae begin with two pairs of book-gills, later gaining three more pairs of book-gills as they molt.\nSea spiders also reproduce via external fertilization. The male and female sea spiders release their sperm and eggs into the water where fertilization occurs. The male then collects the eggs and carries them around under his body.\nExcept for Opiliones and some mites, where the male has a penis used for direct fertilization, fertilization in arachnids is indirect. Indirect fertilization happens in two ways: the male deposit his spermatophore (package of sperm) on the ground, which is then picked up by the female, or the male stores his sperm in appendages modified into sperm transfer organs, such as the pedipalps in male spiders, which are inserted into the female genital openings during copulation. Courtship rituals are common, especially in species where the male risks being eaten before mating. Most arachnids lay eggs, but all scorpions and some mites are viviparous, giving birth to live young (even more mites are ovoviviparous, but most are oviparous). Female pseudoscorpions carry their eggs in a brood pouch on the belly, where the growing embryos feeds on a nutritive fluid provided by the mother during development, and are therefore matrotrophic.\nLevels of parental care for the young range from zero to prolonged. Scorpions carry their young on their backs until the first molt, and in a few semi-social species the young remain with their mother. Some spiders care for their young, for example a wolf spider's brood cling to rough bristles on the mother's back, and females of some species respond to the \"begging\" behavior of their young by giving them their prey, provided it is no longer struggling, or even regurgitate food.\nEvolutionary history.\nFossil record.\nThere are large gaps in the chelicerates' fossil record because, like all arthropods, their exoskeletons are organic and hence their fossils are rare except in a few lagerst\u00e4tten where conditions were exceptionally suited to preserving fairly soft tissues. The Burgess Shale animals like \"Sidneyia\" from about https://\u00a0million years ago have been classified as chelicerates, the latter because its appendages resemble those of the Xiphosura (horseshoe crabs). However, cladistic analyses that consider wider ranges of characteristics place neither as chelicerates. There is debate about whether \"Fuxianhuia\" from earlier in the Cambrian period, about https://\u00a0million years ago, was a chelicerate. Another Cambrian fossil, \"Kodymirus\", was originally classified as an aglaspid but may have been a eurypterid and therefore a chelicerate. If any of these was closely related to chelicerates, there is a gap of at least 43\u00a0million years in the record between true chelicerates and their nearest not-quite chelicerate relatives.\n\"Sanctacaris\", member of the family Sanctacarididae from the Burgess Shale of Canada, represents the oldest occurrence of a confirmed chelicerate, Middle Cambrian in age. Although its chelicerate nature has been doubted for its pattern of tagmosis (how the segments are grouped, especially in the head), a restudy in 2014 confirmed its phylogenetic position as the oldest chelicerate. Another fossil of the site, \"Mollisonia\", is considered a basal chelicerate and it has the oldest known chelicerae and proto-book gills.\nThe eurypterids have left few good fossils and one of the earliest confirmed eurypterid, \"Pentecopterus decorahensis\", appears in the Middle Ordovician period https://\u00a0million years ago, making it the oldest eurypterid.\nUntil recently the earliest known xiphosuran fossil dated from the Late Llandovery stage of the Silurian https:// 428, but in 2008 an older specimen described as \"Lunataspis aurora\" was reported from about https://\u00a0million years ago in the Late Ordovician.\nThe oldest known arachnid is the trigonotarbid \"Palaeotarbus jerami\", from about https://\u00a0million years ago in the Silurian period, and had a triangular cephalothorax and segmented abdomen, as well as eight legs and a pair of pedipalps.\n\"Attercopus fimbriunguis\", from https://\u00a0million years ago in the Devonian period, bears the earliest known silk-producing spigots, and was therefore hailed as a spider, but it lacked spinnerets and hence was not a true spider. Rather, it was likely sister group to the spiders, a clade which has been named Serikodiastida. Close relatives of the group survived through to the Cretaceous Period. Several Carboniferous spiders were members of the Mesothelae, a basal group now represented only by the Liphistiidae, and fossils suggest taxa closely related to the spiders, but which were not true members of the group were also present during this Period.\nThe Late Silurian \"Proscorpius\" has been classified as a scorpion, but differed significantly from modern scorpions: it appears wholly aquatic since it had gills rather than book lungs or tracheae; its mouth was completely under its head and almost between the first pair of legs, as in the extinct eurypterids and living horseshoe crabs. Fossils of terrestrial scorpions with book lungs have been found in Early Devonian rocks from about https://\u00a0million years ago. The oldest species of scorpion found as of 2021 is \"Dolichophonus loudonensis\", which lived during the Silurian, in present-day Scotland.\nRelationships with other arthropods.\nThe \"traditional\" view of arthropod phylogeny shows chelicerates as less closely related to the other major living groups (crustaceans; hexapods, which includes insects; and myriapods, which includes centipedes and millipedes) than these other groups are to each other. Recent research since 2001, using both molecular phylogenetics (the application of cladistic analysis to biochemistry, especially to organisms' DNA and RNA) and detailed examination of how various extant arthropods' nervous systems develop in the embryos, suggests that chelicerates are most closely related to myriapods, while hexapods and crustaceans are each other's closest relatives. However, analysis including extinct arthropods such as trilobites results in a swing back to the \"traditional\" view, wherein trilobites are placed as the sister-group of the Tracheata (hexapods plus myriapods) and chelicerates as least closely related to the other groups.\n\u00a0Cladogram after O'Flynn et al, 2023, showing possible relationships of Chelicerata to living and extinct arthropod groups:\nMajor sub-groups.\nShultz (2007)'s evolutionary family tree of arachnids \u2013 \u2020 marks extinct groups.\nIt is generally agreed that the Chelicerata contain the classes Arachnida (spiders, scorpions, mites, etc.), Xiphosura (horseshoe crabs) and Eurypterida (sea scorpions, extinct). The extinct Chasmataspidida may be a sub-group within Eurypterida. The Pycnogonida (sea spiders) were traditionally classified as chelicerates, but some features suggest they may be representatives of the earliest arthropods from which the well-known groups such as chelicerates evolved.\nHowever, the structure of \"family tree\" relationships within the Chelicerata has been controversial ever since the late 19th century. An attempt in 2002 to combine analysis of DNA features of modern chelicerates and anatomical features of modern and fossil ones produced credible results for many lower-level groups, but its results for the high-level relationships between major sub-groups of chelicerates were unstable, in other words minor changes in the inputs caused significant changes in the outputs of the computer program used (POY). An analysis in 2007 using only anatomical features produced the cladogram on the right, but also noted that many uncertainties remain. In recent analyses the clade Tetrapulmonata is reliably recovered, but other ordinal relationships remain in flux.\nThe position of scorpions is particularly controversial. Some early fossils such as the Late Silurian \"Proscorpius\" have been classified by paleontologists as scorpions, but described as wholly aquatic as they had gills rather than book lungs or tracheae. Their mouths are also completely under their heads and almost between the first pair of legs, as in the extinct eurypterids and living horseshoe crabs. This presents a difficult choice: classify \"Proscorpius\" and other aquatic fossils as something other than scorpions, despite the similarities; accept that \"scorpions\" are not monophyletic but consist of separate aquatic and terrestrial groups; or treat scorpions as more closely related to eurypterids and possibly horseshoe crabs than to spiders and other arachnids, so that either scorpions are not arachnids or \"arachnids\" are not monophyletic. Cladistic analyses have recovered \"Proscorpius\" within the scorpions, based on reinterpretation of the species' breathing apparatus. This is reflected also in the reinterpretation of \"Palaeoscorpius\" as a terrestrial animal.\nA 2013 phylogenetic analysis (the results presented in a cladogram below) on the relationships within the Xiphosura and the relations to other closely related groups (including the eurypterids, which were represented in the analysis by genera \"Eurypterus\", \"Parastylonurus\", \"Rhenopterus\" and \"Stoermeropterus\") concluded that the Xiphosura, as presently understood, was paraphyletic (a group sharing a last common ancestor but not including all descendants of this ancestor) and thus not a valid phylogenetic group. Eurypterids were recovered as closely related to arachnids instead of xiphosurans, forming the group Sclerophorata within the clade Dekatriata (composed of sclerophorates and chasmataspidids). This work suggested it is possible that Dekatriata is synonymous with Sclerophorata as the reproductive system, the primary defining feature of sclerophorates, has not been thoroughly studied in chasmataspidids. Dekatriata is in turn part of the Prosomapoda, a group including the Xiphosurida (the only monophyletic xiphosuran group) and other stem-genera. A recent phylogenetic analysis of the chelicerates places the Xiphosura within the Arachnida as the sister group of Ricinulei, but others still retrieve a monophyletic Arachnida.\nDiversity.\nAlthough well behind the insects, chelicerates are one of the most diverse groups of animals, with over 77,000 living species that have been described in scientific publications. Some estimates suggest that there may be 130,000 undescribed species of spider and nearly 500,000 undescribed species of mites and ticks. While the earliest chelicerates and the living Pycnogonida (if they are chelicerates) and Xiphosura are marine animals that breathe dissolved oxygen, the vast majority of living species are air-breathers, although a few spider species build \"diving bell\" webs that enable them to live under water. Like their ancestors, most living chelicerates are carnivores, mainly on small invertebrates. However, many species feed as parasites, herbivores, scavengers and detritivores.\nInteraction with humans.\nIn the past, Native Americans ate the flesh of horseshoe crabs, and used the tail spines as spear tips and the shells to bail water out of their canoes. More recent attempts to use horseshoe crabs as food for livestock were abandoned when it was found that this gave the meat a bad taste. Horseshoe crab blood contains a clotting agent, \"limulus amebocyte lysate\", which is used to test antibiotics and kidney machines to ensure that they are free of dangerous bacteria, and to detect spinal meningitis and some cancers.\nCooked tarantula spiders are considered a delicacy in Cambodia, and by the Piaroa Indians of southern Venezuela. Spider venoms may be a less polluting alternative to conventional pesticides as they are deadly to insects but the great majority are harmless to vertebrates. Possible medical uses for spider venoms are being investigated, for the treatment of cardiac arrhythmia, Alzheimer's disease, strokes, and erectile dysfunction.\nBecause spider silk is both light and very strong, but large-scale harvesting from spiders is impractical, work is being done to produce it in other organisms by means of genetic engineering. Spider silk proteins have been successfully produced in transgenic goats' milk,\ntobacco leaves,\nsilkworms,\nand bacteria, and recombinant spider silk is now available as a commercial product from some biotechnology companies.\nIn the 20th century, there were about 100 reliably reported deaths from spider bites, compared with 1,500 from jellyfish stings. Scorpion stings are thought to be a significant danger in less-developed countries; for example, they cause about 1,000 deaths per year in Mexico, but only one every few years in the USA. Most of these incidents are caused by accidental human \"invasions\" of scorpions' nests. On the other hand, medical uses of scorpion venom are being investigated for treatment of brain cancers and bone diseases.\nTicks are parasitic, and some transmit micro-organisms and parasites that can cause diseases in humans, while the saliva of a few species can directly cause tick paralysis if they are not removed within a day or two.\nA few of the closely related mites also infest humans, some causing intense itching by their bites, and others by burrowing into the skin. Species that normally infest other animals such as rodents may infest humans if their normal hosts are eliminated. Three species of mite are a threat to honey bees and one of these, \"Varroa destructor\", has become the largest single problem faced by beekeepers worldwide. Mites cause several forms of allergic diseases, including hay fever, asthma and eczema, and they aggravate atopic dermatitis. Mites are also significant crop pests, although predatory mites may be useful in controlling some of these.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50886", "revid": "4700880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50886", "title": "Rectrices", "text": ""}
{"id": "50887", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50887", "title": "Remiges", "text": ""}
{"id": "50888", "revid": "1319093070", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50888", "title": "Struthioniformes", "text": "Order of birds\nStruthioniformes is an order of birds with only a single extant family, Struthionidae, containing the ostriches. Several other extinct families are known, spanning across the Northern Hemisphere, from the Early Eocene to the early Pliocene, including a variety of flightless forms like the Paleotidae, Geranoididae, Eogruidae and Ergilornithidae, the latter two thought to be closely related to Struthionidae.\nEvolutionary history.\nAccording to Mayr and Zelenkov (2021), all Struthioniformes are united by the following characters: \"a very long and narrow tarsometatarsus with short trochleae for the second and fourth toes, a tubercle next to the pons supratendineus on the distal end of the tibiotarsus, as well as a shortening of all non-ungual phalanges of the fourth toe except for the proximal one\" All known members of the group are thought to have been flightless. Struthioniformes were widely distributed in the Northern Hemisphere during the Eocene, including Paleotididae from Europe, and Geranoididae from North America, and Eogruidae and Ergilornithidae in Asia. The discovery of \"Lumbreornis\", belonging to either Paleotididae or Geranoididae, suggests that Struthiorniformes probably also inhabited South America during the Eocene. Ergilornthidae would persist in Asia into the Early Pliocene, while its sister group Struthionidae likely originated from Asia. Ostriches first appeared in Africa during the early Miocene, around 21 million years ago, before dispersing into Eurasia during the late Miocene, beginning around 12 million years ago.\nTaxonomy.\nAfter Mayr, and Zelenkov (2021)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50896", "revid": "47674541", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50896", "title": "Space station", "text": "Habitable artificial satellite\nA space station (or orbital station) is a spacecraft which remains in orbit and hosts humans for extended periods of time. It is therefore an artificial satellite featuring habitation facilities. The purpose of maintaining a space station varies depending on the program. Most often space stations have been research stations, but they have also served military or commercial uses, such as hosting space tourists.\nSpace stations have been hosting the only continuous presence of humans in space. The first space station was Salyut 1 (1971), hosting the first crew, of the ill-fated Soyuz 11. Consecutively space stations have been operated since Skylab (1973) and occupied since 1987 with the Salyut successor Mir. Uninterrupted human presence in orbital space through space stations has been sustained since the operational transition from the Mir to the International Space Station (ISS), with the latter's first occupation in 2000.\nCurrently there are two fully operational space stations \u2013 the ISS and China's \"Tiangong\" Space Station (TSS), which have been occupied since October 2000 with Expedition 1 and since June 2022 with Shenzhou 14. The highest number of people at the same time on one space station has been 13, first achieved with the eleven day docking to the ISS of the 127th Space Shuttle mission in 2009. The present record for most people on all space stations at the same time has been 17, first reached on May 30, 2023, with 11 people on the ISS and 6 on the TSS.\nSpace stations are often modular, featuring docking ports, through which they are built and maintained, allowing the joining or movement of modules and the docking of other spacecrafts for the exchange of people, supplies and tools. While space stations generally do not leave their orbit, they do feature thrusters for station keeping.\nHistory.\nEarly concepts.\nThe first mention of anything resembling a space station occurred in Edward Everett Hale's 1868 \"The Brick Moon\". The first to give serious, scientifically grounded consideration to space stations were Konstantin Tsiolkovsky and Hermann Oberth about two decades apart in the early 20th century.\nIn 1929, Herman Poto\u010dnik's \"The Problem of Space Travel\" was published, the first to envision a \"rotating wheel\" space station to create artificial gravity. Conceptualized during the Second World War, the \"sun gun\" was a theoretical orbital weapon orbiting Earth at a height of . No further research was ever conducted. In 1951, Wernher von Braun published a concept for a rotating wheel space station in \"Collier's Weekly\", referencing Poto\u010dnik's idea. However, development of a rotating station was never begun in the 20th century.\nFirst advances and precursors.\nThe first human flew to space and concluded the first orbit on April 12, 1961, with Vostok 1.\nThe Apollo program had in its early planning instead of a lunar landing a crewed lunar orbital flight and an orbital laboratory station in orbit of Earth, at times called \"Project Olympus\", as two different possible program goals, until the Kennedy administration sped ahead and made the Apollo program focus on what was originally planned to come after it, the lunar landing. The Project Olympus space station, or orbiting laboratory of the Apollo program, was proposed as an in-space unfolded structure with the Apollo command and service module docking. While never realized, the Apollo command and service module would perform docking maneuvers and eventually become a lunar orbiting module which was used for station-like purposes.\nBut before that the Gemini program paved the way and achieved the first space rendezvous (undocked) with Gemini 6 and Gemini 7 in 1965. Subsequently in 1966 Neil Armstrong performed on Gemini 8 the first ever space docking, while in 1967 Kosmos 186 and Kosmos 188 were the first spacecrafts that docked automatically.\nIn January 1969, Soyuz 4 and Soyuz 5 performed the first docked, but not internal, crew transfer, and in March, Apollo 9 performed the first ever internal transfer of astronauts between two docked spaceships.\nSalyut, Almaz and Skylab.\nIn 1971, the Soviet Union developed and launched the world's first space station, Salyut 1. The Almaz and Salyut series were eventually joined by Skylab, \"Mir\", and Tiangong-1 and Tiangong-2. The hardware developed during the initial Soviet efforts remains in use, with evolved variants comprising a considerable part of the ISS, orbiting today. Each crew member stays aboard the station for weeks or months but rarely more than a year.\nEarly stations were monolithic designs that were constructed and launched in one piece, generally containing all their supplies and experimental equipment. A crew would then be launched to join the station and perform research. After the supplies had been consumed, the station was abandoned.\nThe first space station was Salyut 1, which was launched by the Soviet Union on April 19, 1971. The early Soviet stations were all designated \"Salyut\", but among these, there were two distinct types: civilian and military. The military stations, Salyut 2, Salyut 3, and Salyut 5, were also known as Almaz stations.\nThe civilian stations Salyut 6 and Salyut 7 were built with two docking ports, which allowed a second crew to visit, bringing a new spacecraft with them; the Soyuz ferry could spend 90 days in space, at which point it needed to be replaced by a fresh Soyuz spacecraft. This allowed for a crew to man the station continually. The American Skylab (1973\u20131979) was also equipped with two docking ports, like second-generation stations, but the extra port was never used. The presence of a second port on the new stations allowed Progress supply vehicles to be docked to the station, meaning that fresh supplies could be brought to aid long-duration missions. This concept was expanded on Salyut 7, which \"hard docked\" with a TKS tug shortly before it was abandoned; this served as a proof of concept for the use of modular space stations. The later Salyuts may reasonably be seen as a transition between the two groups.\n\"Mir\".\nUnlike previous stations, the Soviet space station \"Mir\" had a modular design; a core unit was launched, and additional modules, generally with a specific role, were later added. This method allows for greater flexibility in operation, as well as removing the need for a single immensely powerful launch vehicle. Modular stations are also designed from the outset to have their supplies provided by logistical support craft, which allows for a longer lifetime at the cost of requiring regular support launches.\nInternational Space Station.\nThe ISS is divided into two main sections, the Russian Orbital Segment (ROS) and the US Orbital Segment (USOS). The first module of the ISS, Zarya, was launched in 1998.\nThe Russian Orbital Segment's \"second-generation\" modules were able to launch on Proton, fly to the correct orbit, and dock themselves without human intervention. Connections are automatically made for power, data, gases, and propellants. The Russian autonomous approach allows the assembly of space stations prior to the launch of crew.\nThe Russian \"second-generation\" modules are able to be reconfigured to suit changing needs. As of 2009, RKK Energia was considering the removal and reuse of some modules of the ROS on the Orbital Piloted Assembly and Experiment Complex after the end of mission is reached for the ISS. However, in September 2017, the head of Roscosmos said that the technical feasibility of separating the station to form OPSEK had been studied, and there were now no plans to separate the Russian segment from the ISS.\nIn contrast, the main US modules launched on the Space Shuttle and were attached to the ISS by crews during EVAs. Connections for electrical power, data, propulsion, and cooling fluids are also made at this time, resulting in an integrated block of modules that is not designed for disassembly and must be deorbited as one mass.\nAxiom Station is a planned commercial space station that will begin as a single module docked to the ISS. Axiom Space gained NASA approval for the venture in January 2020. The first module, the Payload Power Transfer Module (PPTM), is expected to be launched to the ISS no earlier than 2027. PPTM will remain at the ISS until the launch of Axiom's Habitat One (Hab-1) module about one year later, after which it will detach from the ISS to join with Hab-1.\n\"Tiangong\" program.\nChina's first space laboratory, Tiangong-1 was launched in September 2011. The uncrewed Shenzhou 8 then successfully performed an automatic rendezvous and docking in November 2011. The crewed Shenzhou 9 then docked with Tiangong-1 in June 2012, followed by the crewed Shenzhou 10 in 2013.\nAccording to the China Manned Space Engineering Office, Tiangong-1 reentered over the South Pacific Ocean, northwest of Tahiti, on 2 April 2018 at 00:15 UTC.\nA second space laboratory Tiangong-2 was launched in September 2016, while a plan for Tiangong-3 was merged with Tiangong-2. The station made a controlled reentry on 19 July 2019 and burned up over the South Pacific Ocean.\nThe \"Tiangong\" Space Station (), the first module of which was launched on 29 April 2021, is in low Earth orbit, 340 to 450 kilometres above the Earth at an orbital inclination of 42\u00b0 to 43\u00b0. The core module was extended in 2022 with two laboratory modules, bringing the total station capacity to six crew members. The station was completed on 5 November 2022.\nArchitecture.\nTwo types of space stations have been flown: monolithic and modular. Monolithic stations consist of a single vehicle and are launched by one rocket. Modular stations consist of two or more separate vehicles that are launched independently and docked on orbit. Modular stations are currently preferred due to lower costs and greater flexibility.\nA space station is a complex vehicle that must incorporate many interrelated subsystems, including structure, electrical power, thermal control, attitude determination and control, orbital navigation and propulsion, automation and robotics, computing and communications, environmental and life support, crew facilities, and crew and cargo transportation. Stations must serve a useful role, which drives the capabilities required.\nMaterials.\nSpace stations are made from durable materials that have to weather space radiation, internal pressure, micrometeoroids, thermal effects of the sun and cold temperatures for long periods of time. They are typically made from stainless steel, titanium and high-quality aluminum alloys, with layers of insulation such as Kevlar as a ballistics shield protection.\nThe International Space Station (ISS) has a single inflatable module, the Bigelow Expandable Activity Module, which was installed in April2016 after being delivered to the ISS on the SpaceX CRS-8 resupply mission. This module, based on NASA research in the 1990s, weighs and was transported while compressed before being attached to the ISS by the space station arm and inflated to provide a volume. Whilst it was initially designed for a 2year lifetime it was still attached and being used for storage in August 2022.\nHabitability.\nThe space station environment presents a variety of challenges to human habitability, including short-term problems such as the limited supplies of air, water, and food and the need to manage waste heat, and long-term ones such as weightlessness and relatively high levels of ionizing radiation. These conditions can create long-term health problems for space-station inhabitants, including muscle atrophy, bone deterioration, balance disorders, eyesight disorders, and elevated risk of cancer.\nFuture space habitats may attempt to address these issues, and could be designed for occupation beyond the weeks or months that current missions typically last. Possible solutions include the creation of artificial gravity by a rotating structure, the inclusion of radiation shielding, and the development of on-site agricultural ecosystems. Some designs might even accommodate large numbers of people, becoming essentially \"cities in space\" where people would reside semi-permanently.\nMolds that develop aboard space stations can produce acids that degrade metal, glass, and rubber. Despite an expanding array of molecular approaches for detecting microorganisms, rapid and robust means of assessing the differential viability of the microbial cells, as a function of phylogenetic lineage, remain elusive.\nPower.\nLike uncrewed spacecraft close to the Sun, space stations in the inner Solar System generally rely on solar panels to obtain power.\nLife support.\nSpace station air and water is brought up in spacecraft from Earth before being recycled. Supplemental oxygen can be supplied by a solid fuel oxygen generator.\nMilitary.\nThe last military-use space station was the Soviet Salyut 5, which was launched under the Almaz program and orbited between 1976 and 1977.\nOccupation.\nSpace stations have harboured so far the only long-duration direct human presence in space. After the first station, Salyut 1 (1971), and its tragic Soyuz 11 crew, space stations have been operated consecutively since Skylab (1973\u20131974), having allowed a progression of long-duration direct human presence in space. Long-duration resident crews have been joined by visiting crews since 1977 (Salyut 6), and stations have been occupied by consecutive crews since 1987 with the Salyut successor Mir. Uninterrupted occupation of stations has been achieved since the operational transition from the Mir to the ISS, with its first occupation in 2000. The ISS has hosted the highest number of people in orbit at the same time, reaching 13 for the first time during the eleven day docking of STS-127 in 2009.\nThe duration record for a single spaceflight is 437.75 days, set by Valeri Polyakov aboard \"Mir\" from 1994 to 1995. As of 2021[ [update]], four cosmonauts have completed single missions of over a year, all aboard \"Mir\".\nOperations.\nResupply and crew vehicles.\nMany spacecraft are used to dock with the space stations. Soyuz flight T-15 in March to July 1986 was the first and as of 2016, only spacecraft to visit two different space stations, Mir and Salyut 7.\nInternational Space Station.\nThe International Space Station has been supported by many different spacecraft.\nTiangong space station.\nThe Tiangong space station is supported by the following spacecraft:\nTiangong program.\nThe Tiangong program relied on the following spacecraft.\nMir.\nThe Mir space station was in orbit from 1986 to 2001 and was supported and visited by the following spacecraft:\nResearch.\nResearch conducted on the Mir included the first long term space based ESA research project EUROMIR95 which lasted 179days and included 35 scientific experiments.\nDuring the first 20 years of operation of the International Space Station, there were around 3,000 scientific experiments in the areas of biology and biotech, technology development, educational activities, human research, physical science, and Earth and space science.\nMaterials research.\nSpace stations provide a useful platform to test the performance, stability, and survivability of materials in space. This research follows on from previous experiments such as the Long Duration Exposure Facility, a free flying experimental platform which flew from April1984 until January1990.\nSpace tourism.\nOn the International Space Station, guests sometimes pay $50 million to spend the week living as an astronaut. Later, space tourism is slated to expand once launch costs are lowered sufficiently. By the end of the 2020s, space hotels may become relatively common.\nFinance.\nAs it currently costs on average $10,000 to $25,000 per kilogram to launch anything into orbit, space stations remain the exclusive province of government space agencies, which are primarily funded by taxation. In the case of the International Space Station, space tourism makes up a small portion of money to run it.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50897", "revid": "45186837", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50897", "title": "French grammar", "text": "Grammar of the French language\nFrench grammar is the set of rules by which the French language creates statements, questions and commands. In many respects, it is quite similar to that of the other Romance languages.\nFrench is a moderately inflected language. Nouns and most pronouns are inflected for number (singular or plural, though in most nouns the plural is pronounced the same as the singular even if spelled differently); adjectives, for number and gender (masculine or feminine) of their nouns; personal pronouns and a few other pronouns, for person, number, gender, and case; and verbs, for tense, aspect, mood, and the person and number of their subjects. Case is primarily marked using word order and prepositions, while certain verb features are marked using auxiliary verbs.\nVerbs.\nVerbs in French are conjugated to reflect the following information:\nSome of these features are combined into seven tense\u2013aspect\u2013mood combinations. The simple (one-word) forms are commonly referred to as the present, the simple past or preterite (past tense, perfective aspect), the imperfect (past tense, imperfective aspect), the future, the conditional, the present subjunctive, and the imperfect subjunctive. However, the simple past is rarely used in informal French, and the imperfect subjunctive is rarely used in modern French.\nVerbs in the finite moods (indicative, imperative, subjunctive, and conditional) are also conjugated to agree with their subjects in person (first, second, or third) and number (singular or plural). As in English, the subject must be included (except in the imperative mood); in other words, unlike other Romance languages, French is neither a null-subject nor a pro-drop language.\nAuxiliary verbs are combined with past participles of main verbs to produce compound tenses, including the compound past (). For most main verbs the auxiliary is (the appropriate form of) (\"to have\"), but for reflexive verbs and certain intransitive verbs the auxiliary is a form of (\"to be\"). The participle agrees with the subject when the auxiliary is , and with a preceding direct object (if any) when the auxiliary is . Forms of are also used with the past participles of transitive verbs to form the passive voice.\nThe imperative mood, which only has first-person plural and second-person singular and plural forms, usually has forms similar or identical to the corresponding ones in the present indicative.\nNouns.\nThe pronoun and the pronominal group.\nThe pronoun varies in gender (masculine or feminine), in number (singular or plural), and sometimes also in person. It always takes on the meaning of the word or group of words it replaces (the reference). This function is expressed by its name: \"pro-noun\" meaning that which is \u201cfor,\u201d \u201cput in the place of\u201d a noun.\nIts meaning also depends on the extralinguistic context (when the pronoun is a deictic), or on the textual context (depending on whether the pronoun is an anaphoric or a cataphoric one). The meaning of the cataphoric pronoun \u201cthis one,\u201d on the other hand, depends either on the context or on the word to which it refers.\nThe syntactic characteristics of the pronoun are identical to those of the noun, which the pronoun can replace in the sentence.\nGender.\nEvery French noun has a grammatical gender, either masculine or feminine. The grammatical gender of a noun referring to a human usually corresponds to the noun's natural gender (i.e., its referent's sex or gender). For such nouns, there will very often be one noun of each gender, with the choice of noun being determined by the natural gender of the person described; for example, a male singer is , while a female singer is either (a pop singer) or (an opera singer). A plural noun that refers to both males and females is masculine. In some cases, the two nouns are identical in form, with the difference only being marked in neighbouring words (due to gender agreement; see below); a Catholic man is , while a Catholic woman is . Nonetheless, there are some such nouns that retain their grammatical gender regardless of natural gender; 'person' is always feminine, while (at least in \"standard\" French) 'teacher' is always masculine. In Canadian French, is the standard feminine form, which is becoming more and more common in European French.\nA noun's gender is not perfectly predictable from its form, but there are some trends. As a very broad trend, nouns ending in tend to be feminine (e.g., 'a star', 'a car'), while the rest tend to be masculine (e.g., 'a balloon', 'a pen'), but it sometimes can be the opposite. More consistently, some endings, such as , , , and occur almost exclusively with feminine nouns, while others, such as , , and occur almost exclusively with masculine ones. Many nouns ending in preceded by double consonants are also masculine (e.g. ). Nonetheless, a noun that seems masculine judging by its ending might actually be feminine e.g., 'the skin', 'a tooth' or vice versa e.g., 'the elbow', 'a skeleton' are masculine. Noun clauses are masculine.\nA very small number of nouns can be used either in masculine or feminine gender with the same meaning (e.g., 'afternoon'). Often one gender is preferred over the other. Some (very rare) nouns change gender according to the way they are used: the words 'love' and 'pleasure' are masculine in singular and feminine in plural; the word 'organ' is masculine, but when used emphatically in plural to refer to a church organ it becomes feminine (); the plural noun 'people' changes gender in a very unusual way, being usually masculine but triggering feminine agreement when certain adjectives precede the word.\nOther nouns change meaning depending on which grammatical gender they are used in. For example, (masculine) refers to a critic, while (feminine) means criticism; refers to a book, while means the pound (in the sense of both weight and currency). Similarly, means \"veil\", whereas means \"sail\".\nThe vocabulary of French includes many homophones, i.e., pairs of words with different spellings but the same pronunciation. Grammatical gender, however, may serve to distinguish some of these. For example, 'the pot' and 'the skin' are both pronounced but disagree in gender.\nNumber.\nAs in English, nouns inflect for number.\nOrthographically, the plural is usually formed from the singular by adding the letter (cf. 'houses'). Nouns ending in and often take the ending instead (cf. 'games'). However, the endings and are in most cases not pronounced, meaning that in speech the plural form of a noun generally has the same pronunciation as the singular. Nouns that end in or in the singular are left unchanged in the plural in both pronunciation and spelling (cf. 'crosses', both pronounced ).\nLiaison between a plural noun and a following adjective is one case where the plural ending or may be pronounced: (\"open windows\"). However, this form of liaison usually only appears in careful formal speech (for example by newsreaders). In most everyday speech singular and plural forms of most nouns are therefore homophonous in all contexts.\nIn spoken French, the plurality of most nouns is marked not on the form of the noun itself but by a preceding article or determiner (cf. [la m\u025bz\u0254\u0303] 'the house' &gt; [le m\u025bz\u0254\u0303] 'the houses'; [m\u0254\u0303 f\u0281\u025b\u02d0\u0281] 'my brother' &gt; [me f\u0281\u025b\u02d0\u0281] 'my brothers').\nFrench nouns whose spoken plural forms are distinguished from the singular include most of those ending in , whose plural form is (cf. &gt; 'horses'), as well as a few nouns ending in that also follow this pattern (cf. &gt; 'works'). Three nouns form completely irregular plurals: &gt; 'ancestors' (but 'grandfathers'); &gt; 'heavens' (but 'bed canopies'); and &gt; 'eyes' (but 'oculi' (round windows), 'calluses' (on the feet)). Three other nouns have regular plurals in spelling but have irregular pronunciations: &gt; 'oxen, cattle'; &gt; 'eggs'; and &gt; 'bones'.\nAs with English, most uncountable nouns are grammatically treated as singular, though some are plural, such as 'mathematics'; some nouns that are uncountable in English are countable in French, such as 'a piece of information'.\nCase.\nNouns in French are not inflected for any other grammatical categories. (However, personal pronouns are inflected for case and person; see below.)\nArticles and determiners.\nArticles and determiners agree in gender and number with the noun they determine; unlike with nouns, this inflection is made in speech as well as in writing.\nFrench has three articles: definite, indefinite, and partitive. The difference between the definite and indefinite articles is similar to that in English (definite: \"the\"; indefinite: \"a\", \"an\"), except that the indefinite article has a plural form (similar to \"some\", though English normally does not use an article before indefinite plural nouns). The partitive article is similar to the indefinite article but used for uncountable singular nouns.\nAdjectives.\nAn adjective must agree in gender and number with the noun it modifies. French adjectives therefore have four forms: masculine singular, feminine singular, masculine plural, and feminine plural. A few adjectives have a fifth form, viz. an additional masculine singular form for use in liaison before a noun beginning with a vowel or a \"mute h\", e.g. (a beautiful garden, a handsome man, a beautiful woman, beautiful children, beautiful houses). This fifth form, which is older, is sometimes used elsewhere in set phrases, e.g. (Philip the Fair or the Handsome of France, 1268\u20131314) vs. (Philip the Handsome or the Fair of Castile, 1478\u20131506).\nThe masculine singular, an adjective's basic form, is listed in dictionaries. The feminine singular is normally formed by adding to the basic form. This is silent, which makes many masculine and feminine forms homophonous (cf. 'civil', both pronounced ). However, the ending causes \"mute\" final sounds to be pronounced, whereby masculine-feminine pairs become distinguishable in pronunciation if the masculine form ends in a mute consonant, which is the case with a great deal of adjectives (cf. &gt; 'heavy'). Under certain circumstances, other minor changes occur in the formation of feminine forms, such as the placement of an accent, the doubling of a consonant, or its replacement with another, changes that often reflect the pronunciation of such endings (cf. &gt; 'good'; &gt; 'happy'). Irregular feminine forms include 'beautiful', 'white', and a limited number of others. If an adjective's basic form ends in , it is left unchanged in the feminine (cf. 'rich').\nThe plural is normally formed by adding to the singular (masculine and feminine). This is usually mute, but pronounced in liaison with a following noun that begins with a vowel. Unlike liaison after plural nouns, liaison after plural adjectives is common and even obligatory in standard usage. If the basic form ends in , or , an adjective is left unchanged in the masculine plural (cf. 'soft, gentle'). A few adjectives take the (also mute) ending in the masculine plural (cf. 'new'). Plural forms that are distinguishable from the singular outside of liaison environments occur only with adjectives ending in . These normally have in the masculine plural (cf. &gt; 'central'). By contrast, the feminine plural is formed according to the general rule: .\nDue to the aforementioned rules, French adjectives might have four distinguished written forms which are all pronounced the same. This is the case if an adjective's masculine and feminine forms are homophonous and if there is no liaison between the adjective and a following noun.\nOn the other hand, if the masculine and feminine forms have different pronunciations and liaison does occur, all four forms can be distinguishable in pronunciation. Adjective declension is therefore important in spoken French, though to a lesser extent than in writing. (All forms distinguished in pronunciation are also distinguished in writing, but not vice versa.)\nDue to the peculiar orthography of French, which denotes mute final consonants, most feminine forms seem regular in terms of their spelling because they are formed by adding to the masculine form, e.g., , , . However, if we put this etymologic orthography aside and consider only current pronunciation, the formation of French female forms becomes quite irregular with several possible \"endings\": &gt; , &gt; , &gt; .\nMost adjectives, when used attributively, appear after their nouns: (\"the \"red\" wine\"). A number of adjectives (often having to do with beauty, age, goodness, or size, a tendency summarized by the acronym \"BAGS\"), come before their nouns: (\"a \"beautiful\" woman\"). With a few adjectives of the latter type, there are two masculine singular forms: one used before consonants (the basic form), and one used before vowels. For example, the adjective (\"beautiful\") changes form from (\"a \"handsome\" boy\") to (\"a \"handsome\" man\"). Some adjectives change position depending on their meaning, sometimes preceding their nouns and sometimes following them. For example, means \"former\" when it precedes its noun, but \"ancient\" when it follows it. To give another example, means \"a \"tall\" man\", whereas means \"a \"great\" man\".\nMany compound words contain an adjective, such as \"a mother-in-law\", which is distinct from \"a beautiful mother\". Some of them use an archaic form of the feminine adjective that lacks the final . These used to be written with an apostrophe, but a hyphen is now (at least since 1960) considered more correct: (formerly, ) \"a main country road\", which is distinct from \"a long way\", and (formerly, ) \"a grandmother\", which is distinct from \"a tall mother\".\nAdverbs.\nAs in English, adverbs in French are used to modify adjectives, other adverbs, verbs, or clauses. Most adverbs are derived from an adjective by adding the suffix , usually to its feminine form ( is analogous to the English suffix \"-ly\"): e.g. \"anciently\", \"of old\", \"in olden times\"; \"greatly\"; \"slowly\"; though there are some systematic deviations (e.g. \u2192 \"patiently\", \u2192 \"uneasily\"), some adverbs are derived irregularly ( \"good\" \u2192 \"well\") and others do not derive from adjectives at all.\nAdverbs themselves are generally invariable. An exception to this is the adverb \"wholly, very\" which agrees in gender and number with the adjective it modifies when it is in the feminine and begins with a consonant (e.g. \"very small, m.s.\", \"very small, m.pl.\" but \"very small, f.s.\", \"very small, f.pl.\" \u2014 when beginning with a vowel however: \"completely, as a whole\" (with liaison)).\nPrepositions.\nFrench prepositions link two related parts of a sentence. In word order, they are placed in front of a noun in order to specify the relationship between the noun and the verb, adjective, or other noun that precedes it. Some common French prepositions are: (to, at, in), (next to, beside), (after), (about, on the subject of), (before), (with), (at the home/office of, among), (against), (in), (according to), (from, of, about), (since, for), (in back of, behind), (in front of), (during, while), (in, on, to), (outside of), (facing, across from), (between), (toward), (approximately), (outside of), (until, up to, even), (far from), (despite), (by, through), (among), (during), (for), (near), (as for, regarding), (without), (according to), (under), (according to), (on), (toward).\nPronouns.\nIn French, pronouns can be inflected to indicate their role in a clause (subject, direct object, etc.), as well as the person, gender, and number of their referent. Not all of these inflections may be present at once; for example, the relative pronoun (that, which, whom) may have any referent, while the possessive pronoun () may have any role in a clause.\nAs noted above, French (like English) is a non-pro-drop (\"pronoun-dropping\") language; therefore, pronouns feature prominently in the language. Impersonal verbs (e.g., 'to rain') use the impersonal pronoun (analogous to English 'it').\nFrench object pronouns are all clitics. Some appear so consistently \u2013 especially in everyday speech \u2014 that some have commented that French could almost be considered to demonstrate polypersonal agreement.\nNegation.\nFrench usually expresses negation in two parts, with the particle attached to the verb, and one or more negative words (connegatives) that modify the verb or one of its arguments. Negation encircles a conjugated verb with after the subject and the connegative after the verb, if the verb is finite or a gerund. However, both parts of the negation come before the targeted verb when it is in its infinitive form. For example:\nOther negative words used in combination with are:\n \u2014 not anymore, no longer\n \u2014 never\n \u2013 nowhere\n \u2014 not much, hardly (literary)\n \u2014 not, not at all (literary)\n \u2014 nothing\n \u2014 nobody\n(determiner) \u2014 no/not any (also , literary)\n(restrictive particle) \u2014 only\nExamples:\nThe negative adverbs (and ) follow finite verbs but precede infinitives (along with ):\nMoreover, it is possible for and to be used as the subject of a sentence, which moves them to the beginning of the sentence (before the ):\nSeveral negative words (other than ) can appear in the same sentence, but the sentence is still usually interpreted as a simple negation. When another negative word occurs with , a double negation interpretation usually arises, but this construction is criticised.\nColloquial usage.\nIn colloquial French, it is common to drop the , although this can create some ambiguity with the construction when written down, as could mean either 'more' or 'not anymore'. Generally when is used to mean , the final \u27e8s\u27e9 is pronounced (), whereas it is never pronounced when used to mean 'not anymore' ().\nAs an example, the informal sentence could be pronounced with the final () to mean \"there is more\", or it could be pronounced without it () to mean \"there is none left\".\nIndependent \"ne\".\nIn certain, mostly literary constructions, can express negation by itself (without or another negative word). The four verbs that can use this construction are (\"to be able to\"), (\"to know\"), (\"to dare\"), and (\"to cease\").\nExpletive \"ne\".\nIn certain cases in formal French, the word can be used without signifying negation; the in such instances is known as expletive (French: ):\n \u2014 \"I am afraid that it might happen again.\"\n \u2014 \"He arrived before we started.\"\n \u2014 \"There are more of them than you think.\"\nExpletive is found in finite subordinate clauses (never before an infinitive). It is characteristic of literary rather than colloquial style. In other registers French tends to not use any negation at all in such clauses, e.g., .\nThe following contexts allow expletive \nExistential clauses.\nIn French, the equivalent of the English existential clause \"there is/are\" is expressed with (infinitive: ), literally, \"it there has\" or \"it has to it\". As an impersonal verb, the verb may be conjugated to indicate tense, but always remains in the third person singular. For example\nThis construction is also used to express the passage of time since an event occurred, like the English \"ago\" or \"it has been\":\nIn informal speech, is typically reduced to , as in:\nWord order.\nThe components of a declarative clause are typically arranged in the following order (though not all components are always present):\nWhat is called in English (and above) an \"indirect object\" is in many cases called according to French grammar conventions (e.g., in 'to give sth. to s.o.' or 'to give s.o. sth.'). What the French call is a complement introduced by an essentially void or (at least in the case of a noun) required by some particular, otherwise intransitive, verbs: e.g. 'the robbers took advantage of my absence' \u2014 but the essentially synonymous has a direct object instead. Unlike in English, in French neither an indirect object nor a circumstantial can become the subject of the passive voice: has no direct equivalent in French.\nThe most common word order in French is subject-verb-object (SVO).\nFrench also allows for verb-object-subject (VOS) though the usage is relatively rare and various constraints apply. The most common instance of this word order is in more formal texts or in response to questions with a focus on the subject, as opposed to more broad questions such as, (what happened?). Below are examples of each circumstance.\nFinally, in a comparatively limited number of instances French allows for object-subject-verb (OSV) word order, such as when adding emphasis\nIn regard to word order, French is more restrictive than other Romance languages. For example, Spanish allows for all six possible word orders, compared to French's three. Additionally, unlike other Romance languages, specifically Spanish and Italian, French does not have free inversion, which is often explained by French not being a pro-drop language (while Spanish and Italian are).\nNegation.\nAs mentioned above, French expresses negation in two parts, the first with the particle ne attached to the verb and one or more negative words, which modify either the verb or one of its arguments. The participle ne comes before the verb in the sentence that is marked for tense and before any unstressed object pronouns that come before the verb. The location of the second part of the negation varies, however.\nHistory.\nModern French allows for fewer word orders than Latin or Old French, both of which Modern French has evolved from. In both Latin and Old French, all six potential word orders are possible:\nWhile linguistic evolution occurs on a continuum, the major shift towards increased grammaticalization occurred in French most distinctly between the mid 12th century and end of the 15th century. It is believed that the progressive move towards SVO as the dominant French word order occurred during this time, as a result of a \"progressive fixation of the subject in preverbal position from the fourteenth century on\".\nQuestion formation.\nBroadly speaking, there are two types of questions; yes/no questions and information questions.\nYes/no questions.\nIn French there are four ways to form yes/no questions, each of which is typically associated with a different degree of formality.\n1. Raising intonation.\nThe simplest and most informal way to ask a yes/no question is by raising intonation at the end of a declarative sentence. This question formation structure is common in informal spoken French, but relatively uncommon in more formal spoken French or written French. Examples include:\n2. Est-ce que.\nYes/no questions may also be formed by adding est-ce que to the beginning of a declarative sentence. This structure may be used in any style of French; formal, informal, spoken, or written.\n3. ..., n'est-ce pas?\nSource:\nThis is like adding \"is it not?\"\u00a0to the end and it is pronounced .\n4. Inversion of verb and subject.\nFinally, yes/no questions may be formed by inverting the verb and the subject. This sentence structure is typically used in formal and written French. These questions may be formed in one of two ways, depending on whether the pronoun is stressed or unstressed. If the pronoun is unstressed, it changes places with the verb that it agrees with.\nThis subject-verb inversion is similar to question formation in English, though in English the inversion may only occur with auxiliary verbs, while in French it may occur with all verbs.\nIf the subject is anything other than an unstressed pronoun, an unstressed subject pronoun that agrees with the subject is added to the right of the verb.\nTwo additional notes on subject verb inversion in French. First, when the inversion results in the adjacency of two vowels \u27e8t\u27e9 is inserted between them.\nSecondly, only the most formal French inverts the verb with \". It has become more common, both in spoken and written French, to replace je with est-ce-que. For example, the following two sentences are ungrammatical in French.\nInformation questions.\nThere are four ways to form information questions in French. Like yes/no questions, each form is associated with a different degree of formality.\n1. Addition of question word or phrase.\nThe simplest and generally most informal way to form an information question in French is by replacing a word in a declarative sentence with a question word or phrase and adding rising intonation to the end of the sentence. The question word or phrase may occur at the beginning or end of the sentence, depending on which word is being replaced, unlike in English, where the question word typically occurs at the start of the sentence.\n2. Moving question word or phrase.\nAnother common and informal way of forming information questions is by replacing an item in a declarative sentence by a question word or phrase then moving the question word or phrase to the front of the sentence.\n3. Addition of \"est-ce que\".\nAnother way to form a question in French is by following the steps outlined above in one and two, and in addition inserting est-ce que after the question word. This style of question formation may be used in all styles of French.\n4. Inversion of verb and subject.\nFinally, information questions in French may be formed by following the steps outlined above in one and two and additionally, inverting the subject and verb. This is typically the most formal form of question formation and is found in written and formal spoken French. As in yes/no question formation, if the subject is an unstressed pronoun, it switches places with the verb:\nIf the subject is anything other than an unstressed pronoun, an unstressed subject pronoun is added after the verb.\nCleft sentences.\nCleft sentences are sentences that consist of two clauses, one of which is a copular clause and one of which is a relative clause, also known as a cleft clause. The copular clause consists of a copula followed by the cleft constituent. Cleft sentences are found in many European languages, including French. In the sentence, ('It's Stella who reads Kant') \" is the copular clause, \" is the cleft constituent, and \"\" is the cleft clause.\nTypes of clefts.\nWhile cleft sentences are common in European languages, the types of possible cleft sentences vary dramatically by language. Subject clefts, in which the cleft constituent acts as the subject of both the main verb and the cleft clause, are the most common clefts and are found in all languages that have clefts. ('It's Stella who reads Kant') is an example of a subject cleft. In complement clefts the cleft constituent is a complement of both the main verb of the cleft clause and the non-cleft clause. For example, ('it's Kant that Stella reads'). The final type of clefts are adverbial clefts, which are the most common clefts in French, but are not found in all languages with clefts, such as German. In adverbial cleft sentences, the cleft constituent has an adverbial syntactic function. Therefore, the cleft constituent is not subcategorized by the cleft clause's main verb and it is not required in corresponding non-cleft clauses.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50898", "revid": "1219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50898", "title": "2nd Earl of Essex Robert Devereux", "text": ""}
{"id": "50899", "revid": "5957417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50899", "title": "Robert Devereux, 2nd Earl of Essex", "text": "English nobleman, soldier and rebel (1565\u20131601)\nRobert Devereux, 2nd Earl of Essex (; 10 November 1565 \u2013 25 February 1601) was an English nobleman, soldier and a favourite of Queen Elizabeth I.\nA charismatic and ambitious youth, Essex grew up in a family of courtiers with strong ties to the queen. He became a royal ward following his father's death in 1576. He entered court in 1585 as a member of the Earl of Leicester's entourage. Essex rose quickly at court and developed a close personal relationship with the queen. He played a prominent role in England\u2019s military campaigns during the Anglo-Spanish War and Eighty Years' War, including expeditions to Portugal and the Azores (particularly a victory at C\u00e1diz) which gave him celebrity status among the London elite.\nTowards the end of the 1590s Essex's position at court was threatened by Robert Cecil. Essex was appointed Lord Deputy of Ireland during the Nine Years' War. Despite considerable resources, his 1599 campaign against the Irish confederacy was a military disaster, ruining his reputation and straining his relationship with the queen. He deserted his post and was subsequently placed under house arrest, leading to a nervous breakdown. In February 1601, he led a failed coup against the government and was arrested, tried for treason, and executed by beheading at the Tower of London.\nThe nature of Essex's turbulent relationship with Elizabeth I has been speculated on by both historians and dramatists.\nEarly life.\nRobert Devereux was born on 10 November 1565 at Netherwood in Herefordshire, the eldest son of Walter Devereux, 1st Earl of Essex, and his wife Lettice Knollys. From birth, the young Robert Devereux had a strong association with Queen Elizabeth I. Lettice was a close friend of Elizabeth and served as her Maid of the Privy Chamber. Robert Devereux was presumably named after his godfather Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester, who was the queen's favourite for many years. Additionally, Devereux's maternal great-grandmother Mary Boleyn was a sister of Anne Boleyn (Elizabeth I's mother) making him a first-cousin-twice-removed of the queen.\nDevereux had two older sisters, Penelope and Dorothy, a younger brother, Walter, and another brother Francis who died soon after birth. Devereux and his siblings were brought up at the family seat at Chartley in Staffordshire. Local tradition holds that Devereux's parents took the children to Lamphey, Pembrokeshire each summer, but there is no evidence to prove this. From 1573, Devereux's father Walter was involved in a disastrous scheme to colonise Ulster and thus spent much of his time in Ireland.\nWalter died in September 1576, and 10-year-old Robert Devereux (who acceded to the earldom as 2nd Earl of Essex) became a ward of the Crown. Prominent minister Lord Burghley was Master of the Court of Wards and thus took on chief responsibility for young Essex's welfare. He was also brought up by leading courtiers Thomas Radclyffe, 3rd Earl of Sussex and Henry Hastings, 3rd Earl of Huntingdon. Essex was an intelligent and promising child; a report of November 1576 described him as \"very courteous and modest, rather disposed to hear than to answer, given greatly to learning, weak and tender, but very comely and beautiful\". By this time he could speak both Latin and French.\nEssex's late father had crippled his family's finances and left the young earl \u00a318,000 in debt (equivalent to \u00a36.6 million in April 2025). His father's legal advisor Richard Broughton oversaw the family estate whilst he was still a minor. In January 1577, Essex left Chartley to travel to London, where he briefly stayed at Burghley's residence Cecil House. He also spent time at Theobalds, Burghley's estate in Hertfordshire, where he mixed with Burghley's son Robert Cecil.\nAs a boy he was tutored by Thomas Ashton, headmaster of Shrewsbury School and a family servant, then by Ashton's prot\u00e9g\u00e9 Robert Wright. In early May 1577, Essex entered Trinity College, Cambridge. He matriculated by 1579, and in 1581 he graduated with a Master of Arts. He spent the following four years travelling the British countryside.\nEarly career.\nNetherlands.\nIn 1585 Essex came under pressure from his mother to establish a career as a courtier. He joined the entourage of his new stepfather Leicester (Lettice and Leicester married in 1578) and visited the royal court in September 1585. Leicester became a significant patron for his stepson, and he instilled in Essex a sense of unity with fellow Protestants across Europe. Despite his later status as a royal favourite, Essex went unnoticed by the queen in his early visits to court; she was preoccupied by both the Anglo-Spanish War and the Eighty Years' War. Essex was granted permission to accompany Leicester on a military apprenticeship in the Spanish Netherlands. He was appointed colonel-general of the English cavalry in the Netherlands, a prestigious position which signified his status as Leicester's new prot\u00e9g\u00e9. In September 1586 Essex and his horsemen successfully attacked a much larger Spanish force in the Battle of Zutphen, for which Leicester made him a knight-banneret. Leicester's nephew Philip Sidney, a beloved courtier mortally wounded at Zutphen, bequeathed one of his swords to Essex. In effect, Sidney transferred to Essex his dual roles as England's champion of Protestantism and Leicester's right-hand man.\nRoyal favourite.\nEssex returned to England as a war hero in late October 1586 and quickly caught the queen's eye. The handsome Essex was a welcome distraction from Elizabeth's angst over the impending execution of Mary, Queen of Scots. Leicester, himself a former favourite, backed Essex at court to further his own interests and weaken the standing of his rival Walter Raleigh. Essex was appointed Master of the Horse in December 1587, and five months later he was elected a Knight of the Garter. Despite Leicester's death in September 1588, Essex's status continued to grow, and in January 1589, Elizabeth granted him Leicester's monopoly on sweet wines.\nBy May 1587 he was a constant companion of the queen. One of his servants boasted that even at night \"my lord is at cardes or one game or another with her, that he commeth not to his owne lodginge tyll the birdes singe in the morninge\". The queen relished Essex's lively mind and eloquence, as well as his skills as a showman and in courtly love. In June 1587 he replaced the Earl of Leicester as Master of the Horse. After Leicester's death in 1588, the queen transferred the late Earl's royal monopoly on sweet wines to Essex, providing him with revenue from taxes. In 1593, he was made a member of her Privy Council.\nIt is reported that his friend and confidant Francis Bacon warned him to avoid offending the queen by attempting to gain power and underestimating her ability to rule and wield power.\nEssex did underestimate the queen, however, and his later behaviour towards her lacked due respect and showed disdain for the influence of her principal secretary, Robert Cecil. On one occasion during a heated Privy Council debate on the problems in Ireland, the queen reportedly cuffed an insolent Essex round the ear, prompting him to half draw his sword on her.\nIn 1589, he took part in Francis Drake's English Armada, which sailed to Spain in an unsuccessful attempt to press home the English advantage following the defeat of the Spanish Armada, but the queen had ordered him not to take part. The English Armada was defeated with 40 ships sunk and 15,000 men lost. In 1591, he was given command of a force sent to the assistance of King Henry IV of France. In 1596, he distinguished himself by the capture of C\u00e1diz. During the Islands Voyage expedition to the Azores in 1597, with Walter Raleigh as his second-in-command, he defied the queen's orders, pursuing the Spanish treasure fleet without first defeating the Spanish battle fleet.\nIn 1590, he married Frances Walsingham, daughter of Sir Francis Walsingham and Sidney's widow.\nEssex took part in the 1591 Siege of Rouen, in which his brother Walter died.\nWhen the Third Spanish Armada first appeared off the English coast in October 1597, the English fleet was far out to sea, with the coast almost undefended, and panic ensued. This further damaged the relationship between the queen and Essex, even though he was initially given full command of the English fleet when he reached England a few days later. Fortunately, a storm dispersed the Spanish fleet. A number of ships were captured by the English and though there were a few landings, the Spanish withdrew.\nIreland.\nEssex began a rivalry at court with a faction led by Robert Cecil. Essex sought to establish himself as the queen's primary advisor and policy-maker.\nEssex's greatest failure was as Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, a post which he talked himself into in 1599. The Nine Years' War (1593\u20131603) was in its middle stages, and no English commander had been successful. More military force was required to defeat the Irish chieftains, led by Hugh O'Neill, the Earl of Tyrone, and supplied from Spain and Scotland.\nEssex led the largest expeditionary force ever sent to Ireland\u201416,000 troops\u2014with orders to put an end to the rebellion. He departed London to the cheers of the queen's subjects, and it was expected the rebellion would be crushed instantly, but the limits of Crown resources and of the Irish campaigning season dictated otherwise.\nEssex had declared to the Privy Council that he would confront O'Neill in Ulster. Instead, he led his army into southern Ireland, where he fought a series of inconclusive engagements, wasted his funds, and dispersed his army into garrisons, while the Irish won two important battles in other parts of the country. Rather than face O'Neill in battle, Essex entered a truce that some considered humiliating to the Crown and to the detriment of English authority. The queen told Essex that if she had wished to abandon Ireland it would scarcely have been necessary to send him there.\nIn all of his campaigns, Essex secured the loyalty of his officers by conferring knighthoods, an honour the queen dispensed sparingly, and by the end of his time in Ireland more than half the knights in England owed their rank to him. The 38 knights he created in Ireland were later ritually degraded, and stripped of their knighthood by Elizabeth. The rebels were said to have joked that, \"he never drew sword but to make knights\", but his practice of conferring knighthoods could in time enable Essex to challenge the powerful factions at Cecil's command.\nHe was the second Chancellor of the University of Dublin, serving from 1598 to 1601. He was educated at Trinity College Dublin.\nFirst trial.\nRelying on his general warrant to return to England, given under the great seal, Essex sailed from Ireland on 24 September 1599 and reached London four days later. The queen had expressly forbidden his return and was surprised when he presented himself in her bedchamber one morning at Nonsuch Palace, before she was properly wigged or gowned. On that day, the Privy Council met three times, and it seemed his disobedience might go unpunished, but the queen did confine him to his rooms with the comment that \"an unruly beast must be stopped of his provender.\"\nEssex appeared before the full Council on 29 September, when he was compelled to stand before the council during a five-hour interrogation. The Council\u2014his uncle William Knollys, 1st Earl of Banbury included\u2014took a quarter of an hour to compile a report, which declared that his truce with O'Neill was indefensible and his flight from Ireland tantamount to the desertion of duty. He was committed to the custody of Sir Richard Berkeley in his own York House on 1 October, and he blamed Cecil and Raleigh for the queen's hostility. Raleigh advised Cecil to see to it that Essex did not recover power, and Essex appeared to heed advice to retire from public life, despite his popularity with the public.\nDuring his confinement at York House, Essex probably communicated with King James VI of Scotland through Baron Mountjoy, although any plans he may have had at that time to help the Scots king capture the English throne came to nothing. In October, Mountjoy was appointed to replace him in Ireland, and matters seemed to look up for the Earl. In November, the queen was reported to have said that the truce with O'Neill was \"so seasonably made... as great good... has grown by it.\" Others in the council were willing to justify Essex's return from Ireland, on the grounds of the urgent necessity of a briefing by the commander-in-chief.\nCecil kept up the pressure and, on 5 June 1600, Essex was tried before a commission of 18 men. He had to hear the charges and evidence on his knees. Essex was convicted, deprived of public office, and returned to virtual confinement.\nEssex's rebellion.\nIn August, his freedom was granted, but the source of his basic income\u2014the sweet wines monopoly\u2014was not renewed. His situation had become desperate, and he shifted \"from sorrow and repentance to rage and rebellion.\" In early 1601, he began to fortify Essex House, his town mansion on the Strand, and gathered his followers.\nOn the morning of 8 February, he marched out of Essex House with a party of nobles and gentlemen (some later involved in the 1605 Gunpowder Plot) and entered the city of London in an attempt to force an audience with the queen. Cecil immediately had him proclaimed a traitor.\nA force under John Leveson placed a barrier across the street at Ludgate Hill. When Essex's men tried to force their way through, Essex's stepfather, Christopher Blount, was injured in the resulting skirmish, and Essex withdrew with his men to Essex House. Essex surrendered after Crown forces besieged Essex House.\nTreason trial and death.\nOn 19 February 1601, Essex was tried before his peers on charges of treason. Laura Hanes Cadwallader summarised the indictment:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The indictment charged Essex with \"conspiring and imagining at London...to depose and slay the queen, and to subvert the Government.\" It also stated that Essex had \"endeavoured to raise himself to the Crown of England, and usurp the royal dignity,\" and that in order to fulfill these intentions, he and others \"rose and assembled themselves in open rebellion, and moved and persuaded many of the citizens of London to join them in their treason, and endeavoured to get the City of London into their possession and power, and wounded and killed many of the queen's subjects then and there assembled for the purpose of quelling such rebellion.\" Essex was charged also with holding the Lord Keeper and the other Privy Councillors in custody \"for four hours and more.\"\nPart of the evidence showed that he was in favour of toleration of religious dissent. In his own evidence, he countered the charge of dealing with Catholics, swearing that \"papists have been hired and suborned to witness against me.\" Essex also asserted that Cecil had stated that none in the world but the Infanta of Spain had right to the Crown of England, whereupon Cecil (who had been following the trial at a doorway concealed behind some tapestry) stepped out to make a dramatic denial, going down on his knees to give thanks to God for the opportunity. The witness whom Essex expected to confirm this allegation, his uncle William Knollys, was called and admitted there had once been read in Cecil's presence a book treating such matters. The book may have been either \"The book of succession\" supposedly by R. Doleman but probably by Robert Persons or Persons' \"A Conference about the Next Succession to the Crown of England\", works which favoured a Catholic successor friendly to Spain. Knollys denied hearing Cecil make the statement. Thanking God again, Cecil expressed his gratitude that Essex was exposed as a traitor while he was found an honest man.\nEssex was found guilty and was returned to the Tower, where he begged to be given a private execution and which was granted. On the morning of 25 February 1601, he was taken to the Tower's courtyard. After praying, he doffed his cap and coat and indicated that he was ready. He was beheaded on Tower Green. He was the last person to be beheaded in the Tower of London. It took three strokes by the executioner Thomas Derrick to complete the beheading. Derrick held the head aloft, proclaiming \"God save the Queen!\" Previously Derrick had been convicted of rape but had been pardoned by the Earl of Essex (clearing him of the death penalty) on the condition that he become an executioner at Tyburn. At Sir Walter Raleigh's own execution on 29 October 1618, it was alleged that Raleigh had said to a co-conspirator, \"Do not, as my Lord Essex did, take heed of a preacher. By his persuasion, he confessed, and made himself guilty.\" In that same trial, Raleigh also denied that he had stood at a window during the execution of Essex's sentence, disdainfully puffing out tobacco smoke in sight of the condemned man. Essex in the end shocked many by denouncing his sister Penelope, Lady Rich, as his co-conspirator: the queen, who was determined to show as much clemency as possible, ignored the charge.\nEssex was buried in the chapel of St Peter ad Vincula on Tower Green.\nSome days before the execution, Captain Thomas Lee was apprehended as he kept watch on the door to the queen's chambers. His plan had been to confine her until she signed a warrant for the release of Essex. Captain Lee, who had served in Ireland with the Earl, and who acted as a go-between with the Ulster rebels, was tried and put to death the next day.\nEssex's conviction for treason meant that the earldom was forfeit and his son did not inherit the title. However, after the queen's death, King James I of England reinstated the earldom in favour of the disinherited son, Robert Devereux, 3rd Earl of Essex.\nThe Essex ring.\nThere is a widely repeated romantic legend about a ring given by Elizabeth to Essex. There is a possible reference to the legend by John Webster in his 1623 play \"The Devil's Law Case\" suggesting that it was known at this time, but the first printed version of it is in the 1695 romantic novel \"The Secret History of the most renowned Queen Elizabeth and the Earl of Essex, by a Person of Quality\". The version given by David Hume in his \"History of England\" says that Elizabeth had given Essex a ring after the expedition to C\u00e1diz that he should send to her if he was in trouble. After his trial, he tried to send the ring to Elizabeth via the Countess of Nottingham, but the countess kept the ring because her husband was an enemy of Essex. As a result, Essex was executed. On her deathbed, the countess is said to have confessed this to Elizabeth, who angrily replied: \"May God forgive you, Madam, but I never can\". The Queen's Diamond Jubilee Galleries in Westminster Abbey possess a gold ring which is claimed to be this one.\nSome historians consider this story of the ring to be a myth, partly because there are no contemporaneous accounts of it. John Lingard in his history of England says the story appears to be fiction. Lytton Strachey states \"Such a narrative is appropriate enough to the place where it was first fully elaborated\u2014a sentimental novelette, but it does not belong to history\", and Alison Weir calls it a fabrication.\nNevertheless, this version of the story forms the basis of the plot of Gaetano Donizetti's opera \"Roberto Devereux\", with a further twist added to the story, in that Essex is cheating on both the queen and his best friend by having an affair with Lady Nottingham (who in the opera is given the wrong first name of Sarah rather than Catherine): and that this turns out to be (a) the reason why Lord Nottingham turns against his now former friend, when he discovers the ring in question and prevents her sending it, and (b) is the ultimate reason for Queen Elizabeth withdrawing her support for Essex at his trial. The actual question of Devereux's genuine guilt or innocence is sidelined (as is his actual failed rebellion), and the trial is presented as effectively a Parliamentary witch-hunt led by Cecil and Raleigh.\nPoetry.\nLike many other Elizabethan aristocrats Essex was a competent lyric poet, who also participated in court entertainments. He engaged in literary as well as political feuds with his principal enemies, including Walter Raleigh. His poem \"\" attacks Raleigh's influence over the queen.\nOther lyrics were written for masques, including the sonnet \"\" in praise of the queen as the moral power linking Europe and America, who supports \"the world oppressed\" like the mythical Atlas. During his disgrace, he also wrote several bitter and pessimistic verses. His longest poem, \"\" (beginning \"From silent night...\"), is a penitential lament, probably written while imprisoned awaiting execution.\nSeveral of Essex's poems were set to music. English composer John Dowland set a poem called \"Can she excuse my wrongs with virtue's cloak?\" in his 1597 publication \"First Booke of Songs\": these lyrics have been attributed to Essex, largely on the basis of the dedication of \"The Earl of Essex's Galliard\", an instrumental version of the same song. Dowland also sets the opening verses of Essex's poem \"The Passion of a Discontented Mind\" (\"From silent night\") in his 1612 collection of songs. Orlando Gibbons set lines from the poem in the same year. Settings of Essex's poems \" (set by Richard Martin) and \" (set by Daniel Bacheler) are published in \"A Musicall Banquet\" (1610), a collection of songs edited by Robert Dowland.\nIssue.\nIn 1590, he secretly married Frances Walsingham, daughter of Francis Walsingham and widow of Philip Sidney, by whom he had several children, three of whom survived into adulthood. Frances also experienced stillbirths in 1596 and 1598.\nEssex's mistress, Elizabeth Southwell, gave birth to an illegitimate son:\nBesides Elizabeth Southwell, Essex was also known to have affairs with Mary Howard, Mrs. Russell, and the \"fairest Brydges\".\nPortrayals.\nThere have been many portrayals of Essex throughout the years:\nEssex in literature.\nThe best known biographical work about Robert Devereux is Lytton Strachey's masterpiece \"Elizabeth and Essex\".\nAt least two fencing treatises are dedicated to Robert, Earl of Essex. They are as follows:\nRobert Devereux's death and confession became the subject of two popular 17th-century broadside ballads, set to the English folk tunes \"Essex Last Goodnight\" and \"Welladay\". Numerous ballads lamenting his death and praising his military feats were also published throughout the 17th century.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50901", "revid": "40530670", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50901", "title": "Deep Throat", "text": "Deep Throat, deep-throat or deepthroat may refer to:\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "50902", "revid": "6273", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50902", "title": "English county", "text": ""}
{"id": "50903", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50903", "title": "Wavelet", "text": "Function for integral Fourier-like transform\nA wavelet is a wave-like oscillation with an amplitude that begins at zero, increases or decreases, and then returns to zero one or more times. Wavelets are termed a \"brief oscillation\". A taxonomy of wavelets has been established, based on the number and direction of its pulses. Wavelets are imbued with specific properties that make them useful for signal processing.\nFor example, a wavelet could be created to have a frequency of middle\u00a0C and a short duration of roughly one tenth of a second. If this wavelet were to be convolved with a signal created from the recording of a melody, then the resulting signal would be useful for determining when the middle\u00a0C note appeared in the song. Mathematically, a wavelet correlates with a signal if a portion of the signal is similar. Correlation is at the core of many practical wavelet applications.\nAs a mathematical tool, wavelets can be used to extract information from many kinds of data, including audio signals and images. Sets of wavelets are needed to analyze data fully. \"Complementary\" wavelets decompose a signal without gaps or overlaps so that the decomposition process is mathematically reversible. Thus, sets of complementary wavelets are useful in wavelet-based compression/decompression algorithms, where it is desirable to recover the original information with minimal loss.\nIn formal terms, this representation is a wavelet series representation of a square-integrable function with respect to either a complete, orthonormal set of basis functions, or an overcomplete set or frame of a vector space, for the Hilbert space of square-integrable functions. This is accomplished through coherent states.\nIn classical physics, the diffraction phenomenon is described by the Huygens\u2013Fresnel principle that treats each point in a propagating wavefront as a collection of individual spherical wavelets. The characteristic bending pattern is most pronounced when a wave from a coherent source (such as a laser) encounters a slit/aperture that is comparable in size to its wavelength. This is due to the addition, or interference, of different points on the wavefront (or, equivalently, each wavelet) that travel by paths of different lengths to the registering surface. Multiple, closely spaced openings (e.g., a diffraction grating), can result in a complex pattern of varying intensity.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"wavelet\" has been used for decades in digital signal processing and exploration geophysics. The equivalent French word \"ondelette\" meaning \"small wave\" was used by Jean Morlet and Alex Grossmann in the early 1980s.\nWavelet theory.\nWavelet theory is applicable to several subjects. All wavelet transforms may be considered forms of time-frequency representation for continuous-time (analog) signals and so are related to harmonic analysis. Discrete wavelet transform (continuous in time) of a discrete-time (sampled) signal by using discrete-time filterbanks of dyadic (octave band) configuration is a wavelet approximation to that signal. The coefficients of such a filter bank are called the shift and scaling coefficients in wavelets nomenclature. These filterbanks may contain either finite impulse response (FIR) or infinite impulse response (IIR) filters. The wavelets forming a continuous wavelet transform (CWT) are subject to the uncertainty principle of Fourier analysis respective sampling theory: given a signal with some event in it, one cannot assign simultaneously an exact time and frequency response scale to that event. The product of the uncertainties of time and frequency response scale has a lower bound. Thus, in the scaleogram of a continuous wavelet transform of this signal, such an event marks an entire region in the time-scale plane, instead of just one point. Also, discrete wavelet bases may be considered in the context of other forms of the uncertainty principle.\nWavelet transforms are broadly divided into three classes: continuous, discrete and multiresolution-based.\nContinuous wavelet transforms (continuous shift and scale parameters).\nIn continuous wavelet transforms, a given signal of finite energy is projected on a continuous family of frequency bands (or similar subspaces of the \"Lp\" function space \"L\"2(R) ). For instance the signal may be represented on every frequency band of the form [\"f\", 2\"f\"] for all positive frequencies \"f\" &gt; 0. Then, the original signal can be reconstructed by a suitable integration over all the resulting frequency components.\nThe frequency bands or subspaces (sub-bands) are scaled versions of a subspace at scale 1. This subspace in turn is in most situations generated by the shifts of one generating function \u03c8 in \"L\"2(R), the \"mother wavelet\". For the example of the scale one frequency band [1, 2] this function is\nformula_1\nwith the (normalized) sinc function. That, Meyer's, and two other examples of mother wavelets are:\nThe subspace of scale \"a\" or frequency band [1/\"a\", 2/\"a\"] is generated by the functions (sometimes called \"child wavelets\")\nformula_2\nwhere \"a\" is positive and defines the scale and \"b\" is any real number and defines the shift. The pair (\"a\", \"b\") defines a point in the right halfplane R+ \u00d7 R.\nThe projection of a function \"x\" onto the subspace of scale \"a\" then has the form\nformula_3\nwith \"wavelet coefficients\"\nformula_4\nFor the analysis of the signal \"x\", one can assemble the wavelet coefficients into a scaleogram of the signal.\nSee a list of some Continuous wavelets.\nDiscrete wavelet transforms (discrete shift and scale parameters, continuous in time).\nIt is computationally impossible to analyze a signal using all wavelet coefficients, so one may wonder if it is sufficient to pick a discrete subset of the upper halfplane to be able to reconstruct a signal from the corresponding wavelet coefficients. One such system is the affine system for some real parameters \"a\" &gt; 1, \"b\" &gt; 0. The corresponding discrete subset of the halfplane consists of all the points (\"am\", \"nb am\") with \"m\", \"n\" in Z. The corresponding \"child wavelets\" are now given as\nformula_5\nA sufficient condition for the reconstruction of any signal \"x\" of finite energy by the formula\nformula_6\nis that the functions formula_7 form an orthonormal basis of \"L\"2(R).\nMultiresolution based discrete wavelet transforms (continuous in time).\nIn any discretised wavelet transform, there are only a finite number of wavelet coefficients for each bounded rectangular region in the upper halfplane. Still, each coefficient requires the evaluation of an integral. In special situations this numerical complexity can be avoided if the scaled and shifted wavelets form a multiresolution analysis. This means that there has to exist an auxiliary function, the \"father wavelet\" \u03c6 in \"L\"2(R), and that \"a\" is an integer. A typical choice is \"a\" = 2 and \"b\" = 1. The most famous pair of father and mother wavelets is the Daubechies 4-tap wavelet. Note that not every orthonormal discrete wavelet basis can be associated to a multiresolution analysis; for example, the Journe wavelet admits no multiresolution analysis.\nFrom the mother and father wavelets one constructs the subspaces\nformula_8\nformula_9\nThe father wavelet formula_10 keeps the time domain properties, while the mother wavelets formula_11 keeps the frequency domain properties.\nFrom these it is required that the sequence\nformula_12\nforms a multiresolution analysis of \"L2\" and that the subspaces formula_13 are the orthogonal \"differences\" of the above sequence, that is, \"Wm\" is the orthogonal complement of \"Vm\" inside the subspace \"V\"\"m\"\u22121,\nformula_14\nIn analogy to the sampling theorem one may conclude that the space \"Vm\" with sampling distance 2\"m\" more or less covers the frequency baseband from 0 to 1/2\"m\"-1. As orthogonal complement, \"Wm\" roughly covers the band [1/2\"m\"\u22121, 1/2\"m\"].\nFrom those inclusions and orthogonality relations, especially formula_15, follows the existence of sequences formula_16 and formula_17 that satisfy the identities\nformula_18 so that formula_19 and\nformula_20 so that formula_21\nThe second identity of the first pair is a refinement equation for the father wavelet \u03c6. Both pairs of identities form the basis for the algorithm of the fast wavelet transform.\nFrom the multiresolution analysis derives the orthogonal decomposition of the space \"L\"2 as\nformula_22\nFor any signal or function formula_23 this gives a representation in basis functions of the corresponding subspaces as\nformula_24\nwhere the coefficients are\nformula_25 and\nformula_26\nTime-causal wavelets.\nFor processing temporal signals in real time, it is essential that the wavelet filters do not access signal values from the future as well as that minimal temporal latencies can be obtained. Time-causal wavelets representations have been developed by Szu et al and Lindeberg, with the latter method also involving a memory-efficient time-recursive implementation.\nMother wavelet.\nFor practical applications, and for efficiency reasons, one prefers continuously differentiable functions with compact support as mother (prototype) wavelet (functions). However, to satisfy analytical requirements (in the continuous WT) and in general for theoretical reasons, one chooses the wavelet functions from a subspace of the space formula_27 This is the space of Lebesgue measurable functions that are both absolutely integrable and square integrable in the sense that\nformula_28 and formula_29\nBeing in this space ensures that one can formulate the conditions of zero mean and square norm one:\nformula_30 is the condition for zero mean, and\nformula_31 is the condition for square norm one.\nFor \"\u03c8\" to be a wavelet for the continuous wavelet transform (see there for exact statement), the mother wavelet must satisfy an admissibility criterion (loosely speaking, a kind of half-differentiability) in order to get a stably invertible transform.\nFor the discrete wavelet transform, one needs at least the condition that the wavelet series is a representation of the identity in the space \"L\"2(R). Most constructions of discrete WT make use of the multiresolution analysis, which defines the wavelet by a scaling function. This scaling function itself is a solution to a functional equation.\nIn most situations it is useful to restrict \u03c8 to be a continuous function with a higher number \"M\" of vanishing moments, i.e. for all integer \"m\" &lt; \"M\"\nformula_32\nThe mother wavelet is scaled (or dilated) by a factor of \"a\" and translated (or shifted) by a factor of \"b\" to give (under Morlet's original formulation):\nformula_33\nFor the continuous WT, the pair (\"a\",\"b\") varies over the full half-plane R+ \u00d7 R; for the discrete WT this pair varies over a discrete subset of it, which is also called \"affine group\".\nThese functions are often incorrectly referred to as the basis functions of the (continuous) transform. In fact, as in the continuous Fourier transform, there is no basis in the continuous wavelet transform. Time-frequency interpretation uses a subtly different formulation (after Delprat).\nRestriction\uff1a\nComparisons with Fourier transform (continuous-time).\nThe wavelet transform is often compared with the Fourier transform, in which signals are represented as a sum of sinusoids. In fact, the Fourier transform can be viewed as a special case of the continuous wavelet transform with the choice of the mother wavelet\nformula_36.\nThe main difference in general is that wavelets are localized in both time and frequency whereas the standard Fourier transform is only localized in frequency. The short-time Fourier transform (STFT) is similar to the wavelet transform, in that it is also time and frequency localized, but there are issues with the frequency/time resolution trade-off.\nIn particular, assuming a rectangular window region, one may think of the STFT as a transform with a slightly different kernel\nformula_37\nwhere formula_38 can often be written as formula_39, where formula_40 and \"u\" respectively denote the length and temporal offset of the windowing function. Using Parseval's theorem, one may define the wavelet's energy as\nformula_41\nFrom this, the square of the temporal support of the window offset by time \"u\" is given by\nformula_42\nand the square of the spectral support of the window acting on a frequency formula_43\nformula_44\nMultiplication with a rectangular window in the time domain corresponds to convolution with a formula_45 function in the frequency domain, resulting in spurious ringing artifacts for short/localized temporal windows. With the continuous-time Fourier transform, formula_46 and this convolution is with a delta function in Fourier space, resulting in the true Fourier transform of the signal formula_47. The window function may be some other apodizing filter, such as a Gaussian. The choice of windowing function will affect the approximation error relative to the true Fourier transform.\nA given resolution cell's time-bandwidth product may not be exceeded with the STFT. All STFT basis elements maintain a uniform spectral and temporal support for all temporal shifts or offsets, thereby attaining an equal resolution in time for lower and higher frequencies. The resolution is purely determined by the sampling width.\nIn contrast, the wavelet transform's multiresolutional properties enables large temporal supports for lower frequencies while maintaining short temporal widths for higher frequencies by the scaling properties of the wavelet transform. This property extends conventional time-frequency analysis into time-scale analysis. \nThe discrete wavelet transform is less computationally complex, taking O(\"N\") time as compared to O(\"N\"\u00a0log\u00a0\"N\") for the fast Fourier transform (FFT). This computational advantage is not inherent to the transform, but reflects the choice of a logarithmic division of frequency, in contrast to the equally spaced frequency divisions of the FFT which uses the same basis functions as the discrete Fourier transform (DFT). This complexity only applies when the filter size has no relation to the signal size. A wavelet without compact support such as the Shannon wavelet would require O(\"N\"2). (For instance, a logarithmic Fourier Transform also exists with O(\"N\") complexity, but the original signal must be sampled logarithmically in time, which is only useful for certain types of signals.)\nDefinition of a wavelet.\nA wavelet (or a wavelet family) can be defined in various ways:\nScaling filter.\nAn orthogonal wavelet is entirely defined by the scaling filter \u2013 a low-pass finite impulse response (FIR) filter of length 2\"N\" and sum 1. In biorthogonal wavelets, separate decomposition and reconstruction filters are defined.\nFor analysis with orthogonal wavelets the high pass filter is calculated as the quadrature mirror filter of the low pass, and reconstruction filters are the time reverse of the decomposition filters.\nDaubechies and Symlet wavelets can be defined by the scaling filter.\nScaling function.\nWavelets are defined by the wavelet function \u03c8(\"t\") (i.e. the mother wavelet) and scaling function \u03c6(\"t\") (also called father wavelet) in the time domain.\nThe wavelet function is in effect a band-pass filter and scaling that for each level halves its bandwidth. This creates the problem that in order to cover the entire spectrum, an infinite number of levels would be required. The scaling function filters the lowest level of the transform and ensures all the spectrum is covered. See for a detailed explanation.\nFor a wavelet with compact support, \u03c6(\"t\") can be considered finite in length and is equivalent to the scaling filter \"g\".\nMeyer wavelets can be defined by scaling functions\nWavelet function.\nThe wavelet only has a time domain representation as the wavelet function \u03c8(\"t\").\nFor instance, Mexican hat wavelets can be defined by a wavelet function. See a list of a few continuous wavelets.\nHistory.\nThe development of wavelets can be linked to several separate trains of thought, starting with Alfr\u00e9d Haar's work in the early 20th century. Later work by Dennis Gabor yielded Gabor atoms (1946), which are constructed similarly to wavelets, and applied to similar purposes.\nNotable contributions to wavelet theory since then can be attributed to George Zweig's discovery of the continuous wavelet transform (CWT) in 1975 (originally called the cochlear transform and discovered while studying the reaction of the ear to sound), Pierre Goupillaud, Alex Grossmann and Jean Morlet's formulation of what is now known as the CWT (1982), Jan-Olov Str\u00f6mberg's early work on discrete wavelets (1983), the Le Gall\u2013Tabatabai (LGT) 5/3-taps non-orthogonal filter bank with linear phase (1988), Ingrid Daubechies' orthogonal wavelets with compact support (1988), St\u00e9phane Mallat's non-orthogonal multiresolution framework (1989), Ali Akansu's binomial QMF (1990), Nathalie Delprat's time-frequency interpretation of the CWT (1991), Newland's harmonic wavelet transform (1993), and set partitioning in hierarchical trees (SPIHT) developed by Amir Said with William A. Pearlman in 1996.\nThe JPEG 2000 standard was developed from 1997 to 2000 by a Joint Photographic Experts Group (JPEG) committee chaired by Touradj Ebrahimi (later the JPEG president). In contrast to the DCT algorithm used by the original JPEG format, JPEG 2000 instead uses discrete wavelet transform (DWT) algorithms. It uses the CDF 9/7 wavelet transform (developed by Ingrid Daubechies in 1992) for its lossy compression algorithm, and the Le Gall\u2013Tabatabai (LGT) 5/3 discrete-time filter bank (developed by Didier Le Gall and Ali J. Tabatabai in 1988) for its lossless compression algorithm. JPEG 2000 technology, which includes the Motion JPEG 2000 extension, was selected as the video coding standard for digital cinema in 2004.\nWavelet transforms.\nA wavelet is a mathematical function used to divide a given function or continuous-time signal into different scale components. Usually one can assign a frequency range to each scale component. Each scale component can then be studied with a resolution that matches its scale. A wavelet transform is the representation of a function by wavelets. The wavelets are scaled and translated copies (known as \"daughter wavelets\") of a finite-length or fast-decaying oscillating waveform (known as the \"mother wavelet\"). Wavelet transforms have advantages over traditional Fourier transforms for representing functions that have discontinuities and sharp peaks, and for accurately deconstructing and reconstructing finite, non-periodic and/or non-stationary signals.\nWavelet transforms are classified into discrete wavelet transforms (DWTs) and continuous wavelet transforms (CWTs). Note that both DWT and CWT are continuous-time (analog) transforms. They can be used to represent continuous-time (analog) signals. CWTs operate over every possible scale and translation whereas DWTs use a specific subset of scale and translation values or representation grid.\nThere are a large number of wavelet transforms each suitable for different applications. For a full list see list of wavelet-related transforms but the common ones are listed below:\nGeneralized transforms.\nThere are a number of generalized transforms of which the wavelet transform is a special case. For example, Yosef Joseph Segman introduced scale into the Heisenberg group, giving rise to a continuous transform space that is a function of time, scale, and frequency. The CWT is a two-dimensional slice through the resulting 3d time-scale-frequency volume.\nAnother example of a generalized transform is the chirplet transform in which the CWT is also a two dimensional slice through the chirplet transform.\nAn important application area for generalized transforms involves systems in which high frequency resolution is crucial. For example, darkfield electron optical transforms intermediate between direct and reciprocal space have been widely used in the harmonic analysis of atom clustering, i.e. in the study of crystals and crystal defects. Now that transmission electron microscopes are capable of providing digital images with picometer-scale information on atomic periodicity in nanostructure of all sorts, the range of pattern recognition and strain/metrology applications for intermediate transforms with high frequency resolution (like brushlets and ridgelets) is growing rapidly.\nFractional wavelet transform (FRWT) is a generalization of the classical wavelet transform in the fractional Fourier transform domains. This transform is capable of providing the time- and fractional-domain information simultaneously and representing signals in the time-fractional-frequency plane.\nApplications.\nGenerally, an approximation to DWT is used for data compression if a signal is already sampled, and the CWT for signal analysis. Thus, DWT approximation is commonly used in engineering and computer science, and the CWT in scientific research.\nLike some other transforms, wavelet transforms can be used to transform data, then encode the transformed data, resulting in effective compression. For example, JPEG 2000 is an image compression standard that uses biorthogonal wavelets. This means that although the frame is overcomplete, it is a \"tight frame\" (see types of frames of a vector space), and the same frame functions (except for conjugation in the case of complex wavelets) are used for both analysis and synthesis, i.e., in both the forward and inverse transform. For details see wavelet compression.\nA related use is for smoothing/denoising data based on wavelet coefficient thresholding, also called wavelet shrinkage. By adaptively thresholding the wavelet coefficients that correspond to undesired frequency components smoothing and/or denoising operations can be performed.\nWavelet transforms are also starting to be used for communication applications. Wavelet OFDM is the basic modulation scheme used in HD-PLC (a power line communications technology developed by Panasonic), and in one of the optional modes included in the IEEE 1901 standard. Wavelet OFDM can achieve deeper notches than traditional FFT OFDM, and wavelet OFDM does not require a guard interval (which usually represents significant overhead in FFT OFDM systems).\nAs a representation of a signal.\nOften, signals can be represented well as a sum of sinusoids. However, consider a non-continuous signal with an abrupt discontinuity; this signal can still be represented as a sum of sinusoids, but requires an infinite number, which is an observation known as Gibbs phenomenon. This, then, requires an infinite number of Fourier coefficients, which is not practical for many applications, such as compression. Wavelets are more useful for describing these signals with discontinuities because of their time-localized behavior (both Fourier and wavelet transforms are frequency-localized, but wavelets have an additional time-localization property). Because of this, many types of signals in practice may be non-sparse in the Fourier domain, but very sparse in the wavelet domain. This is particularly useful in signal reconstruction, especially in the recently popular field of compressed sensing. (Note that the short-time Fourier transform (STFT) is also localized in time and frequency, but there are often problems with the frequency-time resolution trade-off. Wavelets are better signal representations because of multiresolution analysis.)\nThis motivates why wavelet transforms are now being adopted for a vast number of applications, often replacing the conventional Fourier transform. Many areas of physics have seen this paradigm shift, including molecular dynamics, chaos theory, ab initio calculations, astrophysics, gravitational wave transient data analysis, density-matrix localisation, seismology, optics, turbulence and quantum mechanics. This change has also occurred in image processing, EEG, EMG, ECG analyses, brain rhythms, DNA analysis, protein analysis, climatology, human sexual response analysis, general signal processing, speech recognition, acoustics, vibration signals, computer graphics, multifractal analysis, and sparse coding. In computer vision and image processing, the notion of scale space representation and Gaussian derivative operators is regarded as a canonical multi-scale representation.\nWavelet denoising.\nSuppose we measure a noisy signal formula_48, where formula_49 represents the signal and formula_50 represents the noise. Assume formula_49 has a sparse representation in a certain wavelet basis, and formula_52\nLet the wavelet transform of formula_53 be formula_54, where formula_55 is the wavelet transform of the signal component and formula_56 is the wavelet transform of the noise component.\nMost elements in formula_57 are 0 or close to 0, and formula_58\nSince formula_59 is orthogonal, the estimation problem amounts to recovery of a signal in iid Gaussian noise. As formula_57 is sparse, one method is to apply a Gaussian mixture model for formula_57.\nAssume a prior formula_62, where formula_63 is the variance of \"significant\" coefficients and formula_64 is the variance of \"insignificant\" coefficients.\nThen formula_65, formula_66 is called the shrinkage factor, which depends on the prior variances formula_63 and formula_64. By setting coefficients that fall below a shrinkage threshold to zero, once the inverse transform is applied, an expectedly small amount of signal is lost due to the sparsity assumption. The larger coefficients are expected to primarily represent signal due to sparsity, and statistically very little of the signal, albeit the majority of the noise, is expected to be represented in such lower magnitude coefficients... therefore the zeroing-out operation is expected to remove most of the noise and not much signal. Typically, the above-threshold coefficients are not modified during this process. Some algorithms for wavelet-based denoising may attenuate larger coefficients as well, based on a statistical estimate of the amount of noise expected to be removed by such an attenuation.\nAt last, apply the inverse wavelet transform to obtain formula_69\nMultiscale climate network.\nAgarwal et al. proposed wavelet based advanced linear and nonlinear methods to construct and investigate Climate as complex networks at different timescales. Climate networks constructed using SST datasets at different timescale averred that wavelet based multi-scale analysis of climatic processes holds the promise of better understanding the system dynamics that may be missed when processes are analyzed at one timescale only\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50905", "revid": "49908634", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50905", "title": "Haar wavelet", "text": "First known wavelet basis\nIn mathematics, the Haar wavelet is a sequence of rescaled \"square-shaped\" functions which together form a wavelet family or basis. Wavelet analysis is similar to Fourier analysis in that it allows a target function over an interval to be represented in terms of an orthonormal basis. The Haar sequence is now recognised as the first known wavelet basis and is extensively used as a teaching example.\nThe Haar sequence was proposed in 1909 by Alfr\u00e9d Haar. \nHaar used these functions to give an example of an orthonormal system for the space of square-integrable functions on the unit interval\u00a0[0,\u00a01]. The study of wavelets, and even the term \"wavelet\", did not come until much later. As a special case of the Daubechies wavelet, the Haar wavelet is also known as Db1.\nThe Haar wavelet is also the simplest possible wavelet. The technical disadvantage of the Haar wavelet is that it is not continuous, and therefore not differentiable. This property can, however, be an advantage for the analysis of signals with sudden transitions (discrete signals), such as monitoring of tool failure in machines.\nThe Haar wavelet's mother wavelet function formula_1 can be described as\n formula_2\nIts scaling function formula_3 can be described as\n formula_4\nHaar functions and Haar system.\nFor every pair \"n\", \"k\" of integers in formula_5, the Haar function \"\u03c8\"\"n\",\"k\" is defined on the real line formula_6 by the formula\nformula_7\nThis function is supported on the right-open interval \"I\"\"n\",\"k\" \n [ \"k\"2\u2212\"n\", (\"k\"+1)2\u2212\"n\"), \"i.e.\", it vanishes outside that interval. It has integral 0 and norm\u00a01 in the Hilbert space\u00a0\"L\"2(formula_6),\nformula_9\nThe Haar functions are pairwise orthogonal,\nformula_10\nwhere formula_11 represents the Kronecker delta. Here is the reason for orthogonality: when the two supporting intervals formula_12 and formula_13 are not equal, then they are either disjoint, or else the smaller of the two supports, say formula_12, is contained in the lower or in the upper half of the other interval, on which the function formula_15 remains constant. It follows in this case that the product of these two Haar functions is a multiple of the first Haar function, hence the product has integral\u00a00.\nThe Haar system on the real line is the set of functions\nformula_16\nIt is complete in \"L\"2(formula_6): \"The Haar system on the line is an orthonormal basis in\" \"L\"2(formula_6).\nHaar wavelet properties.\nThe Haar wavelet has several notable properties:\nHaar system on the unit interval and related systems.\nIn this section, the discussion is restricted to the unit interval [0,\u00a01] and to the Haar functions that are supported on [0,\u00a01]. The system of functions considered by Haar in 1910,\ncalled the Haar system on [0,\u00a01] in this article, consists of the subset of Haar wavelets defined as\nformula_19\nwith the addition of the constant function 1 on [0,\u00a01].\nIn Hilbert space terms, this Haar system on [0,\u00a01] is a complete orthonormal system, \"i.e.\", an orthonormal basis, for the space \"L\"2([0,\u00a01]) of square integrable functions on the unit interval.\nThe Haar system on [0,\u00a01] \u2014with the constant function 1 as first element, followed with the Haar functions ordered according to the lexicographic ordering of couples (\"n\", \"k\")\u2014 is further a monotone Schauder basis for the space \"L\"\"p\"([0,\u00a01]) when 1 \u2264 \"p\" &lt; \u221e. \nThis basis is unconditional when 1 &lt; \"p\" &lt; \u221e.\nThere is a related Rademacher system consisting of sums of Haar functions, \nformula_20\nNotice that |\"r\"\"n\"(\"t\")|\u00a0= 1 on [0,\u00a01). This is an orthonormal system but it is not complete.\nIn the language of probability theory, the Rademacher sequence is an instance of a sequence of independent Bernoulli random variables with mean\u00a00. The Khintchine inequality expresses the fact that in all the spaces \"L\"\"p\"([0,\u00a01]), 1 \u2264 \"p\" &lt; \u221e, the Rademacher sequence is equivalent to the unit vector basis in \u2113\"2\". In particular, the closed linear span of the Rademacher sequence in \"L\"\"p\"([0,\u00a01]), 1 \u2264 \"p\" &lt; \u221e, is isomorphic to \u2113\"2\".\nThe Faber\u2013Schauder system.\nThe Faber\u2013Schauder system \nis the family of continuous functions on [0,\u00a01] consisting of the constant function\u00a01, and of multiples of indefinite integrals of the functions in the Haar system on\u00a0[0,\u00a01], chosen to have norm\u00a01 in the maximum norm. This system begins with \"s\"0\u00a0=\u00a01, then \"s\"1(\"t\") \n \"t\" is the indefinite integral vanishing at\u00a00 of the function\u00a01, first element of the Haar system on [0,\u00a01]. Next, for every integer \"n\" \u2265 0, functions \"s\"\"n\",\"k\" are defined by the formula\nformula_21\nThese functions \"s\"\"n\",\"k\" are continuous, piecewise linear, supported by the interval \"I\"\"n\",\"k\" that also supports \u03c8\"n\",\"k\". The function \"s\"\"n\",\"k\" is equal to\u00a01 at the midpoint \"x\"\"n\",\"k\" of the interval\u00a0\"I\"\"n\",\"k\", linear on both halves of that interval. It takes values between\u00a00 and\u00a01 everywhere.\nThe Faber\u2013Schauder system is a Schauder basis for the space \"C\"([0,\u00a01]) of continuous functions on [0,\u00a01]. \nFor every\u00a0\"f\" in \"C\"([0,\u00a01]), the partial sum\nformula_22\nof the series expansion of \"f\" in the Faber\u2013Schauder system is the continuous piecewise linear function that agrees with\u00a0\"f\" at the 2\"n\" + 1 points \"k\"2\u2212\"n\", where 0 \u2264 \"k\" \u2264 2\"n\". Next, the formula\nformula_23\ngives a way to compute the expansion of \"f\" step by step. Since \"f\" is uniformly continuous, the sequence {\"f\"\"n\"} converges uniformly to \"f\". It follows that the Faber\u2013Schauder series expansion of \"f\" converges in \"C\"([0,\u00a01]), and the sum of this series is equal to\u00a0\"f\".\nThe Franklin system.\nThe Franklin system is obtained from the Faber\u2013Schauder system by the Gram\u2013Schmidt orthonormalization procedure.\nSince the Franklin system has the same linear span as that of the Faber\u2013Schauder system, this span is dense in \"C\"([0,\u00a01]), hence in \"L\"2([0,\u00a01]). The Franklin system is therefore an orthonormal basis for \"L\"2([0,\u00a01]), consisting of continuous piecewise linear functions. P. Franklin proved in 1928 that this system is a Schauder basis for \"C\"([0,\u00a01]). \nThe Franklin system is also an unconditional Schauder basis for the space \"L\"\"p\"([0,\u00a01]) when 1 &lt; \"p\" &lt; \u221e.\nThe Franklin system provides a Schauder basis in the disk algebra \"A\"(\"D\").\nThis was proved in 1974 by Bo\u010dkarev, after the existence of a basis for the disk algebra had remained open for more than forty years.\nBo\u010dkarev's construction of a Schauder basis in \"A\"(\"D\") goes as follows: let\u00a0\"f\" be a complex valued Lipschitz function on [0,\u00a0\u03c0]; then\u00a0\"f\" is the sum of a cosine series with absolutely summable coefficients. Let\u00a0\"T\"(\"f\") be the element of \"A\"(\"D\") defined by the complex power series with the same coefficients,\nformula_24\nBo\u010dkarev's basis for \"A\"(\"D\") is formed by the images under\u00a0\"T\" of the functions in the Franklin system on\u00a0[0,\u00a0\u03c0]. Bo\u010dkarev's equivalent description for the mapping\u00a0\"T\" starts by extending \"f\" to an even Lipschitz function\u00a0\"g\"1 on [\u2212\u03c0,\u00a0\u03c0], identified with a Lipschitz function on the unit circle\u00a0T. Next, let \"g\"2 be the conjugate function of\u00a0\"g\"1, and define \"T\"(\"f\") to be the function in\u00a0\"A\"(\"D\") whose value on the boundary T of\u00a0\"D\" is equal to\u00a0\"g\"1 + i\"g\"2.\nWhen dealing with 1-periodic continuous functions, or rather with continuous functions \"f\" on [0,\u00a01] such that \"f\"(0) \n \"f\"(1), one removes the function \"s\"1(\"t\") \n \"t\" from the Faber\u2013Schauder system, in order to obtain the periodic Faber\u2013Schauder system. The periodic Franklin system is obtained by orthonormalization from the periodic Faber\u2013-Schauder system.\nOne can prove Bo\u010dkarev's result on \"A\"(\"D\") by proving that the periodic Franklin system on [0,\u00a02\u03c0] is a basis for a Banach space \"A\"\"r\" isomorphic to \"A\"(\"D\"). \nThe space \"A\"\"r\" consists of complex continuous functions on the unit circle T whose conjugate function is also continuous.\nHaar matrix.\nThe 2\u00d72 Haar matrix that is associated with the Haar wavelet is\n formula_25\nUsing the discrete wavelet transform, one can transform any sequence formula_26 of even length into a sequence of two-component-vectors formula_27. If one right-multiplies each vector with the matrix formula_28, one gets the result formula_29 of one stage of the fast Haar-wavelet transform. Usually one separates the sequences \"s\" and \"d\" and continues with transforming the sequence \"s\". Sequence \"s\" is often referred to as the \"averages\" part, whereas \"d\" is known as the \"details\" part.\nIf one has a sequence of length a multiple of four, one can build blocks of 4 elements and transform them in a similar manner with the 4\u00d74 Haar matrix\n formula_30\nwhich combines two stages of the fast Haar-wavelet transform.\nCompare with a Walsh matrix, which is a non-localized 1/\u20131 matrix.\nGenerally, the 2N\u00d72N Haar matrix can be derived by the following equation.\n formula_31\nwhere formula_32 and formula_33 is the Kronecker product.\nThe Kronecker product of formula_34, where formula_35 is an m\u00d7n matrix and formula_36 is a p\u00d7q matrix, is expressed as\n formula_37\nAn un-normalized 8-point Haar matrix formula_38 is shown below\n formula_39\nNote that, the above matrix is an un-normalized Haar matrix. The Haar matrix required by the Haar transform should be normalized.\nFrom the definition of the Haar matrix formula_40, one can observe that, unlike the Fourier transform, formula_40 has only real elements (i.e., 1, -1 or 0) and is non-symmetric.\nTake the 8-point Haar matrix formula_38 as an example. The first row of formula_38 measures the average value, and the second row of formula_38 measures a low frequency component of the input vector. The next two rows are sensitive to the first and second half of the input vector respectively, which corresponds to moderate frequency components. The remaining four rows are sensitive to the four section of the input vector, which corresponds to high frequency components.\nHaar transform.\nThe Haar transform is the simplest of the wavelet transforms. This transform cross-multiplies a function against the Haar wavelet with various shifts and stretches, like the Fourier transform cross-multiplies a function against a sine wave with two phases and many stretches.\nIntroduction.\nThe Haar transform is one of the oldest transform functions, proposed in 1910 by the Hungarian mathematician Alfr\u00e9d Haar. It is found effective in applications such as signal and image compression in electrical and computer engineering as it provides a simple and computationally efficient approach for analysing the local aspects of a signal.\nThe Haar transform is derived from the Haar matrix. An example of a 4\u00d74 Haar transformation matrix is shown below.\nformula_45\nThe Haar transform can be thought of as a sampling process in which rows of the transformation matrix act as samples of finer and finer resolution.\nCompare with the Walsh transform, which is also 1/\u20131, but is non-localized.\nProperty.\nThe Haar transform has the following properties\nHaar transform and Inverse Haar transform.\nThe Haar transform \"y\"\"n\" of an n-input function \"x\"\"n\" is\n formula_47\nThe Haar transform matrix is real and orthogonal. Thus, the inverse Haar transform can be derived by the following equations.\n formula_48\n where formula_49 is the identity matrix. For example, when n = 4\n formula_50\nThus, the inverse Haar transform is\n formula_51\nExample.\nThe Haar transform coefficients of a n=4-point signal formula_52 can be found as\n formula_53\nThe input signal can then be perfectly reconstructed by the inverse Haar transform\n formula_54\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50907", "revid": "49211846", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50907", "title": "List of Fourier-related transforms", "text": "This is a list of linear transformations of functions related to Fourier analysis. Such transformations map a function to a set of coefficients of basis functions, where the basis functions are sinusoidal and are therefore strongly localized in the frequency spectrum. (These transforms are generally designed to be invertible.) In the case of the Fourier transform, each basis function corresponds to a single frequency component.\nContinuous transforms.\nApplied to functions of continuous arguments, Fourier-related transforms include:\nDiscrete transforms.\nFor usage on computers, number theory and algebra, discrete arguments (e.g. functions of a series of discrete samples) are often more appropriate, and are handled by the transforms (analogous to the continuous cases above):\nThe use of all of these transforms is greatly facilitated by the existence of efficient algorithms based on a fast Fourier transform (FFT). The Nyquist\u2013Shannon sampling theorem is critical for understanding the output of such discrete transforms.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50908", "revid": "50579393", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50908", "title": "Roger Ebert", "text": "American film critic and author (1942\u20132013)\nRoger Joseph Ebert ( ; June 18, 1942 \u2013 April 4, 2013) was an American film critic, film historian, journalist, essayist, screenwriter and author. He wrote for the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" from 1967 until his death in 2013. Ebert was known for his intimate, Midwestern writing style and critical views informed by values of populism and humanism. Writing in a prose style intended to be entertaining and direct, he made sophisticated cinematic and analytical ideas more accessible to non-specialist audiences. Ebert endorsed foreign and independent films he believed would be appreciated by mainstream viewers, championing filmmakers like Werner Herzog, Errol Morris and Spike Lee, as well as Martin Scorsese, whose first published review he wrote. In 1975, Ebert became the first film critic to win the Pulitzer Prize for Criticism. Neil Steinberg of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" said Ebert \"was without question the nation's most prominent and influential film critic,\" and Kenneth Turan of the \"Los Angeles Times\" called him \"the best-known film critic in America.\" Per \"The New York Times\", \"The force and grace of his opinions propelled film criticism into the mainstream of American culture. Not only did he advise moviegoers about what to see, but also how to think about what they saw.\"\nEarly in his career, Ebert co-wrote the Russ Meyer film \"Beyond the Valley of the Dolls\" (1970). Starting in 1975 and continuing for decades, Ebert and \"Chicago Tribune\" critic Gene Siskel helped popularize nationally televised film reviewing when they co-hosted the PBS show \"Sneak Previews\", followed by several variously named \"At the Movies\" programs on commercial TV broadcast syndication. The two verbally sparred and traded humorous barbs while discussing films. They created and trademarked the phrase \"two thumbs up,\" used when both gave the same film a positive review. After Siskel died from a brain tumor in 1999, Ebert continued hosting the show with various co-hosts and then, starting in 2000, with Richard Roeper. In 1996, Ebert began publishing essays on great films of the past; the first hundred were published as \"The Great Movies\". He published two more volumes, and a fourth was published posthumously. In 1999, he founded the Overlooked Film Festival in Champaign, Illinois.\nIn 2002, Ebert was diagnosed with cancer of the thyroid and salivary glands. He required treatment that included removing a section of his lower jaw in 2006, leaving him severely disfigured and unable to speak or eat normally. However, his ability to write remained unimpaired and he continued to publish frequently online and in print until his death in 2013. His \"RogerEbert.com\" website, launched in 2002, remains online as an archive of his published writings. Richard Corliss wrote, \"Roger leaves a legacy of indefatigable connoisseurship in movies, literature, politics and, to quote the title of his 2011 autobiography, \"Life Itself\".\" In 2014, \"Life Itself\" was adapted as a documentary of the same title, released to positive reviews.\nEarly life and education.\nRoger Joseph Ebert was born on June 18, 1942, in Urbana, Illinois, the only child of Annabel (n\u00e9e\u00a0Stumm), a bookkeeper, and Walter Harry Ebert, an electrician. He was raised Roman Catholic, attending St. Mary's elementary school and serving as an altar boy in Urbana.\nHis paternal grandparents were German immigrants and his maternal ancestry was Irish and Dutch. His first movie memory was of his parents taking him to see the Marx Brothers in \"A Day at the Races\" (1937). He wrote that \"Adventures of Huckleberry Finn\" was \"the first real book I ever read, and still the best.\" He began his writing career with his own newspaper, \"The Washington Street News\", printed in his basement. He wrote letters of comment to the science-fiction fanzines of the era and founded his own, \"Stymie\". At age 15, he was a sportswriter for \"The News-Gazette\" covering Urbana High School sports. He attended Urbana High School, where in his senior year he was class president and co-editor of his high school newspaper, \"The Echo\". In 1958, he won the Illinois High School Association state speech championship in \"radio speaking,\" an event that simulates radio newscasts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"I learned to be a movie critic by reading \"Mad\" magazine\u00a0... \"Mad\"'s parodies made me aware of the machine inside the skin\u00a0\u2013 of the way a movie might look original on the outside, while inside it was just recycling the same old dumb formulas. I did not read the magazine, I plundered it for clues to the universe. Pauline Kael lost it at the movies; I lost it at \"Mad\" magazine\"\n\u2014 Roger Ebert, \"Mad About the Movies\" (1998 parody collection)\nEbert began taking classes at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign as an early-entrance student, completing his high school courses while also taking his first university class. After graduating from Urbana High School in 1960, he attended the University of Illinois and received his undergraduate degree in journalism in 1964. While there, Ebert worked as a reporter for \"The Daily Illini\" and served as its editor during his senior year while continuing to work for the \"News-Gazette\".\nHis college mentor was Daniel Curley, who \"introduced me to many of the cornerstones of my life's reading: 'The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock', \"Crime and Punishment\", \"Madame Bovary\", \"The Ambassadors\", \"Nostromo\", \"The Professor's House\", \"The Great Gatsby\", \"The Sound and the Fury\" ... He approached these works with undisguised admiration. We discussed patterns of symbolism, felicities of language, motivation, revelation of character. This was \"appreciation\", not the savagery of deconstruction, which approaches literature as pliers do a rose.\" One of his classmates was Larry Woiwode, who went on to be the Poet Laureate of North Dakota. At \"The\" \"Daily Illini\" Ebert befriended William Nack, who as a sportswriter would cover Secretariat. As an undergraduate, he was a member of the Phi Delta Theta fraternity and president of the United States Student Press Association. One of the first reviews he wrote was of \"La Dolce Vita\", published in \"The Daily Illini\" in October 1961.\nAs a graduate student, he \"had the good fortune to enroll in a class on Shakespeare's tragedies taught by G. Blakemore Evans ... It was then that Shakespeare took hold of me, and it became clear he was the nearest we have come to a voice for what it means to be human.\" Ebert spent a semester as a master's student in the department of English there before attending the University of Cape Town on a Rotary fellowship for a year. He returned from Cape Town to his graduate studies at Illinois for two more semesters and then, after being accepted as a PhD student at the University of Chicago, he prepared to move to Chicago. He needed a job to support himself while he worked on his doctorate and so applied to the \"Chicago Daily News\", hoping that, as he had already sold freelance pieces to the \"Daily News\", including an article on the death of writer Brendan Behan, he would be hired by editor Herman Kogan.\nInstead, Kogan referred Ebert to the city editor at the \"Chicago Sun-Times\", Jim Hoge, who hired him as a reporter and feature writer in 1966. He attended doctoral classes at the University of Chicago while working as a general reporter for a year. After movie critic Eleanor Keane left the \"Sun-Times\" in April 1967, editor Robert Zonka gave the job to Ebert. The paper wanted a young critic to cover movies like \"The Graduate\" and films by Jean-Luc Godard and Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut. \nBeginning in 1968, Ebert worked for the University of Chicago as an adjunct lecturer, teaching a night class on film at the Graham School of Continuing Liberal and Professional Studies. The load of graduate school and being a film critic proved too much, so Ebert left the University of Chicago to focus his energies on film criticism.\nCareer.\n1967\u20131974: Early writings.\nEbert's first review for the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" began: \"Georges Lautner\u2019s \"Galia\" opens and closes with arty shots of the ocean, mother of us all, but in between it's pretty clear that what is washing ashore is the French New Wave.\" He recalls that \"Within a day after Zonka gave me the job, I read \"The Immediate Experience\" by Robert Warshow\", from which he gleaned that \"the critic has to set aside theory and ideology, theology and politics, and open himself to\u2014well, the immediate experience.\" That same year, he met film critic Pauline Kael for the first time at the New York Film Festival. After he sent her some of his columns, she told him they were \"the best film criticism being done in American newspapers today.\" He recalls her telling him how she worked: \"I go into the movie, I watch it, and I ask myself what happened to me.\" A formative experience was reviewing Ingmar Bergman's \"Persona\" (1966). He told his editor he wasn't sure how to review it when he didn't feel he could explain it. His editor told him he didn't have to explain it, just describe it.\nHe was one of the first critics to champion Arthur Penn's \"Bonnie and Clyde\" (1967), calling it \"a milestone in the history of American movies, a work of truth and brilliance. It is also pitilessly cruel, filled with sympathy, nauseating, funny, heartbreaking and astonishingly beautiful. If it does not seem that those words should be strung together, perhaps that is because movies do not very often reflect the full range of human life.\" He concluded: \"The fact that the story is set 35 years ago doesn't mean a thing. It had to be set some time. But it was made now and it's about us.\" Thirty-one years later, he wrote \"When I saw it, I had been a film critic for less than six months, and it was the first masterpiece I had seen on the job. I felt an exhilaration beyond describing. I did not suspect how long it would be between such experiences, but at least I learned that they were possible.\" He wrote Martin Scorsese's first review, for \"Who's That Knocking at My Door\" (1967, then titled \"I Call First\"), and predicted the young director could become \"an American Fellini.\"\nEbert co-wrote the screenplay for Russ Meyer's \"Beyond the Valley of the Dolls\" (1970) and sometimes joked about being responsible for it. It was poorly received on its release yet has become a cult film. Ebert and Meyer also made \"Up!\" (1976), \"Beneath the Valley of the Ultra-Vixens\" (1979) and other films, and were involved in the ill-fated Sex Pistols film \"Who Killed Bambi?\" In April 2010, Ebert posted his screenplay of \"Who Killed Bambi?\", also known as \"Anarchy in the UK\", on his blog.\nEbert served on the jury at the 33rd Venice International Film Festival in 1972.\n1975\u20131999: Stardom with \"Siskel &amp; Ebert\".\nIn 1975, Ebert received the Pulitzer Prize for Criticism. In the aftermath of his win, he was offered jobs at \"The New York Times\" and \"The Washington Post\", but he declined them both, as he did not wish to leave Chicago. That same year, he and Gene Siskel of the \"Chicago Tribune\" began co-hosting a weekly film-review television show, \"Opening Soon at a Theater Near You\", later \"Sneak Previews\", which was locally produced by the Chicago public broadcasting station WTTW. The series was later picked up for national syndication on PBS. The duo became well known for their \"thumbs up/thumbs down\" reviews. They trademarked the phrase \"Two Thumbs Up.\"\nIn 1982, they moved from PBS to launch a similar syndicated commercial television show, \"At the Movies With Gene Siskel &amp; Roger Ebert\". In 1986, they again moved the show to new ownership, creating \"Siskel &amp; Ebert &amp; the Movies\" through Buena Vista Television, part of the Walt Disney Company. Ebert and Siskel made many appearances on late night talk shows, appearing on \"The Late Show with David Letterman\" sixteen times and \"The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson\" fifteen times. They also appeared together on \"The Oprah Winfrey Show\", \"The Arsenio Hall Show\", \"The Howard Stern Show\", \"The Tonight Show with Jay Leno\" and \"Late Night with Conan O'Brien\".\nSiskel and Ebert were sometimes accused of trivializing film criticism. Richard Corliss, in \"Film Comment\", called the show \"a sitcom (with its own noodling, toodling theme song) starring two guys who live in a movie theater and argue all the time\". Ebert responded that \"I am the first to agree with Corliss that the Siskel and Ebert program is not in-depth film criticism\" but that \"When we have an opinion about a movie, that opinion may light a bulb above the head of an ambitious youth who then understands that people can make up their own minds about movies.\" He also noted that they did \"theme shows\" condemning colorization and showing the virtues of letterboxing. He argued that \"good criticism is commonplace these days. \"Film Comment\" itself is healthier and more widely distributed than ever before. \"Film Quarterly\" is, too; it even abandoned eons of tradition to increase its page size. And then look at \"Cin\u00e9aste\" and \"American Film\" and the specialist film magazines (you may not read \"Fangoria\", but if you did, you would be amazed at the erudition its writers bring to the horror and special effects genres.)\" Corliss wrote that \"I do think the program has other merits, and said so in a sentence of my original article that didn't make it into type: 'Sometimes the show does good: in spotlighting foreign and independent films, and in raising issues like censorship and colorization.' The stars' recent excoriation of the MPAA's X rating was salutary to the max.\"\nIn 1996, W. W. Norton &amp; Company asked Ebert to edit an anthology of film writing. This resulted in \"Roger Ebert's Book of Film: From Tolstoy to Tarantino, the Finest Writing From a Century of Film\". The selections are eclectic, ranging from Louise Brooks's autobiography to David Thomson's novel \"Suspects\". Ebert \"wrote to Nigel Wade, then the editor of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\", and proposed a biweekly series of longer articles great movies of the past. He gave his blessing ... Every other week I have revisited a great movie, and the response has been encouraging.\" The first film he wrote about for the series was \"Casablanca\" (1942). A hundred of these essays were published as \"The Great Movies\" (2002); he released two more volumes, and a fourth was published posthumously. In 1999, Ebert founded The Overlooked Film Festival (later Ebertfest), in his hometown, Champaign, Illinois.\nIn May 1998, Siskel took a leave of absence from the show to undergo brain surgery. He returned to the show, although viewers noticed a change in his physical appearance. Despite appearing sluggish and tired, Siskel continued reviewing films with Ebert and would appear on \"Late Show with David Letterman\". In February 1999, Siskel died of a brain tumor. The producers renamed the show \"Roger Ebert &amp; the Movies\" and used rotating co-hosts including Martin Scorsese,Janet Maslin and A.O. Scott. Ebert wrote of his late colleague: \"For the first five years that we knew one another, Gene Siskel and I hardly spoke. Then it seemed like we never stopped.\" He wrote of Siskel's work ethic, of how quickly he returned to work after surgery: \"Someone else might have taken a leave of absence then and there, but Gene worked as long as he could. Being a film critic was important to him. He liked to refer to his job as 'the national dream beat,' and say that in reviewing movies he was covering what people hoped for, dreamed about, and feared.\" Ebert recalled, \"Whenever he interviewed someone for his newspaper or for television, Gene Siskel liked to end with the same question: 'What do you know for sure?' OK Gene, what do I know for sure about you? You were one of the smartest, funniest, quickest men I've ever known and one of the best reporters...I know for sure that seeing a truly great movie made you so happy that you'd tell me a week later your spirits were still high.\" Ten years after Siskel's death, Ebert blogged about his colleague: \"We once spoke with Disney and CBS about a sitcom to be titled \"Best Enemies\". It would be about two movie critics joined in a love/hate relationship. It never went anywhere, but we both believed it was a good idea. Maybe the problem was that no one else could possibly understand how meaningless was the hate, how deep was the love.\"\n2000\u20132006: \"Ebert &amp; Roeper\".\nIn September 2000, \"Chicago Sun-Times\" columnist Richard Roeper became the permanent co-host and the show was renamed \"At the Movies with Ebert &amp; Roeper\" and later \"Ebert &amp; Roeper\". In 2000, Ebert interviewed President Bill Clinton about movies at The White House.\nIn 2002, Ebert was diagnosed with cancer of the salivary glands. In 2006, cancer surgery resulted in his losing his ability to eat and speak. In 2007, prior to his Overlooked Film Festival, he posted a picture of his new condition. Paraphrasing a line from \"Raging Bull\" (1980), he wrote, \"I ain\u2019t a pretty boy no more. (Not that I ever was. The original appeal of \"Siskel &amp; Ebert\" was that we didn't look like we belonged on TV.)\" He added that he would not miss the festival: \"At least, not being able to speak, I am spared the need to explain why every film is 'overlooked', or why I wrote \"Beyond the Valley of the Dolls\".\"\n2007\u20132013: \"RogerEbert.com\".\nEbert ended his association with \"At The Movies\" in July 2008, after Disney indicated it wished to take the program in a new direction. As of 2007, his reviews were syndicated to more than 200 newspapers in the United States and abroad. His \"RogerEbert.com\" website, launched in 2002 and originally underwritten by the \"Chicago Sun-Times\", remains online as an archive of his published writings and reviews while also hosting new material written by a group of critics who were selected by Ebert before his death. Even as he used TV (and later the Internet) to share his reviews, Ebert continued to write for the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" until he died. On February 18, 2009, Ebert reported that he and Roeper would soon announce a new movie-review program, and reiterated this plan after Disney announced that the program's last episode would air in August 2010. In 2008, having lost his voice, he turned to blogging to express himself. Peter Debruge writes that \"Ebert was one of the first writers to recognize the potential of discussing film online.\"\nHis final television series, \"\", premiered on January 21, 2011, with Ebert contributing a review voiced by Bill Kurtis in a brief segment called \"Roger's Office,\" as well as traditional film reviews in the \"At the Movies\" format by Christy Lemire and Ignatiy Vishnevetsky. The program lasted one season, before being cancelled due to funding constraints.\nIn 2011, he published his memoir, \"Life Itself\", in which he describes his childhood, his career, his struggles with alcoholism and cancer, his loves and friendships. On March 7, 2013, Ebert published his last Great Movies essay, for \"The Ballad of Narayama\" (1958). The last review Ebert published during his lifetime was for \"The Host\", on March 27, 2013. The last review Ebert filed, published posthumously on April 6, 2013, was for \"To the Wonder\". In July 2013, a previously unpublished review of \"Computer Chess\" appeared on \"RogerEbert.com\". The review had been written in March but had remained unpublished until the film's wide-release date. Matt Zoller Seitz, the editor of \"RogerEbert.com\", confirmed that there were other unpublished reviews that would eventually be posted. A second review, for \"The Spectacular Now\", was published in August 2013.\nIn his last blog entry, posted two days before his death, Ebert wrote that his cancer had returned and he was taking \"a leave of presence.\" \"What in the world is a leave of presence? It means I am not going away. My intent is to continue to write selected reviews but to leave the rest to a talented team of writers handpicked and greatly admired by me. What's more, I'll be able at last to do what I\u2019ve always fantasized about doing: reviewing only the movies I want to review.\" He signed off, \"So on this day of reflection I say again, thank you for going on this journey with me. I'll see you at the movies.\"\nCritical style.\nEbert cited Andrew Sarris and Pauline Kael as influences, and often quoted Robert Warshow, who said: \"A man goes to the movies. A critic must be honest enough to admit he is that man.\" His own credo was: \"Your intellect may be confused, but your emotions never lie to you.\" He tried to judge a movie on its style rather than its content, and often said \"It's not what a movie is about, it's how it's about what it's about.\"\nHe awarded four stars to films of the highest quality, and generally a half star to those of the lowest, unless he considered the film to be \"artistically inept and morally repugnant\", in which case it received no stars, as with \"Death Wish II\". He explained that his star ratings had little meaning outside the context of the review:\nAlthough Ebert rarely wrote outright scathing reviews, he had a reputation for writing memorable ones for the films he really hated, such as \"North\". Of that film, he wrote \"I hated this movie. Hated hated hated hated hated this movie. Hated it. Hated every simpering stupid vacant audience-insulting moment of it. Hated the sensibility that thought anyone would like it. Hated the implied insult to the audience by its belief that anyone would be entertained by it.\" He wrote that \"Mad Dog Time\" \"is the first movie I have seen that does not improve on the sight of a blank screen viewed for the same length of time. Oh, I've seen bad movies before. But they usually made me \"care\" about how bad they were. Watching \"Mad Dog Time\" is like waiting for the bus in a city where you're not sure they have a bus line\" and concluded that the film \"should be cut up to provide free ukulele picks for the poor.\" Of \"Caligula\", he wrote \"It is not good art, it is not good cinema, and it is not good porn\" and approvingly quoted the woman in front of him at the drinking fountain, who called it \"the worst piece of shit I have ever seen.\"\nEbert's reviews were also characterized by \"dry wit.\" He often wrote in a deadpan style when discussing a movie's flaws; in his review of \"\", he wrote that Mrs. Brody's \"friends pooh-pooh the notion that a shark could identify, follow or even care about one individual human being, but I am willing to grant the point, for the benefit of the plot. I believe that the shark wants revenge against Mrs. Brody. I do. I really do believe it. After all, her husband was one of the men who hunted this shark and killed it, blowing it to bits. And what shark wouldn't want revenge against the survivors of the men who killed it? Here are some things, however, that I do not believe\", going on to list the other ways the film strained credulity. He wrote \"\"Pearl Harbor\" is a two-hour movie squeezed into three hours, about how on Dec. 7, 1941, the Japanese staged a surprise attack on an American love triangle. Its centerpiece is 40 minutes of redundant special effects, surrounded by a love story of stunning banality. The film has been directed without grace, vision, or originality, and although you may walk out quoting lines of dialog, it will not be because you admire them.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"[Ebert's prose] had a plain-spoken Midwestern clarity...a genial, conversational presence on the page...his criticism shows a nearly unequaled grasp of film history and technique, and formidable intellectual range, but he rarely seems to be showing off. He's just trying to tell you what he thinks, and to provoke some thought on your part about how movies work and what they can do\".\n \u2014 A.O. Scott, film critic for \"The New York Times\"\nEbert often included personal anecdotes in his reviews; reviewing \"The Last Picture Show\", he recalls his early days as a moviegoer: \"For five or six years of my life (the years between when I was old enough to go alone, and when TV came to town) Saturday afternoon at the Princess was a descent into a dark magical cave that smelled of Jujubes, melted Dreamsicles and Crisco in the popcorn machine. It was probably on one of those Saturday afternoons that I formed my first critical opinion, deciding vaguely that there was something about John Wayne that set him apart from ordinary cowboys.\" Reviewing \"Star Wars\", he wrote: \"Every once in a while I have what I think of as an out-of-the-body experience at a movie. When the ESP people use a phrase like that, they're referring to the sensation of the mind actually leaving the body and spiriting itself off to China or Peoria or a galaxy far, far away. When I use the phrase, I simply mean that my imagination has forgotten it is actually present in a movie theater and thinks it's up there on the screen. In a curious sense, the events in the movie seem real, and I seem to be a part of them...My list of other out-of-the-body films is a short and odd one, ranging from the artistry of \"Bonnie and Clyde\" or \"Cries and Whispers\" to the slick commercialism of \"Jaws\" and the brutal strength of \"Taxi Driver\". On whatever level (sometimes I'm not at all sure) they engage me so immediately and powerfully that I lose my detachment, my analytical reserve. The movie's \"happening\", and it's happening to me.\" He sometimes wrote reviews in the forms of stories, poems, songs, scripts, open letters, or imagined conversations.\nAlex Ross, music critic for \"The New Yorker\", wrote of how Ebert had influenced his writing: \"I noticed how much Ebert could put across in a limited space. He didn't waste time clearing his throat. 'They meet for the first time when she is in her front yard practicing baton-twirling,' begins his review of \"Badlands\". Often, he managed to smuggle the basics of the plot into a larger thesis about the movie, so that you don't notice the exposition taking place: \"'Broadcast News\" is as knowledgeable about the TV news-gathering process as any movie ever made, but it also has insights into the more personal matter of how people use high-pressure jobs as a way of avoiding time alone with themselves.' The reviews start off in all different ways, sometimes with personal confessions, sometimes with sweeping statements. One way or another, he pulls you in. When he feels strongly, he can bang his fist in an impressive way. His review of \"Apocalypse Now\" ends thus: 'The whole huge grand mystery of the world, so terrible, so beautiful, seems to hang in the balance.'\"\nIn his introduction to \"The Great Movies III\", he wrote:\nIn the first \"Great Movies\", he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMovies do not change, but their viewers do. When I first saw \"La Dolce Vita\" in 1961, I was an adolescent for whom \"the sweet life\" represented everything I dreamed of: sin, exotic European glamour, the weary romance of the cynical newspaperman. When I saw it again, around 1970, I was living in a version of Marcello's world; Chicago's North Avenue was not the Via Veneto, but at 3 A. M. the denizens were just as colorful, and I was about Marcello's age.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When I saw the movie around 1980, Marcello was the same age, but I was ten years older, had stopped drinking, and saw him not as role model, but as a victim, condemned to an endless search for happiness that could never be found, not that way. By 1991, when I analyzed the film a frame at a time at the University of Colorado, Marcello seemed younger still, and while I had once admired and then criticized him, now I pitied and loved him. And when I saw the movie right after Mastroianni died, I thought that Fellini and Marcello had taken a moment of discovery and made it immortal. There may be no such thing as the sweet life. But it is necessary to find that out for yourself.\nPreferences.\nFavorites.\nIn an essay looking back at his first 25 years as a film critic, Ebert wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIf I had to make a generalization, I would say that many of my favorite movies are about Good People ... \"Casablanca\" is about people who do the right thing. \"The Third Man\" is about people who do the right thing and can never speak to one another as a result ... Not all good movies are about Good People. I also like movies about bad people who have a sense of humor. Orson Welles, who does not play either of the good people in \"The Third Man\", has such a winning way, such witty dialogue, that for a scene or two we almost forgive him his crimes. Henry Hill, the hero of \"Goodfellas\", is not a good fella, but he has the ability to be honest with us about why he enjoyed being bad. He is not a hypocrite.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Of the other movies I love, some are simply about the joy of physical movement. When Gene Kelly splashes through \"Singin' in the Rain\", when Judy Garland follows the yellow brick road, when Fred Astaire dances on the ceiling, when John Wayne puts the reins in his teeth and gallops across the mountain meadow, there is a purity and joy that cannot be resisted. In \"Equinox Flower\", a Japanese film by the old master Yasujir\u014d Ozu, there is this sequence of shots: A room with a red teapot in the foreground. Another view of the room. The mother folding clothes. A shot down a corridor with a mother crossing it at an angle, and then a daughter crossing at the back. A reverse shot in the hallway as the arriving father is greeted by the mother and daughter. A shot as the father leaves the frame, then the mother, then the daughter. A shot as the mother and father enter the room, as in the background the daughter picks up the red pot and leaves the frame. This sequence of timed movement and cutting is as perfect as any music ever written, any dance, any poem.\nEbert credits film historian Donald Richie and the Hawaii International Film Festival for introducing him to Asian cinema through Richie's invitation to join him on the jury of the festival in 1983, which quickly became a favorite of his and would frequently attend along with Richie, lending their support to validate the festival's status as a \"festival of record\". He lamented the decline of campus film societies: \"There was once a time when young people made it their business to catch up on the best works by the best directors, but the death of film societies and repertory theaters put an end to that, and for today's younger filmgoers, these are not well-known names: Bu\u00f1uel, Fellini, Bergman, Ford, Kurosawa, Ray, Renoir, Lean, Bresson, Wilder, Welles. Most people still know who Hitchcock was, I guess.\"\nEbert argued for the aesthetic values of black-and-white photography and against colorization, writing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Black-and-white movies present the deliberate absence of color. This makes them less realistic than color films (for the real world is in color). They are more dreamlike, more pure, composed of shapes and forms and movements and light and shadow. Color films can simply be illuminated. Black-and-white films have to be lighted ... Black and white is a legitimate and beautiful artistic choice in motion pictures, creating feelings and effects that cannot be obtained any other way.\nHe wrote: \"Black-and-white (or, more accurately, silver-and-white) creates a mysterious dream state, a simpler world of form and gesture. Most people do not agree with me. They like color and think a black-and-white film is missing something. Try this. If you have wedding photographs of your parents and grandparents, chances are your parents are in color and your grandparents are in black and white. Put the two photographs side by side and consider them honestly. Your grandparents look timeless. Your parents look goofy.\nThe next time you buy film for your camera, buy a roll of black-and-white. Go outside at dusk, when the daylight is diffused. Stand on the side of the house away from the sunset. Shoot some natural-light closeups of a friend. Have the pictures printed big, at least 5 x 7. Ask yourself if this friend, who has always looked ordinary in every color photograph you've ever taken, does not suddenly, in black and white, somehow take on an aura of mystery. The same thing happens in the movies.\"\nEbert championed animation, particularly the films of Hayao Miyazaki and Isao Takahata. In his review of Miyazaki's \"Princess Mononoke\", he wrote: \"I go to the movies for many reasons. Here is one of them. I want to see wondrous sights not available in the real world, in stories where myth and dreams are set free to play. Animation opens that possibility, because it is freed from gravity and the chains of the possible. Realistic films show the physical world; animation shows its essence. Animated films are not copies of 'real movies,' are not shadows of reality, but create a new existence in their own right.\" He concluded his review of \"Ratatouille\" by writing: \"Every time an animated film is successful, you have to read all over again about how animation isn't 'just for children' but 'for the whole family,' and 'even for adults going on their own.' No kidding!\"\nEbert championed documentaries, notably Errol Morris's \"Gates of Heaven\": \"They say you can make a great documentary about anything, as long as you see it well enough and truly, and this film proves it. \"Gates of Heaven\", which has no connection to the unfortunate \"Heaven's Gate\", is about a couple of pet cemeteries and their owners. It was filmed in Southern California, so of course we expect a sardonic look at the peculiarities of the Moonbeam State. But then \"Gates of Heaven\" grows ever so much more complex and frightening, until at the end it is about such large issues as love, immortality, failure, and the dogged elusiveness of the American Dream.\" Morris credited Ebert's review with putting him on the map. He championed Michael Apted's \"Up\" films, calling them \"an inspired, even noble use of the medium.\" Ebert concluded his review of \"Hoop Dreams\" by writing: \"Many filmgoers are reluctant to see documentaries, for reasons I've never understood; the good ones are frequently more absorbing and entertaining than fiction. \"Hoop Dreams\", however, is not only documentary. It is also poetry and prose, muckraking and expose, journalism and polemic. It is one of the great moviegoing experiences of my lifetime.\"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIf a movie can illuminate the lives of other people who share this planet with us and show us not only how different they are but, how even so, they share the same dreams and hurts, then it deserves to be called great.\n\u2014 Ebert, 1986\nEbert said that his favorite film was \"Citizen Kane\", joking, \"That's the official answer,\" although he preferred to emphasize it as \"the most important\" film. He said seeing \"The Third Man\" cemented his love of cinema: \"This movie is on the altar of my love for the cinema. I saw it for the first time in a little fleabox of a theater on the Left Bank in Paris, in 1962, during my first $5 a day trip to Europe. It was so sad, so beautiful, so romantic, that it became at once a part of my own memories \u2014 as if it had happened to me.\" He implied that his real favorite film was \"La Dolce Vita\".\nHis favorite actor was Robert Mitchum and his favorite actress was Ingrid Bergman. He named Buster Keaton, Yasujir\u014d Ozu, Robert Altman, Werner Herzog and Martin Scorsese as his favorite directors. He expressed his distaste for \"top-10\" lists, and all movie lists in general, but did make an annual list of the year's best films, joking that film critics are \"required by unwritten law\" to do so. He also contributed an all-time top-10 list for the decennial \"Sight &amp; Sound\" Critics' poll in 1982, 1992, 2002 and 2012. In 1982, he chose, alphabetically, \"\", \"Aguirre, the Wrath of God\", \"Bonnie and Clyde\", \"Casablanca\", \"Citizen Kane\", \"La Dolce Vita\", \"Notorious\", \"Persona\", \"Taxi Driver\" and \"The Third Man\". In 2012, he chose \"2001: A Space Odyssey\", \"Aguirre, the Wrath of God\", \"Apocalypse Now\", \"Citizen Kane\", \"La Dolce Vita\", \"The General\", \"Raging Bull\", \"Tokyo Story\", \"The Tree of Life\" and \"Vertigo\". Several of the contributors to Ebert's website participated in a video tribute to him, featuring films that made his \"Sight &amp; Sound\" list in 1982 and 2012.\nBest films of the year.\nEbert made annual \"ten best lists\" from 1967 to 2012. His choices for best film of the year were:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEbert revisited and sometimes revised his opinions. After ranking \"E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial\" third on his 1982 list, it was the only movie from that year to appear on his later \"Best Films of the 1980s\" list (where it also ranked third). He made similar reevaluations of \"Raiders of the Lost Ark\" (1981) and \"Ran\" (1985). The \"Three Colours trilogy\" (' (1993), ' (1994), and \"\" (also 1994), and \"Pulp Fiction\" (1994) originally ranked second and third on Ebert's 1994 list; both were included on his \"Best Films of the 1990s\" list, but their order had reversed.\nIn 2006, Ebert noted his own \"tendency to place what I now consider the year's best film in second place, perhaps because I was trying to make some kind of point with my top pick,\" adding, \"In 1968, I should have ranked \"\" above \"The Battle of Algiers\". In 1971, \"McCabe &amp; Mrs. Miller\" was better than \"The Last Picture Show\". In 1974, \"Chinatown\" was probably better, in a different way, than \"Scenes from a Marriage\". In 1976, how could I rank \"Small Change\" above \"Taxi Driver\"? In 1978, I would put \"Days of Heaven\" above \"An Unmarried Woman\". And in 1980, of course, \"Raging Bull\" was a better film than \"The Black Stallion\"\u00a0... although I later chose \"Raging Bull\" as the best film of the entire decade of the 1980s, it was only the second-best film of 1980\u00a0... am I the same person I was in 1968, 1971, or 1980? I hope not.\"\nEbert's ten best lists resumed in 2014, the first full year after his death, as a Borda count system by contributors to RogerEbert.com. Regular contributors release their list of the ten best films of the year, and with each film being scored ten points for a first place vote to one point for the tenth place film. The total scores are tallied, and the best film of the year is the one with the most points in the survey of contributors.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBest films of the decade.\nEbert compiled \"best of the decade\" movie lists in the 2000s for the 1970s to the 2000s, thereby helping provide an overview of his critical preferences. Only three films for this listing were named by Ebert as the best film of the year, \"Five Easy Pieces\" (1970), \"Hoop Dreams\" (1994), and \"Synecdoche, New York\" (2008). In 2019, the editors of RogerEbert.com continued the tradition as a joint review of the RogerEbert.com writers.\nGenres and content.\nEbert was often critical of the Motion Picture Association of America film rating system (MPAA). His main arguments were that they were too strict on sex and profanity, too lenient on violence, secretive with their guidelines, inconsistent in applying them and not willing to consider the wider context and meaning of the film. He advocated replacing the NC-17 rating with separate ratings for pornographic and nonpornographic adult films. He praised \"This Film is Not Yet Rated\", a documentary critiquing the MPAA, adding that their rules are \"Kafkaesque.\" He signed off on his review of \"Almost Famous\" by asking, \"Why did they give an R rating to a movie so perfect for teenagers?\"\nEbert also frequently lamented that cinemas outside major cities are \"booked by computer from Hollywood with no regard for local tastes,\" making high-quality independent and foreign films virtually unavailable to most American moviegoers.\nHe wrote that \"I've always preferred generic approach to film criticism; I ask myself how good a movie is of its type.\" \nHe gave \"Halloween\" four stars: \"Seeing it, I was reminded of the favorable review I gave a few years ago to \"Last House on the Left\", another really terrifying thriller. Readers wrote to ask how I could possibly support such a movie. But I wasn't supporting it so much as describing it: You don't want to be scared? Don't see it. Credit must be paid to directors who want to really frighten us, to make a good thriller when quite possibly a bad one would have made as much money. Hitchcock is acknowledged as a master of suspense; it's hypocrisy to disapprove of other directors in the same genre who want to scare us too.\"\nEbert did not believe in grading children's movies on a curve, as he thought children were smarter than given credit for and deserved quality entertainment. He began his review of \"Willy Wonka &amp; the Chocolate Factory\": \"Kids are not stupid. They are among the sharpest, cleverest, most eagle-eyed creatures on God's green Earth, and very little escapes their notice. You may not have observed that your neighbor is still using his snow-tires in mid-July, but every four-year-old on the block has, and kids pay the same attention when they go to the movies. They don't miss a thing, and have an instinctive contempt for shoddy and shabby work. I make this observation because nine out of ten kids' movies are stupid, witless and display contempt for their audiences. Is that all parents want from kids' movies? That they not have anything bad in them? Shouldn't they have something good in them \u2014 some life, imagination, fantasy, inventiveness, something to tickle the imagination? If a movie isn't going to do your kids any good, why let them watch it? Just to kill a Saturday afternoon? That shows a subtle contempt for a child's mind, I think.\" He went on to say he thought \"Willy Wonka\" was the best movie of its kind since \"The Wizard of Oz\".\nEbert tried not to judge a film on its ideology. Reviewing \"Apocalypse Now\", he writes: \"I am not particularly interested in the 'ideas' in Coppola's film...Like all great works of art about war, \"Apocalypse Now\" essentially contains only one idea or message, the not-especially-enlightening observation that war is hell. We do not go to see Coppola's movie for that insight \u2014 something Coppola, but not some of his critics, knows well. Coppola also well knows (and demonstrated in \"The Godfather\" films) that movies aren't especially good at dealing with abstract ideas \u2014 for those you'd be better off turning to the written word \u2014 but they are superb for presenting moods and feelings, the look of a battle, the expression on a face, the mood of a country. \"Apocalypse Now\" achieves greatness not by analyzing our 'experience in Vietnam,' but by re-creating, in characters and images, something of that experience.\" Ebert commented on films using his Catholic upbringing as a point of reference, and was critical of films he believed were grossly ignorant of or insulting to Catholicism, such as \"Stigmata\" (1999) and \"Priest\" (1994). He also gave favorable reviews of controversial films relating to Jesus Christ or Catholicism, including \"The Last Temptation of Christ\" (1988), \"The Passion of the Christ\" (2004), and Kevin Smith's religious satire \"Dogma\" (1999). He defended Spike Lee's \"Do the Right Thing\": \"Some of the advance articles about this movie have suggested that it is an incitement to racial violence. Those articles say more about their authors than about the movie. I believe that any good-hearted person, white or black, will come out of this movie with sympathy for all of the characters. Lee does not ask us to forgive them, or even to understand everything they do, but he wants us to identify with their fears and frustrations. \"Do the Right Thing\" doesn't ask its audiences to choose sides; it is scrupulously fair to both sides, in a story where it is our society itself that is not fair.\"\nContrarian reviews.\nMetacritic later noted that Ebert tended to give more lenient ratings than most critics. His average film rating was 71%, if translated into a percentage, compared to 59% for the site as a whole. Of his reviews, 75% were positive and 75% of his ratings were better than his colleagues. Ebert had acknowledged in 2008 that he gave higher ratings on average than other critics, though he said this was in part because he considered a rating of 3 out of 4 stars to be the general threshold for a film to get a \"thumbs up.\"\nWriting in \"Hazlitt\" about Ebert's reviews, Will Sloan argued that \"[t]here were inevitably movies where he veered from consensus, but he was not provocative or idiosyncratic by nature.\" Examples of Ebert dissenting from other critics include his negative reviews of such celebrated films as \"Blue Velvet\" (\"marred by sophomoric satire and cheap shots\"), \"A Clockwork Orange\" (\"a paranoid right-wing fantasy masquerading as an Orwellian warning\"), and \"The Usual Suspects\" (\"To the degree that I do understand, I don't care\"). He gave only two out of four stars to the widely acclaimed \"Brazil\", calling it \"very hard to follow\" and is the only critic on RottenTomatoes to not like it.\nHe gave a one-star review to the critically acclaimed Abbas Kiarostami film \"Taste of Cherry\", which won the \"Palme d'Or\" at the 1997 Cannes Film Festival. Ebert later added the film to a list of his most-hated movies of all time. He was dismissive of the 1988 Bruce Willis action film \"Die Hard\", stating that \"inappropriate and wrongheaded interruptions reveal the fragile nature of the plot\". His positive 3 out of 4 stars review of 1997's \"\", \"Movies like this embrace goofiness with an almost sensual pleasure\" is one of only three positive reviews accounting for that film's 4% approval rating on the reviewer aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, one of the two others having been written by his \"At the Movies\" co-star Gene Siskel.\nEbert reflected on his \"Speed 2\" review in 2013, and wrote that it was \"Frequently cited as an example of what a lousy critic I am,\" but defended his opinion, and noted, \"I'm grateful to movies that show me what I haven't seen before, and \"Speed 2\" had a cruise ship plowing right up the main street of a Caribbean village.\" In 1999, Ebert held a contest for University of Colorado Boulder students to create short films with a \"Speed 3\" theme about an object that could not stop moving. The winning entrant was set on a roller coaster and was screened at Ebertfest that year.\nOther interests.\nIn addition to film, Ebert occasionally wrote about other topics for the \"Sun-Times\", such as music. In 1970, Ebert wrote the first published concert review of singer-songwriter John Prine, who at the time was working as a mailman and performing at Chicago folk clubs.\nEbert was a lifelong reader, and said he had \"more or less every book I have owned since I was seven, starting with \"Huckleberry Finn\".\" Among the authors he considered indispensable were Shakespeare, Henry James, Willa Cather, Colette and Simenon. He writes of his friend William Nack: \"He approached literature like a gourmet. He relished it, savored it, inhaled it, and after memorizing it rolled it on his tongue and spoke it aloud. It was Nack who already knew in the early 1960s, when he was a very young man, that Nabokov was perhaps the supreme stylist of modern novelists. He recited to me from \"Lolita,\" and from \"Speak, Memory\" and \"Pnin\". I was spellbound.\" Every time Ebert saw Nack, he'd ask him to recite the last lines of \"The Great Gatsby\". Reviewing \"Stone Reader\", he wrote: \"get me in conversation with another reader, and I'll recite titles, too. Have you ever read \"The Quincunx\"? \"The Raj Quartet\"? \"A Fine Balance\"? Ever heard of that most despairing of all travel books, \"The Saddest Pleasure\", by Moritz Thomsen? Does anybody hold up better than Joseph Conrad and Willa Cather? Know any Yeats by heart? Surely P. G. Wodehouse is as great at what he does as Shakespeare was at what he did.\" Among contemporary authors he admired Cormac McCarthy, and credited \"Suttree\" with reviving his love of reading after his illness. He also loved audiobooks, particularly praising Sean Barrett's reading of \"Perfume\". He was a fan of Herg\u00e9's \"The Adventures of Tintin\", which he read in French.\nEbert first visited London in 1966 with his professor Daniel Curley, who \"started me on a lifelong practice of wandering around London. From 1966 to 2006, I visited London never less than once a year and usually more than that. Walking the city became a part of my education, and in this way I learned a little about architecture, British watercolors, music, theater and above all people. I felt a freedom in London I've never felt elsewhere. I made lasting friends. The city lends itself to walking, can be intensely exciting at eye level, and is being eaten alive block by block by brutal corporate leg-lifting.\" Ebert and Curley coauthored \"The Perfect London Walk\".\nEbert attended the Conference on World Affairs at the University of Colorado Boulder for many years. It was there that he coined the Boulder Pledge: \"Under no circumstances will I ever purchase anything offered to me as the result of an unsolicited e-mail message. Nor will I forward chain letters, petitions, mass mailings, or virus warnings to large numbers of others. This is my contribution to the survival of the online community.\" Starting in 1975, he hosted a program called Cinema Interruptus, where would analyze a film with an audience, and anyone could say \"Stop!\" to point out anything they found interesting. He wrote \"Boulder is my hometown in an alternate universe. I have walked its streets by day and night, in rain, snow, and sunshine. I have made life-long friends there. I was in my twenties when I first came to the Conference on World Affairs and was greeted by Howard Higman, its choleric founder, with 'Who invited you back?' Since then I have appeared on countless panels where I have learned and rehearsed debatemanship, the art of talking to anybody about anything.\" In 2009, Ebert invited Ramin Bahrani to join him in analyzing Bahrani's film \"Chop Shop\" a frame at a time. The next year, they invited Werner Herzog to join them in analyzing \"Aguirre, the Wrath of God\". After that, Ebert announced that he would not return to the conference: \"It is fueled by speech, and I'm out of gas ... But I went there for my adult lifetime and had a hell of a good time.\"\nRelations with filmmakers.\nEbert wrote Martin Scorsese's first review, for \"Who's That Knocking at My Door\", and predicted the director could be \"an American Fellini someday.\" He later wrote, \"Of the directors who started making films since I came on the job, the best is Martin Scorsese. His camera is active, not passive. It doesn't regard events, it participates in them. There is a sequence in \"GoodFellas\" that follows Henry Hill's last day of freedom, before the cops swoop down. Scorsese uses an accelerating pacing and a paranoid camera that keeps looking around, and makes us feel what Hill feels. It is easy enough to make an audience feel basic emotions ('Play them like a piano,' Hitchcock advised), but hard to make them share a state of mind. Scorsese can do it.\" In 2000, Scorsese joined Ebert on his show in choosing the best films of the 1990s.\nEbert was an admirer of Werner Herzog, and conducted a Q&amp;A session with him at the Walker Arts Center in 1999. It was there that Herzog read his \"Minnesota Declaration\" which defined his idea of \"ecstatic truth.\" Herzog dedicated his \"Encounters at the End of the World\" to Ebert, and Ebert responded with an open letter of gratitude. Ebert often quoted something Herzog told him: \"our civilization is starving for new images.\"\nWhen Vincent Gallo's \"The Brown Bunny\" (2003) premiered at Cannes, Ebert called it the worst film in the history of the festival. Gallo responded by putting a curse on his colon and a hex on his prostate. Ebert replied, \"I had a colonoscopy once, and they let me watch it on TV. It was more entertaining than \"The Brown Bunny.\"\" Gallo called Ebert a \"fat pig\". Ebert replied: \"It is true that I am fat, but one day I will be thin, and he will still be the director of \"The Brown Bunny.\"\" Ebert gave the director's cut a positive review, writing that Gallo \"is not the director of the same \"Brown Bunny\" I saw at Cannes, and the film now plays so differently that I suggest the original Cannes cut be included as part of the eventual DVD, so that viewers can see for themselves how 26 minutes of aggressively pointless and empty footage can sink a potentially successful film...Make no mistake: The Cannes version was a bad film, but now Gallo's editing has set free the good film inside.\" \nIn 2005, \"Los Angeles Times\" critic Patrick Goldstein wrote that the year's Best Picture Nominees were \"ignored, unloved and turned down flat by most of the same studios that ... bankroll hundreds of sequels, including a follow-up to \"Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo,\" a film that was sadly overlooked at Oscar time because apparently nobody had the foresight to invent a category for Best Running Penis Joke Delivered by a Third-Rate Comic.\" Rob Schneider responded in an open letter: \"Well, Mr. Goldstein, I decided to do some research to find out what awards you have won. I went online and found that you have won nothing. Absolutely nothing. No journalistic awards of any kind ... Maybe you didn't win a Pulitzer Prize because they haven't invented a category for Best Third-Rate, Unfunny Pompous Reporter Who's Never Been Acknowledged by His Peers.\" Reviewing \"\", Ebert responded: \"Reading this, I was about to observe that Schneider can dish it out but he can't take it. Then I found he's not so good at dishing it out, either. I went online and found that Patrick Goldstein has won a National Headliner Award, a Los Angeles Press Club Award, a RockCritics.com award, and the Publicists\u2019 Guild award for lifetime achievement ... Schneider is correct, and Patrick Goldstein has not yet won a Pulitzer Prize. Therefore, Goldstein is not qualified to complain that Columbia financed \"Deuce Bigalow: European Gigolo\" while passing on the opportunity to participate in \"Million Dollar Baby,\" \"Ray\", \"The Aviator,\" \"Sideways\" and \"Finding Neverland.\" As chance would have it, I \"have\" won the Pulitzer Prize, and so I am qualified. Speaking in my official capacity as a Pulitzer Prize winner, Mr. Schneider, your movie sucks.\" After Ebert's cancer surgery, he received a bouquet from \"Your Least Favorite Movie Star, Rob Schneider\". Ebert wrote of the flowers, \"They were a reminder, if I needed one, that although Rob Schneider might (in my opinion) have made a bad movie, he is not a bad man, and no doubt tried to make a wonderful movie, and hopes to again. I hope so, too.\"\nViews on technology.\nEbert was a strong advocate for Maxivision 48, in which the movie projector runs at 48 frames per second, as compared to the usual 24 frames per second. He was opposed to the practice whereby theaters lower the intensity of their projector bulbs in order to extend the life of the bulb, arguing that this has little effect other than to make the film harder to see. Ebert was skeptical of the resurgence of 3D effects in film, which he found unrealistic and distracting.\nViews on video games as an art form.\nIn 2005, Ebert opined that video games are not art, and are inferior to media created through authorial control, such as film and literature, stating, \"video games can be elegant, subtle, sophisticated, challenging and visually wonderful,\" but \"the nature of the medium prevents it from moving beyond craftsmanship to the stature of art.\" This resulted in negative reaction from video game enthusiasts, such as writer Clive Barker, who defended video games as an art form. Responding to Barker, Ebert wrote, \"I believe art is created by an artist. If you change it, you become the artist,\" and said that the main attributes of video games \"have more in common with sports\" than they do with arts. Ebert maintained his position in 2010, but conceded that he should not have expressed this skepticism without being more familiar with the actual experience of playing them. He admitted that he barely played video games: \"I have played \"Cosmology of Kyoto\" which I enormously enjoyed, and \"Myst\" for which I lacked the patience.\" In the article, Ebert wrote, \"It is quite possible a game could someday be great art.\"\nEbert had reviewed \"Cosmology of Kyoto\" for \"Wired\" in 1994, and had praised the exploration, depth, and graphics found in the game, writing \"This is the most beguiling computer game I have encountered, a seamless blend of information, adventure, humor, and imagination \u2014 the gruesome side-by-side with the divine.\" Ebert filed one other video game-related article for \"Wired\" in 1994, in which he described his visit to Sega's Joypolis arcade in Tokyo.\nAppearances in other media.\nEbert provided DVD audio commentaries for \"Citizen Kane\" (1941), \"Casablanca\" (1942), \"Beyond the Valley of the Dolls\" (1970) and \"Dark City\" (1998). For the Criterion Collection, he recorded commentaries for \"Floating Weeds\" (1959) and \"Crumb\" (1994), the latter with director Terry Zwigoff. Ebert was also interviewed by Central Park Media for an extra feature on the DVD release of \"Grave of the Fireflies\" (1988).\nIn 1982, 1983 and 1985, Gene Siskel and Ebert appeared as themselves on \"Saturday Night Live\". For their first two appearances, they reviewed sketches from that night's telecast; for their last, they reviewed sketches from the \"SNL Film Festival\". In 1991, Siskel and Ebert appeared in the \"Sesame Street\" segment \"Sneak Peek Previews\" (a parody of \"Sneak Previews\"). That year, the two were in the show's celebrity version of \"Monster in the Mirror\". In 1995, Siskel and Ebert guest-starred on an episode of the animated sitcom \"The Critic\". In the episode, a parody of \"Sleepless in Seattle,\" Siskel and Ebert split and each wants protagonist Jay Sherman, a fellow film critic, as his new partner.\nIn 1997, Ebert appeared in \"Pitch\", a documentary by Spencer Rice and Kenny Hotz and the Chicago-set television series \"Early Edition\", where consoles a young boy who is depressed after he sees the character Bosco the Bunny die in a movie. Ebert made a cameo in \"Abby Singer\" (2003). In 2004, Ebert appeared in \"Sesame Streets direct-to-video special \"A Celebration of Me, Grover\", delivering a review of the \"Monsterpiece Theater\" segment \"The King and I\". Ebert was one of the principal critics featured in Gerald Peary's 2009 documentary '. He discusses the dynamics of appearing with Gene Siskel on the 1970s show \"Coming to a Theatre Near You\", the predecessor of \"Sneak Previews\" on Chicago PBS station WTTW, and expresses approval of the proliferation of young people writing film reviews today on the internet. On October 22, 2010, Ebert appeared with Robert Osborne on Turner Classic Movies during their \"The Essentials\" series. Ebert selected \"Sweet Smell of Success\" (1957) and \"The Lady Eve\" (1941).\nA \"Mayor Ebert\" (Michael Lerner) appeared in the 1998 remake of \"Godzilla\". In his review, Ebert wrote: \"Now that I've inspired a character in a Godzilla movie, all I really still desire is for several Ingmar Bergman characters to sit in a circle and read my reviews to one another in hushed tones.\"\nPersonal life.\nMarriage.\nAt age 50, Ebert married trial attorney Charlie \"Chaz\" Hammel-Smith in 1992. Chaz Ebert became vice president of the Ebert Company and has emceed Ebertfest. He explained in his memoir, \"Life Itself\", that he did not want to marry before his mother died, as he was afraid of displeasing her. In a July 2012 blog entry, Ebert wrote about Chaz, \"She fills my horizon, she is the great fact of my life, she has my love, she saved me from the fate of living out my life alone, which is where I seemed to be heading... She has been with me in sickness and in health, certainly far more sickness than we could have anticipated. I will be with her, strengthened by her example. She continues to make my life possible, and her presence fills me with love and a deep security. That's what a marriage is for. Now I know.\"\nAlcoholism recovery.\nEbert was a recovering alcoholic, having quit drinking in 1979. He was a member of Alcoholics Anonymous and had written some blog entries on the subject. Ebert was a longtime friend of Oprah Winfrey, and Winfrey credited him with persuading her to syndicate \"The Oprah Winfrey Show\", which became the highest-rated talk show in American television history.\nLou Lumenick incident.\nIn September 2008, at the 2008 Toronto International Film Festival, during the premiere of \"Slumdog Millionaire\", Ebert was attacked by \"New York Post\" film critic Lou Lumenick, who was sitting in front of him. Ebert was inconvenienced by Lumenick obstructing his line of sight, could not see the subtitles, and tapped him on the shoulder a few times to get him to move a bit to the side. Lumenick abruptly rose from his seat, shouting \"Don't touch me!\"; he did this again a few minutes later and then also hit Ebert with a large binder, causing a loud noise that reportedly startled the audience. He then understood that he had yelled at and hit Ebert, but reportedly did not apologize at the time.\nHealth.\nIn February 2002, Ebert was diagnosed with papillary thyroid cancer which was successfully removed. In 2003, he underwent surgery for salivary gland cancer, which was followed up by radiation therapy. He was again diagnosed with cancer in 2006. In June of that year, he had a mandibulectomy to remove cancerous tissue in the right side of his jaw. A week later he had a life-threatening complication when his carotid artery burst near the surgery site. He was confined to bed rest and was unable to speak, eat, or drink for a time, necessitating the use of a feeding tube.\nThe complications kept Ebert off the air for an extended period. Ebert made his first public appearance since mid-2006 at Ebertfest on April 25, 2007. He was unable to speak, instead communicating through his wife. He returned to reviewing on May 18, 2007, when three of his reviews were published in print. In July 2007, he revealed that he was still unable to speak. Ebert adopted a computerized voice system to communicate, eventually using a copy of his own voice created from his recordings by CereProc.\nIn March 2010, his health trials and new computerized voice were featured on \"The Oprah Winfrey Show\". In 2011, Ebert gave a TED talk assisted by his wife, Chaz, and friends Dean Ornish and John Hunter, called \"Remaking my voice\" in which, he proposed a test to determine the verisimilitude of a synthesized voice.\nEbert underwent further surgery in January 2008 to try to restore his voice and address the complications from his previous surgeries. On April 1, Ebert announced his speech had not been restored. Ebert underwent further surgery in April 2008 after fracturing his hip in a fall. By 2011, Ebert had a prosthetic chin made to hide some of the damage done by his many surgeries.\nIn December 2012, Ebert was hospitalized due to the fractured hip, which was subsequently determined to be the result of cancer.\nEbert wrote that \"what's sad about not eating\" was:The loss of dining, not the loss of food. It may be personal, but for me, unless I'm alone, it doesn't involve dinner if it doesn't involve talking. The food and drink I can do without easily. The jokes, gossip, laughs, arguments and shared memories I miss. Sentences beginning with the words, \"Remember that time?\" I ran in crowds where anyone was likely to break out in a poetry recitation at any time. Me too. But not me anymore. So yes, it's sad. Maybe that's why I enjoy this blog. You don't realize it, but we're at dinner right now.\nPolitics.\nA supporter of the Democratic Party, he wrote of how his Catholic schooling led him to his politics: \"Through a mental process that has by now become almost instinctive, those nuns guided me into supporting universal health care, the rightness of labor unions, fair taxation, prudence in warfare, kindness in peacetime, help for the hungry and homeless, and equal opportunity for the races and genders. It continues to surprise me that many who consider themselves religious seem to tilt away from me.\"\nEbert was critical of political correctness, \"a rigid feeling that you have to keep your ideas and your ways of looking at things within very narrow boundaries, or you'll offend someone. Certainly one of the purposes of journalism is to challenge that kind of thinking. And certainly one of the purposes of criticism is to break boundaries. It's also one of the purposes of art.\" He lamented that \"Adventures of Huckleberry Finn\" \"has regrettably been under fire in recent years from myopic advocates of Political Correctness, who do not have a bone of irony (or humor) in their bodies, and cannot tell the difference between what is said or done in the novel, and what Twain means by it.\" Ebert defended the cast and crew of Justin Lin's \"Better Luck Tomorrow\" (2002) during a Sundance Film Festival screening when a white member of the audience asked \u201cWhy, with the talent yup there and yourself, make a film so empty and amoral for Asian Americans and for Americans?\u201d Ebert responded that \"What I find very offensive and condescending about your statement is nobody would say to a bunch of white filmmakers, \u2018How could you do this to 'your people'?...Asian-American characters have the right to be whoever the hell they want to be. They do not have to represent 'their people'!\" He was a supporter of the film after the incident at Sundance.\nEbert opposed the Iraq War, writing: \"Am I against the war? Of course. Do I support our troops? Of course. They were sent to endanger their lives by zealots with occult objectives.\" He endorsed Barack Obama for re-election in 2012, citing the Affordable Care Act as one important reason for his support of Obama. He was concerned about income inequality, writing: \"I have no objection to financial success. I've had a lot of it myself. All of my income came from paychecks from jobs I held and books I published. I have the quaint idea that wealth should be obtained by legal and conventional means\u2013by working, in other words\u2013and not through the manipulation of financial scams. You're familiar with the ways bad mortgages were urged upon people who couldn't afford them, by banks who didn't care that the loans were bad. The banks made the loans and turned a profit by selling them to investors while at the same time betting against them on their own account. While Wall Street was knowingly trading the worthless paper that led to the financial collapse of 2008, executives were being paid huge bonuses.\" He voiced tentative support for the Occupy Wall Street movement: \"I believe the Occupiers are opposed to the lawless and destructive greed in the financial industry, and the unhealthy spread in this country between the rich and the rest.\" Referring to the subprime mortgage crisis, he wrote: \"I have also felt despair at the way financial instruments were created and manipulated to deliberately defraud the ordinary people in this country. At how home buyers were peddled mortgages they couldn't afford, and civilian investors were sold worthless 'securities' based on those bad mortgages. Wall Street felt no shame in backing paper that was intended to fail, and selling it to customers who trusted them. This is clear and documented. It is theft and fraud on a staggering scale.\" He was also sympathetic to Ron Paul, noting that he \"speaks directly and clearly without a lot of hot air and lip flap\". In a review of the 2008 documentary \"I.O.U.S.A.\", he credited Paul with being \"a lonely voice talking about the debt\", proposing based on the film that the US government was \"already broke\". He opposed the war on drugs and capital punishment.\nLaura Emerick, his \"Sun Times\" editor, recalled: \u201cHis union sympathies began at an early age. His father, Walter, worked as an electrician, and Roger remained a member of the Newspaper Guild throughout his career \u2014 though after he became an independent contractor, he probably could have opted out. He famously stood with the Guild in 2004, when he wrote to then publisher John Cruickshank that \u2018it would be with a heavy heart that I would go on strike against my beloved Sun-Times, but strike I will if a strike is called.'\u201d He lamented that \"Most Americans don't understand the First Amendment, don't understand the idea of freedom of speech, and don't understand that it's the responsibility of the citizen to speak out.\" Regarding his own freedom of speech, he said: \"I write op-ed columns for the Chicago Sun-Times, and people send me e-mails saying, 'You're a movie critic. You don't know anything about politics.' Well, you know what, I'm 60 years old, and I've been interested in politics since I was on my daddy's knee... I know a lot about politics.\"\nBeliefs.\nEbert was critical of intelligent design, and stated that people who believe in either creationism or New Age beliefs such as crystal healing or astrology should not be president. He wrote that in Catholic school he learned of the \"Theory of Evolution, which in its elegance and blinding obviousness became one of the pillars of my reasoning, explaining so many things in so many ways. It was an introduction not only to logic but to symbolism, thus opening a window into poetry, literature and the arts in general. All my life I have deplored those who interpret something only on its most simplistic level.\"\nEbert described himself as an agnostic on at least one occasion, but at other times explicitly rejected that designation; biographer Matt Singer wrote that Ebert opposed any categorization of his beliefs. In 2009, Ebert wrote that he did not \"want [his] convictions reduced to a word,\" and stated, \"I have never said, although readers have freely informed me I am an atheist, an agnostic, or at the very least a secular humanist\u00a0\u2013 which I am.\" He wrote: \"I am not a believer, not an atheist, not an agnostic. I am still awake at night, asking \"how\"? I am more content with the question than I would be with an answer.\" He writes: \"I was asked at lunch today who or what I worshiped. The question was asked sincerely, and in the same spirit I responded that I worshiped whatever there might be outside knowledge. I worship the void. The mystery. And the ability of our human minds to perceive an unanswerable mystery. To reduce such a thing to simplistic names is an insult to it, and to our intelligence.\"\nHe wrote of his Catholic upbringing: \"I believed in the basic Church teachings because I thought they were correct, not because God wanted me to. In my mind, in the way I interpret them, I still live by them today. Not by the rules and regulations, but by the principles. For example, in the matter of abortion, I am pro-choice, but my personal choice would be to have nothing to do with an abortion, certainly not of a child of my own. I believe in free will, and believe I have no right to tell anyone else what to do. Above all, the state does not.\" He later wrote: \"My choice is to not support abortion, except in cases of a clear-cut choice between the lives of the mother and child. A child conceived through incest or rape is innocent and deserves the right to be born.\"\nHe wrote: \"I drank for many years in a tavern that had a photograph of Brendan Behan on the wall, and under it is this quotation, which I memorized: \"'I respect kindness in human beings first of all, and kindness to animals. I don't respect the law; I have a total irreverence for anything concerned with society except that which makes the roads safer, the beer stronger, the food cheaper and the old men and the old women warmer in the winter and happier in the summer.\"' For 57 words, that does a pretty good job of summing it up.\" Summarizing his beliefs, Ebert wrote:\nI believe that if, at the end of it all, according to our abilities, we have done something to make others a little happier, and something to make ourselves a little happier, that is about the best we can do. To make others less happy is a crime. To make ourselves unhappy is where all crime starts. We must try to contribute joy to the world. That is true no matter what our problems, our health, our circumstances. We must try. I didn't always know this, and am happy I lived long enough to find it out.\nHe wrote: \"I correspond with a dear friend, the wise and gentle Australian director Paul Cox. Our subject sometimes turns to death. In 2010 he came very close to dying before receiving a liver transplant. In 1988 he made a documentary named \"Vincent: The Life and Death of Vincent Van Gogh\". Paul wrote that in his Arles days, van Gogh called himself 'a simple worshiper of the external Buddha.' Paul told me that in those days, Vincent wrote: \n Looking at the stars always makes me dream, as simply as I dream over the black dots representing towns and villages on a map. \nWhy, I ask myself, shouldn't the shining dots of the sky be as accessible as the black dots on the map of France? \nJust as we take a train to get to Tarascon or Rouen, we take death to reach a star. We cannot get to a star any more when we are alive than we can take the train when we are dead. So to me it seems possible that cholera, tuberculosis and cancer are the celestial means of locomotion. Just as steamboats, buses and railways are the terrestrial means. \nTo die simply of old age would be to go there on foot. \nThat is a lovely thing to read, and a relief to find I will probably take the celestial locomotive. Or, as the little dog, Milou, says whenever Tintin proposes a journey, 'Not by foot, I hope!'\"\nDeath and legacy.\nOn April 4, 2013, Ebert died at age 70 at a hospital in Chicago, shortly before he was set to return to his home and enter hospice care.\nPresident Barack Obama wrote, \"For a generation of Americans \u2014 and especially Chicagoans \u2014 Roger was the movies... [he could capture] the unique power of the movies to take us somewhere magical.\u00a0... The movies won't be the same without Roger.\" Martin Scorsese released a statement saying, \"The death of Roger Ebert is an incalculable loss for movie culture and for film criticism. And it's a loss for me personally... there was a professional distance between us, but then I could talk to him much more freely than I could to other critics. Really, Roger was my friend. It's that simple.\"\nSteven Spielberg stated that Ebert's \"reviews went far deeper than simply thumbs up or thumbs down. He wrote with passion through a real knowledge of film and film history, and in doing so, helped many movies find their audiences... [He] put television criticism on the map.\" Numerous celebrities paid tribute including Christopher Nolan, Oprah Winfrey, Steve Martin, Albert Brooks, Jason Reitman, Ron Howard, Darren Aronofsky, Larry King, Cameron Crowe, Werner Herzog, Howard Stern, Steve Carell, Stephen Fry, Diablo Cody, Anna Kendrick, Jimmy Kimmel, and Patton Oswalt.\nMichael Phillips of the \"Chicago Tribune\" recalled that \"I came late to film criticism in Chicago, after writing about the theater. Roger loved the theater. His was a theatrical personality: a raconteur, a spinner of dinner-table stories, a man who was not shy about his accomplishments. But he made room in that theatrical, improbable, outsized life for others.\" Andrew O'Hehir of \"Salon\" wrote that \"He's up there with Will Rogers, H. L. Mencken, A. J. Liebling and not too far short of Mark Twain as one of the great plainspoken commentators on American life.\"\nPeter Debruge wrote \"Ebert's negative reviews were invariably his most entertaining, and yet, he never insulted those who found something to admire in lesser films. Instead, he hoped to enlighten readers, challenging them to think, while whetting their appetite for stronger work ... It's a testament to Ebert's gift that, after a life spent writing about film, he made us love the movies all the more. ...I\u2019ve always suspected the reason he settled into this profession is that film reviews, as he wrote them, served as a Trojan horse for the delivery of bigger philosophical ideas, of which he had an inexhaustible supply to share.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"No one has done as much as Roger to connect the creators of movies with their consumers. He has immense power, and he\u2019s used it for good, as an apostle of cinema. Reading his work, or listening to him parse the shots of some notable film, the movie lover is also engaged with an alert mind constantly discovering things \u2014 discovering them to share them. That\u2019s what a great teacher does, and what Roger\u2019s done as a writer, public personality and friend to film for all these years. And, dammit, keep on doing.\"\n \u2014 Richard Corliss, film critic for \"Time\"\n\"The Onion\" paid tribute to Ebert: \"Calling the overall human existence 'poignant,' 'thought-provoking,' and 'a complete tour de force,' film critic Roger Ebert praised existence as 'an audacious and thrilling triumph.'...'At times brutally sad, yet surprisingly funny, and always completely honest, I wholeheartedly recommend existence. If you haven't experienced it yet, what are you waiting for? It is not to be missed.' Ebert later said that while human existence's running time was 'a little on the long side' it could have gone on much, much longer and he would have been perfectly happy.\"\nHundreds of people attended the funeral Mass held at Chicago's Holy Name Cathedral on April 8, 2013, where Ebert was celebrated as a film critic, newspaperman, advocate for social justice, and husband. Father Michael Pfleger concluded the service with \"the balconies of heaven are filled with angels singing 'Thumbs Up' \". Reverend John F. Costello of Loyola University delivered a homily for Ebert. After the funeral service, he was buried at Graceland Cemetery in Chicago, Illinois\nA documentary adaptation of \"Life Itself\" (2014), directed by Steve James, premiered at the Sundance Film Festival. The film was executive produced by Martin Scorsese and includes interviews with Scorsese, Ava DuVernay, Werner Herzog, Errol Morris and numerous critics. The film received critical acclaim and received numerous accolades including a Emmy Award, Producers Guild of America Award and Critics' Choice Movie Award.\nMemorials.\nA nearly-three-hour public tribute, entitled \"Roger Ebert: A Celebration of Life\", was held on April 11, 2013, at the Chicago Theatre. It featured in-person remembrances, video testimonials, video and film clips, and gospel choirs, and was, according to the \"Chicago Tribune\"'s Mark Caro, \"a laughter- and sorrow-filled send-off from the entertainment and media worlds.\"\nIn September 2013, organizers in Champaign, Illinois, announced plans to raise $125,000 to build a life-size bronze statue of Roger Ebert in the town, which was unveiled in front of the Virginia Theatre at Ebertfest on April 24, 2014. The composition was selected by his widow, Chaz Ebert, and depicts Ebert sitting in the middle of three theater seats giving a \"thumbs up.\"\nThe 2013 Toronto International Film Festival opened with a video tribute of Ebert at Roy Thomson Hall during the world premiere of the WikiLeaks-based film \"The Fifth Estate\". Ebert had been an avid supporter of the festival since its inception in the 1970s. Chaz was in attendance to accept a plaque on Roger's behalf. At the same festival, Errol Morris dedicated his film \"The Unknown Known\" to Ebert, saying \"He was a really fabulous part of my life, a good friend, a champion, an inspiring writer. I loved Roger.\"\nIn August 2013, the Plaza Classic Film Festival in El Paso, Texas, paid homage to Ebert by screening seven films that played a role in his life: \"Citizen Kane\", \"The Third Man, Tokyo Story, La Dolce Vita\", \"Beyond the Valley of the Dolls\", \"Fitzcarraldo\" and \"Goodfellas\".\nAt the 86th Academy Awards ceremony, Ebert was included in the \"in memoriam\" montage, a rare honor for a film critic.\nIn 2014, the documentary \"Life Itself\" was released. Director Steve James, whose films had been widely advocated by Ebert, started making the documentary while Ebert was still alive. Martin Scorsese served as an executive producer. The film studies Ebert's life and career, while also filming Ebert during his final months, and includes interviews with his family and friends. It was universally praised by critics. It has a 98% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes.\nWerner Herzog told \"Entertainment Weekly\" that Ebert was \"a soldier of the cinema\": \"I always loved Roger for being the good soldier, not only the good soldier of cinema, but he was a wounded soldier who for years in his affliction held out and plowed on and soldiered on and held the outpost that was given up by almost everyone: The monumental shift now is that intelligent, deep discourse about cinema has been something that has been vanishing over the last maybe two decades...I've always tried to be a good soldier of cinema myself, so of course since he's gone, I will plow on, as I have plowed on all my life, but I will do what I have to do as if Roger was looking over my shoulder. And I am not gonna disappoint him.\"\nEbert was inducted as a laureate of The Lincoln Academy of Illinois. In 2001, the governor of Illinois awarded him the state's highest honor, the Order of Lincoln, in the area of performing arts. In 2016, Ebert was inducted into the Chicago Literary Hall of Fame.\nThe website \"RogerEbert.com\" contains an archive of every review Ebert wrote, as well as many essays and opinion pieces. The site, operated by Ebert Digital (a partnership between Chaz and friend Josh Golden), continues to publish new material written by a group of critics who were selected by Ebert before his death.\nIn November of 2025, the Chicago Cultural Center scheduled a series of events to mark the 50th anniversary of the \"Siskel &amp; Ebert\" show.\nAwards and honors.\nEbert received many awards during his long and distinguished career as a film critic and television host. He was the first film critic to ever win a Pulitzer Prize, receiving the Pulitzer Prize for Criticism in 1975 while working for the \"Chicago Sun-Times\", \"for his film criticism during 1974\".\nIn 2003, Ebert was honored by the American Society of Cinematographers, winning a Special Achievement Award. In 2005, Ebert became the first film critic to receive a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, for his work on television. His star is located at 6834 Hollywood Boulevard. That same year, he was honored with a sidewalk plaque at the Chicago Theatre on the city-decreed \"Roger Ebert Day\". In 2009, Ebert received the Directors Guild of America Award's for Honorary Life Member Award. In 2010, Ebert received the Webby Award for Person of the Year.\nIn 2007, Ebert was honored by the Gotham Awards receiving a tribute and award for his lifetime contributions to independent film.\nOn January 31, 2009, Ebert was made an honorary life member of the Directors Guild of America.,On May 15, 2009, Ebert was honored by the American Pavilion at the Cannes Film Festival by the renaming of its conference room, \"The Roger Ebert Conference Center.\" Martin Scorsese joined Ebert and his wife Chaz at the ribbon-cutting ceremony. On May 4, 2010, Ebert was announced by the International Academy of Digital Arts and Sciences as the Webby Person of the Year, having found a voice on the Internet following his battle with cancer.\nHonors\nPublished works.\nEach year from 1986 to 1998, Ebert published \"Roger Ebert's Movie Home Companion\" (retitled \"Roger Ebert's Video Companion\" for its last five installments), which collected all of his movie reviews to that point. From 1999 to 2013 (except in 2008), Ebert instead published \"Roger Ebert's Movie Yearbook\", a collection of all of his movie reviews from the previous two and a half years (for example, the 2011 edition, , covers January 2008\u00a0\u2013 July 2010.) Both series also included yearly essays, interviews, and other writings. He also wrote the following books:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50909", "revid": "38627444", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50909", "title": "Basis function", "text": "Element of a basis for a function space\nIn mathematics, a basis function is an element of a particular basis for a function space. Every function in the function space can be represented as a linear combination of basis functions, just as every vector in a vector space can be represented as a linear combination of basis vectors.\nIn numerical analysis and approximation theory, basis functions are also called blending functions, because of their use in interpolation: In this application, a mixture of the basis functions provides an interpolating function (with the \"blend\" depending on the evaluation of the basis functions at the data points).\nExamples.\nMonomial basis for \"C\u03c9\".\nThe monomial basis for the vector space of analytic functions is given by \nformula_1\nThis basis is used in Taylor series, amongst others.\nMonomial basis for polynomials.\nThe monomial basis also forms a basis for the vector space of polynomials. After all, every polynomial can be written as formula_2 for some formula_3, which is a linear combination of monomials.\nFourier basis for \"L\"2[0,1].\nSines and cosines form an (orthonormal) Schauder basis for square-integrable functions on a bounded domain. As a particular example, the collection\nformula_4\nforms a basis for \"L\"2[0,1].\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "50910", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50910", "title": "Fast Fourier Transform", "text": ""}
{"id": "50911", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50911", "title": "Wavelet compression", "text": ""}
{"id": "50914", "revid": "46866511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50914", "title": "Transform coding", "text": "Data compression\nTransform coding is a type of data compression for \"natural\" data like audio signals or photographic images. The transformation is typically lossless (perfectly reversible) on its own but is used to enable better (more targeted) quantization, which then results in a lower quality copy of the original input (lossy compression).\nIn transform coding, knowledge of the application is used to choose information to discard, thereby lowering its bandwidth. The remaining information can then be compressed via a variety of methods. When the output is decoded, the result may not be identical to the original input, but is expected to be close enough for the purpose of the application.\nColour television.\nNTSC.\nOne of the most successful transform encoding system is typically not referred to as such\u2014the example being NTSC color television. After an extensive series of studies in the 1950s, Alda Bedford showed that the human eye has high resolution only for black and white, somewhat less for \"mid-range\" colors like yellows and greens, and much less for colors on the end of the spectrum, reds and blues.\nUsing this knowledge allowed RCA to develop a system in which they discarded most of the blue signal after it comes from the camera, keeping most of the green and only some of the red; this is chroma subsampling in the YIQ color space.\nThe result is a signal with considerably less content, one that would fit within existing 6\u00a0MHz black-and-white signals as a phase modulated differential signal. The average TV displays the equivalent of 350 pixels on a line, but the TV signal contains enough information for only about 50 pixels of blue and perhaps 150 of red. This is not apparent to the viewer in most cases, as the eye makes little use of the \"missing\" information anyway.\nPAL and SECAM.\nThe PAL and SECAM systems use nearly identical or very similar methods to transmit colour. In any case both systems are subsampled.\nDigital.\nThe term is much more commonly used in digital media and digital signal processing. The most widely used transform coding technique in this regard is the discrete cosine transform (DCT), proposed by Nasir Ahmed in 1972, and presented by Ahmed with T. Natarajan and K. R. Rao in 1974. This DCT, in the context of the family of discrete cosine transforms, is the DCT-II. It is the basis for the common JPEG image compression standard, which examines small blocks of the image and transforms them to the frequency domain for more efficient quantization (lossy) and data compression. In video coding, the H.26x and MPEG standards modify this DCT image compression technique across frames in a motion image using motion compensation, further reducing the size compared to a series of JPEGs.\nIn audio coding, MPEG audio compression analyzes the transformed data according to a psychoacoustic model that describes the human ear's sensitivity to parts of the signal, similar to the TV model. MP3 uses a hybrid coding algorithm, combining the modified discrete cosine transform (MDCT) and fast Fourier transform (FFT). It was succeeded by Advanced Audio Coding (AAC), which uses a pure MDCT algorithm to significantly improve compression efficiency.\nThe basic process of digitizing an analog signal is a kind of transform coding that uses sampling in one or more domains as its transform.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50918", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50918", "title": "William Carlos Williams", "text": "American poet (1883\u20131963)\nWilliam Carlos Williams (September 17, 1883 \u2013 March 4, 1963) was an American poet and physician closely associated with modernism and imagism. His \"Spring and All\" (1923) was written in the wake of T. S. Eliot's \"The Waste Land\" (1922). In his five-volume poem \"Paterson\" (1946\u20131958), he took Paterson, New Jersey as \"my 'case' to work up. It called for a poetry such as I did not know, it was my duty to discover or make such a context on the 'thought.'\" Some of his best known poems, \"This Is Just to Say\" and \"The Red Wheelbarrow\", are reflections on the everyday. Other poems reflect the influence of the visual arts. He, in turn, influenced the visual arts; his poem \"The Great Figure\" inspired the painting \"I Saw the Figure 5 in Gold\" by Charles Demuth. Williams was awarded a posthumous Pulitzer Prize for Poetry for \"Pictures from Brueghel and Other Poems\" (1962).\nWilliams practiced both pediatrics and general medicine. He was affiliated with Passaic General Hospital, where he served as the hospital's chief of pediatrics from 1924 until his death. The hospital, which is now known as St. Mary's General Hospital, paid tribute to Williams with a memorial plaque that states \"We walk the wards that Williams walked\".\nRandall Jarrell wrote that Williams \"feels, not just says, that the differences between men are less important than their similarities\u2014that he and you and I, together, are the Little Men.\" Marc Hofstadter wrote that Williams \"sought to express his democracy through his way of speaking. His point was to speak on an equal level with the reader and to use the language and thought materials of America in expressing his point of view.\" Per Hugh Fox, Williams saw \"the \"real\" [original emphasis] function of the imagination as breaking through the alienation of the near at hand and reviving its wonder.\"\nLife and career.\nWilliams was born in Rutherford, New Jersey, in 1883. His father, William George Williams, was born in England but raised from \"a very young age\" in the Dominican Republic and \"was most comfortable speaking in Spanish, which was the primary language spoken in the Williams's New Jersey household\"; his mother, Raquel H\u00e9l\u00e8ne Hoheb, from Mayag\u00fcez, Puerto Rico, was of French extraction. Williams's maternal grandmother was named Emily Dickinson, though she was no relation to the poet of that name.\nScholars note that the Caribbean culture of the family home had an important influence on Williams. Jeffrey Herlihy-Mera observes, \"English was not his primary means of communication until he was a teenager. At home his mother and father\u2014who were raised in Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic, respectively\u2014spoke Spanish with each other and to young William Carlos.\" While he wrote in English, \"the poet's first language\" was Spanish and his \"consciousness and social orientation\" were shaped by Caribbean customs; his life influenced \"to a very important degree by a plural cultural foundation.\"\nJohn Keats and Walt Whitman were important early influences on Williams. Williams received his primary and secondary education in Rutherford until 1897 when he was sent for two years to a school near Geneva and to the Lyc\u00e9e Condorcet in Paris. He attended the Horace Mann School upon his return to New York City and, having passed a special examination, was admitted in 1902 to the medical school of the University of Pennsylvania, from which he graduated in 1906. Upon leaving Penn, Williams did internships at both French Hospital and Child's Hospital in New York, then went to Leipzig for advanced study of pediatrics. He published his first book, \"Poems\", in 1909.\nWilliams married Florence (\"Flossie\") Herman (1891\u20131976) in 1912 after he returned from Germany. They moved into a house on 9 Ridge Road in Rutherford, New Jersey, where they resided for many years. Shortly afterward, his second book of poems, \"The Tempers\", was published by a London press through the help of his friend Ezra Pound, whom he had met while studying at the University of Pennsylvania. Around 1914, Williams and his wife had their first son, William E. Williams, followed by their second son, Paul H. Williams, in 1917. William E. also became a physician.\nAlthough his primary occupation was as a family doctor, Williams had a successful literary career as a poet. His work has a great affinity with painting, in which he had a lifelong interest. In addition to poetry (his main literary focus), he occasionally wrote short stories, plays, novels, essays, and translations. He practiced medicine by day and wrote at night. Early in his career, he briefly became involved in the Imagist movement through his friendships with Pound and H.D. (whom he had befriended during his medical studies at Penn), but soon he began to develop opinions that differed from theirs and his style changed to express his commitment to a modernist expression of his immediate environment. He was influenced by the \"inarticulate poems\" of his patients.\nIn 1920, Williams was sharply criticized by many of his peers (including H.D., Pound and Wallace Stevens) when he published one of his more experimental books \"Kora in Hell: Improvisations\". Pound called the work \"incoherent\" and H.D. thought the book was \"flippant\". The Dada artist and poet Baroness Elsa criticized Williams's sexual and artistic politics in her experimental prose poem review titled \"Thee I call 'Hamlet of Wedding Ring'\", published in \"The Little Review\" in March 1921. Williams had an affair with the Baroness, and published three poems in \"Contact,\" describing the forty-year-old as \"an old lady\" with \"broken teeth [and] syphilis\".\nIn 1923, Williams published \"Spring and All\", one of his seminal books of poetry, which contained the classics \"By the road to the contagious hospital\", \"The Red Wheelbarrow\" and \"To Elsie\". However, in 1922, the publication of T. S. Eliot's \"The Waste Land\" had become a literary sensation that overshadowed Williams's very different brand of poetic modernism. In his \"Autobiography\", Williams later wrote of \"the great catastrophe to our letters\u2014the appearance of T. S. Eliot's \"The Waste Land.\"\" He said, \nI felt at once that \"The Waste Land\" had set me back twenty years and I'm sure it did. Critically, Eliot returned us to the classroom just at the moment when I felt we were on a point to escape to matters much closer to the essence of a new art form itself\u2014rooted in the locality which should give it fruit. Although he respected the work of Eliot, Williams became openly critical of Eliot's highly intellectual style with its frequent use of foreign languages and allusions to classical and European literature. Instead, Williams preferred colloquial American English.\nDuring the 1930s, Williams began working on an opera. Titled \"The First President\", it was focused on George Washington and his influence on the history of the United States of America and was intended to \"galvanize us into a realization of what we are today.\" As a lifelong radical democrat, Williams often collaborated with left-wing and anti-fascist circles and magazines, particularly during the Great Depression.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\u2014Say it, no ideas but in things\u2014\nnothing but the blank faces of the houses\nand cylindrical trees\nbent, forked by preconception and accident\u2014\nsplit, furrowed, creased, mottled, stained\u2014\nsecret\u2014into the body of the light!&lt;/poem&gt;\n\"from\" \"Paterson: Book I\"\nIn \"Paterson\" (published between 1946 and 1958), an account of the history, people, and essence of Paterson, New Jersey, Williams wrote his own modern epic poem, focusing on \"the local\" on a wider scale than he had previously attempted. He also examined the role of the poet in American society and famously summarized his poetic method in the phrase \"No ideas but in things\" (found in his poem \"A Sort of a Song\" and repeated again and again in \"Paterson\").\nIn his later years, Williams mentored and influenced many younger poets. He had a significant influence on many of the American literary movements of the 1950s, including the Beat movement, the San Francisco Renaissance, the Black Mountain school, and the New York School.\nOne of Williams's more dynamic relationships as a mentor was with fellow New Jersey poet Allen Ginsberg. Williams included several of Ginsberg's letters in \"Paterson\", stating that one of them helped inspire the fifth section of that work. Williams also wrote the introduction to Ginsberg's first book, \"Howl and Other Poems\" in 1956.\nWilliams suffered a heart attack in 1948, and after 1949, a series of strokes. Severe depression after one such stroke caused him to be confined to Hillside Hospital, New York, for four months in 1953. He died on March 4, 1963, at age 79 at his home in Rutherford. He was buried in Hillside Cemetery in Lyndhurst, New Jersey.\nPoetry.\nThe poet and critic Randall Jarrell stated of Williams's poetry, William Carlos Williams is as magically observant and mimetic as a good novelist. He reproduces the details of what he sees with surprising freshness, clarity, and economy; and he sees just as extraordinarily, sometimes, the forms of this earth, the spirit moving behind the letters. His quick transparent lines have the nervous and contracted strength, move as jerkily and intently as a bird. R. P. Blackmur said of Williams's poetry, \"the Imagism of 1912, self-transcended.\" A contemporary, Harriet Monroe, stated \"to assert his freedoms he must play the devil, showing himself rioting in purple and turquoise pools of excess.\"\nWilliams's major collections are \"Spring and All\" (1923), \"The Desert Music and Other Poems\" (1954), \"Pictures from Brueghel and Other Poems\" (1962), and \"Paterson\" (1963, repr. 1992). His most anthologized poem is \"The Red Wheelbarrow\", an example of the Imagist movement's style and principles (see also \"This Is Just to Say\"). However, Williams, like his peer and friend Ezra Pound, had rejected the Imagist movement by the time this poem was published as part of \"Spring and All\" in 1923.\nWilliams is strongly associated with the American modernist movement in literature and saw his poetic project as a distinctly American one; he sought to renew language through the fresh, raw idiom that grew out of United States cultural and social heterogeneity, at the same time freeing it from what he saw as the worn-out language of British and European culture. \u201cNo one believes that poetry can exist in his own life,\u201d Williams said. \u201cThe purpose of an artist, whatever it is, is to take the life, whatever he sees, and to raise it up to an elevated position where it has dignity.\u201d\nIn 1920, Williams turned his attentions to \"Contact\", a periodical launched by Williams and fellow writer Robert McAlmon: \"The two editors sought American cultural renewal in the local condition in clear opposition to the internationalists\u2014Pound, \"The Little Review\", and the Baroness.\" Yvor Winters, the poet/critic, judged that Williams's verse bears a certain resemblance to the best lyric poets of the 13th century.\nWilliams sought to invent an entirely fresh and uniquely American form of poetry whose subject matter centered on everyday circumstances of life and the lives of common people. He came up with the concept of the \"variable foot\" which Williams never clearly defined, although the concept vaguely referred to Williams's method of determining line breaks. \"The Paris Review\" called it \"a metrical device to resolve the conflict between form and freedom in verse.\"\nOne of Williams's aims, in experimenting with his \"variable foot\", was to show the American (opposed to European) rhythm that he claimed was present in everyday American language. Stylistically, Williams also worked with variations on a line-break pattern that he labeled \"triadic-line poetry\" in which he broke a long line into three free-verse segments. A well-known example of the \"triadic line [break]\" can be found in Williams's love-poem \"Asphodel, That Greeny Flower.\"\nIn a review of Herbert Leibowitz's biography of Williams, book critic Christopher Benfey wrote: Early and late, Williams held the conviction that poetry was, in his friend Kenneth Burke's phrase, \"equipment for living, a necessary guide amid the bewilderments of life.\" The American ground was wild and new, a place where a blooming foreigner needed all the help he could get. Poems were as essential to a full life as physical health or the love of men and women.\nWilliams and the painters.\nWilliams's mother had trained as a painter in Paris and passed on her enthusiasm to her son, who also painted in his early years. A painting by him now hangs in Yale University's Beinecke Library and as late as 1962 he was still remembering in an interview that \"I'd like to have been a painter, and it would have given me at least as great a satisfaction as being a poet.\" For most of his life Williams wrote art criticism and introductions to exhibitions by his friends.\nIn 1915, Williams began to associate with the New York group of artists and writers known as \"The Others.\" Founded by the poet Alfred Kreymborg and the artist Man Ray, they included Walter Conrad Arensberg, Wallace Stevens, Mina Loy, Marianne Moore, Orrick Glenday Johns and Marcel Duchamp. Interlocking with them were the US artists who met at Arensburg's studio, including Marsden Hartley, Joseph Stella, Charles Demuth and Charles Sheeler, with whom Williams developed close friendships.\nAlthough he championed the new way of seeing and representation pioneered by the European avant-garde, Williams and his artistic friends wished to get away from what they saw as a purely derivative style. As one result, he started \"Contact\" magazine with Hartley in 1920 in order to create an outlet for works showcasing the belief that creative work should derive from the artist's direct experience and sense of place and reject traditional notions of how this should be done.\nPrecisionism emerged in response to such thinking. In her study of the influence of painting on Williams, Ruth Grogan devoted several paragraphs to the dependency of some of his poems on the paintings of Charles Sheeler in this style, singling out in particular the description of a power house in Williams's \"Classic Scene\". But the close relationship with Charles Demuth was more overt. Williams's poem \"The Pot of Flowers\" (1923) references Demuth's painting \"Tuberoses\" (1922), which he owned. On his side, Demuth created his \"I saw the figure 5 in gold\" (1928) as a homage to Williams's poem \"The Great Figure\" (1921). Williams's collection \"Spring and All\" (1923) was dedicated to the artist and, after his early death, he dedicated the long poem \"The Crimson Cyclamen.\" (1936) to Demuth's memory.\nLater collaborations with artists include the two poem/ two drawing volume that he shared with William Zorach in 1937 and his poem \"Jersey Lyric\", written in response to Henry Niese's 1960 painting of the same title: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThroughout his career, Williams thought of his approach to poetry as a painterly deployment of words, saying explicitly in an interview, \"I've attempted to fuse the poetry and painting, to make it the same thing\u2026.A design in the poem and a design in the picture should make them more or less the same thing.\" However, in the case of his references to much earlier painters, culminating in \"Pictures from Brueghel\" (1962), his approach was more commentarial. Of this late phase of his work it has been claimed that \"Williams saw these artists solving, in their own ways, the same problems that concerned him,\" but his engagement with them was at a distance.\nLegacy, awards and honors.\nThe U.S. National Book Award was reestablished in 1950 with awards by the book industry to authors of books published in 1949 in three categories. Williams won the first National Book Award for Poetry, recognizing both the third volume of \"Paterson\" and \"Selected Poems\".\nIn 1952, Williams was named Consultant in Poetry to the Library of Congress in Washington, DC, but was barred from serving out his term due to unfounded accusations of Williams's membership in a communist organization. Williams retained legal counsel to refute the charges but was never allowed to respond to his critics and never received an apology from the Library of Congress. The next year, however, he received the Bollingen Prize along with Archibald MacLeish.\nIn May 1963, he was posthumously awarded the Pulitzer Prize for \"Pictures from Brueghel and Other Poems\" (1962) and the gold medal for Poetry of the National Institute of Arts and Letters. The Poetry Society of America presents the William Carlos Williams Award annually for the best book of poetry published by a small, non-profit or university press.\nWilliams's house in Rutherford was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1973. He was inducted into the New Jersey Hall of Fame in 2009.\nBibliography.\nDrama.\nThe above are collected in \"Many Loves and Other Plays: The Collected Plays of William Carlos Williams\" (1962)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50920", "revid": "38001712", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50920", "title": "Seamus Heaney", "text": "Irish poet (1939\u20132013)\nSeamus Justin Heaney (13 April 1939\u00a0\u2013 30 August 2013) was an Irish poet, playwright and translator. He received the 1995 Nobel Prize in Literature. Among his best-known works is \"Death of a Naturalist\" (1966), his first major published volume. American poet Robert Lowell described him as \"the most important Irish poet since Yeats\", and many others, including the academic John Sutherland, have said that he was \"the greatest poet of our age\". Robert Pinsky has stated that \"with his wonderful gift of eye and ear Heaney has the gift of the story-teller.\" Upon his death in 2013, \"The Independent\" described him as \"probably the best-known poet in the world\".\nHeaney was born in the townland of Tamniaran, near Castledawson, Northern Ireland. His family moved to nearby Bellaghy when he was a boy. He became a lecturer at St. Joseph's College in Belfast in the early 1960s, after attending Queen's University, and began to publish poetry. He lived in Sandymount, Dublin, from 1976 until his death. He lived part-time in the United States from 1981 to 2006. He was a professor at Harvard from 1981 to 1997, and their Poet in Residence from 1988 to 2006. From 1989 to 1994, he was also the Professor of Poetry at Oxford. In 1996 he was made a and in 1998 was bestowed the title Saoi of Aosd\u00e1na. He received numerous prestigious awards.\nHeaney is buried at St. Mary's Church, Bellaghy, Northern Ireland. The headstone bears the epitaph \"Walk on air against your better judgement\", from his poem \"The Gravel Walks\".\nEarly life.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\nWearing a poppy bruise on the left temple,\nHe lay in the four-foot box as in his cot.\nNo gaudy scars, the bumper knocked him clear.\nA four-foot box, a foot for every year.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\n from \"Mid-Term break\", \"Death of a Naturalist\" (1966)\nHeaney was born on 13 April 1939 at the family farmhouse called Mossbawn, near Castledawson in County Londonderry; he was the first of nine children. In 1953, his family moved to Bellaghy, a few miles away, which is now the family home. His father was Patrick Heaney (d. October 1986), a farmer and cattle dealer, and the eighth child of ten born to James and Sarah Heaney. Patrick was introduced to cattle dealing by his uncles, who raised him after his parents' early deaths. Heaney's mother was Margaret Kathleen McCann (1911\u20131984), whose relatives worked at a local linen mill. Heaney remarked on the inner tension between the rural Gaelic past exemplified by his father and the industrialized Ulster exemplified by his mother.\nHeaney attended Anahorish Primary School, and won a scholarship to St Columb's College, a Roman Catholic boarding school in Derry when he was twelve years old. While studying at St Columb's, Heaney's younger brother Christopher was killed in February 1953 at the age of four in a road accident. The poems \"Mid-Term Break\" and \"The Blackbird of Glanmore\" are related to his brother's death.\nHeaney played Gaelic football for Castledawson GAC, the club in the area of his birth, as a boy, and did not change to Bellaghy when his family moved there. However, he has remarked that he became involved culturally with Bellaghy GAA Club in his late teens, acting in amateur plays and composing treasure hunts for the club.\nCareer.\n1957\u20131969.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\nMy grandfather cut more turf in a day\nThan any other man on Toner's bog.\nOnce I carried him milk in a bottle\nCorked sloppily with paper. He straightened up\nTo drink it, then fell to right away\nNicking and slicing neatly, heaving sods\nOver his shoulder, going down and down\nFor the good turf. Digging.\nThe cold smell of potato mould, the squelch and slap\nOf soggy peat, the curt cuts of an edge\nThrough living roots awaken in my head.\nBut I've no spade to follow men like them.\nBetween my finger and my thumb\nThe squat pen rests.\nI'll dig with it.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nfrom \"Digging\", \"Death of a Naturalist\" (1966)\nHeaney studied English Language and Literature at Queen's University Belfast starting in 1957. While there, he found a copy of Ted Hughes's \"Lupercal\", which spurred him to write poetry. \"Suddenly, the matter of contemporary poetry was the material of my own life,\" he said. He graduated in 1961 with a First Class Honours degree.\nHeaney studied for a teacher certification at St Joseph's Teacher Training College in Belfast (now merged with St Mary's, University College), and began teaching at St Thomas' Secondary Intermediate School in Ballymurphy, Belfast. The headmaster of this school was the writer Michael McLaverty from County Monaghan, who introduced Heaney to the poetry of Patrick Kavanagh. With McLaverty's mentorship, Heaney first started to publish poetry in 1962. Sophia Hillan describes how McLaverty was like a foster father to the younger Belfast poet. In the introduction to McLaverty's \"Collected Works\", Heaney summarised the poet's contribution and influence: \"His voice was modestly pitched, he never sought the limelight, yet for all that, his place in our literature is secure.\" Heaney's poem \"Fosterage\", in the sequence \"Singing School\", from \"North\" (1975), is dedicated to him.\nIn 1963 Heaney began lecturing at St Joseph's, and joined the Belfast Group, a poets' workshop organized by Philip Hobsbaum, then an English lecturer at Queen's University. Through this, Heaney met other Belfast poets, including Derek Mahon and Michael Longley.\nHeaney met Marie Devlin, a native of Ardboe, County Tyrone, while at St Joseph's in 1962; they married in August 1965 and would go on to have three children. A school teacher and writer, Devlin published \"Over Nine Waves\" (1994), a collection of traditional Irish myths and legends. Heaney's first book, \"Eleven Poems\", was published in November 1965 for the Queen's University Festival. In 1966 their first son, Michael, was born. Heaney earned a living at the time by writing for \"The Irish Times\", often on the subject of radio. A second son, Christopher, was born in 1968.\nHeaney initially sought publication with Dolmen Press in Dublin for his first volume of work. While waiting to hear back, he was signed with Faber and Faber and published \"Death of a Naturalist\" in 1966, and Faber remained his publisher for the rest of his life. This collection was met with much critical acclaim and won several awards, including the Gregory Award for Young Writers and the Geoffrey Faber Prize. The same year, he was appointed as a lecturer in Modern English Literature at Queen's University Belfast. In 1968, Heaney and Michael Longley undertook a reading tour called \"Room to Rhyme\", which increased awareness of the poet's work. The following year, Heaney published his second major volume, \"Door into the Dark\".\n1970\u20131984.\nHeaney taught as a visiting professor in English at the University of California, Berkeley in the 1970\u20131971 academic year. In 1972, he left his lectureship in Belfast, moved to Wicklow in the Republic of Ireland, and began writing on a full-time basis. That year, he published his third collection, \"Wintering Out\". His daughter Catherine Ann was born in 1973. In 1975, Heaney's next volume, \"North\", was published. A pamphlet of prose poems entitled \"Stations\" was published the same year.\nIn 1976, Heaney was appointed Head of English at Carysfort College in Dublin and moved with his family to the suburb of Sandymount. His next collection, \"Field Work\", was published in 1979. \"Selected Poems 1965-1975\" and \"Preoccupations: Selected Prose 1968\u20131978\" were published in 1980. When \"Aosd\u00e1na\", the national Irish Arts Council, was established in 1981, Heaney was among those elected into its first group. (He was subsequently elected a \"Saoi\", one of its five elders and its highest honour, in 1997).\nAlso in 1981, Heaney travelled to the United States as a visiting professor at Harvard, where he was affiliated with Adams House. He was awarded two honorary doctorates, from Queen's University and from Fordham University in New York City (1982). At the Fordham commencement ceremony on 23 May 1982, Heaney delivered his address as a 46-stanza poem entitled \"Verses for a Fordham Commencement.\"\nBorn and educated in Northern Ireland, Heaney stressed that he was Irish and not British. Following the success of the Field Day Theatre Company's production of Brian Friel's \"Translations\", the founders Brian Friel and Stephen Rea decided to make the company a permanent group. Heaney joined the company's expanded Board of Directors in 1981. In autumn 1984, his mother, Margaret, died. Three years later he would publish eight sonnets, under the title \"Clearances\", as a tribute to his mother.\n1985\u20131999.\nHeaney became a tenured faculty member at Harvard, as the Boylston Professor of Rhetoric and Oratory (formerly visiting professor) 1985\u20131997, and the Ralph Waldo Emerson Poet in Residence at Harvard 1998\u20132006. In 1986, Heaney received a Litt.D. from Bates College. His father, Patrick, died in October the same year. The loss of both parents within two years affected Heaney deeply, and he expressed his grief in poems. In 1988, a collection of his critical essays, \"The Government of the Tongue\", was published.\nIn 1985 Heaney wrote the poem \"From the Republic of Conscience\" at the request of Amnesty International Ireland. He wanted to \"celebrate United Nations Day and the work of Amnesty\". The poem inspired the title of Amnesty International's highest honour, the Ambassador of Conscience Award.\nIn 1988 Heaney donated his lecture notes to the Rare Book Library of Emory University in Atlanta, Georgia, after giving the notable Ellmann Lectures there.\nIn 1989, Heaney was elected Oxford Professor of Poetry, which he held for a five-year term to 1994. The chair does not require residence in Oxford. Throughout this period, he divided his time between Ireland and the United States. He also continued to give public readings. These events were so well attended and keenly anticipated that those who queued for tickets with such enthusiasm were sometimes dubbed \"Heaneyboppers\", suggesting an almost teenybopper fan base.\nIn 1990 \"The Cure at Troy\", a play based on Sophocles's \"Philoctetes\", was published. The next year, he published another volume of poetry, \"Seeing Things\" (1991). Heaney was named an Honorary Patron of the University Philosophical Society, Trinity College Dublin, and was elected an Honorary Fellow of the Royal Society of Literature (1991).\nIn 1993 Heaney guest-edited \"The Mays Anthology\", a collection of new writing from students at the University of Oxford and University of Cambridge. That same year, he was awarded the Dickinson College Arts Award and returned to the Pennsylvania college to deliver the commencement address and receive an honorary degree. He was scheduled to return to Dickinson again to receive the Harold and Ethel L. Stellfox Award\u2014for a major literary figure\u2014at the time of his death in 2013. Irish poet Paul Muldoon was named recipient of the award that year, partly in recognition of the close connection between the two poets.\nHeaney was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1995 for \"works of lyrical beauty and ethical depth, which exalt everyday miracles and the living past\". He was on holiday in Greece with his wife when the news broke. Neither journalists nor his own children could reach him until he arrived at Dublin Airport two days later, although an Irish television camera traced him to Kalamata. Asked how he felt to have his name added to the Irish Nobel pantheon of W. B. Yeats, George Bernard Shaw and Samuel Beckett, Heaney responded: \"It's like being a little foothill at the bottom of a mountain range. You hope you just live up to it. It's extraordinary.\" He and his wife Marie were immediately taken from the airport to \u00c1ras an Uachtar\u00e1in for champagne with President Mary Robinson. He would refer to the prize discreetly as \"the N thing\" in personal exchanges with others.\nHeaney's 1996 collection \"The Spirit Level\" won the Whitbread Book of the Year Award; he repeated the success in 1999 with \"\".\nHeaney was elected a Member of the Royal Irish Academy in 1996 and was admitted in 1997. In the same year, Heaney was elected Saoi of Aosd\u00e1na. In 1998, Heaney was elected Honorary Fellow of Trinity College Dublin.\n2000s.\nIn 2000, Heaney was awarded an honorary doctorate and delivered the commencement address at the University of Pennsylvania. In 2002, Heaney was awarded an honorary doctorate from Rhodes University and delivered a public lecture on \"The Guttural Muse\".\nIn 2003 the Seamus Heaney Centre for Poetry was opened at Queen's University Belfast. It houses the Heaney Media Archive, a record of Heaney's entire oeuvre, along with a full catalogue of his radio and television presentations. That same year, Heaney decided to lodge a substantial portion of his literary archive at Emory University as a memorial to the work of William M. Chace, the university's recently retired president. The Emory papers represented the largest repository of Heaney's work (1964\u20132003). He donated these to help build their large existing archive of material from Irish writers including Yeats, Paul Muldoon, Ciaran Carson, Michael Longley and other members of the Belfast Group.\nIn 2003, when asked if there was any figure in popular culture who aroused interest in poetry and lyrics, Heaney praised American rap artist Eminem from Detroit, saying, \"He has created a sense of what is possible. He has sent a voltage around a generation. He has done this not just through his subversive attitude but also his verbal energy.\" Heaney wrote the poem \"Beacons at Bealtaine\" to mark the 2004 EU Enlargement. He read the poem at a ceremony for the 25 leaders of the enlarged European Union, arranged by the Irish EU presidency.\nIn August 2006 Heaney had a stroke. Although he recovered and joked, \"Blessed are the pacemakers\" when fitted with a heart monitor, he cancelled all public engagements for several months. He was in County Donegal at the time of the 75th birthday of Anne Friel, wife of playwright Brian Friel. He read the works of Henning Mankell, Donna Leon and Robert Harris while in hospital. Among his visitors was former President Bill Clinton.\nHeaney's \"District and Circle\" won the 2006 T. S. Eliot Prize. In 2008, he became artist of honour in \u00d8stermarie, Denmark, and Seamus Heaney Str\u00e6de (street) was named after him. In 2009, Heaney was presented with an Honorary-Life Membership award from the University College Dublin (UCD) Law Society, in recognition of his remarkable role as a literary figure.\nFaber and Faber published Dennis O'Driscoll's book \"\" in 2008; this has been described as the nearest thing to an autobiography of Heaney. In 2009, Heaney was awarded the David Cohen Prize for Literature. He recorded a spoken word album, over 12 hours long, of himself reading his poetry collections to commemorate his 70th birthday, which occurred on 13 April 2009.\n2010s.\nHe spoke at the West Belfast Festival in July 2010 in celebration of his mentor, the poet and novelist Michael McLaverty, who had helped Heaney to first publish his poetry.\nIn September 2010 Faber published \"Human Chain\", Heaney's twelfth collection. \"Human Chain\" was awarded the Forward Poetry Prize for Best Collection, one of the major poetry prizes Heaney had never previously won, despite having been twice shortlisted. The book, published 44 years after the poet's first, was inspired in part by Heaney's stroke in 2006, which left him \"babyish\" and \"on the brink\". Poet and Forward judge Ruth Padel described the work as \"a collection of painful, honest and delicately weighted poems ... a wonderful and humane achievement.\" Writer Colm T\u00f3ib\u00edn described \"Human Chain\" as \"his best single volume for many years, and one that contains some of the best poems he has written... is a book of shades and memories, of things whispered, of journeys into the underworld, of elegies and translations, of echoes and silences.\" In October 2010, the collection was shortlisted for the T. S. Eliot Prize.\nHeaney was named one of \"Britain's top 300 intellectuals\" by \"The Observer\" in 2011, though the newspaper later published a correction acknowledging that \"several individuals who would not claim to be British\" had been featured, of which Heaney was one. That same year, he contributed translations of Old Irish marginalia for \"Songs of the Scribe\", an album by Traditional Singer in Residence of the Seamus Heaney Centre for Poetry, P\u00e1draig\u00edn N\u00ed Uallach\u00e1in.\nIn December 2011, Heaney donated his personal literary notes to the National Library of Ireland. Even though he admitted he would likely have earned a fortune by auctioning them, Heaney personally packed up the boxes of notes and drafts and, accompanied by his son Michael, delivered them to the National Library.\nIn June 2012, Heaney accepted the Griffin Trust for Excellence in Poetry's Lifetime Recognition Award and gave a speech in honour of the award.\nHeaney was compiling a collection of his work in anticipation of \"Selected Poems 1988\u20132013\" at the time of his death. The selection includes poems and writings from \"Seeing Things\", \"The Spirit Level\", the translation of \"\", \"Electric Light\", \"District and Circle\", and \"Human Chain\" (fall 2014).\nIn February 2014, Emory University premiered \"Seamus Heaney: The Music of What Happens\", the first major exhibition to celebrate the life and work of Seamus Heaney since his death. The exhibit holds a display of the surface of Heaney's personal writing desk that he used in the 1980s as well as old photographs and personal correspondence with other writers.\nHeaney died in August 2013 during the curatorial process of the exhibition. Though the exhibit's original vision to celebrate Heaney's life and work remains at the forefront, there is a small section commemorating his death and its influence.\nIn September 2015, it was announced that Heaney's family would posthumously publish his translation of Book VI of \"The Aeneid\" in 2016.\nDeath.\nSeamus Heaney died in the Blackrock Clinic in Dublin on 30 August 2013, aged 74, following a short illness. After a fall outside a restaurant in Dublin, he entered a hospital for a medical procedure but died at 7:30 the following morning before it took place. His funeral was held in Donnybrook, Dublin, on the morning of 2 September 2013, and he was buried in the evening at St. Mary's Church, Bellaghy his home village, in the same graveyard as his parents, younger brother, and other family members. His son Michael revealed at the funeral mass that his father texted his final words, \"Noli timere\" (Latin: \"Be not afraid\"), to his wife, Marie, minutes before he died.\nHis funeral was broadcast live the following day on RT\u00c9 television and radio and was streamed internationally at RT\u00c9's website. RT\u00c9 Radio 1 Extra transmitted a continuous broadcast, from 8 a.m. to 9:15\u00a0p.m. on the day of the funeral, of his \"Collected Poems\" album, recorded by Heaney in 2009. His poetry collections sold out rapidly in Irish bookshops immediately following his death.\nMany tributes were paid to Heaney. President Michael D. Higgins said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...we in Ireland will once again get a sense of the depth and range of the contribution of Seamus Heaney to our contemporary world, but what those of us who have had the privilege of his friendship and presence will miss is the extraordinary depth and warmth of his personality...Generations of Irish people will have been familiar with Seamus' poems. Scholars all over the world will have gained from the depth of the critical essays, and so many rights organisations will want to thank him for all the solidarity he gave to the struggles within the republic of conscience.President Higgins also appeared live from \u00c1ras an Uachtar\u00e1in on the in a five-minute segment in which he paid tribute to Seamus Heaney.\nBill Clinton, former President of the United States, said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJos\u00e9 Manuel Barroso, European Commission president, said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Harvard University issued a statement: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPoet Michael Longley, a close friend of Heaney, said: \"I feel like I've lost a brother.\" Thomas Kinsella said he was shocked, but John Montague said he had known for some time that the poet was not well. Playwright Frank McGuinness called Heaney \"the greatest Irishman of my generation: he had no rivals.\" Colm T\u00f3ib\u00edn wrote: \"In a time of burnings and bombings Heaney used poetry to offer an alternative world.\" Gerald Dawe said he was \"like an older brother who encouraged you to do the best you could do\". Theo Dorgan said: \"[Heaney's] work will pass into permanence. Everywhere I go there is real shock at this. Seamus was one of us.\" His publisher, Faber and Faber, noted that \"his impact on literary culture is immeasurable.\" Playwright Tom Stoppard said, \"Seamus never had a sour moment, neither in person nor on paper.\" Andrew Motion, a former UK Poet Laureate and friend of Heaney, called him \"a great poet, a wonderful writer about poetry, and a person of truly exceptional grace and intelligence.\"\nMany memorial events were held, including a commemoration at Emory University, Harvard University, Oxford University and the Southbank Centre, London. Leading US poetry organisations also met in New York to commemorate the death.\nWork.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn order that human beings bring about the most radiant conditions for themselves to inhabit, it is essential that the vision of reality which poetry offers should be transformative, more than just a printout of the given circumstances of its time and place. The poet who would be most the poet has to attempt an act of writing that outstrips the conditions even as it observes them.\n\u2014from \"Joy Or Night: Last Things in the Poetry of W. B. Yeats and Philip Larkin\", W. D. Thomas Memorial Lecture delivered by Seamus Heaney at University College of Swansea on 18 January 1993.\nNaturalism.\nAt one time Heaney's books made up two-thirds of the sales of living poets in the UK. His work often deals with the local surroundings of Ireland, particularly in Northern Ireland, where he was born and lived until young adulthood. Speaking of his early life and education, he commented, \"I learned that my local County Derry experience, which I had considered archaic and irrelevant to 'the modern world', was to be trusted. They taught me that trust and helped me to articulate it.\" \"Death of a Naturalist\" (1966) and \"Door into the Dark\" (1969) mostly focus on the details of rural, parochial life.\nIn a number of volumes, beginning with \"Door into the Dark\" (1969) and \"Wintering Out\" (1972), Heaney also spent a significant amount of time writing on the northern Irish bog. Particularly of note is the collection of bog body poems in \"North\" (1975), featuring mangled bodies preserved in the bog. In a review by Ciaran Carson, he said that the bog poems made Heaney into \"the laureate of violence\u2014a mythmaker, an anthropologist of ritual killing...the world of megalithic doorways and charming noble barbarity.\" Poems such as \"Bogland\" and \"Bog Queen\" addressed political struggles directly for the first time.\nPolitics.\nAllusions to sectarian differences, widespread in Northern Ireland throughout his lifetime, can be found in his poems. His books \"Wintering Out\" (1973) and \"North\" (1975) seek to interweave commentary on the Troubles with a historical context and wider human experience. While some critics accused Heaney of being \"an apologist and a mythologiser\" of the violence, Blake Morrison suggests the poet &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nShaun O'Connell in the \"New Boston Review\" notes that \"those who see Seamus Heaney as a symbol of hope in a troubled land are not, of course, wrong to do so, though they may be missing much of the undercutting complexities of his poetry, the backwash of ironies which make him as bleak as he is bright.\" O'Connell notes in his \"Boston Review\" critique of \"Station Island\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Again and again Heaney pulls back from political purposes; despite its emblems of savagery, \"Station Island\" lends no rhetorical comfort to Republicanism. Politic about politics, \"Station Island\" is less about a united Ireland than about a poet seeking religious and aesthetic unity.\nHeaney is described by critic Terry Eagleton as \"an enlightened cosmopolitan liberal\", refusing to be drawn. Eagleton suggests: \"When the political is introduced... it is only in the context of what Heaney will or will not say.\" Reflections on what Heaney identifies as \"tribal conflict\" favour the description of people's lives and their voices, drawing out the \"psychic landscape\". His collections often recall the assassinations of his family members and close friends, lynchings and bombings. Colm T\u00f3ib\u00edn wrote, \"throughout his career there have been poems of simple evocation and description. His refusal to sum up or offer meaning is part of his tact.\"\nHeaney published \"Requiem for the Croppies\", a poem that commemorates the Irish rebels of 1798, on the 50th anniversary of the 1916 Easter Rising. He read the poem to both Catholic and Protestant audiences in Ireland. He commented: \"To read 'Requiem for the Croppies' wasn't to say 'up the IRA' or anything. It was silence-breaking rather than rabble-rousing.\" He stated, \"You don't have to love it. You just have to permit it.\"\nHe turned down the offer of laureateship of the United Kingdom, partly for political reasons, commenting, \"I've nothing against the Queen personally: I had lunch at the Palace once upon a time.\" He stated that his \"cultural starting point\" was \"off-centre\". A much-quoted statement was when he objected to being included in \"The Penguin Book of Contemporary British Poetry\" (1982). Although he was born in Northern Ireland, his response to being included in the British anthology was delivered in his poem \"An Open Letter\":\n&lt;poem&gt;\nDon't be surprised if I demur, for, be advised\nMy passport's green.\nNo glass of ours was ever raised\nTo toast The Queen.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nTranslation.\nHe was concerned, as a poet and a translator, with the English language as it is spoken in Ireland but also as spoken elsewhere and in other times; he explored Anglo-Saxon influences in his work and study. Critic W. S. Di Piero noted &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; Heaney's first translation was of the Irish lyric poem \"Buile Suibhne\", published as \"Sweeney Astray: A Version from the Irish\" (1984). He took up this character and connection in poems published in \"Station Island\" (1984). Heaney's prize-winning translation of \"\" (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, 2000, Whitbread Book of the Year Award) was considered groundbreaking in its use of modern language melded with the original Anglo-Saxon \"music\".\nPlays and prose.\nHis plays include \"The Cure at Troy: A Version of Sophocles' Philoctetes\" (1991). Heaney's 2004 play, \"The Burial at Thebes\", suggests parallels between Creon and the foreign policies of the Bush administration.\nHeaney's engagement with poetry as a necessary engine for cultural and personal change is reflected in his prose works \"The Redress of Poetry\" (1995) and \"Finders Keepers: Selected Prose: 1971\u20132001\" (2001).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He continues: \"The vision of reality which poetry offers should be transformative, more than just a printout of the given circumstances of its time and place\". Often overlooked and underestimated in the direction of his work is his profound poetic debts to and critical engagement with 20th-century Eastern European poets, and in particular Nobel laureate Czes\u0142aw Mi\u0142osz.\nUse in the school syllabus.\nHeaney's work is used extensively in the school syllabus internationally, including the anthologies \"The Rattle Bag\" (1982) and \"The School Bag\" (1997) (both edited with Ted Hughes). Originally entitled \"The Faber Book of Verse for Younger People\" on the Faber contract, Hughes and Heaney decided the main purpose of \"The Rattle Bag\" was to offer enjoyment to the reader: \"Arbitrary riches.\" Heaney commented \"the book in our heads was something closer to \"The Fancy Free Poetry Supplement\"\". It included work that they would have liked to encounter sooner in their own lives, as well as nonsense rhymes, ballad-type poems, riddles, folk songs and rhythmical jingles. Much familiar canonical work was not included, since they took it for granted that their audience would know the standard fare. Fifteen years later, \"The School Bag\" aimed at something different. The foreword stated that they wanted \"less of a carnival, more like a checklist.\" It included poems in English, Irish, Welsh, Scots and Scots Gaelic, together with work reflecting the African-American experience. \nLegacy.\nThe Seamus Heaney HomePlace, in Bellaghy, is a literary and arts centre which commemorates Heaney's legacy. His literary papers are held by the National Library of Ireland.\nFollowing an approach by Fintan O'Toole, the Heaney family authorised a biography of the poet, with access to family-held records (2017). O'Toole had been somewhat acquainted with Heaney and Heaney had, according to his son, admired O'Toole's work.\nIn November 2019, the documentary \"Seamus Heaney and the music of what happens\" was aired on BBC Two. His wife Marie and his children talked about their family life and read some of the poems he wrote for them. For the first time, Heaney's four brothers remembered their childhood and the shared experiences that inspired many of his poems.\nIn 2022, \"The Translations of Seamus Heaney\" was published, edited by Marco Sonzogni.\nIn 2023, \"The Letters of Seamus Heaney\" was published, edited by Christopher Reid.\nIn 2025, \"The Poems of Seamus Heaney\" will be published, edited by Bernard O'Donoghue and Rosie Lavan. It encompasses all the poems Heaney published in his lifetime as well as the small number that appeared after his death: twelve single volumes, from Death of a Naturalist (1966) to Human Chain (2010), and those poems published in pamphlets, journals and magazines or with limited circulation. In addition, the book includes a small selection of previously unseen material.\nPublications.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPrizes and honours.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50926", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50926", "title": "Fourier Transform", "text": ""}
{"id": "50928", "revid": "49636717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50928", "title": "The Crocodile Hunter", "text": "Australian television program\nThe Crocodile Hunter is a wildlife documentary television series hosted by Steve Irwin and his wife, Terri. The show became a popular franchise due to Irwin's unconventional approach to wildlife. It spawned a number of separate projects, including the feature film \"\" and two television spinoffs: \"Croc Files\" and \"The Crocodile Hunter Diaries\".\nFirst airing in 1992 on Network 10 in Australia, the series received broader attention in the United States through Animal Planet, becoming the network's highest-rated series at the time, and was in international syndication on networks worldwide. The series aired 64 episodes during five seasons, from 1997 to 2004, two years before Irwin's death, with a pilot episode in 1996 and 13 specials into 2007.\nWith a nearly 11-year run, the series is the second longest-running program of any Discovery Communications network, behind \"MythBusters\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50929", "revid": "11308236", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50929", "title": "Hieroglypics", "text": ""}
{"id": "50930", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50930", "title": "Charles De Gaulle", "text": ""}
{"id": "50931", "revid": "12336988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50931", "title": "Total function", "text": ""}
{"id": "50939", "revid": "88604", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50939", "title": "Gestuno language", "text": ""}
{"id": "50943", "revid": "41219559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50943", "title": "Light rail", "text": "Form of passenger urban rail transit\nLight rail (or light rail transit, abbreviated to LRT) is a form of passenger urban rail transit that uses rolling stock derived from tram technology while also having some features from heavy rapid transit.\nThe term was coined in 1972 in the United States as an English equivalent for the German word \"Stadtbahn\", meaning \"city railroad\". Different definitions exist in some countries, but in the United States, light rail operates primarily along exclusive rights-of-way and uses either individual tramcars or multiple units coupled together, with a lower capacity and speed than a long heavy rail passenger train or rapid transit system.\nNarrowly defined, light rail transit uses rolling stock that is similar to that of a traditional tram, while operating at a higher capacity and speed, often on an exclusive right-of-way. In broader usage, light rail transit can include tram-like operations mostly on streets. Some light rail networks have characteristics closer to rapid transit. Only when these systems are fully grade-separated, they are referred to as light metros or light rail rapid transit (LRRT).\nTerminology.\nThe term \"light rail\" was introduced in 1972 by the U.S. Urban Mass Transportation Administration (UMTA, predecessor to the Federal Transit Administration) to describe modernized streetcar systems in Europe and the United States.\nIn Germany, the concept was known as \"Stadtbahn\" (\"city rail\"), but UMTA adopted the term \"light rail\" instead. The word \"light\" refers to lighter infrastructure and capacity requirements compared with heavy rail, rather than to physical weight. Mode classification is usually based on the type of right-of-way.\nThe American Public Transportation Association (APTA) defines light rail as:\n...a mode of transit service (also called streetcar, tramway, or trolley) operating single cars or short trains on fixed rails, often partly separated from traffic. Vehicles are typically electric, powered from overhead lines via trolley pole or pantograph, operated by an onboard driver, and may feature either high-platform or low-floor boarding.\nIn international usage, \"light rail\" generally denotes newer tram or streetcar systems, ranging from street-running lines to partly grade-separated networks. People movers are typically lower in capacity, while monorail and automated guideway transit are separate technologies with more specialized applications.\n\"Light rail\" is distinct from the British English term \"light railway\", which refers to lightly regulated, low-speed mainline railways.\nVarieties of English.\nThe term \"light rail\" helps avoid regional differences in terminology. In the UK, Australia, Ireland and New Zealand \"tram\" refers to a street-running rail vehicle, while in North America it can also mean an aerial tramway or, in amusement parks, a land train. Similarly, \"trolley\" means \"streetcar\" in North America.\nIn North America, \"streetcar\" commonly refers to older vehicles operating in mixed traffic, while \"light rail\" is used for newer systems that operate mostly on reserved track. The American term \"street railway\" (with vehicles called \"streetcars\") emerged in the 19th century, influenced by the German word \"Stra\u00dfenbahn\" (\"street railway\"). While Britain abandoned most tramways after World War II, several North American cities\u2014including Toronto, Boston, Philadelphia, San Francisco, Pittsburgh, Newark, Cleveland, and New Orleans\u2014retained theirs. These cities later adopted the term \"light rail\" when introducing modern systems alongside older streetcars. Since the 1980s, Portland, Oregon has developed all three types: light rail, streetcar, and aerial tram.\n\"Heavy rail\" refers to higher-capacity, higher-speed systems such as the London Underground or New York City Subway. Conventional passenger and freight railways are also classified as heavy rail. The main distinction is that light rail vehicles can, where necessary, operate in mixed street traffic.\nHistory.\nPrecursors.\nBy the late 19th century, some cities began placing tramways underground to reduce congestion. Early examples include the Murray Hill Tunnel in New York, adapted for streetcars in 1870, Marseille's Noailles station in 1893, and Boston's Tremont Street subway in 1897, the first purpose-built tram subway in North America and a precursor to today's MBTA Green Line. London's Kingsway tramway subway opened in 1906 to connect tram networks and operated until 1952.\nEarly systems.\nThe \"Shaker Heights Rapid Transit\" in Cleveland (1920s) provided an early model of a suburban rail line upgraded for tram-like operation and is now part of the RTA Rapid Transit. In Europe, a suburban railway in The Hague was converted to tram operation in 1927, while in Boston the Highland branch was converted in 1959 to create what became the Green Line D branch, boosting ridership with modern PCC cars.&lt;ref name=\"HTM/BMDH\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; In 1964 Chicago's experimental Skokie Swift demonstrated features later adopted by many U.S. light rail systems. Many traditional tram and streetcar systems in the United Kingdom, United States, and elsewhere were closed after the 1950s as investment shifted to cars and buses. Leeds and Glasgow briefly built modernized tram lines during the 1940s, but by 1962 Britain had abandoned all tramways except for Blackpool.\nPost-war emergence.\nMany traditional tram and streetcar systems in the United Kingdom, United States, and elsewhere were closed after the 1950s as investment shifted to cars and buses. Leeds and Glasgow briefly built modernized tram lines during the 1940s, but by 1962 Britain had abandoned all tramways except for Blackpool. Modern light rail developed largely in postwar West Germany, where many tram networks were upgraded rather than abandoned. These \"Stadtbahn\" systems introduced features such as high-capacity vehicles, dedicated alignments, and underground city-center tunnels. With the exception of Hamburg, nearly all large and most medium-sized German cities retained trams and modernized them into light rail. Similar modernization took place in Zurich, Rotterdam, The Hague, Gothenburg, Brussels, and in Central and Eastern Europe, notably Ostrava.\nIn the United States, American planner H. Dean Quinby defined the concept of a \"limited tramway\" in 1962, distinguishing it from traditional streetcars by features such as articulated vehicles, multiple doors, and higher capacity.\nThe term \"light rail transit\" was introduced in North America in 1972 to describe these upgraded systems. The first of the new generation opened in 1978 in Edmonton, Alberta, using German Siemens-Duewag U2 vehicles, followed by Calgary and San Diego. These proved successful and inspired many more U.S., Canadian, and Mexican light rail systems.\nGlobal expansion.\nFrom the 1980s onward, light rail and modern tramways experienced a renewed expansion worldwide. In Europe, new networks were built in cities that had abandoned trams, including the reopening of the Nantes tramway in 1985, and systems in Grenoble, Paris, Strasbourg, Bordeaux, Dublin, Barcelona, Bergen In Britain, modern light rail returned in the 1980s with the Tyne and Wear Metro (1980), Manchester Metrolink (1992), and South Yorkshire Supertram (1994) and Edinburgh (2014).\nIn North America, the San Diego Trolley (1981) became a model for later projects, and the number of U.S. systems roughly doubled between the 1990s and 2010s with expansions in Portland, Los Angeles, Denver, Dallas, Minneapolis and Seattle. Canada added the Ion in Waterloo and the Confederation Line in Ottawa (both 2019), while Australia introduced the Sydney Light Rail in 1997.\nIn Asia, the Toyama Light Rail opened in 2006 as Japan's first new tramway in decades, along with a series of Chinese systems such as Shenyang, Nanjing, Guangzhou, Beijing and Shanghai Songjiang.\nIn Africa and the Middle East, new light rail was introduced in Tunis (1985), Rabat (2011), Algiers (2011), Casablanca (2012), Jerusalem (2011), Dubai (2014), Addis Ababa (2015) and Lusail (2022).\nIn South America, projects included the Ayacucho Tram in Medell\u00edn (2016) and the VLT Carioca in Rio de Janeiro (2016).\nTypes.\nIt can be hard to distinguish what is called light rail, and other forms of urban and commuter rail. A system termed as a light rail in one city may be considered to be a streetcar or tram system in another. Conversely, some lines that are called \"light rail\" are very close to rapid transit. In recent years, new terms such as light metro have been used to describe medium-capacity rail systems. Some \"diesel light rail\" systems, such as Sprinter, bear little similarity to urban rail, and could alternatively be classified as commuter rail with lightweight trains.\nThere is a history of what would now be considered light rail vehicles operating on heavy rail rapid transit tracks in the US, especially in the case of interurban streetcars. Notable examples are Lehigh Valley Transit trains running on the Philadelphia and Western Railroad high-speed third rail line (now the Norristown High-Speed Line).\nFlexibility.\nLight rail corridors may constitute a fully segregated corridor, a dedicated right-of-way on a street, an on-street corridor shared with other traffic, a corridor shared with other public transport, or a corridor shared with pedestrians, resulting in a much higher flexibility than heavy rail.\nMany systems have mixed characteristics. Indeed, with proper engineering, a rail line could run along a street, then go underground, and then run along an elevated viaduct. For example, the Los Angeles Metro Rail's A Line \"light rail\" has sections that could alternatively be described as a tramway, a light metro, and, in a narrow sense, rapid transit. This is especially common in the United States, where there is not a popularly perceived distinction between these different types of urban rail systems.\nLower capacity.\nThe most difficult distinction to draw is that between low-floor light rail and streetcar or tram systems. There is a significant amount of overlap between the technologies; similar rolling stock may be used for either, and it is common to classify streetcars or trams as a subcategory of light rail rather than as a distinct type of transportation. However, some distinctions can be made, though systems may combine elements of both. Low-floor light rail lines tend to follow a reserved right-of-way and with trains receiving priority at intersections, and tend not to operate in mixed traffic, enabling higher operating speeds. Light rail lines tend to have less frequent stops than tramways, and operate over a longer distance. Light rail cars are often coupled into multiple units of two to four cars.\nHigher capacity.\nLight rail systems may also exhibit attributes of rapid transit systems, including having downtown subways, as in San Francisco and Seattle. These partially grade separated light rail lines are sometimes called \"semi-metro\". This type of light rail emerged when the first subway in Boston opened in 1897 and became popular again in Europe from the 1950s onwards. The development of technology for low-floor and catenary-free trams facilitates the construction of such mixed systems with only short and shallow underground sections below critical intersections as the required clearance height can be reduced significantly compared to conventional light rail vehicles.\nLight rail operating on mainline railroads.\nLight rail can be designed to address a gap in interurban transportation between mainline rail and bus services, carrying high passenger numbers more quickly than local buses and more cheaply than mainline trains. Around Karlsruhe, Kassel, and Saarbr\u00fccken in Germany, dual-voltage light rail trains partly use mainline railroad tracks, sharing these tracks with mainline rail trains. This allows commuters to ride directly into the city center, rather than taking a mainline train only as far as a central station and then having to change to a tram. In France, similar tram-trains are in use in Paris, Mulhouse, and Strasbourg; further plans exist. In 2022, Spain opened the C\u00e1diz TramBahia, where trams share track with commuter and long-distance trains from the main terminus in the city and curve off to serve cities without a rail connection.\nSome of the issues involved in such schemes are:\nIn some cases, tram-trains use previously abandoned or lightly used heavy rail lines in addition to or instead of still in use mainline tracks, like the Manchester Metrolink. In the San Diego region, the \"SD&amp;AE\" freight line was used to create the initial stage of the light rail network of the San Diego Trolley. In the Netherlands, this concept was first applied on the RijnGouweLijn, and was followed by the RandstadRail project.\nSystem-wide considerations.\nMany light rail systems\u2014even fairly old ones\u2014have a combination of both on- and off-road sections. In some countries (especially in Europe), only the latter is described as light rail. In those places, trams running on mixed rights-of-way are not regarded as a light rail but considered distinctly as streetcars or trams. However, the requirement for saying that a rail line is \"separated\" can be quite low\u2014sometimes just with concrete \"buttons\" to discourage automobile drivers from getting onto the tracks. Some systems such as Seattle's Link had on-road mixed sections but were closed to regular road traffic, with light rail vehicles and buses both operating along a common right-of-way (however, Link converted to full separation in 2019).\nFloor height.\nLow-floor LRVs have the advantage of a low-floor design, allowing them to load passengers directly from low-rise platforms that can be little more than raised curbs. High-floor light rail systems also exist, featuring larger stations.\nSpeed and stop frequency.\nReference speed from major light rail systems, including station stop time, is shown below.\nHowever, low top speed is not always a differentiating characteristic between light rail and other systems. For example, the Siemens S70 LRVs used in the Houston METRORail and other North American LRT systems have a top speed of depending on the system, while the trains on the all-underground Montreal Metro can only reach a top speed of . LACMTA light rail vehicles have higher top and average speeds than Montreal Metro or New York City Subway trains.\nInfrastructure.\nLight rail systems operate between heavy rapid transit and conventional street-level trams. Construction costs are typically lower than for metro systems, but building infrastructure can still be significant, sometimes leading to phased development or partial completion of lines. Light rail vehicles can often be compatible with existing tram networks, avoiding the need for entirely separate infrastructure or rolling stock. In some cases, multiple at-grade branches are used to maximize the capacity of tunneled sections.\nTracks.\nRight-of-way.\nLight rail systems can be defined by their right-of-way type and operational features such as power supply and speed. Three main categories of right-of-way can be categorized as:\nConventional tram lines typically operate on category C, light rail commonly uses category B with some sections of category A, while rapid transit generally operates entirely on category A.\nGrade-separated tracks correspond to fully independent right-of-way, while reserved tracks can be exclusive or semi-exclusive. Light rail operating entirely on independent tracks is sometimes also referred to as light rail rapid transit. Dedicated stretches of track may designed to function similarly to regular metro or rapid transit lines. One key difference from rapid transit is that light rail lines may only have one or a few sections in tunnels and on viaducts.\nTrack gauge.\nLight rail systems historically used various gauges, with narrow gauge common early on. Most modern systems use standard gauge, which allows standard maintenance equipment, easier transfer of rolling stock, tighter turns with articulated cars, and better low-floor accessibility. For example, the Tren de la Costa in Greater Buenos Aires was converted from broad to standard gauge to accommodate light rail vehicles.\nPower sources.\nMost light rail systems use overhead lines for electricity, avoiding hazards from an electrified third rail. Some systems use battery power for sections of track without overhead catenary, while a few light rail systems use diesel power.\nGround-level power supply.\nConduit power was an early alternative to overhead wires in cities prohibiting them, used in London, Paris, Berlin, Marseille, Budapest, Prague, New York City, and Washington, D.C.\nIn Bordeaux, the tram network uses a ground-level third rail in the city center, segmented and powered only under trams to ensure safety. Outside the center, trams use overhead wires. The system is three times more expensive than conventional overhead wiring and has high maintenance costs but has proven popular, carrying up to 190,000 passengers per day. . Sydney, Australia uses a similar system on the two of its lines.\nSignalling.\nAutomatic train operation.\nAutomatic train operation (ATO) monitors train position and speed, adjusting movements for safety and efficient operations, and is used in some light rail networks.\nRolling stock.\nLight rail routes are operated either with regular trams (with or without low floor) or with specially developed tramcars (light rail vehicles), such as the Stadtbahn-car 'type B'.55 Many light rail systems (including in the United States), are operated with larger and heavier vehicles than those on streetcar systems.\nComparisons of rolling stock types.\n\"The BART railcar in the chart is not generally considered to be a \"light rail\" vehicle (it is a heavy rail vehicle), and is only included for comparison purposes.\"\nRelated types of rail transit.\nPremetro.\nPremetro is largely equal to light rail: a type of public transport in which trams run partly grade separated, by using tunnels and/or viaducts. However, there is one clear distinguishing factor: premetro uses infrastructure that has been explicitly constructed with the ambition to transfer to use metro trains in the future.5219 It is usually also developed from an existing classic tram network. One prominent example is the premetro in Brussels, where several premetro lines have been or will be converted into full heavy rail metro lines.\nU-Stadtbahn.\nThe U-Stadtbahn is also an intermediate transportation form between metro and tram. It has originated in Germany, adapting the existing tram networks. Here specially developed trams run underground through tunnels in central urban areas.10 Stadtbahn lines can be subdivided by looking at the types of rolling stock.\nLight metro.\nSome systems, such as the AirTrain JFK in New York City, the DLR in London, and Kelana Jaya Line in Kuala Lumpur, have dispensed with the need for an operator. The Vancouver SkyTrain was an early adopter of driverless vehicles, while the Toronto Scarborough rapid transit operated the same trains as Vancouver, but used drivers. In most discussions and comparisons, these specialized systems are generally not considered light rail but as light metro systems. Light metro systems are essentially hybrids of light rail and rapid transit.\nHybrid rail.\nIn the United States, interurban-style services are now rare, largely because the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) does not permit non-compliant railcars (such as rapid transit or light rail vehicles) to operate simultaneously with standard freight or passenger equipment on the same tracks for safety reasons.\nExceptions, known as hybrid rail in the United States, include NJ Transit's River Line from Camden and Trenton and the North County Transit District's (NCTD) Sprinter service in northern San Diego County, California. These services operate under FRA waivers that allow passenger trains to run during daytime hours and freight trains at night, with several hours of temporal separation between the two. These diesel-powered systems use lightweight diesel multiple units (DMUs) originally designed for mainline railroads.\nVery light rail.\nWhile the word \"light\" in \"light rail\" refers to the lighter capacity compared to heavy rail/rapid transit, however the same word refers to lightweight in \"very light rail'. One example in passengers service is British Rail Class 139 on the Stourbridge Town branch line.\nVery Light Rail developments with prefabricated track and onboard power (no Over Head Line) in the UK are aiming for \u00a310 m per km as opposed to convention tram rail and OHL at \u00a320\u2013\u00a330 m per km. First tests in Coventry have started in 2025, a full line should be operation able by 2027.\nComparison to other rail transit modes.\nWith its mix of right-of-way types and train control technologies, LRT offers the widest range of latitude of any rail system in the design, engineering, and operating practices. The challenge in designing light rail systems is to realize the potential of LRT to provide fast, comfortable service while avoiding the tendency to overdesign that results in excessive capital costs beyond what is necessary to meet the public's needs.\nCapacity.\nComparison with high-capacity roads.\nA single light rail line (requiring a 7.6 m [25\u00a0ft] right-of-way) can carry up to eight times more passengers than a 3.7\u00a0m (12\u00a0ft) freeway lane during peak periods. Freeway lanes typically reach capacity at about 2,000 vehicles per hour, beyond which traffic flow breaks down and speeds collapse. With average commuter car occupancy of only 1.5 persons, freeways carry a maximum of about 3,000 passengers per lane per hour. HOV lanes and ride-sharing can improve this, but most jurisdictions expand roadway capacity instead, sometimes worsening congestion (Downs\u2013Thomson paradox, Braess's paradox).\nBy contrast, light rail trains operating in two-track rights-of-way as narrow as two car lanes can exceed 20,000 passengers per hour per direction, and over 25,000 with moving block signaling.\nRoadway person-throughput varies by permitted vehicle types. A typical car-only lane carries about 1,900 passenger cars per lane per hour (pcplph). Adding buses or light rail raises capacity, as shown below:\nComparison with bus rapid transit.\nBus rapid transit (BRT) is often compared with LRT in corridor planning. BRT in dedicated lanes can exceed 30,000 passengers per hour per direction, as in Guangzhou Bus Rapid Transit, which operates up to 350 buses per hour. Achieving this requires large stations, bus priority at intersections, and overtaking lanes for express services. BRT labor and fuel costs are typically higher, since each bus requires a driver and most use non-electrified vehicles. Ride quality is also lower, with more abrupt braking and acceleration compared to rail.\nPractical considerations.\nMost U.S. light rail systems are demand-limited, carrying under 4,000 passengers per hour per direction, though Boston and San Francisco reach 9,600 and 13,100 respectively. Calgary's C-Train and Mexico's Monterrey Metro have higher ridership, while Manila's Light Rail Transit System exceeds 40,000 per hour per direction, operating four-car trains of up to 1,350 passengers at 30 trains per hour. Manila's system, however, is fully grade-separated and more comparable to a metro.\nCosts and efficiency.\nLight rail construction costs vary widely depending on tunneling and elevated structures. A survey of North American projects found most systems cost between $15\u00a0million and $100\u00a0million per mile, averaging $35\u00a0million (excluding Seattle). Seattle's Link Light Rail reached $179\u00a0million per mile due to tunneling, elevated sections, and deep stations, while Baltimore, Camden, Sacramento, and Salt Lake City each built systems for under $20\u00a0million per mile.\nBy comparison, freeway lane expansion averages $2.3\u00a0million per lane-mile, but is usually built in less costly suburban or rural areas. The most expensive U.S. road project, Boston's Big Dig, reached $200\u00a0million per lane-mile. A light rail track can carry up to 20,000 passengers per hour, compared with 2,000\u20132,200 vehicles per freeway lane, with Boston and San Francisco lines carrying 9,600 and 13,100 peak-hour passengers respectively.\nJoint highway\u2013LRT projects can lower costs, as shown by Denver's Transportation Expansion Project, which rebuilt 17\u00a0mi of highway and added 19\u00a0mi of light rail for $1.67\u00a0billion, or $19.3\u00a0million per highway lane-mile and $27.6\u00a0million per rail mile. The project finished under budget and nearly two years early.\nThe Calgary CTrain minimized costs by avoiding tunnels and elevated sections, using existing rail corridors, and combining construction with freeway projects. Its capital cost was $24\u00a0million per mile, about one-third that of the San Diego Trolley. By 2009, Calgary carried three times San Diego's ridership with lower capital and operating cost per passenger. Operating costs average C$163 per train-hour, or about 27 cents per ride, compared with $1.50 for buses.\nLight rail often has lower labor costs per passenger mile, attracts more riders than buses, and achieves faster speeds with fewer vehicles required. Vehicles cost more upfront but last longer, reducing life-cycle costs. Compared with heavy rail, LRT has lower capital but higher operating costs.\nLight rail energy efficiency is estimated at 120 passenger-miles per gallon of fuel equivalent, though performance varies with context.\nEffects.\nSafety.\nAn analysis of data from the 505-page National Transportation Statistics report published by the US Department of Transportation shows that light rail fatalities are higher than all other forms of transportation except motorcycle travel (31.5 fatalities per 100\u00a0million miles).\nHowever, the National Transportation Statistics report published by the US Department of Transportation states that:Caution must be exercised in comparing fatalities across modes because significantly different definitions are used. In particular, Rail and Transit fatalities include incident-related (as distinct from accident-related) fatalities, such as fatalities from falls in transit stations or railroad employee fatalities from a fire in a workshed. Equivalent fatalities for the Air and Highway modes (fatalities at airports not caused by moving aircraft or fatalities from accidents in automobile repair shops) are not counted toward the totals for these modes. Thus, fatalities not necessarily directly related to in-service transportation are counted for the transit and rail modes, potentially overstating the risk for these modes.\nHealth impact.\nStudies have attributed light rail with a number of health impacts. Research has associated light rail positively with increased walking and decreased obesity. Additionally, one electric light rail train produces nearly 99 percent less carbon monoxide and hydrocarbon emissions per mile than one automobile does.\nExamples.\nWorldwide around 400 cities have one or more tram/light rail systems. Some date back to the 19th century, and by the 1930s almost 900 tram/light rail system existed. Many of the original tram and streetcar systems were closed down in the mid-20th century, except in most Central and Eastern European countries. Other cities that once closed down their streetcar networks are now restoring, or have already rebuilt, at least some of their former streetcar/tram systems.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50948", "revid": "38510424", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50948", "title": "Streetcar (disambiguation)", "text": "A streetcar, street car, or tram is a vehicle that travels on rails, typically in a street.\nThis may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "50949", "revid": "89105", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50949", "title": "Trolley", "text": "Trolley may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "50950", "revid": "16861812", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50950", "title": "Hypoglycaemia", "text": ""}
{"id": "50951", "revid": "218", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50951", "title": "Pneumatic tubes", "text": ""}
{"id": "50952", "revid": "42608126", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50952", "title": "Swan", "text": "Tribe of large water birds\nSwans are birds of the genus Cygnus within the family Anatidae. The swans' closest relatives include geese and ducks. Swans are grouped with the closely related geese in the subfamily Anserinae, forming the tribe Cygnini. Sometimes, they are considered a distinct subfamily, Cygninae. They are the largest waterfowl and are often among the largest flighted birds in their range. \nThere are six living and many extinct species of swan; in addition, there is a species known as the coscoroba swan, which is no longer considered one of the true swans. Swans usually mate for life, although separation sometimes occurs, particularly following nesting failure, and if a mate dies, the remaining swan will take up with another. The number of eggs in each clutch ranges from three to eight.\nTaxonomy and terminology.\nThe genus \"Cygnus\" was introduced in 1764 by the French naturalist Fran\u00e7ois Alexandre Pierre de Garsault. The English word \"swan\", akin to the German , Dutch , and Swedish , is derived from the Indo-European root ('to sound, to sing').\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Young swans are known as \"cygnets\", from Old French or (diminutive suffix \"et\" 'little'), from the Latin word , a variant form of 'swan', itself from the Greek , a word of the same meaning. An adult male is a \"cob\", from Middle English (leader of a group); an adult female is a \"pen\". A group of swans is called a bevy or a wedge.\nDescription.\nSwans are the largest extant members of the waterfowl family Anatidae and are among the largest flying birds. The largest living species, including the mute swan, trumpeter swan, and whooper swan, can reach a length of over and weigh over . Their wingspans can be over . Compared to the closely related geese, they are much larger and have proportionally larger feet and necks. Adults also have a patch of unfeathered skin between the eyes and bill. The sexes are alike in plumage, but males are generally bigger and heavier than females. The biggest species of swan ever was the extinct \"Cygnus falconeri\", a flightless giant swan known from fossils found on the Mediterranean islands of Malta and Sicily; its disappearance is thought to have resulted from extreme climate fluctuations or the arrival of superior predators and competitors.\nThe Northern Hemisphere species of swan have pure white plumage, while the Southern Hemisphere species are mixed black and white. The Australian black swan (\"Cygnus atratus\") is completely black except for the white flight feathers on its wings; the chicks of black swans are light grey. The South American black-necked swan has a white body with a black neck.\nThe legs of most swans are typically a dark blackish-grey colour, except for the South American black-necked swan, which has pink legs. Bill colour varies: the four subarctic species have black bills with varying amounts of yellow, and all the others are patterned red and black. Although birds do not have teeth, swans, like other Anatidae, have beaks with serrated edges that look like small jagged \"teeth\" as part of their beaks, which are used for catching and eating aquatic plants and algae, as well as molluscs, small fish, frogs, and worms. In the mute swan and black-necked swan, both sexes have a fleshy lump at the base of their bills on the upper mandible, known as the knob, which is larger in males and is condition-dependent, changing seasonally.\nDistribution and movements.\nSwans are generally found in temperate environments, rarely occurring in the tropics. Four (or five) species occur in the Northern Hemisphere, one species is found in Australia, one extinct species was found in New Zealand and the Chatham Islands, and one species is distributed in southern South America. They are absent from tropical Asia, Central America, northern South America and the entirety of Africa. One species, the mute swan, has been introduced to North America, Australia and New Zealand.\nSeveral species are migratory, either wholly or partly so. The mute swan is a partial migrant, being resident over areas of Western Europe but wholly migratory in Eastern Europe and Asia. The tundra swan is wholly migratory, and the whooper swan and trumpeter swan are almost entirely migratory. There is some evidence that the black-necked swan is migratory over part of its range, but detailed studies have not established whether these movements constitute long- or short-range migration.\nBehaviour.\nSwans feed in water and on land. They are almost entirely herbivorous, although they may eat small amounts of aquatic animals. In the water, food is obtained by up-ending or dabbling, and their diet is composed of the roots, tubers, stems, and leaves of aquatic and submerged plants. \nA familiar behaviour of swans is that they mate for life and typically bond even before they reach sexual maturity. Trumpeter swans, for example, can live as long as 24 years and only start breeding at the age of 4\u20137, forming monogamous pair bonds as early as 20 months. \"Divorce\", though rare, does occur; one study of mute swans shows a 3% rate for pairs that breed successfully and 9% for pairs that do not. The pair bonds are maintained year-round, even in gregarious and migratory species like the tundra swan, which congregate in large flocks in the wintering grounds.\nSwans' nests are on the ground near water and about a metre (3') across. Unlike many other ducks and geese, the male helps with the nest construction and will also take turns incubating the eggs. Alongside the whistling ducks, swans are the only anatids that will do this. The average egg size (for the mute swan) is 113 \u00d7 74\u00a0mm (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;4+1\u20442 x 3 in), weighing 340 g (12\u00a0oz), in a clutch size of 4 to 7, with an incubation period of 34\u201345 days. Swans are highly protective of their nests. They will viciously attack anything that they perceive as a threat to their chicks, including humans; one man was suspected to have drowned in such an attack. Swans' intraspecific aggressive behaviour is shown more frequent than interspecific behaviour for food and shelter. The aggression with other species is shown more in tundra swans.\nSystematics and evolution.\nEvidence suggests that the genus \"Cygnus\" evolved in Europe or western Eurasia during the Miocene, spreading all over the Northern Hemisphere until the Pliocene. When the southern species branched off is not known. The mute swan is closest to the Southern Hemisphere \"Cygnus\"; its habits of carrying the neck curved (not straight) and the wings fluffed (not flush) as well as its bill colour and knob indicate that its closest living relative is the black swan. Given the biogeography and appearance of the subgenus \"Olor\", it seems likely that these are of a more recent origin, as evidenced shows by their modern ranges (which were mostly uninhabitable during the last ice age) and great similarity between the taxa.\nSpecies.\nGenus \"Cygnus\"\nThe coscoroba swan (\"Coscoroba coscoroba\") from South America, the only species in its genus, is not a true swan. Its phylogenetic position is not fully resolved; it is in some aspects more similar to geese and shelducks.\nFossil record.\nThe fossil record of the genus \"Cygnus\" is quite impressive, although allocation to the subgenera is often tentative; as indicated above, at least the early forms probably belong to the \"C. olor\" \u2013 Southern Hemisphere lineage, whereas the Pleistocene taxa from North America would be placed in \"Olor\". Several prehistoric species have been described, mostly from the Northern Hemisphere. In the Mediterranean, the leg bones of the giant swan (\"C. falconeri\") were found on the islands of Malta and Sicily; it may have been over 2 metres from tail to bill, which was taller (though not heavier) than the contemporary local dwarf elephants (\"Palaeoloxodon falconeri\").\nThe supposed fossil swans \"\"Cygnus\" bilinicus\" and \"\"Cygnus\" herrenthalsi\" were, respectively, a stork and some large bird of unknown affinity (due to the bad state of preservation of the referred material).\nIn culture.\nEuropean motifs.\nMany of the cultural aspects refer to the mute swan of Europe. Perhaps the best-known story about a swan is the fairy tale \"The Ugly Duckling\". Swans are frequently regarded as symbols of love or fidelity, owing to their enduring and seemingly monogamous pair bonds. Swans feature prominently in two Wagner operas, \"Lohengrin\" and \"Parsifal\".\nAs food.\nSwan meat was regarded as a luxury food in England during the reign of Elizabeth I. A recipe for baked swan survives from that time: \"To bake a Swan[,] scald it and take out the bones, and parboil it, then season it very well with Pepper, Salt and Ginger, then lard it, and put it in a deep Coffin of Rye Paste with store of Butter, close it and bake it very well, and when it is baked, fill up the Vent-hole with melted Butter, and so keep it; serve it in as you do the Beef-Pie.\" Swans being raised for food were sometimes kept in swan pits.\nThe \"Illustrious Brotherhood of Our Blessed Lady\", a religious confraternity that existed in 's-Hertogenbosch in the late Middle Ages, had \"sworn members\", also called \"swan-brethren\" because they used to donate a swan for the yearly banquet.\nA common misconception holds that the British monarch owns all the swans in the United Kingdom and is uniquely permitted to eat them.\nAncient Greece and Rome.\nSwans feature strongly in mythology. In Greek mythology, the story of Leda and the Swan recounts that Helen of Troy was conceived in a union of Zeus disguised as a swan and Leda, Queen of Sparta. Four different men (Cycnus, Cycnus, Cycnus, and Cycnus) are said to have been transformed into swans by the gods.\nOther references in classical literature include the belief that, upon death, the mute swan would sing beautifully \u2014 hence the phrase \"swan song\".\nThe mute swan is one of Apollo's sacred birds, associated both with light and with the concept of a \"swan song\". Apollo is often shown riding a chariot pulled by, or made of, swans during his ascension from Delos.\nIn the second century, the Roman poet Juvenal made a sarcastic reference to a good woman being a \"rare bird, as rare on earth as a black swan\" (black swans being completely unknown in the Northern Hemisphere until Dutch explorers reached Australia in the 1600s), from which comes the Latin phrase \"\" (\"rare bird\").\nIrish lore and poetry.\nThe Irish legend of the Children of Lir is about a stepmother who transformed her children into swans for 900 years.\nIn the legend \"The Wooing of Etain\", the king of the Sidhe (subterranean-dwelling, supernatural beings) transforms himself and the most beautiful woman in Ireland, Etain, into swans to escape from the king of Ireland and Ireland's armies. The swan has recently been depicted on an Irish commemorative coin.\nSwans are also present in Irish literature in the poetry of W. B. Yeats; \"The Wild Swans at Coole\" has a heavy focus on the mesmerising characteristics of the swan. Yeats also recounts the myth of Leda and the Swan in the poem of the same name.\nNordic lore.\nIn Norse mythology, two swans drink from the sacred Well of Urd in the realm of Asgard, home of the gods. According to the Prose Edda, the water of this well is so pure and holy that all things that touch it turn white, including this original pair of swans and all others descended from them. The poem \"Volundarkvida\", or the \"Lay of Volund\", part of the Poetic Edda, also features swan maidens.\nIn the Finnish epic \"Kalevala\", a swan lives in the Tuoni River located in Tuonela, the underworld realm of the dead; according to the story, whoever killed a swan would perish as well. Jean Sibelius composed the \"Lemmink\u00e4inen Suite\" based on the \"Kalevala\", with the second piece entitled \"Swan of Tuonela\" \"(Tuonelan joutsen)\". Today, five flying swans are the symbol of the Nordic countries; the whooper swan (\"Cygnus cygnus\") is the national bird of Finland, and the mute swan is the national bird of Denmark.\n\"Swan Lake\" ballet.\nThe ballet \"Swan Lake\" is one of the most canonical classical ballets. Based on the 1875\u201376 score by Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky, the most promulgated choreographic version was created by Marius Petipa and Lev Ivanov (1895), the premiere of which was danced by the Imperial Ballet at the Mariinsky Theatre in Saint Petersburg. The ballet's lead dual roles of Odette (white swan)/Odile (black swan) represent good and evil, and they are among the most challenging roles created in Romantic classical ballet. The ballet is included in the repertories of ballet companies worldwide.\nChristianity.\nA swan is one of the attributes of St. Hugh of Lincoln, based on the story of a swan that was devoted to him.\nSpanish language literature.\nIn Latin American literature, the Nicaraguan poet Rub\u00e9n Dar\u00edo (1867\u20131916) consecrated the swan as a symbol of artistic inspiration by drawing attention to the constancy of swan imagery in Western culture, beginning with the rape of Leda and ending with Wagner's \"Lohengrin\". Dar\u00edo's most famous poem in this regard is \"Blas\u00f3n \u2013 \"Coat of Arms\"\" (1896), and his use of the swan made it a symbol for the Modernismo poetic movement that dominated Spanish language poetry from the 1880s until the First World War. Such was the dominance of Modernismo in Spanish language poetry that the Mexican poet Enrique Gonz\u00e1lez Mart\u00ednez attempted to announce the end of Modernismo with a sonnet provocatively entitled \"Tu\u00e9rcele el cuello al cisne \u2013 \"Wring the Swan's Neck\"\" (1910).\nHinduism.\nIn Hinduism, swans are revered and likened to saintly persons who live in the world without attachment, much like a swan's feather stays dry in water. The Sanskrit word for swan is \"hamsa\" and the \"Raja Hamsam\" or the Royal Swan is the vehicle of the Devi Saraswati, which symbolises the \"Sattva Guna\" (\"purity par excellence\"). The swan, if offered a mixture of milk and water, is said to be able to drink the milk alone. Therefore, Saraswati, the goddess of knowledge, is seen riding the swan because the swan thus symbolizes \"Viveka\", i.e. prudence and discrimination between the good and the bad or between the eternal and the transient; this is seen as a great quality, as shown by this Sanskrit verse:\nAs mentioned several times in the Vedic literature, persons who have attained great spiritual capabilities are sometimes called Paramahamsa (\"Supreme Swan\") on account of their spiritual grace and ability to travel between various spiritual worlds. In the Vedas, swans are said to reside on Lake Manasarovar during the summer and to migrate to Indian lakes for the winter; they are also believed to possess some powers, such as the ability to eat pearls.\nIndo-European religions.\nSwans are intimately associated with the divine twins in Indo-European religions, and it is thought that in Proto-Indo-European times, swans were a solar symbol associated with the divine twins and the original Indo-European sun goddess.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50953", "revid": "43901784", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50953", "title": "Egyptian hieroglyphs", "text": "Ancient Egyptian writing system\nAncient Egyptian hieroglyphs ( ) were the formal writing system used in Ancient Egypt for writing the Egyptian language. Hieroglyphs combined ideographic, logographic, syllabic, and alphabetic elements, with more than 1,000 distinct characters. Cursive hieroglyphs were used for religious literature on papyrus and wood. The later hieratic and demotic Egyptian scripts were derived from hieroglyphic writing, as was the Proto-Sinaitic script that later evolved into the Phoenician alphabet. Egyptian hieroglyphs are the ultimate ancestor of the Phoenician alphabet, the first widely adopted phonetic writing system. Moreover, owing in large part to the Greek and Aramaic scripts that descended from Phoenician, the majority of the world's living writing systems are descendants of Egyptian hieroglyphs\u2014most prominently the Latin and Cyrillic scripts through Greek, and the Arabic and Brahmic scripts through Aramaic. Hieroglyphs are thought to be one of four writing systems developed without outside influence, the others being Cuneiforms, Chinese characters, and Mayan script.\nThe use of hieroglyphic writing arose from proto-literate symbol systems in the Early Bronze Age c.\u2009the 33rd century\u00a0BC (Naqada III), with the first decipherable sentence written in the Egyptian language dating to the 28th century\u00a0BC (Second Dynasty). Ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs developed into a mature writing system used for monumental inscription in the classical language of the Middle Kingdom period; during this period, the system used about 900 distinct signs. The use of this writing system continued through the New Kingdom and Late Period, and on into the Persian and Ptolemaic periods. Late survivals of hieroglyphic use are found well into the Roman period, extending into the 4th century\u00a0AD.\nDuring the 5th century, the permanent closing of pagan temples across Roman Egypt ultimately resulted in the loss of fluent readers and writers in hieroglyphs. Despite attempts at decipherment, the nature of the script remained unknown throughout the Middle Ages and the early modern period. Regardless, mixture of medieval Arab (pre-Islamic) and Egyptian people kept the fascination of hieroglyphics alive. Scholars, spiritualists and treasure hunters like highly sought after artifacts in attempts to decode the language while also understanding the phonetic and alphabetical similarities between Coptic and Hieroglyphs. The decipherment of hieroglyphic writing was finally accomplished in the 1820s by Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Champollion, with the help of the Rosetta Stone.\nThe entire Ancient Egyptian corpus, including both hieroglyphic and hieratic texts, is approximately 5 million words in length; if counting duplicates (such as the \"Book of the Dead\" and the Coffin Texts) as separate, this figure is closer to 10 million. The most complete compendium of Ancient Egyptian, the \"\", contains 1.5\u20131.7 million words.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"hieroglyph\" comes from the Ancient Greek (), meaning 'sacred carving'\u00a0\u2013 a compound of 'sacred' and '\u0399 carve, engrave' (cf. English \"glyph\").\nFrom the Ptolemaic period (3rd\u20131st centuries\u00a0BC), the glyphs themselves were called () 'the sacred engraved letters', the Greek counterpart to the Egyptian term 'words of gods'. Greek meant 'a carver of hieroglyphs'.\nIn English, \"hieroglyph\" as a noun is recorded from 1590, originally short for nominalized \"hieroglyphic\" (1580s, with a plural \"hieroglyphics\"), from adjectival use (\"hieroglyphic character\").\nHistory and evolution.\nOrigin.\nHieroglyphs may have emerged from the preliterate artistic traditions of Egypt. For example, symbols on Gerzean pottery from c.\u20094000 BC have been argued to resemble hieroglyphic writing.\nProto-writing systems developed in the second half of the 4th millennium\u00a0BC, such as the clay labels of a Predynastic ruler called \"Scorpion I\" (Naqada IIIA period, ) recovered at Abydos (modern Umm el-Qa'ab) in 1998 or the Narmer Palette ().\nThe first full sentence written in mature hieroglyphs so far discovered was found on a seal impression in the tomb of Seth-Peribsen at Umm el-Qa'ab, which dates from the Second Dynasty (28th or 27th century\u00a0BC). Around 800 hieroglyphs are known to date back to the Old Kingdom, Middle Kingdom and New Kingdom eras. By the Greco-Roman period, there were more than 5,000.\nScholars have long debated whether hieroglyphs were developed independently of any other script, or derived from cuneiform, the earliest writing system in human history that developed to write Sumerian in southern Mesopotamia during the late 4th millennium\u00a0BC. Scholars like Geoffrey Sampson argued that Egyptian hieroglyphs \"came into existence a little after Sumerian script, and, probably, [were] invented under the influence of the latter\", and that it is \"probable that the general idea of expressing words of a language in writing was brought to Egypt from Sumerian Mesopotamia\". Further, Egyptian writing appeared suddenly, while Mesopotamia had a long evolutionary history, with antecedent signs used in tokens for agricultural and accounting purposes as early as .\nWhile there are many instances of early Egypt\u2013Mesopotamia relations, the lack of direct evidence for the transfer of writing means that \"no definitive determination has been made as to the origin of hieroglyphics in ancient Egypt\". Since the 1990s, the above-mentioned discoveries of glyphs at Abydos, dated between 3400 and 3200\u00a0BC, have shed further doubt on the classical notion that the Mesopotamian symbol system predates the Egyptian one. A date of for the earliest Abydos glyphs challenges the hypothesis of diffusion from Mesopotamia to Egypt, pointing to an independent development of writing in Egypt.\nRosalie David has argued that the debate is moot since \"If Egypt did adopt the idea of writing from elsewhere, it was presumably only the concept which was taken over, since the forms of the hieroglyphs are entirely Egyptian in origin and reflect the distinctive flora, fauna and images of Egypt's own landscape.\" Egyptian scholar Gamal Mokhtar argued further that the inventory of hieroglyphic symbols derived from \"fauna and flora used in the signs [which] are essentially African\" and in \"regards to writing, we have seen that a purely Nilotic, hence African origin not only is not excluded, but probably reflects the reality.\"\nMature writing system.\nHieroglyphs consist of three kinds of glyphs: phonetic glyphs, including single-consonant characters that function like an alphabet; logographs, representing morphemes; and determinatives, which narrow down the meaning of logographic or phonetic words.\nLate period.\nAs writing developed and became more widespread among the Egyptian people, simplified glyph forms developed, resulting in the hieratic (priestly) and demotic (popular) scripts. These variants were also more suited than hieroglyphs for use on papyrus. Hieroglyphic writing was not, however, eclipsed, but existed alongside the other forms, especially in monumental and other formal writing. The Rosetta Stone contains three parallel scripts\u00a0\u2013 hieroglyphs, demotic, and the Greek alphabet.\nLate survival.\nHieroglyphs continued to be used intermittently under Persian rule in the 6th and 5th centuries\u00a0BC, as well as during the ensuing Ptolemaic and Roman periods that followed after Alexander the Great's conquest of Egypt. It appears that the misleading quality of comments from Greek and Roman writers about hieroglyphs came about, at least in part, as a response to the changed political situation. Some believed that hieroglyphs may have functioned as a way to distinguish 'true Egyptians' from some of the foreign conquerors. Another reason may be the refusal to tackle a foreign culture on its own terms, which characterized Greco-Roman approaches to Egyptian culture generally. Having learned that hieroglyphs were sacred writing, Greco-Roman authors imagined the complex but rational system as an allegorical, even magical, system transmitting secret, mystical knowledge.\nBy the 4th century\u00a0AD, few Egyptians were capable of reading hieroglyphs, and the \"myth of allegorical hieroglyphs\" was ascendant. Monumental use of hieroglyphs ceased after the closing of all non-Christian temples in 391 by the Roman Emperor Theodosius I; the last known inscription is from Philae, known as the Graffito of Esmet-Akhom, from 394.\nThe \"\" of Horapollo (c.\u00a05th century) appears to retain some genuine knowledge about the writing system. It offers an explanation of close to 200 signs. Some are identified correctly, such as the 'goose' hieroglyph () representing the word for 'son'.\nA half-dozen Demotic glyphs are still in use, added to the Greek alphabet when writing Coptic.\nDecipherment.\nKnowledge of the hieroglyphs had been lost completely in the medieval period. \nEarly attempts at decipherment were made by some such as Dhul-Nun al-Misri and pseudo-Ibn Wahshiyya (9th and 10th century, respectively).\nAll medieval and early modern attempts were hampered by the fundamental assumption that hieroglyphs \nrecorded ideas and not the sounds of the language. As no bilingual texts were available, any such symbolic 'translation' could be proposed without the possibility of verification. It was not until Athanasius Kircher in the mid 17th century that scholars began to think the hieroglyphs might also represent sounds. Kircher was familiar with Coptic, and thought that it might be the key to deciphering the hieroglyphs, but was held back by a belief in the mystical nature of the symbols.\nThe breakthrough in decipherment came only with the discovery of the Rosetta Stone by Napoleon's troops in 1799 (during Napoleon's Egyptian invasion). \nAs the stone presented a hieroglyphic and a demotic version of the same text in parallel with a Greek translation, plenty of material for falsifiable studies in translation was suddenly available. In the early 19th century, scholars such as Silvestre de Sacy, Johan David \u00c5kerblad, and Thomas Young studied the inscriptions on the stone, and were able to make some headway. Finally, Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Champollion made the complete decipherment by the 1820s. In his \"\" (1822), he wrote:\nIt is a complex system, writing figurative, symbolic, and phonetic all at once, in the same text, the same phrase, I would almost say in the same word.\nWriting system.\nVisually, hieroglyphs are all more or less figurative: they represent real or abstract elements, sometimes stylized and simplified, but all generally perfectly recognizable in form. However, the same sign can, according to context, be interpreted in diverse ways: as a phonogram (phonetic reading), as a logogram, or as an ideogram (semagram; \"determinative\") (semantic reading). The determinative was not read as a phonetic constituent, but facilitated understanding by differentiating the word from its homophones.\nPhonetic reading.\nMost non-determinative hieroglyphic signs are \"phonograms\", whose meaning is determined by pronunciation, independent of visual characteristics. This follows the rebus principle where, for example, in English, the picture of an eye could stand not only for the word \"eye\", but also for its phonetic equivalent, the first person pronoun \"I\".\nPhonograms formed with one consonant are called \"uniliteral\" signs; with two consonants, \"biliteral\" signs; with three, \"triliteral\" signs.\nTwenty-four uniliteral signs make up the alphabetic elements. Egyptian hieroglyphic writing does not normally indicate vowels, unlike cuneiform, and for that reason has been labelled by some as an \"abjad\", i.e., an alphabet without vowels.\nThus, hieroglyphic writing representing a pintail duck is read in Egyptian as , derived from the main consonants of the Egyptian word for this duck: 's', '\ua723' and 't'. (Note that \ua723 or , two half-rings opening to the left, sometimes replaced by the digit '3', is the Egyptian \"alef.\")\nIt is also possible to use the hieroglyph of the pintail duck without a link to its meaning in order to represent the two phonemes \"s\" and \"\ua723\", independently of any vowels that could accompany these consonants, and in this way write the word: 'son', or when complemented by other signs detailed below 'keep', 'watch'; and 'hard ground'. For example:\nG38\u00a0\u2013 the characters ;\nG38-Z1s\u00a0\u2013 the same character used only in order to signify, according to the context, 'pintail duck' or, with the appropriate determinative, 'son', two words having the same or similar consonants:\nz:G38-A-A47-D54\u00a0\u2013 the character as used in the word 'keep', 'watch'\nAs in the Arabic script, not all vowels were written in Egyptian hieroglyphs; it is debatable whether vowels were written at all. Possibly, as with Arabic, the semivowels and (as in English W and Y) could double as the vowels and . In modern transcriptions, an \"e\" is added between consonants to aid in their pronunciation. For example, 'good' is typically written \"nefer\". This does not reflect Egyptian vowels, which are obscure, but is merely a modern convention. Likewise, the \"\ua723\" and \"\ua725\" are commonly transliterated as \"a\", as in Ra (\"r\ua725\").\nHieroglyphs are inscribed in rows of pictures arranged in horizontal lines or vertical columns. Both hieroglyph lines as well as signs contained in the lines are read with upper content having precedence over content below. The lines or columns, and the individual inscriptions within them, read from left to right in rare instances only and for particular reasons at that; ordinarily however, they read from right to left\u2013the Egyptians' preferred direction of writing (although, for convenience, modern texts are often normalized into left-to-right order). The direction toward which asymmetrical hieroglyphs face indicate their proper reading order. For example, when human and animal hieroglyphs face or look toward the left, they almost always must be read from left to right, and vice versa.\nAs in many ancient writing systems, words are not separated by blanks or punctuation marks. However, certain hieroglyphs appear particularly common only at the end of words, making it possible to readily distinguish words.\nUniliteral signs.\nThe Egyptian hieroglyphic script contained 24 uniliterals (symbols that stood for single consonants, much like letters in English). It would have been possible to write all Egyptian words in the manner of these signs, but the Egyptians never did so and never simplified their complex writing into a true alphabet.\nEach uniliteral glyph once had a unique reading, but several of these fell together as Old Egyptian developed into Middle Egyptian. For example, the folded-cloth glyph () seems to have originally been an /s/ and the door-bolt glyph ) a /\u03b8/ sound, but these both came to be pronounced , as the sound was lost. A few uniliterals first appear in Middle Egyptian texts.\nBesides the uniliteral glyphs, there are also the biliteral and triliteral signs, to represent a specific sequence of two or three consonants, consonants and vowels, and a few as vowel combinations only, in the language.\nPhonetic complements.\nEgyptian writing is often redundant: in fact, it happens very frequently that a word is followed by several characters writing the same sounds, in order to guide the reader. For example, the word \"nfr\", \"beautiful, good, perfect\", was written with a unique triliteral that was read as \"nfr\":\nnfr\nHowever, it is considerably more common to add to that triliteral, the uniliterals for \"f\" and \"r\". The word can thus be written as \"nfr+f+r\", but one still reads it as merely \"nfr\". The two alphabetic characters are adding clarity to the spelling of the preceding triliteral hieroglyph.\nRedundant characters accompanying biliteral or triliteral signs are called \"phonetic complements\" (or complementaries). They can be placed in front of the sign (rarely), after the sign (as a general rule), or even framing it (appearing both before and after). Ancient Egyptian scribes consistently avoided leaving large areas of blank space in their writing and might add additional phonetic complements or sometimes even invert the order of signs if this would result in a more aesthetically pleasing appearance (good scribes attended to the artistic, and even religious, aspects of the hieroglyphs, and would not simply view them as a communication tool). Various examples of the use of phonetic complements can be seen below:\n S43-d-w \u2013 \"md +d +w\" (the complementary \"d\" is placed after the sign) \u2192 it reads \"mdw\", meaning \"tongue\".\n x:p-xpr:r-i-A40 \u2013 \"\u1e2b +p +\u1e2bpr +r +j\" (the four complementaries frame the triliteral sign of the scarab beetle) \u2192 it reads \"\u1e2bpr.j\", meaning the name \"Khepri\", with the final glyph being the determinative for 'ruler or god'.\nNotably, phonetic complements were also used to allow the reader to differentiate between signs that are homophones, or which do not always have a unique reading. For example, the symbol of \"the seat\" (or chair):\n Q1 \u2013 This can be read \"st\", \"ws\" or \"\u1e25tm\", according to the word in which it is found. The presence of phonetic complements\u2014and of the suitable determinative\u2014allows the reader to know which of the three readings to choose:\n*1st Reading: st \u2013 Q1-t:pr \u2013 \"st\", written \"st+t\"; the last character is the determinative of \"the house\" or that which is found there, meaning \"seat, throne, place\";\n Q1-t:H8 \u2013 \"st\" (written \"st+t\"; the \"egg\" determinative is used for female personal names in some periods), meaning \"Isis\";\n*2nd Reading: ws \u2013 Q1:ir-A40 \u2013 \"wsjr\" (written \"ws\"+\"jr\", with, as a phonetic complement, \"the eye\", which is read \"jr\", following the determinative of \"god\"), meaning \"Osiris\";\n*3rd Reading: \u1e25tm \u2013 H-Q1-m:t-E17 \u2013 \"\u1e25tm.t\" (written \"\u1e25+\u1e25tm+m+t\", with the determinative of \"Anubis\" or \"the jackal\"), meaning a kind of wild animal;\n H-Q1-t-G41 \u2013 \"\u1e25tm\" (written \"\u1e25 +\u1e25tm +t\", with the determinative of the flying bird), meaning \"to disappear\".\nFinally, it sometimes happens that the pronunciation of words might be changed because of their connection to Ancient Egyptian: in this case, it is not rare for writing to adopt a compromise in notation, the two readings being indicated jointly. For example, the adjective \"bnj\", \"sweet\", became \"bnr\". In Middle Egyptian, one can write:\n b-n:r-i-M30 \u2013 \"bnrj\" (written \"b+n+r+i\", with determinative)\nwhich is fully read as \"bnr\", the \"j\" not being pronounced but retained in order to keep a written connection with the ancient word (in the same fashion as the English language words \"through\", \"knife\", or \"victuals\", which are no longer pronounced the way they are written.)\nSemantic reading.\nBesides a phonetic interpretation, characters can also be read for their meaning: in this instance, logograms are being spoken (or ideograms) and \"semagrams\" (the latter are also called determinatives).\nLogograms.\nA hieroglyph used as a logogram defines the object of which it is an image. Logograms are therefore the most frequently used common nouns; they are always accompanied by a mute vertical stroke indicating their status as a logogram (the usage of a vertical stroke is further explained below); in theory, all hieroglyphs would have the ability to be used as logograms. Logograms can be accompanied by phonetic complements. Here are some examples:\n*ra:Z1 \u2013 \"r\ua725\", meaning \"sun\";\n*pr:Z1 \u2013 \"pr\", meaning \"house\";\n*sw-t:Z1 \u2013 \"swt\" (\"sw\"+\"t\"), meaning \"reed\";\n*Dw:Z1 \u2013 \"\u1e0fw\", meaning \"mountain\".\nIn some cases, the semantic connection is indirect (metonymic or metaphoric):\n*nTr-Z1 \u2013 \"n\u1e6fr\", meaning \"god\"; the character in fact represents a temple flag (standard);\n*G53-Z1 \u2013 \"b\ua723\", meaning \"B\u00e2\" (soul); the character is the traditional representation of a \"b\u00e2\" (a bird with a human head);\n*G27-Z1 \u2013 \"d\u0161r\", meaning \"flamingo\"; the corresponding phonogram means \"red\" and the bird is associated by metonymy with this color.\nDeterminatives.\nDeterminatives or semagrams (semantic symbols specifying meaning) are placed at the end of a word. These mute characters serve to clarify what the word is about, as homophonic glyphs are common. If a similar procedure existed in English, words with the same spelling would be followed by an indicator that would not be read, but which would fine-tune the meaning: \"retort [chemistry]\" and \"retort [rhetoric]\" would thus be distinguished.\nA number of determinatives exist: divinities, humans, parts of the human body, animals, plants, etc. Certain determinatives possess a literal and a figurative meaning. For example, a roll of papyrus, Y1 \u00a0 is used to define \"books\" but also abstract ideas. The determinative of the plural is a shortcut to signal three occurrences of the word, that is to say, its plural (since the Egyptian language had a dual, sometimes indicated by two strokes). This special character is explained below.\nHere are several examples of the use of determinatives borrowed from the book, \"Je lis les hi\u00e9roglyphes\" (\"I am reading hieroglyphs\") by Jean Capart, which illustrate their importance:\nnfr-w-A17-Z3 \u2013 \"nfrw\" (\"w\" and the three strokes are the marks of the plural): [literally] \"the beautiful young people\", that is to say, the young military recruits. The word has a young-person determinative symbol: \u2013 which is the determinative indicating babies and children;\nnfr-:f:r:t-B1 \u2013 \"nfr.t\" (\".t\" is here the suffix that forms the feminine): meaning \"the nubile young woman\", with B1 as the determinative indicating a woman;\nnfr-nfr-nfr-pr \u2013 \"nfrw\" (the tripling of the character serving to express the plural, flexional ending \"w\") : meaning \"foundations (of a house)\", with the house as a determinative, pr;\nnfr-f:r-S28 \u2013 \"nfr\" : meaning \"clothing\" with \u00a0 as the determinative for lengths of cloth;\nnfr-W22:Z2ss \u2013 \"nfr\" : meaning \"wine\" or \"beer\"; with a jug W22 \u00a0 as the determinative.\nAll these words have a meliorative connotation: \"good, beautiful, perfect\". The \"Concise Dictionary of Middle Egyptian\" by Raymond A. Faulkner, gives some twenty words that are read \"nfr\" or which are formed from this word.\nAdditional signs.\nCartouche.\nRarely, the names of gods are placed within a cartouche; the two last names of the sitting king are always placed within a cartouche:\n&lt; N5:Z1-i-Y5:n-A40 &gt;\njmn-r\ua725, \"Amun-Ra\";\n&lt; q:E23-i-V4-p:d:r-A-t:H8 &gt;\nqljw\ua723pdr\ua723.t, \"Cleopatra\";\nFilling stroke.\nA filling stroke is a character indicating the end of a quadrat that would otherwise be incomplete.\nSigns joined.\nSome signs are the contraction of several others. These signs have, however, a function and existence of their own: for example, a forearm where the hand holds a scepter is used as a determinative for words meaning \"to direct, to drive\" and their derivatives.\nDoubling.\nThe doubling of a sign indicates its dual; the indicates its plural.\nSpelling.\nStandard orthography\u2014\"correct\" spelling\u2014in Egyptian is much looser than in modern languages. In fact, one or several variants exist for almost every word. One finds:\nHowever, many of these apparent spelling errors constitute an issue of chronology. Spelling and standards varied over time, so the writing of a word during the Old Kingdom might be considerably different during the New Kingdom. Furthermore, the Egyptians were perfectly content to include older orthography (\"historical spelling\") alongside newer practices, as though it were acceptable in English to use archaic spellings in modern texts. Most often, ancient \"spelling errors\" are simply misinterpretations of context. Today, hieroglyphists use numerous cataloguing systems (notably the \"Manuel de Codage\" and \"Gardiner's Sign List\") to clarify the presence of determinatives, ideograms, and other ambiguous signs in transliteration.\nSimple examples.\nThe glyphs in this cartouche are transliterated as:\nthough \"ii\" is considered a single letter and transliterated \"y\".\nAnother way in which hieroglyphs work is illustrated by the two Egyptian words pronounced \"pr\" (usually vocalised as \"per\"). One word is 'house', and its hieroglyphic representation is straightforward:\npr:Z1\nHere, the 'house' hieroglyph works as a logogram: it represents the word with a single sign. The vertical stroke below the hieroglyph is a common way of indicating that a glyph is working as a logogram.\nAnother word \"pr\" is the verb 'to go out, leave'. When this word is written, the 'house' hieroglyph is used as a phonetic symbol:\npr:r-D54\nHere, the 'house' glyph stands for the consonants \"pr\". The 'mouth' glyph below it is a \"phonetic complement:\" it is read as \"r\", reinforcing the phonetic reading of \"pr\". The third hieroglyph is a \"determinative\": it is an ideogram for verbs of motion that gives the reader an idea of the meaning of the word.\nEncoding and font support.\nEgyptian hieroglyphs were added to the Unicode Standard in October 2009 with the release of version 5.2 which introduced the Egyptian Hieroglyphs block (U+13000\u2013U+1342F).\nAs of July\u00a02013[ [update]], four fonts, \"Aegyptus\", \"NewGardiner\", \"Noto Sans Egyptian Hieroglyphs\" and \"JSeshFont\" support this range. Another font, \"Segoe UI Historic\", comes bundled with Windows 10 and also contains glyphs for the Egyptian Hieroglyphs block. Segoe UI Historic excludes three glyphs depicting phallus (Gardiner's D52, D52A D53, Unicode code points U+130B8\u2013U+130BA).\nThe \"Egyptian Hieroglyphs Extended-A\" Unicode block is U+13460-U+143FF. It was added to the Unicode Standard in September 2024 with the release of version 16.0:\nThe \"Egyptian Hieroglyph Format Controls\" Unicode block is U+13430-U+1345F. It was added to the Unicode Standard in March 2019 with the release of version 12.0:\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50954", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50954", "title": "Rosetta stone", "text": ""}
{"id": "50955", "revid": "1830170", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50955", "title": "History of the Maya", "text": ""}
{"id": "50956", "revid": "7770027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50956", "title": "Witness", "text": "Person who can attest to the reality of a fact\nIn law, a witness is someone who, either voluntarily or under compulsion, provides testimonial evidence, either oral or written, of what they know or claim to know.\nA witness might be compelled to provide testimony in court, before a grand jury, before an administrative tribunal, before a deposition officer, or in a variety of other legal proceedings. A subpoena is a legal document that commands a person to appear at a proceeding. It is used to compel the testimony of a witness in a trial. Usually, it can be issued by a judge or by the lawyer representing the plaintiff or the defendant in a civil trial or by the prosecutor or the defense attorney in a criminal proceeding, or by a government agency. In many jurisdictions, it is compulsory to comply with the subpoena and either take an oath or solemnly affirm to testify truthfully under penalty of perjury.\nAlthough informally a witness includes whoever perceived the event, in law, a witness is different from an informant. A \"confidential informant\" is someone who claimed to have witnessed an event or have hearsay information, but whose identity is being withheld from at least one party (typically the criminal defendant). The information from the confidential informant may have been used by a police officer or other official acting as a hearsay witness to obtain a search warrant.\nTypes.\nA percipient witness (or eye-witness) is one with knowledge obtained through their own senses (e.g., visual perception, hearing, smell, touch). That perception might be either with the unaided human sense or with the aid of an instrument, such as microscope or stethoscope.\nA \"hearsay\" witness is one who testifies about what someone else said or wrote. In most court proceedings there are many limitations on when hearsay evidence is admissible. Such limitations do not apply to grand jury investigations, many administrative proceedings, and may not apply to declarations used in support of an arrest or search warrant. Also some types of statements are not deemed to be hearsay and are not subject to such limitations.\nAn \"expert witness\" is one who allegedly has specialized knowledge relevant to the matter of interest, which knowledge purportedly helps to either make sense of other evidence, including other testimony, documentary evidence or physical evidence (e.g., a fingerprint). An expert witness may or may not also be a percipient witness, as in a doctor or may or may not have treated the victim of an accident or crime.\nA \"character witness\" testifies about the personality of a defendant if it helps to solve the crime in question.\nA \"crown witness\" is one who incriminates former accomplices in a crime who following receive either a lower sentence, immunity or also a protection of themselves or/and their family by the court. After they have provided the court with their testimony they often enter into a witness protection program.\nA \"secret witness\" or \"anonymous witness\" is one whose identity is kept secret by the court.\nCalling a witness.\nIn a court proceeding, a witness may be \"called\" (requested to testify) by either the prosecution or the defense. The side that calls the witness first asks questions in what is called direct examination. The opposing side then may ask their own questions in what is called cross-examination. In some cases, redirect examination may be used by the side that called the witness but usually only to contradict specific testimony from the cross-examination.\nRecalling a witness means calling a witness, who has already given testimony in a proceeding, to give further testimony. A court may give leave to a party to recall a witness only to give evidence about a matter adduced by another party if the second party's testimony contradicts evidence given by the original witness on direct examination.\nTestimony.\nWitnesses are usually permitted to testify only what they experienced first-hand. In most cases, they may not testify about something they were told (hearsay). That restriction does not apply to expert witnesses, but they may testify only in the area of their expertise.\nReliability.\nAlthough eyewitness testimony is often assumed to be more reliable than circumstantial evidence, studies have established that individual, separate witness testimony is often flawed. Mistaken eyewitness identification may result from such factors as faulty observation and recollection, or bias, or may involve a witness's knowingly giving false testimony. If several people witness a crime, it is possible to look for commonalities in their testimony, which are more likely to represent events as they occurred, although differences are to be expected and don't of themselves indicate dishonesty. Witness identification will help investigators get an idea of what a criminal suspect looks like, but eyewitness recollection include mistaken or misleading elements.\nOne study involved an experiment, in which subjects acted as jurors in a criminal case. Jurors heard a description of a robbery-murder, a prosecution argument, and then an argument for the defense. Some jurors heard only circumstantial evidence; others heard from a clerk who claimed to identify the defendant. In the former case, 18% percent found the defendant guilty, but in the latter case, 72% found the defendant guilty (Loftus 1988).\nPolice lineups in which the eyewitness picks out a suspect from a group of people in the police station are often grossly suggestive, and they give the false impression that the witness remembered the suspect. In another study, students watched a staged crime. An hour later they looked through photos. A week later they were asked to pick the suspect out of lineups. 8% of the people in the lineups were mistakenly identified as criminals. 20% of the innocent people whose photographs were included were mistakenly identified.\nWeapon focus effects in which the presence of a weapon impairs memory for surrounding details is also an issue.\nAnother study looked at 65 cases of \"erroneous criminal convictions of innocent people.\" In 45% of the cases, eyewitness mistakes were responsible.\nThe formal study of eyewitness memory is usually undertaken within the broader category of cognitive processes, the different ways in which we make sense of the world around us. That is done by employing the mental skills at one's disposal like thinking, perception, memory, awareness, reasoning, and judgment. Although cognitive processes can be only inferred and cannot be seen directly, they all have very important practical implications within a legal context.\nIf one were to accept that the way people think, perceive, reason, and judge is not always perfect, it becomes easier to understand why cognitive processes and the factors influencing the processes are studied by psychologists in matters of law, one being the grave implications that this imperfection can have within the criminal justice system.\nThe study of witness memory has dominated the realm of investigation. As Huff and Rattner note, the single most important factor contributing to wrongful conviction is eyewitness misidentification.\nCredibility.\nA credible witness is a person who acts as a witness, including through giving testimony in court, whose testimony is perceived as truthful and believable. Other witnesses may be perceived as less credible, or to have no credibility. Assessment of credibility is made of each witness, and is not affected by the number of witnesses who testify. Several factors affect witnesses' credibility. Generally, witnesses are perceived as more credible when they are perceived as more accurate and less suggestible.\nAt common law, the term could be used in relation to the giving of testimony, or for the witnessing of documents. In modern English law, a credible witness is one who is \"not\" \"speaking from hearsay.\" In Scottish law, a credible witness is one \"whose credibility commends itself to the presiding magistrate ... the trustworthiness\" of whom is good.\nWitnessing of wills and documents.\nCredible witnesses must be used to give meaning or existence to certain types of legal documents. For example, in most common law jurisdictions, at least two witnesses must sign their names to a will in order to verify that it was executed by the testator. In Canadian law, a credible witness to a Will means a witness who is not incapacitated by mental deficiency, conflict of interest, or crime."}
{"id": "50958", "revid": "51041526", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50958", "title": "Sulfur dioxide", "text": "Chemical compound of sulfur and oxygen\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nSulfur dioxide (IUPAC-recommended spelling) or sulphur dioxide (traditional Commonwealth English) is the chemical compound with the formula SO2. It is a colorless gas with a pungent smell that is responsible for the odor of burnt matches. It is released naturally by volcanic activity and is produced as a by-product of metals refining and the burning of sulfur-bearing hydrocarbon fuels.\nSulfur dioxide is somewhat toxic to humans, although only when inhaled in relatively large quantities for a period of several minutes or more. It was known to medieval alchemists as \"volatile spirit of sulfur\".\nStructure and bonding.\nSO2 is a bent molecule with \"C\"2v symmetry point group.\nA valence bond theory approach considering just \"s\" and \"p\" orbitals would describe the bonding in terms of resonance between two resonance structures.\nThe sulfur\u2013oxygen bond has a bond order of 1.5. There is support for this simple approach that does not invoke \"d\" orbital participation.\nIn terms of electron-counting formalism, the sulfur atom has an oxidation state of +4 and a formal charge of +1.\nOccurrence.\nSulfur dioxide is found on Earth and exists in very small concentrations in the atmosphere at about 15 ppb.\nOn other planets, sulfur dioxide can be found in various concentrations, the most significant being the atmosphere of Venus, where it is the third-most abundant atmospheric gas at 150 ppm. There, it reacts with water to form clouds of sulfurous acid ( + \u21cc + ), and is a key component of the planet's global atmospheric sulfur cycle. It has been implicated as a key agent in the warming of early Mars, with estimates of concentrations in the lower atmosphere as high as 100 ppm, though it only exists in trace amounts. On both Venus and Mars, as on Earth, its primary source is thought to be volcanic. The atmosphere of Io, a natural satellite of Jupiter, is 90% sulfur dioxide and trace amounts are thought to also exist in the atmosphere of Jupiter. The James Webb Space Telescope has observed the presence of sulfur dioxide on the exoplanet WASP-39b, where it is formed through photochemistry in the planet's atmosphere.\nAs an ice, it is thought to exist in abundance on the Galilean moons\u2014as subliming ice or frost on the trailing hemisphere of Io, and in the crust and mantle of Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto, possibly also in liquid form and readily reacting with water.\nProduction.\nSulfur dioxide is primarily produced for sulfuric acid manufacture (see contact process, but other processes predated that at least since 16th century). In the United States in 1979, 23.6\u00a0million metric tons (26\u00a0million U.S. short tons) of sulfur dioxide were used in this way, compared with 150,000 metric tons (165,347 U.S. short tons) used for other purposes. Most sulfur dioxide is produced by the combustion of elemental sulfur. Some sulfur dioxide is also produced by roasting pyrite and other sulfide ores in air.\nCombustion routes.\nSulfur dioxide is the product of the burning of sulfur or of burning materials that contain sulfur:\n + 8 \u2192 8 , \u0394H = \u2212297 kJ/mol\nTo aid combustion, liquified sulfur ( is sprayed through an atomizing nozzle to generate fine drops of sulfur with a large surface area. The reaction is exothermic, and the combustion produces temperatures of . The significant amount of heat produced is recovered by steam generation that can subsequently be converted to electricity.\nThe combustion of hydrogen sulfide and organosulfur compounds proceeds similarly. For example:\n2 + 3 \u2192 2 + 2 \nThe roasting of sulfide ores such as pyrite, sphalerite, and cinnabar (mercury sulfide) also releases SO2:\n4 + 11 \u2192 2 + 8 \n2 + 3 \u2192 2 + 2 \n4 FeS + 7 \u2192 2 + 4 \nA combination of these reactions is responsible for the largest source of sulfur dioxide, volcanic eruptions. These events can release millions of tons of SO2.\nReduction of higher oxides.\nSulfur dioxide can also be a byproduct in the manufacture of calcium silicate cement; CaSO4 is heated with coke and sand in this process:\n2 + 2 + C \u2192 2 + 2 + \nUntil the 1970s commercial quantities of sulfuric acid and cement were produced by this process in Whitehaven, England. Upon being mixed with shale or marl, and roasted, the sulfate liberated sulfur dioxide gas, used in sulfuric acid production, the reaction also produced calcium silicate, a precursor in cement production.\nOn a laboratory scale, the action of hot concentrated sulfuric acid on copper turnings produces sulfur dioxide.\nCu + 2 \u2192 \nTin also reacts with concentrated sulfuric acid but it produces tin(II) sulfate which can later be pyrolyzed at 360\u00a0\u00b0C into tin dioxide and dry sulfur dioxide.\nSn + \u2192 \nFrom sulfites.\nThe reverse reaction occurs upon acidification:\nReactions.\nSulfites result by the action of aqueous base on sulfur dioxide:\nSulfur dioxide is a mild but useful reducing agent. It is oxidized by halogens to give the sulfuryl halides, such as sulfuryl chloride:\nSulfur dioxide is the oxidising agent in the Claus process, which is conducted on a large scale in oil refineries. Here, sulfur dioxide is reduced by hydrogen sulfide to give elemental sulfur:\nThe sequential oxidation of sulfur dioxide followed by its hydration is used in the production of sulfuric acid.\n + + &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 \u2192 \nSulfur dioxide dissolves in water to give \"sulfurous acid\", which cannot be isolated and is instead an acidic solution of bisulfite, and possibly sulfite, ions.\n\"K\"a = 1.54\u00d710\u22122; p\"K\"a = 1.81\nLaboratory reactions.\nSulfur dioxide is one of the few common acidic yet reducing gases. It turns moist litmus pink (being acidic), then white (due to its bleaching effect). It may be identified by bubbling it through a dichromate solution, turning the solution from orange to green (Cr3+ (aq)). It can also reduce ferric ions to ferrous.\nSulfur dioxide can react with certain 1,3-dienes in a cheletropic reaction to form cyclic sulfones. This reaction is exploited on an industrial scale for the synthesis of sulfolane, which is an important solvent in the petrochemical industry.\nSulfur dioxide can bind to metal ions as a ligand to form metal sulfur dioxide complexes, typically where the transition metal is in oxidation state 0 or +1. Many different bonding modes (geometries) are recognized, but in most cases, the ligand is monodentate, attached to the metal through sulfur, which can be either planar and pyramidal \u03b71. As a \u03b71-SO2 (S-bonded planar) ligand sulfur dioxide functions as a Lewis base using the lone pair on S. SO2 functions as a Lewis acids in its \u03b71-SO2 (S-bonded pyramidal) bonding mode with metals and in its 1:1 adducts with Lewis bases such as dimethylacetamide and trimethyl amine. When bonding to Lewis bases the acid parameters of SO2 are EA = 0.51 and EA = 1.56.\nUses.\nThe overarching, dominant use of sulfur dioxide is in the production of sulfuric acid.\nPrecursor to sulfuric acid.\nSulfur dioxide is an intermediate in the production of sulfuric acid, being converted to sulfur trioxide, and then to oleum, which is made into sulfuric acid. Sulfur dioxide for this purpose is made when sulfur combines with oxygen. The method of converting sulfur dioxide to sulfuric acid is called the contact process. Several million tons are produced annually for this purpose.\nFood preservative.\nSulfur dioxide is sometimes used as a preservative for dried apricots, dried figs, and other dried fruits, owing to its antimicrobial properties and ability to prevent oxidation, and is called E220 when used in this way in Europe. As a preservative, it maintains the colorful appearance of the fruit and prevents rotting. Historically, molasses was \"sulfured\" as a preservative and also to lighten its color. Treatment of dried fruit was usually done outdoors, by igniting sublimed sulfur and burning in an enclosed space with the fruits. Fruits may be sulfured by dipping them into sodium bisulfite, sodium sulfite or sodium metabisulfite.\nWinemaking.\nSulfur dioxide was first used in winemaking by the Romans, when they discovered that burning sulfur candles inside empty wine vessels keeps them fresh and free from vinegar smell.\nIt is still an important compound in winemaking, and is measured in parts per million (\"ppm\") in wine. It is present even in so-called unsulfurated wine at concentrations of up to 10\u00a0mg/L. It serves as an antibiotic and antioxidant, protecting wine from spoilage by bacteria and oxidation \u2013 a phenomenon that leads to the browning of the wine and a loss of cultivar specific flavors. Its antimicrobial action also helps minimize volatile acidity. Wines containing sulfur dioxide are typically labeled with \"containing sulfites\".\nSulfur dioxide exists in wine in free and bound forms, and the combinations are referred to as total SO2. Binding, for instance to the carbonyl group of acetaldehyde, varies with the wine in question. The free form exists in equilibrium between molecular SO2 (as a dissolved gas) and bisulfite ion, which is in turn in equilibrium with sulfite ion. These equilibria depend on the pH of the wine. Lower pH shifts the equilibrium towards molecular (gaseous) SO2, which is the active form, while at higher pH more SO2 is found in the inactive sulfite and bisulfite forms. The molecular SO2 is active as an antimicrobial and antioxidant, and this is also the form which may be perceived as a pungent odor at high levels. Wines with total SO2 concentrations below 10 ppm do not require \"contains sulfites\" on the label by US and EU laws. The upper limit of total SO2 allowed in wine in the US is 350 ppm; in the EU it is 160 ppm for red wines and 210 ppm for white and ros\u00e9 wines. In low concentrations, SO2 is mostly undetectable in wine, but at free SO2 concentrations over 50 ppm, SO2 becomes evident in the smell and taste of wine.\nSO2 is also a very important compound in winery sanitation. Wineries and equipment must be kept clean, and because bleach cannot be used in a winery due to the risk of cork taint, a mixture of SO2, water, and citric acid is commonly used to clean and sanitize equipment. Ozone (O3) is now used extensively for sanitizing in wineries due to its efficacy, and because it does not affect the wine or most equipment.\nAs a soaking agent.\nAqueous sulfur dioxide solution is used in corn wet-milling, in the steeping stage of the process. The corn kernels are soaked in this solution in large tanks containing lactic acid and sulphur dioxide at around 53\u02daC (127\u02daF) temperature for nearly 40 hours. This is done to soften the kernel so that the oil in the germ will not contaminate other products and is easy to separate.\nAs a reducing agent.\nSulfur dioxide is also a good reductant. In the presence of water, sulfur dioxide is able to decolorize substances. Specifically, it is a useful reducing bleach for papers and delicate materials such as clothes. This bleaching effect normally does not last very long. Oxygen in the atmosphere reoxidizes the reduced dyes, restoring the color. In municipal wastewater treatment, sulfur dioxide is used to treat chlorinated wastewater prior to release. Sulfur dioxide reduces free and combined chlorine to chloride.\nSulfur dioxide is fairly soluble in water, and by both IR and Raman spectroscopy; the hypothetical sulfurous acid, H2SO3, is not present to any extent. However, such solutions do show spectra of the hydrogen sulfite ion, HSO3\u2212, by reaction with water, and it is in fact the actual reducing agent present:\nSO2 + H2O \u21cc HSO3\u2212 + H+\nAs a fumigant.\nIn the beginning of the 20th century sulfur dioxide was used in Buenos Aires as a fumigant to kill rats that carried the \"Yersinia pestis\" bacterium, which causes bubonic plague. The application was successful, and the application of this method was extended to other areas in South America. In Buenos Aires, where these apparatuses were known as Sulfurozador, but later also in Rio de Janeiro, New Orleans and San Francisco, the sulfur dioxide treatment machines were brought into the streets to enable extensive disinfection campaigns, with effective results.\nBiochemical and biomedical roles.\nSulfur dioxide or its conjugate base bisulfite is produced biologically as an intermediate in both sulfate-reducing organisms and in sulfur-oxidizing bacteria, as well. The role of sulfur dioxide in mammalian biology is not yet well understood. Sulfur dioxide blocks nerve signals from the pulmonary stretch receptors and abolishes the Hering\u2013Breuer inflation reflex.\nIt is considered that endogenous sulfur dioxide plays a significant physiological role in regulating cardiac and blood vessel function, and aberrant or deficient sulfur dioxide metabolism can contribute to several different cardiovascular diseases, such as arterial hypertension, atherosclerosis, pulmonary arterial hypertension, and stenocardia.\nIt was shown that in children with pulmonary arterial hypertension due to congenital heart diseases the level of homocysteine is higher and the level of endogenous sulfur dioxide is lower than in normal control children. Moreover, these biochemical parameters strongly correlated to the severity of pulmonary arterial hypertension. Authors considered homocysteine to be one of useful biochemical markers of disease severity and sulfur dioxide metabolism to be one of potential therapeutic targets in those patients.\nEndogenous sulfur dioxide also has been shown to lower the proliferation rate of endothelial smooth muscle cells in blood vessels, via lowering the MAPK activity and activating adenylyl cyclase and protein kinase A. Smooth muscle cell proliferation is one of important mechanisms of hypertensive remodeling of blood vessels and their stenosis, so it is an important pathogenetic mechanism in arterial hypertension and atherosclerosis.\nEndogenous sulfur dioxide in low concentrations causes endothelium-dependent vasodilation. In higher concentrations it causes endothelium-independent vasodilation and has a negative inotropic effect on cardiac output function, thus effectively lowering blood pressure and myocardial oxygen consumption. The vasodilating and bronchodilating effects of sulfur dioxide are mediated via ATP-dependent calcium channels and L-type (\"dihydropyridine\") calcium channels. Endogenous sulfur dioxide is also a potent antiinflammatory, antioxidant and cytoprotective agent. It lowers blood pressure and slows hypertensive remodeling of blood vessels, especially thickening of their intima. It also regulates lipid metabolism.\nEndogenous sulfur dioxide also diminishes myocardial damage, caused by isoproterenol adrenergic hyperstimulation, and strengthens the myocardial antioxidant defense reserve.\nAs a reagent and solvent in the laboratory.\nSulfur dioxide is a versatile inert solvent widely used for dissolving highly oxidizing salts. It is also used occasionally as a source of the sulfonyl group in organic synthesis. Treatment of aryl diazonium salts with sulfur dioxide and cuprous chloride yields the corresponding aryl sulfonyl chloride, for example:\nAs a result of its very low Lewis basicity, it is often used as a low-temperature solvent/diluent for superacids like magic acid (FSO3H/SbF5), allowing for highly reactive species like \"tert\"-butyl cation to be observed spectroscopically at low temperature (though tertiary carbocations do react with SO2 above about \u221230\u00a0\u00b0C, and even less reactive solvents like SO2ClF must be used at these higher temperatures).\nAs a refrigerant.\nSulfur dioxide was one of the earliest refrigerants adopted for mechanical refrigeration owing to its ease of liquefaction and high latent heat of vaporization. In 1784, Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Clouet and Gaspard Monge first demonstrated that sulfur dioxide gas could be liquefied at low temperatures. In the mid-1870s, Raoul Pictet successfully employed sulfur dioxide in a prototype refrigeration system. Beginning in 1920, it saw widespread use in the \"Rollator\" rotary-compressor home refrigerators produced by Norge. Following the introduction of less toxic, non-flammable chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) refrigerants, the use of sulfur dioxide in refrigeration systems gradually declined.\nAs an indicator of volcanic activity.\nSulfur dioxide content in naturally-released geothermal gasses is measured by the Icelandic Meteorological Office as an indicator of possible volcanic activity.\nSafety.\nIngestion.\nIn the United States, the Center for Science in the Public Interest lists the two food preservatives, sulfur dioxide and sodium bisulfite, as being safe for human consumption except for certain asthmatic individuals who may be sensitive to them, especially in large amounts. Symptoms of sensitivity to sulfiting agents, including sulfur dioxide, manifest as potentially life-threatening trouble breathing within minutes of ingestion. Sulphites may also cause symptoms in non-asthmatic individuals, namely dermatitis, urticaria, flushing, hypotension, abdominal pain and diarrhea, and even life-threatening anaphylaxis.\nInhalation.\nIncidental exposure to sulfur dioxide is routine, e.g. the smoke from matches, coal, and sulfur-containing fuels like bunker fuel. Relative to other chemicals, it is only mildly toxic and requires high concentrations to be actively hazardous. However, its ubiquity makes it a major air pollutant with significant impacts on human health.\nIn 2008, the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists reduced the short-term exposure limit to 0.25 parts per million (ppm). In the US, the OSHA set the PEL at 5 ppm (13\u00a0mg/m3) time-weighted average. Also in the US, NIOSH set the IDLH at 100 ppm. In 2010, the EPA \"revised the primary SO2 NAAQS by establishing a new one-hour standard at a level of 75 parts per billion (ppb). EPA revoked the two existing primary standards because they would not provide additional public health protection given a one-hour standard at 75 ppb.\"\nEnvironmental role.\nAir pollution.\nMajor volcanic eruptions have an overwhelming effect on sulfate aerosol concentrations in the years when they occur: eruptions ranking 4 or greater on the Volcanic Explosivity Index inject and water vapor directly into the stratosphere, where they react to create sulfate aerosol plumes. Volcanic emissions vary significantly in composition, and have complex chemistry due to the presence of ash particulates and a wide variety of other elements in the plume. Only stratovolcanoes containing primarily felsic magmas are responsible for these fluxes, as mafic magma erupted in shield volcanoes doesn't result in plumes which reach the stratosphere. However, before the Industrial Revolution, dimethyl sulfide pathway was the largest contributor to sulfate aerosol concentrations in a more average year with no major volcanic activity. According to the IPCC First Assessment Report, published in 1990, volcanic emissions usually amounted to around 10\u00a0million tons in 1980s, while dimethyl sulfide amounted to 40 million tons. Yet, by that point, the global human-caused emissions of sulfur into the atmosphere became \"at least as large\" as \"all\" natural emissions of sulfur-containing compounds \"combined\": they were at less than 3\u00a0million tons per year in 1860, and then they increased to 15\u00a0million tons in 1900, 40\u00a0million tons in 1940 and about 80 millions in 1980. The same report noted that \"in the industrialized regions of Europe and North America, anthropogenic emissions dominate over natural emissions by about a factor of ten or even more\". In the eastern United States in the early 2000s, sulfate particles were estimated to account for 25% or more of all air pollution. Exposure to sulfur dioxide emissions by coal power plants (coal PM2.5) in the US was associated with 2.1 times greater mortality risk than exposure to PM2.5 from all sources. \nMeanwhile, the Southern Hemisphere had much lower concentrations due to being much less densely populated, with an estimated 90% of the human population in the north. In the early 1990s, anthropogenic sulfur dominated in the Northern Hemisphere, where only 16% of annual sulfur emissions were natural, yet amounted for less than half of the emissions in the Southern Hemisphere.\nSuch an increase in sulfate aerosol emissions had a variety of effects. At the time, the most visible one was acid rain, caused by precipitation from clouds carrying high concentrations of sulfate aerosols in the troposphere.\nAt its peak, acid rain has eliminated brook trout and some other fish species and insect life from lakes and streams in geographically sensitive areas, such as Adirondack Mountains in the United States. Acid rain worsens soil function as some of its microbiota is lost and heavy metals like aluminium are mobilized (spread more easily) while essential nutrients and minerals such as magnesium can leach away because of the same. Ultimately, plants unable to tolerate lowered pH are killed, with montane forests being some of the worst-affected ecosystems due to their regular exposure to sulfate-carrying fog at high altitudes. While acid rain was too dilute to affect human health directly, breathing smog or even any air with elevated sulfate concentrations is known to contribute to heart and lung conditions, including asthma and bronchitis. Further, this form of pollution is linked to preterm birth and low birth weight, with a study of 74,671 pregnant women in Beijing finding that every additional 100\u00a0\u03bcg/m3 of in the air reduced infants' weight by 7.3 g, making it and other forms of air pollution the largest attributable risk factor for low birth weight ever observed.\nControl measures.\nDue largely to the US EPA's Acid Rain Program, the U.S. has had a 33% decrease in emissions between 1983 and 2002 (see table). This improvement resulted in part from flue-gas desulfurization, a technology that enables SO2 to be chemically bound in power plants burning sulfur-containing coal or petroleum.\nIn particular, calcium oxide (lime) reacts with sulfur dioxide to form calcium sulfite:\n CaO + SO2 \u2192 CaSO3\nAerobic oxidation of the CaSO3 gives CaSO4, anhydrite. Most gypsum sold in Europe comes from flue-gas desulfurization.\nTo control sulfur emissions, dozens of methods with relatively high efficiencies have been developed for fitting of coal-fired power plants. Sulfur can be removed from coal during burning by using limestone as a bed material in fluidized bed combustion.\nSulfur can also be removed from fuels before burning, preventing formation of SO2 when the fuel is burnt. The Claus process is used in refineries to produce sulfur as a byproduct. The Stretford process has also been used to remove sulfur from fuel. Redox processes using iron oxides can also be used, for example, Lo-Cat or Sulferox.\nFuel additives such as calcium additives and magnesium carboxylate may be used in marine engines to lower the emission of sulfur dioxide gases into the atmosphere.\nEffects on ozone layer.\nSulfur dioxide aerosols in the stratosphere can contribute to ozone depletion in the presence of chlorofluorocarbons and other halogenated ozone-depleting substances. The effects of volcanic eruptions containing sulfur dioxide aerosols on the ozone layer are complex, however. In the absence of anthropogenic or biogenic halogenated compounds in the lower stratosphere, depletion of dinitrogen pentoxide in the middle stratosphere associated with its reactivity to the aerosols can promote ozone formation. Injection of sulfur dioxide and large amounts of water vapor into the stratosphere following the 2022 eruption of Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha\u02bbapai resulted in altered atmospheric circulation that promoted a decrease in ozone in the southern latitudes but an increase in the tropics. The additional presence of hydrochloric acid in eruptions can result in net ozone depletion.\nImpact on climate change.\nSolar geoengineering.\nAs the real world had shown the importance of sulfate aerosol concentrations to the global climate, research into the subject accelerated. Formation of the aerosols and their effects on the atmosphere can be studied in the lab, with methods like ion-chromatography and mass spectrometry Samples of actual particles can be recovered from the stratosphere using balloons or aircraft, and remote satellites were also used for observation. This data is fed into the climate models, as the necessity of accounting for aerosol cooling to truly understand the rate and evolution of warming had long been apparent, with the IPCC Second Assessment Report being the first to include an estimate of their impact on climate, and every major model able to simulate them by the time IPCC Fourth Assessment Report was published in 2007. Many scientists also see the other side of this research, which is learning how to cause the same effect artificially. While discussed around the 1990s, if not earlier, stratospheric aerosol injection as a solar geoengineering method is best associated with Paul Crutzen's detailed 2006 proposal. Deploying in the stratosphere ensures that the aerosols are at their most effective, and that the progress of clean air measures would not be reversed: more recent research estimated that even under the highest-emission scenario RCP 8.5, the addition of stratospheric sulfur required to avoid relative to now (and relative to the preindustrial) would be effectively offset by the future controls on tropospheric sulfate pollution, and the amount required would be even less for less drastic warming scenarios. This spurred a detailed look at its costs and benefits, but even with hundreds of studies into the subject completed by the early 2020s, some notable uncertainties remain.\nProperties.\nTable of thermal and physical properties of saturated liquid sulfur dioxide:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50959", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50959", "title": "Italian neorealism", "text": "Italian film movement\nItalian Neorealism (), also known as the Golden Age of Italian Cinema, was a national film movement characterized by stories set amongst the poor and the working class. They are filmed on location, frequently with non-professional actors. They primarily address the difficult economic and moral conditions of post-World War II Italy, representing changes in the Italian psyche and conditions of everyday life, including poverty, oppression, injustice and desperation. Italian Neorealist filmmakers used their films to tell stories that explored the contemporary daily life and struggles of Italians in the post-war period. Italian neorealist films have become explanatory discourse for future generations to understand the history of Italy during a specific period through the storytelling of social life in the context, reflecting the documentary and communicative nature of the film. Some people believe that neorealistic films evolved from Soviet montage films. But in reality, compared to Soviet filmmakers describing the people's opposition to class struggle through their films, neorealist films aim to showcase individuals' resistance to reality in a social environment.\nHistory.\nItalian neorealism came about as World War II ended and Benito Mussolini's government fell, causing the Italian film industry to lose its centre. Neorealism was a sign of cultural and social change in Italy. New realism films are considered to be films with specific styles and philosophies that emerged during the turbulent period after World War II. Its films presented contemporary stories and ideas and were often shot on location as the Cinecitt\u00e0 film studios had been damaged significantly during the war.\nThe neorealist style was developed by a circle of film critics that revolved around the magazine \"Cinema\", including:\nLargely prevented from writing about politics (the editor-in-chief of the magazine was Vittorio Mussolini, son of Benito Mussolini), the critics attacked the \"Telefoni Bianchi\" (\"white telephone\") films that dominated the industry at the time. As a counter to the popular mainstream films, some critics felt that Italian cinema should turn to the realist writers from the turn of the 20th century.\nMany of the filmmakers involved in neorealism developed their skills working on Calligrafismo films in the early 1940s (although the short-lived movement was markedly different from neorealism). Elements of neorealism are also found in the films of Alessandro Blasetti and the documentary-style films of Francesco De Robertis. Two of the most significant precursors of neorealism are Jean Renoir's \"Toni\" (1935) and Blasetti's \"1860\" (1934). Both Visconti and Michelangelo Antonioni worked closely with Renoir.\nIn the spring of 1945, Mussolini was executed and Italy was liberated from German occupation. This period, known as the \"Italian Spring\", broke from old ways and fostered a more realistic approach to making films. Italian cinema went from utilizing elaborate studio sets to shooting on location in the countryside and city streets in a realist style.\nAlthough the true beginning of neorealism has been widely contested by theorists and filmmakers, the first neorealist film is generally thought to be Visconti's \"Ossessione\", released in 1943, during the occupation. Neorealism became famous globally in 1946 with Roberto Rossellini's \"Rome, Open City\", when it won the Grand Prize at the Cannes Film Festival as the first major film produced in Italy after the war.\nItalian neorealism rapidly declined in the early 1950s. Liberal and socialist parties were having difficulties presenting their message. The vision of the existing poverty and despair, presented by neorealist cinema, was demoralizing a nation anxious for prosperity and change. Additionally, the first positive effects of the Italian economic miracle period\u2014such as gradual rises in income levels\u2014caused the themes of neorealism to lose their relevance. As a consequence, most Italians favored the optimism shown in many American movies of the time. The views of the post-war Italian government of the time were also far from positive, and the remark of Giulio Andreotti, who was then a vice-minister in the De Gasperi cabinet, characterized the official view of the movement: Neorealism is \"dirty laundry that shouldn't be washed and hung to dry in the open\".\nItaly's move from individual concern with neorealism to the tragic frailty of the human condition can be seen through Federico Fellini's films. His early works \"La Strada\" (1954) and \"Il bidone\" (1955) are transitional movies. The larger social concerns of humanity, treated by neorealists, gave way to the exploration of individuals. Their needs, their alienation from society and their tragic failure to communicate became the main focal point in the Italian films to follow in the 1960s. Similarly, Antonioni's \"Red Desert\" (1964) and \"Blow-up\" (1966) take the neorealist trappings and internalise them in the suffering and search for knowledge brought out by Italy's post-war economic and political climate.\nIn the early 1950s the neorealist torch was picked up by artists like Sicily's Bruno Caruso, whose work focused on the warehouses, shipyards and psychiatric wards of his native Palermo.\nCharacteristics.\nNeorealist films were generally filmed with nonprofessional actors, although in a number of cases, well-known actors were cast in leading roles, playing strongly against their normal character types in front of a background populated by local people rather than extras brought in for the film.\nThey were shot almost exclusively on location, mostly in rundown cities as well as rural areas.\nNeorealist films typically explore the conditions of the poor and the lower working class. Characters often exist within a simple social order where survival is the primary objective. Performances are mostly constructed from scenes of people performing fairly mundane and quotidian activities, devoid of the self-consciousness that amateur acting usually entails. Neorealist films often feature children in major roles, though their characters are frequently more observational than participatory. These characters are both sympathetic and cynical, constantly portraying the pain, misfortune, social struggles, and working-class struggles in social life, with the aim of criticizing the injustice of the real social system and resisting reality.\nIn terms of production, the new realism film adopts a documentary format, striving to showcase historicity, and striving to use the least cutting and video editing techniques, as well as tolerance for filming equipment.\n\"Open City\" established several of the principles of neorealism, depicting clearly the struggle of normal Italian people to live from day to day under the extraordinary difficulties of the German occupation of Rome, consciously doing what they can to resist the occupation. The children play a key role in this, and their presence at the end of the film is indicative of their role in neorealism as a whole: as observers of the difficulties of today who hold the key to the future. Vittorio De Sica's 1948 film \"Bicycle Thieves\" is also representative of the genre, with non-professional actors, and a story that details the hardships of working-class life after the war. This movie focuses on exploring the concerns and behaviors of struggling working-class characters through the presentation of outstanding non professional actors. The light portrayal of events reveals the indifference, dirtiness, and violence of society, showcasing the conflict between public and private perspectives.\nIn the period from 1944 to 1948, many neorealist filmmakers drifted away from pure neorealism. Some directors explored allegorical fantasy, such as de Sica's \"Miracle in Milan\", and historical spectacle, like \"Senso\" by Visconti. It was also the time period when a more upbeat neorealism emerged, which produced films that melded working-class characters with 1930s-style populist comedy, as seen in de Sica's \"Umberto D\".\nAt the height of neorealism, in 1948, Visconti adapted \"I Malavoglia\", a novel by Giovanni Verga, written during the 19th century realist verismo movement, bringing the story to a modern setting, which resulted in remarkably little change in either the plot or the tone. The resulting film, \"The Earth Trembles\", starred only nonprofessional actors and was filmed in the same village (Aci Trezza) in which the novel was set.\nMore contemporary theorists of Italian neorealism characterize it less as a consistent set of stylistic characteristics and more as the relationship between film practice and the social reality of post-war Italy. Millicent Marcus delineates the lack of consistent film styles of neorealist film. Peter Brunette and Marcia Landy both deconstruct the use of reworked cinematic forms in Rossellini's \"Open City\". Using psychoanalysis, Vincent Rocchio characterizes neorealist film as consistently engendering the structure of anxiety into the structure of the plot itself.\nImpact.\nThe period between 1943 and 1950 in the history of Italian cinema was dominated by the impact of neorealism, which was properly defined as a moment or a trend in Italian film rather than an actual school or group of theoretically motivated and like-minded directors and scriptwriters. Its impact nevertheless has been enormous not only on Italian film but also on French New Wave cinema, the Polish Film School, Brazilian Cinema Novo and ultimately on films all over the world. It also influenced film directors of India's Parallel Cinema movement, including Satyajit Ray (who directed the award-winning \"Apu Trilogy\") and Bimal Roy (who made \"Do Bigha Zameen\" [1953]), both heavily influenced by Vittorio De Sica's \"Bicycle Thieves\" (1948).\nThe birth and development of Italian neorealism films marked the transition of the world film center from Europe and the United States, where classicism was prevalent before World War II, to Europe, where realism was prevalent.\nFurthermore, as some critics have argued, the abandoning of the classical way of doing cinema and so the starting point of the French New Wave and the Modern Cinema can be found in the post-war Italian cinema and in the neorealism experiences. In particular,\nthis cinema seems to be constituted as a new subject of knowledge, which itself builds and develops. It produces a new world in which the main elements have not so many narrative functions as they have their own aesthetic value, related with the eye that is watching them and not with the action they are coming from.\nAlthough \"Umberto D.\" is considered the end of the neorealist period, later films such as Federico Fellini's \"La Strada\" (1954) and De Sica's 1960 film \"Two Women\" (for which Sophia Loren won the Oscar for Best Actress) are grouped with the genre. Director Pier Paolo Pasolini's first film, \"Accattone\" (1961), shows a strong neorealist influence. The Neorealist period is often simply referred to as \"The Golden Age\" of Italian cinema by critics, filmmakers and scholars.\nSignificant works.\nPrecursors and influences.\nThe extent to which Italian neorealism was truly innovative continues to be debated among film historians. Despite its wide influence, some have argued that it was more a revival of earlier Italian creative works than a groundbreaking movement. Important forerunners of Italian neorealism include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50960", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50960", "title": "Joan Baez", "text": "American contemporary folk musician (born 1941)\nJoan Chandos Baez (, ; born January 9, 1941) is an American singer, songwriter, musician, and activist. Her contemporary folk music often includes songs of protest and social justice. Baez has performed publicly for over 60 years, releasing more than 30 albums.\nBaez is generally regarded as a folk singer, but her music has diversified since the counterculture era of the 1960s and encompasses genres such as folk rock, pop, country, and gospel music. She began her recording career in 1960 and achieved immediate success. Her first three albums, \"Joan Baez\", \"Joan Baez, Vol. 2\" and \"Joan Baez in Concert\", all achieved gold record status. Although a songwriter herself, Baez generally interprets others' work, having recorded many traditional songs and songs written by the Allman Brothers Band, the Beatles, Jackson Browne, Leonard Cohen, Woody Guthrie, Violeta Parra, the Rolling Stones, Pete Seeger, Paul Simon, Stevie Wonder, Bob Marley, and many others. She was one of the first major artists to record songs by Bob Dylan in the early 1960s; Baez was already an internationally celebrated artist and did much to popularize his early songwriting efforts. Her tumultuous relationship with Dylan later became the subject of songs by each of them and generated much public speculation. On her later albums she has found success interpreting the work of more recent songwriters, including Ryan Adams, Josh Ritter, Steve Earle, Natalie Merchant, and Joe Henry.\nBaez's songs include \"Diamonds &amp; Rust\" and covers of Phil Ochs's \"There but for Fortune\" and the Band's \"The Night They Drove Old Dixie Down\". She also recorded \"Farewell, Angelina\", \"Love Is Just a Four-Letter Word\", \"Forever Young\", \"Here's to You\", \"Joe Hill\", \"Sweet Sir Galahad\" and \"We Shall Overcome\". Baez performed fourteen songs at the 1969 Woodstock Festival and has displayed a lifelong commitment to political and social activism in the fields of nonviolence, civil rights, human rights, and the environment. Baez was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame on April 7, 2017.\nEarly and personal life.\nBaez was born in the Staten Island borough of New York City on January 9, 1941. Her paternal grandfather Alberto Baez left the Catholic Church to become a Methodist minister and moved to the U.S. when her father was two years old. Her father Albert Baez (1912\u20132007) was born in Puebla, Mexico, and grew up in Brooklyn, New York, where his father preached to and advocated for a Spanish-speaking congregation. Albert first considered becoming a minister but instead turned to the study of mathematics and physics and received his PhD from Stanford University in 1950. Albert was later credited as a co-inventor of the X-ray microscope. Joan's cousin John C. Baez is a mathematical physicist. Her mother Joan Chandos Baez (n\u00e9e Bridge), referred to as \"Joan Senior\" or \"Big Joan\", was born in Edinburgh, Scotland, the second daughter of an English Anglican priest who claimed to be descended from the Dukes of Chandos. Born on April 11, 1913, she died on April 20, 2013 aged 100.\nBaez was the second of three sisters, all of whom were political activists and musicians. The eldest was Pauline Thalia Baez Bryan (1938\u20132016), also known as Pauline Marden, and the youngest was Margarita Mimi Baez Fari\u00f1a (1945\u20132001), who was better known as Mimi Fari\u00f1a. The Baez family converted to Quakerism during Joan's early childhood, and she has continued to identify with the tradition, particularly in her commitment to pacifism and social issues. While growing up, Baez was subjected to racial slurs and discrimination because of her Mexican heritage. Consequently, she became involved in social causes early in her career. She declined to play in any white student venues that were segregated, which meant that when she toured the Southern states, she would play only at black colleges.\nOwing to her father's work with UNESCO, their family moved many times, living in towns across the U.S. as well as in England, France, Switzerland, Spain, Canada, and the Middle East, including Iraq. Joan Baez became involved with a variety of social causes early in her career, including civil rights and nonviolence. Social justice, she stated in the PBS series \"American Masters\", is the true core of her life, \"looming larger than music\". Baez spent much of her formative youth living in the San Francisco Bay area, where she graduated from Palo Alto High School in 1958. Here, Baez dated Michael New, a fellow student described as \"Trinidad English\" whom she met at her college in the late 1950s, and occasionally introduced as her husband. Baez committed her first act of civil disobedience by refusing to leave her Palo Alto High School classroom in Palo Alto, California for an air raid drill.\nBaez remained close to her younger sister Mimi up until Mimi's death in 2001 and mentioned in the 2009 \"American Masters\" documentary that she had grown closer to her older sister Pauline in later years. Currently, Baez is a resident of Woodside, California, where she lived with her mother until the latter's death in 2013. She has said that her house has a backyard tree house in which she spends time meditating, writing, and \"being close to nature\". Since stepping down from the stage in 2019, she has devoted herself to portraiture. Owing to false assumptions that have been promoted about her, Baez stated in 2019 that she was not a vegetarian and had not been part of the second-wave feminist movement, remarking that her stardom shielded her from the everyday struggles of other women. She is the subject of the 2023 documentary \"\" in which she reflected on among other things her personal struggles, her political activism, and her personal and professional relationship with Bob Dylan. She also related that Mimi and she had struggled with depression and after years of therapy came to believe that they had been abused by their father. In her 2024 poetry collection \"When You See My Mother Ask Her to Dance,\" Joan Baez said that she has been diagnosed with Dissociative Identity Disorder.\nMusic career.\nThe opening line of Baez's memoir \"And a Voice to Sing With\" is \"I was born gifted\", referring to her singing voice, which she explained was given to her and for which she can take no credit. A friend of Joan's father gave her a ukulele. She learned four chords, which enabled her to play rhythm and blues, the music she was listening to at the time. Her parents, however, were fearful that the music would lead her into a life of drug addiction. When Baez was 13, her aunt took her to a concert by folk musician Pete Seeger, and Baez found herself strongly moved by his music. She soon began practicing the songs of his repertoire and performing them publicly. One of her earliest public performances was at a retreat in Saratoga, California, for a youth group from Temple Beth Jacob, a Redwood City, California, Jewish congregation. A few years later, in 1957, Baez bought her first Gibson acoustic guitar.\nCollege music scene in Massachusetts.\nAfter graduating from high school in 1958, Baez and her family moved from the San Francisco area to Boston, Massachusetts, after her father accepted a faculty position at MIT. At that time, it was in the center of the up-and-coming folk-music scene and she began performing near home in Boston and nearby Cambridge. She also performed in clubs and attended Boston University for about six weeks before she gave her first concert at the Club 47 in Cambridge. When designing the poster for the performance, Baez considered changing her performing name to either Rachel Sandperl, the surname of her longtime mentor Ira Sandperl, or Maria from the song \"They Call the Wind Maria\". She later opted against doing so, fearing that people would accuse her of changing her last name because it was Spanish. The audience consisted of her parents, sister Mimi, her boyfriend, and a few friends\u2014a total of eight patrons. Baez was paid ten dollars before she was later asked back and began performing twice a week for $25 per show.\nA few months later, Baez and two other folk enthusiasts made plans to record an album in the cellar of a friend's house. The trio sang solos and duets and a family friend designed the album cover, which was released on Veritas Records that same year as \"Folksingers 'Round Harvard Square\". Baez later met Bob Gibson and Odetta, who were at the time two of the most prominent vocalists singing folk and gospel music. Baez cites Odetta as a primary influence along with Marian Anderson and Pete Seeger. Gibson invited Baez to perform with him at the 1959 Newport Folk Festival, where they sang two duets, \"Virgin Mary Had One Son\" and \"We Are Crossing Jordan River\". The performance generated substantial praise for the \"barefoot Madonna\" with the otherworldly voice, and it was this appearance that led to Baez signing with Vanguard Records the following year, although Columbia Records tried to sign her first. Baez later claimed that she felt she would be given more artistic license at a more \"low key\" label. Baez's nickname at the time, \"Madonna\", has been attributed to her clear voice, long hair, and natural beauty, and to her role as \"Earth Mother\".\nFirst albums and 1960s breakthrough.\nHer true professional career began at the inaugural Newport Folk Festival in 1959. After that appearance, she recorded her first album for Vanguard, \"Joan Baez\" (1960). It was recorded in just four days in the ballroom of New York City's Manhattan Towers Hotel and was produced by Fred Hellerman of The Weavers, who produced many albums by folk artists. Its songs included traditional folk ballads, blues, and laments, including Child Ballads, sung to her own guitar accompaniment. The album also included \"El Preso Numero Nueve\", a song sung entirely in Spanish, which she would re-record in 1974 for inclusion on her Spanish-language album \"Gracias a la Vida\". The album sold moderately well.\nShe made her New York concert debut on November 5, 1960, at the 92nd Street Y and on November 11, 1961, Baez played her first major New York concert at a sold-out performance at Town Hall. Robert Shelton, folk critic of the \"New York Times\", praised the concert, saying, \"That superb soprano voice, as lustrous and rich as old gold, flowed purely all evening with a wondrous ease. Her singing (unwound) like a spool of satin.\" Years later when Baez thought back to that concert, she laughed, saying: \"I remember in 1961 my manager sending me this newspaper (clipping) in the mail (which) read, 'Joan Baez Town Hall Concert, SRO.' I thought SRO meant 'sold right out.' I was so innocent of it all.\"\nHer second release, \"Joan Baez, Vol. 2\" (1961), went gold, as did \"Joan Baez in Concert, Part 1\" (1962) and \"Joan Baez in Concert, Part 2\" (1963). Like its immediate predecessor, \"Joan Baez, Vol. 2\" contained strictly traditional material. Her two albums of live material, \"Joan Baez in Concert, Part 1\" and its second counterpart were unique in that unlike most live albums, they contained only new songs rather than established favorites. It was \"Joan Baez in Concert, Part 2\" that featured Baez's first-ever Dylan cover. From the early to the mid-1960s, Baez emerged at the forefront of the American roots revival, where she introduced her audiences to the then-unknown Bob Dylan and was emulated by artists such as Judy Collins, Emmylou Harris, Joni Mitchell, and Bonnie Raitt. On November 23, 1962, Baez appeared on the cover of \"Time Magazine\"\u2014a rare honor then for a musician. Although primarily an album artist, several of Baez's singles have charted, the first being her 1965 cover of Phil Ochs' \"There but for Fortune\", which became a mid-level chart hit in the U.S. and Canada, and a top-ten single in the United Kingdom.\nBaez added other instruments to her recordings on \"Farewell, Angelina\" (1965), which features several Dylan songs interspersed with more traditional fare. Deciding to experiment with different styles, Baez turned to Peter Schickele, a classical music composer, who provided classical orchestration for her next three albums: \"No\u00ebl\" (1966), \"Joan\" (1967), and \"\" (1968). \"No\u00ebl\" was a Christmas album of traditional material, while \"Baptism\" was akin to a concept album, featuring Baez reading and singing poems written by celebrated poets such as James Joyce, Federico Garc\u00eda Lorca, and Walt Whitman. \"Joan\" featured interpretations of work by contemporary composers, including John Lennon and Paul McCartney, Tim Hardin, Paul Simon, and Donovan.\nIn 1968, Baez traveled to Nashville, Tennessee, where a marathon recording session resulted in two albums. The first, \"Any Day Now\" (1968), consists exclusively of Dylan covers. The other, the country-music-infused \"David's Album\" (1969), was recorded for husband David Harris, a prominent anti-Vietnam War protester eventually imprisoned for draft resistance. Harris, a country music fan, turned Baez toward more complex country-rock influences beginning with \"David's Album\". Later in 1968, Baez published her first memoir, \"Daybreak\" (by Dial Press). In August 1969, her appearance at Woodstock in upstate New York raised her international musical and political profile, particularly after the successful release of the documentary film \"Woodstock\" (1970).\nBeginning in the late 1960s, Baez began writing many of her own songs, beginning with \"Sweet Sir Galahad\" and \"A Song For David\", both songs appearing on her 1970 \"(I Live) One Day at a Time\" album; \"Sweet Sir Galahad\" was written about her sister Mimi's second marriage, while \"A Song For David\" was a tribute to Harris. \"One Day at a Time\", like \"David's Album\", featured a decidedly country sound. Baez's distinctive vocal style and political activism had a significant impact on American popular music. She was one of the first musicians to use her popularity as a vehicle for social protest, singing and marching for human rights and peace. Pete Seeger, Odetta, and decades-long friend Harry Belafonte were her early social justice advocate influences. Baez came to be considered the \"most accomplished interpretive folksinger/songwriter of the 1960s\". Her appeal extended far beyond the folk music audience. Of her fourteen Vanguard albums, thirteen made the top 100 of Billboard's mainstream pop chart, eleven made the top forty, eight made the top twenty, and four made the top ten.\n1970s and the end of Vanguard years.\nAfter eleven years with Vanguard, Baez decided in 1971 to cut ties with the label that had released her albums since 1960. She delivered Vanguard one last success with the gold-selling album \"Blessed Are...\" (1971), which included a top-ten hit in \"The Night They Drove Old Dixie Down\", her cover of the Band's signature song. With \"Come from the Shadows\" (1972), Baez switched to A&amp;M Records, where she remained for four years and six albums. Joan Baez wrote \"The Story of Bangladesh\" in 1971. This song was based on the Pakistani army crackdown on unarmed sleeping Bengali students at Dhaka University on March 25, 1971, which ignited the prolonged nine-month Bangladesh Liberation War. The song was later entitled \"The Song of Bangladesh\" and released in a 1972 album from Chandos Music.\nDuring this period in late 1971, she reunited with composer Peter Schickele to record two tracks, \"Rejoice in the Sun\" and \"Silent Running\" for the science-fiction film \"Silent Running\". The two songs were issued as a single on Decca (32890). In addition to this, another LP was released on Decca (DL 7-9188) and was later reissued by Var\u00e8se Sarabande on black (STV-81072) and green (VC-81072) vinyl. In 1998, a limited release on CD by the \"Valley Forge Record Groupe\" was released.\nBaez's first album for A&amp;M, \"Come from the Shadows\", was recorded in Nashville, and included a number of more personal compositions, including \"Love Song to a Stranger\" and \"Myths\", as well as work by Mimi Farina, John Lennon, and Anna Marly. \"Where Are You Now, My Son?\" (1973) featured a 23-minute title song which took up all of the B-side of the album. Half spoken word poem and half tape-recorded sounds, the song documented Baez's visit to Hanoi, North Vietnam, in December 1972 during which she and her traveling companions survived the 11-day-long Christmas Bombings campaign over Hanoi and Haiphong.\n\"Gracias a la Vida\" (1974) (the title song written and first performed by Chilean folk singer Violeta Parra) followed and was a success in both the U.S. and Latin America. It included the song \"Cucurrucuc\u00fa paloma\". Flirting with mainstream pop music as well as writing her own songs for \"Diamonds &amp; Rust\" (1975), the album became the highest selling of Baez's career and included a second top-ten single in the form of the title track. After \"Gulf Winds\" (1976), an album of entirely self-composed songs and \"From Every Stage\" (1976), a live album that had Baez performing songs \"from every stage\" of her career, Baez again parted ways with a record label when she moved to CBS Records for \"Blowin' Away\" (1977) and \"Honest Lullaby\" (1979).\n1980s and 1990s.\nIn 1980, Baez was given honorary Doctor of Humane Letters degrees by Antioch University and Rutgers University for her political activism and the \"universality of her music\". In 1983, she appeared on the Grammy Awards, performing Dylan's anthemic \"Blowin' in the Wind\", a song she first performed twenty years earlier. Baez also played a significant role in the 1985 Live Aid concert for African famine relief, opening the U.S. segment of the show in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. She has toured on behalf of many other causes, including Amnesty International's 1986 \"A Conspiracy of Hope\" tour and a guest spot on their subsequent \"Human Rights Now!\" tour.\nBaez found herself without an American label for the release of \"Live Europe 83\" (1984), which was released in Europe and Canada but not released commercially in the U.S. She did not have an American release until the album \"Recently\" (1987) on Gold Castle Records. In 1987, Baez's second autobiography, called \"And a Voice to Sing With\", was published and became a \"New York Times\" bestseller. That same year, she traveled to the Middle East to visit with and sing songs of peace for Israel and the Palestinians.\nIn May 1989, Baez performed at a music festival in Communist Czechoslovakia called Bratislavsk\u00e1 l\u00fdra. While there, she met future Czechoslovak president V\u00e1clav Havel, whom she let carry her guitar so as to prevent his arrest by government agents. During her performance, she greeted members of Charter 77, a dissident human-rights group, which resulted in her microphone being shut off abruptly. Baez then proceeded to sing \"a cappella\" for the nearly four thousand gathered. Havel cited her as a great inspiration and influence in that country's Velvet Revolution, the revolution in which the Soviet-dominated Communist government there was overthrown.\nBaez recorded two more albums with Gold Castle: \"Speaking of Dreams\", (1989) and \"Brothers in Arms\" (1991). She then landed a contract with a major label, Virgin Records, recording \"Play Me Backwards\" (1992) for Virgin shortly before the company was purchased by EMI. She then switched to Guardian, with whom she produced a live album, \"Ring Them Bells\" (1995), and a studio album, \"Gone from Danger\" (1997).\nIn 1993, at the invitation of Refugees International and sponsored by the Soros Foundation, she traveled to the war-torn Bosnia and Herzegovina region of former-Yugoslavia in an effort to help bring more attention to the suffering there. She was the first major artist to perform in Sarajevo since the outbreak of the Yugoslav civil war. In October 1993, Baez became the first major artist to perform in a professional concert presentation on Alcatraz Island (a former U.S. federal prison) in San Francisco, California, in a benefit for her sister Mimi's Bread and Roses organization. She later returned for another concert in 1996.\n2000s.\nBeginning in 2001, Baez has had several successful long-term engagements as a lead character at San Francisco's Teatro ZinZanni. In August 2001, Vanguard began re-releasing Baez's first 13 albums, which she recorded for the label between 1960 and 1971. The reissues, being released through Vanguard's Original Master Series, feature digitally restored sound, unreleased bonus songs, new and original artwork, and new liner-note essays written by Arthur Levy. Likewise, her six A&amp;M albums were reissued in 2003. In 2003, Baez was also a judge for the third annual Independent Music Awards to support independent artists' careers.\nBaez's album, \"Dark Chords on a Big Guitar\" (2003), features songs by composers half her age, while a November 2004 performance at New York City's Bowery Ballroom was recorded for a live release, \"Bowery Songs\" (2005). On October 1, 2005, she performed at the Hardly Strictly Bluegrass festival, at San Francisco's Golden Gate Park. Then, on January 13, 2006, Baez performed at the funeral of Lou Rawls, where she led Jesse Jackson Sr., Wonder, and others in the singing of \"Amazing Grace\". On June 6, 2006, Baez joined Bruce Springsteen on stage at his San Francisco concert, where the two performed the rolling anthem \"Pay Me My Money Down\". In September 2006, Baez contributed a live, retooled version of her classic song \"Sweet Sir Galahad\" to a Starbucks's exclusive XM Artist Confidential album. In the new version, she changed the lyric \"here's to the dawn of their days\" to \"here's to the dawn of \"her\" days\", as a tribute to her late sister Mimi, about whom Baez wrote the song in 1969.\nOn October 8, 2006, Baez appeared as a special surprise guest at the opening ceremony of the Forum 2000 international conference in Prague. Her performance was kept secret from former Czech Republic President Havel until the moment she appeared on stage. Havel was a great admirer of both Baez and her work. During Baez's next visit to Prague, in April 2007, the two met again when she performed in front of a sold-out house at Prague's Lucerna Hall, a building erected by Havel's grandfather. On December 2, 2006, she made a guest appearance at the Oakland Interfaith Gospel Choir's Christmas Concert at the Paramount Theatre in Oakland, California. Her participation included versions of \"Let Us Break Bread Together\" and \"Amazing Grace\". She also joined the choir in the finale of \"O Holy Night\".\nIn February 2007, Proper Records reissued her 1995 live album \"Ring Them Bells\", which featured duets with artists ranging from Dar Williams and Mimi Fari\u00f1a to the Indigo Girls and Mary Chapin Carpenter. The reissue features a 16-page booklet and six unreleased live tracks from the original recording sessions. In addition, Baez recorded a duet of \"Jim Crow\" with John Mellencamp which appears on his album \"Freedom's Road\" (2007). Also in February 2007, she received the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award. The day after receiving the honor, she appeared at the Grammy Awards ceremony and introduced a performance by the Dixie Chicks.\nSeptember 2008 saw the release of the studio album \"Day After Tomorrow\", produced by Steve Earle and featuring three of his songs. The album was Baez's first charting record in nearly three decades. On June 29, 2008, Baez performed on the acoustic stage at the Glastonbury Festival playing out the final set to a packed audience. On July 6, 2008, she played at the Montreux Jazz Festival in Montreux, Switzerland. During the concert's finale, she spontaneously danced on stage with a band of African percussionists.\nOn August 2, 2009, Baez played at the 50th Newport Folk Festival, which also marked the 50th anniversary of her breakthrough performance at the first festival. On October 14, 2009, PBS aired an episode of its documentary series \"American Masters\", entitled \"Joan Baez: How Sweet the Sound\". It was produced and directed by Mary Wharton. A DVD and CD of the soundtrack were released at the same time.\n2010s and 2020s.\nOn April 4, 2017, Baez released on her Facebook page her first new song in 27 years, \"Nasty Man\", a protest song against US President Donald Trump, which became a viral hit. On April 7, 2017, she was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. On March 2, 2018, she released a new studio album entitled \"Whistle Down the Wind\", which charted in many countries and was nominated for a Grammy, and undertook her \"Fare Thee Well Tour\" to support the album. On April 30, 2019, Baez told \"Rolling Stone\" that she had been approached to perform at the Woodstock 50 festival, but had turned the offer down for \"it was too complicated to even get involved in\" and her \"instincts\" were telling her \"no\". She retired from touring in 2019 because, she explained, her vocal cords could no longer consistently perform at the level she demanded of herself. However, she still performs at occasional special events.\nOn July 28, 2019, following dates across Europe, Baez performed her final concert at Madrid's Teatro Real. In January 2021, it was announced that Baez would receive a 2020 Kennedy Center Honor in a ceremony that was postponed because of the COVID-19 pandemic. She was honored along with Debbie Allen, Garth Brooks, Midori, and Dick Van Dyke in May 2021.\nSocial and political involvement.\nCivil rights.\nIn 1956, Baez first heard Martin Luther King Jr. speak about nonviolence, civil rights and social change in a speech that brought tears to her eyes. Several years later, the two became friends, with Baez participating in many of the Civil Rights Movement demonstrations that King helped organize. When she was a senior in high school, Baez met anti-war activist Ira Sandperl and through their interests in various philosophies and political causes they developed a friendship. In 1965 they founded together the Institute for the Study of Non-violence in Carmel Valley, California with Sandperl running the general operations and funding coming from Baez.\nThe early years of Baez's career saw the Civil Rights Movement in the U.S. become a prominent issue. Her performance of \"We Shall Overcome\", the civil rights anthem written by Pete Seeger and Guy Carawan, at the 1963 March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom permanently linked her to the song. Baez again sang \"We Shall Overcome\" in Sproul Plaza during the mid-1960s Free Speech Movement demonstrations at the University of California, Berkeley in Berkeley, California, and at many other rallies and protests. Baez refused to play at any colleges or universities that participated in racial segregation as well.\nHer recording of the song \"Birmingham Sunday\" (1964), written by her brother-in-law, Richard Fari\u00f1a, was used in the opening of \"4 Little Girls\" (1997), Spike Lee's documentary film about the four young victims killed in the 1963 16th Street Baptist Church bombing. In 1965, Baez announced that she would be opening a school to teach nonviolent protest. She also participated in the 1965 Selma to Montgomery marches for voting rights.\nIn November 2017, as part of a release of documents from the National Archives that were supposed to relate to the assassination of John F. Kennedy, a 1968 FBI report alleged that Baez was involved in the 1960s in an intimate affair with King, an accusation described by history professor Clayborne Carson, the director of the Martin Luther King Jr. Research and Education Institute at Stanford University, as \"part of a smear campaign\" against King.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI went to jail for 11 days for disturbing the peace; I was trying to disturb the war.\n \u2014Joan Baez, 1967 Pop Chronicles interview.\nVietnam War.\nHighly visible in civil-rights marches, Baez became more vocal about her disagreement with the Vietnam War. In 1964, she publicly endorsed resisting taxes by withholding sixty percent of her 1963 income taxes. In 1964, she founded the Institute for the Study of Nonviolence (along with her mentor Sandperl) and encouraged draft resistance at her concerts. The Institute for the Study of Nonviolence would later branch into the Resource Center for Nonviolence.\nIn 1966, Baez's autobiography, \"Daybreak\", was released. It is the most detailed report of her life through 1966 and outlined her anti-war position, dedicating the book to men facing imprisonment for resisting the draft. Baez was arrested twice in 1967, having blocked the entrance of the Armed Forces Induction Center in Oakland, California, and spent over a month in jail. She was a frequent participant in anti-war marches and rallies, including:\nThere were many others, culminating in Phil Ochs's The War Is Over celebration in New York City in May 1975. During the Christmas season 1972, Baez joined a peace delegation traveling to North Vietnam, both to address human rights in the region, and to deliver Christmas mail to American prisoners of war. During her time there, she was caught in the U.S. military's \"Christmas bombing\" of Hanoi, North Vietnam, during which the city was bombed for eleven straight days. She was critical of Vietnam's government and organized the May 30, 1979, publication of a full-page advertisement (published in four major U.S. newspapers) in which the government was described as having created a nightmare. Her one-time anti-war ally Jane Fonda refused to join in Baez's criticism of the Vietnamese government, leading to what was publicly described as a feud between the two.\nPrison and death penalty reform.\nIn December 2005, Baez appeared and sang \"Swing Low, Sweet Chariot\" at the California protest at the San Quentin State Prison against the execution of Tookie Williams. She had previously performed the same song at San Quentin at the 1992 vigil protesting against the execution of Robert Alton Harris, the first man to be executed in California after the death penalty was reinstated. She subsequently lent her prestige to the campaign opposing the execution of Troy Davis by the State of Georgia. In 2016, Baez advocated for the Innocence Project and Innocence Network. At each concert, Baez informs the audience about the organizations' efforts to exonerate the wrongfully convicted and reform the system to prevent such incidents.\nLGBT rights.\nBaez has been prominent in the struggle for gay and lesbian rights. In 1978, she performed at several benefit concerts to defeat the Briggs Initiative, which proposed banning openly gay people from teaching in public schools in California. Later that same year, she participated in memorial marches for the assassinated San Francisco city supervisor, Harvey Milk, who was openly gay. In the 1990s, she appeared with her friend Janis Ian at a benefit for the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force, a gay lobbying organization, and performed at the San Francisco Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Pride March. Her song \"Altar Boy and the Thief\" from \"Blowin' Away\" (1977) was written as a dedication to her gay fanbase.\nIran.\nOn June 25, 2009, Baez created a special version of \"We Shall Overcome\", with a few lines of Persian lyrics in support of peaceful protests by Iranian people. She recorded it in her home and posted the video on her personal website and on YouTube. She dedicated the song \"Joe Hill\" to the people of Iran during her concert at Merrill Auditorium in Portland, Maine on July 31, 2009.\nEnvironmental causes.\nOn Earth Day 1999, Baez and Bonnie Raitt honored environmental activist Julia Butterfly Hill with Raitt's \"Arthur M. Sohcot Award\" in person on her -high redwood treetop platform, where Hill had camped to protect ancient redwoods in the Headwaters Forest from logging.\nWar in Iraq.\nIn early 2003, Baez performed at two rallies of hundreds of thousands of people in San Francisco protesting the U.S. invasion of Iraq. In August 2003, she was invited by Emmylou Harris and Steve Earle to join them in London, England, at the Concert For a Landmine-Free World. In the summer of 2004, Baez joined Michael Moore's \"Slacker uprising Tour\" on American college campuses, encouraging young people to get out and vote for peace candidates in the upcoming presidential election. In August 2005, Baez appeared at an anti-war protest in Crawford, Texas, which had been started by Cindy Sheehan.\nTree sit-in for urban farmers.\nOn May 23, 2006, Baez once again joined Julia Butterfly Hill, this time in a \"tree sit\" in a giant tree on the site of the South Central Farm in a poor neighborhood of downtown Los Angeles, California. Baez and Hill were hoisted into the tree, where they remained overnight. The women, in addition to many other activists and celebrities, were protesting the imminent eviction of the community farmers and demolition of the site, which is the largest urban farm in the state. Because many of the South Central Farmers are immigrants from Central America, Baez sang several songs from her 1974 Spanish-language album, \"Gracias a la Vida\", including the title track and \"No Nos Mover\u00e1n\" (\"We Shall Not Be Moved\").\n2008 presidential election.\nThroughout most of her career, Baez remained apprehensive about involving herself in party politics. However, on February 3, 2008, Baez wrote a letter to the editor at the \"San Francisco Chronicle\" endorsing Barack Obama in the 2008 U.S. presidential election. She noted: \"Through all those years, I chose not to engage in party politics.\u00a0... At this time, however, changing that posture feels like the responsible thing to do. If anyone can navigate the contaminated waters of Washington, lift up the poor, and appeal to the rich to share their wealth, it is Sen. Barack Obama.\" Playing at the Glastonbury Festival in June, Baez said during the introduction of a song that one reason she liked Obama was because he reminded her of another old friend of hers, Martin Luther King Jr.\nAlthough a highly political figure throughout most of her career, Baez had never publicly endorsed a major political party candidate prior to Obama. However, after Obama was elected, she expressed that she would likely never do so again, saying in a 2013 interview in \"The Huffington Post\" that \"In some ways I'm disappointed, but in some ways it was silly to expect more. If he had taken his brilliance, his eloquence, his toughness and not run for office he could have led a movement. Once he got in the Oval Office he couldn't do anything.\" She performed at the White House on February 10, 2010, as part of an evening celebrating the music associated with the civil rights movement, performing \"We Shall Overcome\".\nOccupy Wall Street.\nOn November 11, 2011, Baez played as part of a musical concert for the protestors at Occupy Wall Street. Her three-song set included \"Joe Hill\", a cover of the Rolling Stones' \"Salt of the Earth\" and her own composition \"Where's My Apple Pie?\"\nCatalan independence movement.\nBaez has been a strong defender of the Catalan independence movement. On July 21, 2019, she described jailed Catalan independence leaders as political prisoners. Five days later, she visited former Parliament of Catalonia president Carme Forcadell in prison.\nCurrent Activism and Public Engagement.\nIn 2025, Baez was a musical guest at the Fighting Oligarchy Tour. The tour was hosted by Bernie Sanders and joined by Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez in order to discuss corporate interests and Oligarchs' influence in the United States. Baez performed in the Los Angeles stop of the tour as a musical guest alongside Neil Young on April 12, 2025 with 36,000 people in attendance. \nOn October 18, 2025, she made a surprise appearance and performed at the October 2025 No Kings protests during rally held in San Francisco.\nAwards.\nIn 2003, Baez was presented with the John Steinbeck Award for her civil rights activism. She was presented with a Lifetime \nAchievement Award at the 2007 Grammys. To reward her decades of dedicated activism, Baez was honored with the Spirit of Americana/Free Speech award at the 2008 Americana Music Honors &amp; Awards. On March 18, 2011, Baez was honored by Amnesty International at its 50th Anniversary Annual General Meeting in San Francisco. The tribute to Baez was the inaugural event for the Amnesty International Joan Baez Award for Outstanding Inspirational Service in the Global Fight for Human Rights. Baez was presented with the first award in recognition of her human rights work with Amnesty International and beyond, and the inspiration she has given activists around the world. The award is to be presented to an artist \u2013 music, film, sculpture, paint or other medium \u2013 who has helped advance human rights.\nIn 2015, Amnesty International jointly awarded Baez and Ai Wei Wei the Ambassador of Conscience award. The American Academy of Arts and Sciences elected her to fellowship in 2020, praising her contributions both to music and to activism. In May 2021, Baez was recognized as part of the 43rd Kennedy Center Honors. In 2023, \"Rolling Stone\" ranked Baez at number 189 on its list of the 200 Greatest Singers of All Time. In February 2024, she received the Third Class of the Order of the White Double Cross by Zuzana \u010caputov\u00e1\nRelationships.\nBob Dylan.\nBaez first met Dylan in April 1961 at Gerde's Folk City in New York City's Greenwich Village. Baez had already released her debut album and her popularity as the emerging \"Queen of Folk\" was on the rise. Baez was initially unimpressed with the \"urban hillbilly\", but she liked one of Dylan's first compositions, \"Song to Woody\" and remarked that she would like to record it. By 1963, Baez had released three albums, two of which had been certified gold, and she invited Dylan on stage to perform alongside her at the Newport Folk Festival. The two performed the Dylan composition \"With God on Our Side\", a collaboration that set the stage for many more duets in the months and years to come. Typically, while on tour, Baez would invite Dylan to sing on stage partly by himself and partly with her, much to the chagrin of her fans.\nBefore meeting Dylan, Baez's topical songs were few: \"Last Night I Had the Strangest Dream\", \"We Shall Overcome\", and an assortment of spirituals. Baez would later say that Dylan's songs seemed to update the topics of protest and justice. By the time of Dylan's 1965 tour of the UK, their relationship had slowly begun to deteriorate. The couple were captured in D. A. Pennebaker's documentary film \"Dont Look Back\" (1967). Baez later described it as an abrupt halt that broke her heart. In the 2023 documentary \"\" Baez referred to the relationship as \"totally demoralizing\" which she later forgave him for but said that they are no longer in touch with each other.\nBaez toured with Dylan as a performer on his Rolling Thunder Revue in 1975\u201376. She sang four songs with Dylan on the live album of the tour, \"\", released in 2002. Baez appeared with Dylan in the one-hour TV special \"Hard Rain\", filmed at Fort Collins, Colorado, in May 1976. Baez also starred as 'The Woman in White' in the film \"Renaldo and Clara\" (1978), directed by Bob Dylan and filmed during the Rolling Thunder Revue. They performed together at the Peace Sunday anti-nuke concert in 1982. Dylan and Baez toured together again in 1984 along with Carlos Santana. Baez discussed her relationship with Dylan in Martin Scorsese's documentary film \"No Direction Home\" (2005), and in the PBS \"American Masters\" biography of Baez, \"How Sweet the Sound\" (2009).\nBaez wrote and composed at least three songs that were specifically about Dylan. In \"To Bobby\", written in 1972, she urged Dylan to return to political activism, while in \"Diamonds &amp; Rust\", the title track from her 1975 album, she revisited her feelings for him in warm, yet direct terms. \"Winds of the Old Days\", also on the \"Diamonds &amp; Rust\" album, is a bittersweet reminiscence about her time with \"Bobby\". The references to Baez in Dylan's songs are far less clear. Baez herself has suggested that she was the subject of both \"Visions of Johanna\" and \"Mama, You Been on My Mind\", although the latter was more likely about his relationship with Suze Rotolo. Dylan's \"To Ramona\" is potentially also about Baez. In the liner notes of his 1985 compilation album \"Biograph\", Dylan stated that the song was \"pretty literal. That was just somebody I knew\"; and in her 1987 biography \"And A Voice To Sing With,\" Baez wrote about how Dylan would call her \"Ramona\". Baez implied when speaking about the connection to \"Diamonds and Rust\" that \"Lily, Rosemary and the Jack of Hearts\" is, at least in part, a metaphor for Dylan's view of his relationship with her. As for \"Like A Rolling Stone\", \"Visions of Johanna\", \"She Belongs to Me\", and other songs alleged to have been written about Baez, neither Dylan nor biographers such as Clinton Heylin and Michael Gray have had anything definitive to say either way regarding the subject of these songs.\nBaez's relationship with Dylan was also referenced in the 2024 film \"A Complete Unknown\".\nDavid Harris.\nIn October 1967, Baez, her mother, and nearly 70 other women were arrested at the Oakland, California, Armed Forces Induction Center for blocking its doorways to prevent entrance by young inductees, and in support of young men who refused military induction. They were incarcerated in the Santa Rita Jail, and it was here that Baez met David Harris, who was kept on the men's side but who still managed to visit with Baez regularly. The two formed a close bond upon their release and Baez moved into his draft-resistance commune in the hills above Stanford, California. The pair had known each other for three months when they decided to marry. After confirming the news to Associated Press, media outlets began dedicating ample press to the impending nuptials (at one point, \"Time\" magazine referred to the event as the \"Wedding of the Century\").\nAfter finding a pacifist preacher and a church outfitted with peace signs and writing a blend of Episcopalian and Quaker wedding vows, Baez and Harris married in New York City on March 26, 1968. Her friend Judy Collins sang at the ceremony. After the wedding, Baez and Harris moved into a home in Los Altos Hills, California on of land called Struggle Mountain, part of a commune, where they tended gardens.\nA short time later, Harris refused induction into the armed forces and was indicted. On July 16, 1969, Harris was taken by federal marshals to prison. Baez was visibly pregnant in public in the months that followed, especially at the Woodstock Festival, where she performed a handful of songs in the early morning. The documentary film \"Carry It On\" was produced during this period and was released in 1970. The film's behind-the-scenes looks at Harris's views and arrest and Baez on her subsequent performance tour was positively reviewed in \"Time\" magazine and \"The New York Times\".\nAmong the songs Baez wrote about this period of her life are \"A Song for David\", \"Myths\", \"Prison Trilogy (Billy Rose)\" and \"Fifteen Months\" (the amount of time Harris was imprisoned). Their son Gabriel was born on December 2, 1969. Harris was released from Texas prison after 15 months, but they separated three months after his release and the couple divorced amicably in 1973. They shared custody of Gabriel, who lived primarily with Baez. Explaining the split, Baez wrote in her autobiography: \"I am made to live alone.\" Baez and Harris remained on friendly terms throughout the years; they reunited on-camera for the 2009 \"American Masters\" documentary for the USA's PBS. Their son Gabriel is a drummer and occasionally tours with his mother. He has a daughter Jasmine who also sang with Joan Baez at Kidztock in 2010.\nSteve Jobs.\nBaez dated Apple Computer cofounder Steve Jobs during the early 1980s. A number of sources have stated that Jobs\u2014then in his mid-twenties\u2014had considered asking Baez to marry him, except that her age at the time (early 40s) made the possibility of their having children unlikely. Baez mentioned Jobs in the acknowledgments in her 1987 memoir \"And a Voice to Sing With\" and performed at the memorial for him in 2011. After Jobs's death, Baez spoke fondly about him, stating that even after the relationship had ended, the two remained friends, with Jobs having visited Baez a few months before he died. Baez remarked that \"Steve had a very sweet side, even if he was as... erratic as he was famous for being. But he gets genius license for that, because he was somebody who changed the world.\"\nDiscography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFilmography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50961", "revid": "50770170", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50961", "title": "John Balliol", "text": "King of Scots from 1292 to 1296\nJohn Balliol or John de Balliol (c.\u20091249 \u2013 late 1314), known derisively as Toom Tabard (meaning 'empty coat'), was King of Scots from 1292 to 1296. Little is known of his early life. After the death of Margaret, Maid of Norway, Scotland entered an interregnum during which several competitors for the Crown of Scotland put forward claims. Balliol was chosen from among them as the new King of Scotland by a group of selected noblemen headed by King Edward I of England.\nEdward used his influence over the process to subjugate Scotland and undermined Balliol's personal reign by treating Scotland as a vassal of England. Under pressure from the Scottish nobility, Balliol signed a treaty with France known as the \"Auld Alliance\" and renounced his fealty to Edward. \nIn retaliation, Edward invaded Scotland, starting the Wars of Scottish Independence. After a Scottish defeat in 1296, Balliol abdicated and was imprisoned in the Tower of London. Eventually, Balliol was sent to his estates in France and retired into obscurity, taking no more part in politics. Scotland was then left without a monarch until the accession of Robert the Bruce in 1306. John Balliol's son Edward Balliol would later exert a claim to the Scottish throne against the Bruce claim during the minority of Robert's son David.\nName.\nIn Norman French his name was Johan de Bailliol; in Middle Scots it was \"Jhon Ballioun\", and in Scottish Gaelic, \"Iain Bailiol\". In Scots he was known by the nickname Toom Tabard, usually understood to mean \"empty coat\" in the sense that he was an ineffective king. Alternatively the word \"coat\" may refer to a coat of arms; either to the Balliol arms which are a plain shield with an orle, also known as an \"inescutcheon voided\" or because his arms were stripped from his tabard in public.\nEarly life.\nLittle of Balliol's early life is known. He was born between 1248 and 1250 at an unknown location; possibilities include Galloway, Picardy, and Barnard Castle, County Durham. He was the son of John, 5th Baron Balliol, Lord of Barnard Castle (and founder of Balliol College, Oxford), and his wife Dervorguilla of Galloway, daughter of Alan, Lord of Galloway and granddaughter of David, Earl of Huntingdon \u2014 the brother of William the Lion. From his mother he inherited significant lands in Galloway and claim to lordship over the Gallovidians, as well as various English and Scottish estates of the Huntingdon inheritance; from his father he inherited large estates in England and France, such as Hitchin, in Hertfordshire.\nAccession as King of Scots.\nIn 1284 Balliol had attended a parliament at Scone, which had recognised Margaret, Maid of Norway, as heir presumptive to her grandfather, King Alexander III. Following the deaths of Alexander III in 1286 and Margaret in 1290, John Balliol was a competitor for the Scottish crown in the Great Cause, as he was a great-great-great-grandson of David I through his mother (and therefore one generation further than his main rival Robert Bruce, 5th Lord of Annandale, grandfather of Robert the Bruce, who later became king), being senior in genealogical primogeniture but not in proximity of blood. He submitted his claim to the Scottish auditors with King Edward I of England as the administrator of the court, at Berwick-upon-Tweed, on 6 June 1291. The Scottish auditors' decision in favour of Balliol was pronounced in the Great Hall of Berwick Castle on 17 November 1292, and he was inaugurated accordingly King of Scotland at Scone, 30 November 1292, St. Andrew's Day.\nEdward I, who had coerced recognition as Lord Paramount of Scotland, the feudal superior of the realm, steadily undermined John's authority. He demanded homage to be paid towards himself, legal authority over the Scottish king in any disputes brought against him by his own subjects, contribution towards the costs for the defence of England, and military support was expected in his war against France. He treated Scotland as a feudal vassal state and repeatedly humiliated the new king. According to some English accounts, such as the Lanercost Chronicle, the Scots soon tired of their deeply compromised king and the direction of affairs was taken out of his hands by the leading men of the kingdom, who appointed a council of twelve \u2014 in practice, a new panel of guardians \u2014 at Stirling in July 1295. This has been challenged by recent historians; Amanda Beam argues that Balliol was not deposed, and that this council was formed to assist in the defence of the realm against England. Balliol continued to issue charters in his name for the remainder of his reign, demonstrating that he was still playing an active role as king. Assisted by the council, Balliol went on to conclude a treaty of mutual assistance with Philip IV of France on 23 October 1295, known in later years as the \"Auld Alliance\". By the terms of the alliance, Balliol's son Edward was betrothed to Philip's niece, Joan of Valois\nAbdication.\nIn retaliation for Scotland's treaty with France, Edward I invaded, commenced the Wars of Scottish Independence. The Scots were defeated at Dunbar and the English took Dunbar Castle on 27 April 1296. John abdicated at Stracathro, near Montrose, on 10 July 1296.\nBalliol was imprisoned in the Tower of London until allowed to go to France in July 1299. When his baggage was examined at Dover, the Royal Golden Crown and Seal of the Kingdom of Scotland, with many vessels of gold and silver, and a considerable sum of money, were found in his chests. Edward I ordered that the crown be offered to the shrine of St Thomas Becket at Canterbury and that the money be returned to Balliol for the expenses of his journey. But he kept the seal himself. Balliol was released into the custody of Pope Boniface VIII on condition that he remain at a papal residence. He was released around the summer of 1301 and lived the rest of his life on his family's ancestral estates at H\u00e9licourt, Picardy.\nOver the next few years, there were several Scottish rebellions against Edward (for example, in 1297 under William Wallace and Andrew Moray). When Wallace was chosen as commander, he claimed to act in the name of his king, John Balliol. This claim came to look increasingly tenuous, as Balliol's position under nominal house-arrest meant that he could not return to Scotland nor campaign for his release, despite the Scots' diplomatic attempts in Paris and Rome. After 1302, he made no further attempts to extend his personal support to the Scots.\nDeath.\nBalliol died in late 1314 at his family's ch\u00e2teau at H\u00e9licourt in France. On 4 January 1315, King Edward II of England, writing to King Louis X of France, said that he had heard of the death of \"Sir John de Balliol\" and requested the fealty and homage of Edward Balliol to be given by proxy.\nA John de Bailleul is interred in the church of St. Waast at Bailleul-Neuville in Normandy.\nBalliol was survived by his son, Edward Balliol, who later revived his family's claim to the Scottish throne, received support from the English, and had some temporary successes.\nMarriage and children.\nBalliol married around 9 February 1281 to Isabella de Warenne, daughter of John de Warenne, 6th Earl of Surrey.\nIt has been established that Balliol and de Warenne had at least one child, Edward Balliol. Other children linked to the couple include Henry Balliol, killed in the Battle of Annan on 16 December 1332, Agnes (or Maud or Anne) Balliol (who might actually have been his sister), who married Bryan FitzAlan, Lord FitzAlan, and Margaret Balliol who married Sir John St Clere, knight, of East Grinsted, Sussex.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50963", "revid": "51034634", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50963", "title": "List of national independence days", "text": "An independence day is an annual event commemorating the anniversary of a nation's independence or statehood, usually after ceasing to be a group or part of another nation or state, or after the end of a military occupation, or after a major change in government. Many countries commemorate their independence from a colonial empire.\nNot all countries mark independence as a national holiday. Many, such as Australia, Canada, China, Denmark, France, New Zealand, Ireland, Luxembourg, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Taiwan, and Turkey mark other dates of significance.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\n * See also* References\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50964", "revid": "26536202", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50964", "title": "Liouville number", "text": "Class of irrational numbers\nIn number theory, a Liouville number is a real number formula_1 with the property that, for every positive integer formula_2, there exists a pair of integers formula_3 with formula_4 such that\nformula_5\nThe inequality implies that Liouville numbers possess an excellent sequence of rational number approximations. In 1844, Joseph Liouville proved a bound showing that there is a limit to how well algebraic numbers can be approximated by rational numbers, and he defined Liouville numbers specifically so that they would have rational approximations better than the ones allowed by this bound. Liouville also exhibited examples of Liouville numbers thereby establishing the existence of transcendental numbers for the first time.\nOne of these examples is Liouville's constant\nformula_6\nin which the formula_2th digit after the decimal point is 1 if formula_2 is the factorial of a positive integer and 0 otherwise. It is known that \u03c0 and e, although transcendental, are not Liouville numbers.\nThe existence of Liouville numbers (Liouville's constant).\nLiouville numbers can be shown to exist by an explicit construction.\nFor any integer formula_9 and any sequence of integers formula_10 such that formula_11 for all formula_12 and formula_13 for infinitely many formula_12, define the number\nformula_15.\nIn the special case when formula_16, and formula_17 for all formula_12, the resulting number formula_1 is called Liouville's constant:\nformula_20\nIt follows from the definition of formula_1 that its base-formula_22 representation is\nformula_23\nwhere the formula_2th term is in the formula_25-th place.\nSince this base-formula_22 representation is non-repeating, it follows that formula_1 is not a rational number. Therefore, for any rational number formula_28, formula_29.\nNow, for any integer formula_30, formula_31 and formula_32 can be defined as follows:\nformula_33.\nThen\nformula_34\nTherefore, any such formula_1 is a Liouville number.\nformula_36\nNotes on the proof.\nfollows since \"a\"\"k\"\u00a0\u2208\u00a0{0,\u00a01,\u00a02,\u00a0..., \"b\"\u22121} for all \"k\", so at most \"a\"\"k\"\u00a0= \"b\"\u22121. The largest possible sum would occur if the sequence of integers (\"a\"1, \"a\"2,\u00a0...) were (\"b\"\u22121, \"b\"\u22121, ...), i.e. \"a\"\"k\"\u00a0= \"b\"\u22121, for all \"k\". formula_37 will thus be less than or equal to this largest possible sum.\nIrrationality.\nHere the proof will show that the number formula_55 where c and d are integers and formula_56 cannot satisfy the inequalities that define a Liouville number. Since every rational number can be represented as suchformula_57 the proof will show that no Liouville number can be rational.\nMore specifically, this proof shows that for any positive integer n large enough that formula_58 [equivalently, for any positive integer formula_59)], no pair of integers formula_60 exists that simultaneously satisfies the pair of bracketing inequalities\nformula_61\nIf the claim is true, then the desired conclusion follows.\nLet p and q be any integers with formula_62 Then,\nformula_63\nIf formula_64 then\nformula_65\nmeaning that such pair of integers formula_60 would violate the \"first\" inequality in the definition of a Liouville number, irrespective of any choice of n\u00a0.\nIf, on the other hand, since formula_67 then, since formula_68 is an integer, we can assert the sharper inequality formula_69 From this it follows that\nformula_70\nNow for any integer formula_71 the last inequality above implies\nformula_72\nTherefore, in the case formula_73 such pair of integers formula_60 would violate the \"second\" inequality in the definition of a Liouville number, for some positive integer n.\nTherefore, to conclude, there is no pair of integers formula_75 with formula_76 that would qualify such an formula_55 as a Liouville number.\nHence a Liouville number cannot be rational.\nLiouville numbers and transcendence.\nNo Liouville number is algebraic. The proof of this assertion proceeds by first establishing a property of irrational algebraic numbers. This property essentially says that irrational algebraic numbers cannot be well approximated by rational numbers, where the condition for \"well approximated\" becomes more stringent for larger denominators. A Liouville number is irrational but does not have this property, so it cannot be algebraic and must be transcendental. The following lemma is usually known as Liouville's theorem (on diophantine approximation), there being several results known as Liouville's theorem.\nLemma: If formula_78 is an irrational root of an irreducible polynomial of degree formula_79 with integer coefficients, then there exists a real number formula_80 such that for all integers formula_81 with formula_82,\nformula_83\nProof of Lemma: Let formula_84 be a minimal polynomial with integer coefficients, such that formula_85.\nBy the fundamental theorem of algebra, formula_86 has at most formula_2 distinct roots.&lt;br&gt;\nTherefore, there exists formula_88 such that for all formula_89 we get formula_90.\nSince formula_86 is a minimal polynomial of formula_78 we get formula_93, and also formula_94 is continuous.&lt;br&gt;\nTherefore, by the extreme value theorem there exists formula_95 and formula_96 such that for all formula_97 we get formula_98.\nBoth conditions are satisfied for formula_99.\nNow let formula_100 be a rational number. Without loss of generality we may assume that formula_101. By the mean value theorem, there exists formula_102 such that\nformula_103\nSince formula_85 and formula_105, both sides of that equality are nonzero. In particular formula_106 and we can rearrange:\nformula_107\nLet \"r\" be a positive integer such that 1/(2\"r\") \u2264 \"A\" and define \"m\" = \"r\" + \"n\". Since \"x\" is a Liouville number, there exist integers \"a\", \"b\" with \"b\" &gt; 1 such that\n formula_108\nwhich contradicts the lemma. Hence a Liouville number cannot be algebraic, and therefore must be transcendental.\nEstablishing that a given number is a Liouville number proves that it is transcendental. However, not every transcendental number is a Liouville number. The terms in the continued fraction expansion of every Liouville number are unbounded; using a counting argument, one can then show that there must be uncountably many transcendental numbers which are not Liouville. Using the explicit continued fraction expansion of \"e\", one can show that \"e\" is an example of a transcendental number that is not Liouville. Mahler proved in 1953 that \u03c0 is another such example.\nUncountability.\nConsider the number\n3.1400010000000000000000050000...\n3.14(3 zeros)1(17 zeros)5(95 zeros)9(599 zeros)2(4319 zeros)6...\nwhere the digits are zero except in positions \"n\"! where the digit equals the \"n\"th digit following the decimal point in the decimal expansion of\u00a0\u03c0.\nAs shown in the section on the existence of Liouville numbers, this number, as well as any other non-terminating decimal with its non-zero digits similarly situated, satisfies the definition of a Liouville number. Since the set of all sequences of non-null digits has the cardinality of the continuum, the same is true of the set of all Liouville numbers.\nMoreover, the Liouville numbers form a dense subset of the set of real numbers.\nLiouville numbers and measure.\nFrom the point of view of measure theory, the set of all Liouville numbers formula_109 is small. More precisely, its Lebesgue measure, formula_110, is zero. The proof given follows some ideas by John C. Oxtoby.\nFor positive integers formula_111 and formula_112 set:\nformula_113\nthen\nformula_114\nObserve that for each positive integer formula_115 and formula_116, then\nformula_117\nSince\n formula_118\nand formula_111 then\n formula_120\nNow\nformula_121\nand it follows that for each positive integer formula_122, formula_123 has Lebesgue measure zero. Consequently, so has formula_109.\nIn contrast, the Lebesgue measure of the set of \"all\" real transcendental numbers is infinite (since the set of algebraic numbers is a null set).\nOne could show even more - the set of Liouville numbers has Hausdorff dimension 0 (a property strictly stronger than having Lebesgue measure 0).\nStructure of the set of Liouville numbers.\nFor each positive integer n, set\nformula_125\nThe set of all Liouville numbers can thus be written as\nformula_126\nEach formula_127 is an open set; as its closure contains all rationals (the formula_128 from each punctured interval), it is also a dense subset of real line. Since it is the intersection of countably many such open dense sets, L is comeagre, that is to say, it is a \"dense\" G\u03b4 set.\nIrrationality measure.\nThe Liouville\u2013Roth irrationality measure (irrationality exponent, approximation exponent, or Liouville\u2013Roth constant) of a real number formula_1 is a measure of how \"closely\" it can be approximated by rationals. It is defined by adapting the definition of Liouville numbers: instead of requiring the existence of a sequence of pairs formula_3 that make the inequality hold for each formula_2\u2014a sequence which necessarily contains infinitely many distinct pairs\u2014the irrationality exponent formula_132 is defined to be the supremum of the set of formula_2 for which such an infinite sequence exists, that is, the set of formula_2 such that formula_135 is satisfied by an infinite number of integer pairs formula_3 with formula_82. For any value formula_138, the infinite set of all rationals formula_28 satisfying the above inequality yields good approximations of formula_1. Conversely, if formula_141, then there are at most finitely many formula_3 with formula_82 that satisfy the inequality. If formula_1 is a Liouville number then formula_145.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50965", "revid": "21203279", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50965", "title": "Crane", "text": "Crane or cranes may refer to:\nCommon meanings.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "50967", "revid": "119438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50967", "title": "DASD (disambiguation)", "text": "DASD may refer to:\nEducation.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "50968", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50968", "title": "Brunswick", "text": "Brunswick is the historical English name for the German city of Braunschweig (Low German: \"Brunswiek\", Braunschweig dialect: \"Bronswiek\").\nBrunswick may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "50969", "revid": "47737263", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50969", "title": "List of computing and IT abbreviations", "text": "This is a list of computing and IT acronyms, initialisms and abbreviations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"TOC top/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;* 0\u20139\n0\u20139.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nA.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nB.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nD.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nE.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nF.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nG.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nH.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nI.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nJ.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nK.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nL.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nM.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nN.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nO.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nP.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nQ.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nR.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nS.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nT.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nU.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nV.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nW.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nX.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nY.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nZ.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50972", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50972", "title": "Grenoble", "text": "Prefecture and commune in Auvergne-Rh\u00f4ne-Alpes, France\n \nGrenoble ( ; ; or ; or ) is the prefecture and largest city of the Is\u00e8re department in the Auvergne-Rh\u00f4ne-Alpes region of southeastern France. It was the capital of the Dauphin\u00e9 historical province and lies where the river Drac flows into the Is\u00e8re at the foot of the French Alps.\nThe population of the commune of Grenoble was 158,198 as of 2019, while the population of the Grenoble metropolitan area (French: or ) was 714,799 which makes it the largest metropolis in the Alps, ahead of Innsbruck and Bolzano. A significant European scientific centre, the city advertises itself as the \"Capital of the Alps\", due to its size and its proximity to the mountains. The many suburban communes that make up the rest of the metropolitan area include four with populations exceeding 20,000: Saint-Martin-d'H\u00e8res, \u00c9chirolles, Fontaine and Voiron.\nGrenoble's history goes back over 2,000 years, to a time when it was a village of the Allobroges Gallic tribe. It became the capital of the Dauphin\u00e9 in the 11th century. This status, consolidated by the annexation to France, allowed it to develop its economy. Grenoble then became a parliamentary and military city, close to the border with Savoy, which at the time was part of the Holy Roman Empire. Industrial development increased the prominence of Grenoble through several periods of economic expansion over the last three centuries. This started with a booming glove industry in the 18th and 19th centuries, continued with the development of a strong hydropower industry in the late 19th to early 20th centuries, and ended with a post-World War II economic boom symbolized by the holding of the X\u00a0Olympic Winter Games in 1968.\nThe city has grown to be one of Europe's most important research, technology and innovation centres, with one in five inhabitants working directly in these fields. Grenoble is classified as a global city with the ranking of \"sufficiency\" by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network. The city held the title of European Green Capital in 2022.\nHistory.\nAntiquity.\nThe first references to what is now Grenoble date back to 43\u00a0BC. Cularo was at that time a village of the Allobroges Gallic tribe, near a bridge across the Is\u00e8re. Three centuries later and with insecurity rising in the late Roman empire, a strong wall was built around the small town in 286\u00a0AD.\nThe Emperor Gratian visited Cularo and, touched by the people's welcome, made the village a Roman city. In honour of this, Cularo was renamed Gratianopolis (\"city of Gratian\") in 381. Through regular historical sound shifts, this later became \"Graignovol\" during the Middle Ages, and this then became \"Grenoble\".\nChristianity spread to the region during the 4th century, and the diocese of Grenoble was founded in 377\u00a0AD. From that time on, the bishops exercised significant political power over the city. Until the French Revolution, they styled themselves the \"bishops and princes of Grenoble\".\nMiddle Ages.\nAfter the collapse of the Roman Empire, the city became part of the first Burgundian kingdom in the 5th century and of the later Kingdom of Burgundy until 1032, when it was integrated into the Holy Roman Empire. The Burgundian rule was interrupted between 942 and 970 by Arab rule based in Fraxinet.\nGrenoble grew significantly in the 11th century when the Counts of Albon chose the city as the capital of their territories. Their possessions at the time were a patchwork of several territories sprawled across the region, and the central position of Grenoble allowed the Counts to strengthen their authority. When they later adopted the title of \"Dauphins\", Grenoble became the capital of the State of Dauphin\u00e9.\nDespite their status, the Counts had to share authority over the city with the Bishop of Grenoble. One of the most famous of those was Saint Hugh. Under his rule, the city's bridge was rebuilt, and a regular and leper hospital was built.\nThe inhabitants of Grenoble took advantage of the conflicts between the Counts and the bishops and obtained the recognition of a Charter of Customs that guaranteed their rights. That charter was confirmed by Kings Louis XI in 1447 and Francis\u00a0I in 1541.\nIn 1336, the last Dauphin Humbert\u00a0II founded a court of justice, the Conseil delphinal, which settled at Grenoble in 1340. He also established the University of Grenoble in 1339. Without an heir and deep into debt, Humbert sold his state to France in 1349, on the condition that the heir to the French crown used the title of \"Dauphin\". The first one, the future Charles\u00a0V, spent nine months in Grenoble. The city remained the capital of the Dauphin\u00e9, henceforth a province of France, and the Estates of Dauphin\u00e9 were created.\nThe only Dauphin who governed his province was the future Louis\u00a0XI, whose \"reign\" lasted from 1447 to 1456. It was only under his rule that Dauphin\u00e9 properly joined the Kingdom of France. The Old Conseil Delphinal became a Parlement (the third in France after the Parliaments of Paris and Toulouse), strengthening the status of Grenoble as a Provincial capital. He also ordered the construction of the Palais du Parlement (finished under Francis\u00a0I) and ensured that the Bishop pledged allegiance, thus unifying the political control of the city.\nAt that time, Grenoble was a crossroads between Vienne, Geneva, Italy, and Savoy. It was the industrial centre of the Dauphin\u00e9 and the province's biggest city, but a rather small one.\nRenaissance.\nOwing to Grenoble's geographical situation, French troops were garrisoned in the city and its region during the Italian Wars. Charles\u00a0VIII, Louis\u00a0XII, and Francis\u00a0I went several times to Grenoble. Its people consequently had to suffer from the exactions of the soldiers.\nThe nobility of the region took part in various battles (Marignano, Pavia) and in doing so gained significant prestige. The best-known of its members was Bayard, \"the knight without fear and beyond reproach\".\nGrenoble suffered as a result of the French Wars of Religion. The Dauphin\u00e9 was indeed an important settlement for Protestants and therefore experienced several conflicts. The baron des Adrets, the leader of the Huguenots, pillaged the Cathedral of Grenoble and destroyed the tombs of the former Dauphins.\nIn August 1575, Lesdigui\u00e8res became the new leader of the Protestants and, thanks to the accession of Henry\u00a0IV to the throne of France, allied himself with the governor and the lieutenant general of the Dauphin\u00e9. But this alliance did not bring an end to the conflicts. Indeed, a Catholic movement, the \"Ligue\", which took Grenoble in December 1590, refused to make peace. After months of assaults, Lesdigui\u00e8res defeated the Ligue and took back Grenoble. He became the leader of the entire province.\nLesdigui\u00e8res became the lieutenant-general of the Dauphin\u00e9 and administered the Province from 1591 to 1626. He began the construction of the Bastille to protect the city and ordered the construction of new walls, increasing the city's size. He also constructed the H\u00f4tel Lesdigui\u00e8res, built new fountains, and dug sewers.\nIn 1689, the bishop \u00c9tienne Le Camus launched the construction of Saint-Louis Church.\nFrom Louis XIV to the French Revolution.\nThe revocation of the Edict of Nantes by Louis XIV caused the departure of 2,000 Protestants from Grenoble, weakening the city's economy. However, it also weakened the competing glove industry of Grasse, leaving the glove factories of Grenoble without any competition. This allowed a stronger economic development for the city during the 18th century. At the beginning of that century, only 12 glovers made 15,000 dozen gloves each year; by 1787, 64 glovers made 160,000 dozen gloves each year.\nThe city gained some notoriety on 7 June 1788 when the townspeople assaulted troops of Louis XVI in the \"Day of the Tiles\". The people attacked the royal troops to prevent an expulsion of the notables of the city, which would have seriously endangered the economic prosperity of Grenoble. Following these events, the Assembly of Vizille took place. Its members organized the meeting of the old Estates General, thus beginning the French Revolution. During the Revolution, Grenoble was represented in Paris by two illustrious notables, Jean Joseph Mounier and Antoine Barnave.\nIn 1790, the Dauphin\u00e9 was divided into three departments, and Grenoble became the \"chef-lieu\" of the Is\u00e8re department. Only two refractory priests were executed at Grenoble during the Reign of Terror. Pope Pius\u00a0VI, prisoner of France, spent two days at Grenoble in 1799 before going to Valence where he died at 81 six weeks after his arrival.\n19th century.\nThe establishment of the Empire was overwhelmingly approved (in Is\u00e8re, the results showed 82,084 yes and only 12 no). Grenoble held for the second time a prisoner Pope in 1809, when Pius\u00a0VII spent 10\u00a0days in the city en route to his exile in Fontainebleau.\nIn 1813, Grenoble was under threat from the Austrian army, which invaded Switzerland and Savoy. The well-defended city contained the Austrian attacks, and the French army defeated the Austrians, forcing them to withdraw at Geneva. However, the later invasion of France in 1814 resulted in the capitulation of the troops and the occupation of the city.\nDuring his return from the island of Elba in 1815, Napoleon took a road that led him near Grenoble at Laffrey. There he met the Royalist R\u00e9giment d'Angoul\u00eame (former 5th) of Louis\u00a0XVIII's Royal Army. Napoleon stepped toward the soldiers and said these famous words: \"If there is among you a soldier who wants to kill his Emperor, here I am.\" The soldiers all joined his cause. After that, Napoleon was acclaimed at Grenoble and General Jean Gabriel Marchand could not prevent Napoleon from entering the city through the Bonne gate. He said later: \"From Cannes to Grenoble, I still was an adventurer; in that last city, I came back a sovereign\". But after the defeat of Waterloo, the region suffered from a new invasion of Austrian and Sardinian troops.\nThe 19th century saw significant industrial development of Grenoble. The glove factories reached their Golden Age, and their products were exported to the United States, the United Kingdom, and Russia.\nGeneral Haxo transformed the Bastille fortress, which took on its present aspect between 1824 and 1848. The Second Empire saw the construction of the French railway network, and the first trains arrived at Grenoble in 1858. Shortly thereafter Grenoble experienced widespread destruction by extensive flooding in 1859.\nIn 1869, engineer Aristide Berg\u00e8s played a major role in industrializing hydroelectricity production. With the development of his paper mills, he accelerated the economic development of the Gr\u00e9sivaudan valley and Grenoble.\nOn 4 August 1897, a stone and bronze fountain was inaugurated in Grenoble to commemorate the pre-revolutionary events of June 1788. Built by the sculptor Henri Ding, the Fountain of the Three Orders, which represents three characters, is located on Place Notre-Dame. People in Grenoble interpret these characters as follows: \"Is it raining?\" inquires the third estate; \"Please heaven it had rained\", lament the clergy; and \"It will rain\", proclaims the nobility.\n20th century.\nWorld War\u00a0I accelerated Grenoble's economic development. To sustain the war effort, new hydroelectric industries developed along the various rivers of the region, and several existing companies moved into the armaments industry (for example in Livet-et-Gavet). Electrochemical factories were also established in the area surrounding Grenoble, initially to produce chemical weapons. This development resulted in significant immigration to Grenoble, particularly from Italian workers who settled in the Saint-Laurent neighborhood.\nThe economic development of the city was highlighted by the organization of the International Exhibition of Hydropower and Tourism in 1925, which was visited by more than 1\u00a0million people. The organization of this exhibition forced the military to remove the old city walls and allowed the expansion of the city to the south. This exhibition also highlighted the city's hydropower industry and the region's tourist attractions.\nThe site of the exhibition became an urban park in 1926, named Parc Paul Mistral after the death of the mayor in 1932. The only building of this exhibition remaining in the park is the crumbling Tour Perret, which has been closed to the public since 1960 due to its very poor state of maintenance.\nWorld War II.\nDuring World War II, at the Battle of France, the German invasion was stopped near Grenoble at Voreppe by the forces of General Cartier. The French forces resisted until the armistice, after which Grenoble was part of the French State before an Italian occupation from 1942 to 1943. The relative tolerance of the Italian occupiers towards the Jewish populations resulted in a significant number moving to the region from the German-occupied parts of France.\nGrenoble was extremely active in the R\u00e9sistance against the occupation. Its action was symbolized by figures such as Eug\u00e8ne Chavant, L\u00e9on Martin, and Marie Reynoard. The University of Grenoble supported the clandestine operations and provided false documentation for young people to prevent them from being assigned to STO.\nIn September 1943, German troops occupied Grenoble, escalating the conflict with the clandestine movements. On 11 November 1943 (the anniversary of the armistice of 1918), massive strikes and demonstrations took place in front of the local collaboration offices. In response, the occupiers arrested 400 demonstrators in the streets. On 13 November, the resistance blew up the artillery at the Polygon, which was a psychological shock for an enemy who then intensified the repression. On 25 November, the occupiers killed 11 members of the R\u00e9sistance organizations of Grenoble. This violent crackdown was nicknamed \"Grenoble's Saint-Bartholomew\". From these events, Grenoble was styled by the Free French Forces the title of \"Capital of the Maquis\" on the antennas of the BBC.\nThis event only intensified the activities of Grenoble's resistance movements. The Germans could not prevent the destruction of their new arsenal on 2 December at the Bonne Barracks. After the Normandy landing, resistance operations reached their peak, with numerous attacks considerably hampering the activity of German troops. With the landing in Provence, German troops evacuated the city on 22 August 1944. On 5 November 1944, General Charles de Gaulle came to Grenoble and bestowed on the city the \"Compagnon de la Lib\u00e9ration\" to recognise \"a heroic city at the peak of the French resistance and combat for the liberation\".\nPost-war.\nIn 1955, future physics Nobel Prize laureate Louis N\u00e9el created the Grenoble Center for Nuclear Studies (CENG), resulting in the birth of the Grenoble model, a combination of research and industry. The first stone was laid in December 1956.\nIn 1968, Grenoble hosted the X Olympic Winter Games. This event helped modernize the city with the development of infrastructure such as an airport, motorways, the new H\u00f4tel de Ville (town hall), and a new train station. It also helped the development of ski resorts like Chamrousse, Les Deux Alpes, and Villard-de-Lans.\nSince 2017, anarchist movements have been behind a wave of arson attacks in Grenoble. During the last week of August 2023, a police operation was carried out in the Saint-Bruno district of Grenoble, after the city experienced a new series of gangland killings during the summer. Numerous recurring security problems were observed in the immediate vicinity of Place Saint-Bruno and Cours Berriat, particularly related to drug trafficking and arms trafficking.\nGeography.\nGrenoble is surrounded by mountains. To the north lies the Chartreuse, to the south and west the Vercors, and to the east the Belledonne range. Grenoble is regarded as the capital of the French Alps. It is the centre of the Grenoble urban unit (agglomeration).\nExcept for a few dozen houses on the slopes of the Bastille hill of Chartreuse, Grenoble is exclusively built on the alluvial plain of the rivers Is\u00e8re and Drac at an altitude of . As a result, the city itself is extremely flat. Mountain sports are an important tourist attraction in summer and winter. Twenty large and small ski resorts surround the city, the nearest being Le Sappey-en-Chartreuse, which is about 15 minutes away by car.\nHistorically, Grenoble and the surrounding areas were heavy industry and mining sites. Abandoned mills and factories can be found in small towns and villages, and a few have been converted to tourist attractions, such as the coal mine at La Mure.\nClimate.\nThe climate in Grenoble depends on the data from the chosen weather station. Grenoble Airport, located northwest of the city has a range from temperate continental climate to oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: Cfb, Trewartha: Dc, Do) depending on the chosen classifications. The area contains significant seasonal differences between warm to hot summers and cool to cold winters. Both temperatures above for the summer months and winter air frosts are common.\nIn addition, the climate is much gloomier than in the Mediterranean region, although less so than in Northern France. Rainfall is quite heavy by French standards, although the number of rainy days is relatively moderate.\nAs a result of winter lows averaging below freezing, snowfall also occurs, although the Grenoble Airport area itself is too mild to sustain a snowpack all winter, unlike the surrounding mountains. The record low of decisively indicates the continental influence, being colder than records in typical maritime climates. Winter nights are also colder than in all other French lowland areas.\nThe Grenoble metropolitan area experiences two different microclimates: one more windy and cold to the west, the other, on the contrary, not very windy and warmer to the east.\nHowever, the city of Grenoble features a humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen: Cfa) with no dry season. Although the record is incomplete, the newer station will meet the humid subtropical classification if maintained for the required 30-year period.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUrbanism and architecture.\nThe Bouchayer-Viallet site is a powerful symbol of Grenoble's industrial past. This former factory is now converted into a dual-purpose area more closely linked to the Berriat neighbourhood. Innovative business activities as Apple Inc. co-exist with housing, sporting facilities, contemporary music venue and arts centres as Le Magasin. At the entrance to the Bouchayer-Viallet site, Square des Fusill\u00e9s has been redeveloped and extended taking over an old car park, to facilitate access from the tramway stop and Cours Berriat.\nRedevelopment of the former De Bonne barracks was an important step in the drive to launch sustainable housing in France. In 2009, the site of De Bonne was distinguished as the best eco-neighborhood in France. A shopping mall contains 53 shops arranged around an inner concourse, with one side opening onto the park and the other connecting to the town.\nMain sights.\nLa Bastille.\nThe Bastille, an ancient series of fortifications on the mountainside, overlooks Grenoble on the northern side and is visible from many points in the city. The Bastille is one of Grenoble's most visited tourist attractions and provides a good vantage point over both the town below and the surrounding mountains.\nThe Bastille fort was begun in the Middle Ages, and later centuries saw extensive additions, including a semi-underground defense network. The Bastille has been credited as the most extensive example of early 18th-century fortifications in all of France. It then held an important strategic point on the French Alpine frontier with the Kingdom of Sardinia.\nThe first cable transport system, installed on the Bastille in 1875, was built by the Porte de France Cement Company for freight. This cable transport system connected a quarry on Mount Jalla, just over the Bastille, and Grenoble. It was abandoned in the early 20th century.\nSince 1934, the Bastille has been the destination of the \"Grenoble-Bastille cable car\". This system of mostly transparent egg-shaped cable cars known to locals as \"Les Bulles\" (the bubbles) provides the occupants with an excellent view over the Is\u00e8re. At the top are two restaurants and installed in the casemates of the fort itself since June 2006, the Bastille Art Centre allows visitors to see contemporary art exhibitions. There is also a small military museum on mountain troops (\"Mus\u00e9e des troupes de montagne\") and, since 2000, a memorial to the mountain troops (\"M\u00e9morial national des troupes de montagne\") further along the road, on top of the hill.\nPalace of the Parliament of Dauphin\u00e9.\nThis renaissance palace was constructed at the Place Saint Andr\u00e9 around 1500 and extended in 1539. It was the location of the Parlement of Dauphin\u00e9 until the French Revolution. It then became the Grenoble courthouse, until the courts were moved to a modern building in 2002. The left wing of the palace was extended in 1897. The front of the former seat of the nearby Dauphin\u00e9 Parlement combines elements from a gothic chapel and a Renaissance fa\u00e7ade.\nThe building now belongs to the Is\u00e8re Council (Conseil G\u00e9n\u00e9ral de l'Is\u00e8re). An ongoing renovation project will give this building a new life whilst preserving its patrimonial character and adding a modern touch.\nMuseum of Grenoble.\nThe city's most prized museum, the Museum of Grenoble (\"Mus\u00e9e de Grenoble\"), welcomes visitors a year. It is primarily renowned for its extensive paintings collection, which covers Western paintings from the Middle Ages to the 21st century. In the early 20th century, the Museum of Grenoble became the first French museum to open its collections to modern art, and its collection of modern and contemporary art has grown to become one of the largest in Europe. The painting holdings include works by painters such as Veronese, Rubens, Zurbar\u00e1n, Ingres, Delacroix, Renoir, Gauguin, Signac, Monet, Matisse, Picasso, Kandinsky, Joan Mir\u00f3, Paul Klee, Giorgio de Chirico and Andy Warhol. The museum also presents a few Egyptian antiquities as well as Greek and Roman artifacts. The Sculpture collection features works by Auguste Rodin, Matisse, Alberto Giacometti and Alexander Calder. In April 2010, the \"prophetess of Antinoe\", a 6th-century mummy discovered in 1907 in the Coptic necropolis of Antinoe in Middle Egypt, returned to the Museum of Grenoble, after more than fifty years of absence and extensive restoration.\nArchaeological museums.\nSituated on the right bank of the Is\u00e8re, on Place Saint-Laurent, the Grenoble Archaeological Museum presents the archaeological excavations done on its location. The vestiges date back to the 3rd century AD and provide a timeline of the history of Christianity in the region. The museum is situated below a 12th-century Benedictine church, under which Jacques Joseph Champollion-Figeac, brother of famed egyptologist Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Champollion, discovered a 6th-century AD church in 1803. It was one of the first classified monuments in France thanks to the intervention of Prosper M\u00e9rim\u00e9e, historic monument inspector. Systematic excavations were conducted from 1978 to 2011, as part of a regional research program on the evolution of churches during the Middle Ages. After eight years of work, the museum reopened on 6 May 2011.\nThe Mus\u00e9e de l'Ancien \u00c9v\u00each\u00e9 is the second archaeological museum in the city and is located near the Grenoble Cathedral. Installed in 1998, it houses the first baptistery of the city.\nThe Grenoble town hall hosts a bust of Stendhal by sculptor Pierre Charles Lenoir.\nEducation and science.\nSecondary level.\nThe large community of both foreign students and foreign researchers prompted the creation of an international school. The Cit\u00e9 Scolaire Internationale Europole (CSI Europole) was formerly housed within the \"Lyc\u00e9e Stendhal\" across from the \"Maison du Tourisme\", but later moved to its own building in the Europole district. In the centre of the city, two high schools have provided education to the is\u00e9rois for more than three centuries. The oldest one, the Lyc\u00e9e Stendhal, was founded in 1651 as a Jesuit College. An astronomical and astrological sundial created in the college's main building in 1673 can still be visited today. The second-oldest higher education establishment in Grenoble is the Lyc\u00e9e Champollion, completed in 1887 to offer an excellent education to both high school students and students of preparatory classes.\nHigher education.\nThe city is an important university centre with over 54,000 students in 2013, of whom 16% arrive from abroad.\nIn a 1339 pontificial bull, Pope Benedict XII commissioned the establishment of the University of Grenoble.\nIn 1965, the university mostly relocated from downtown to a suburban main campus outside of the city in Saint Martin d'H\u00e8res (with some parts in Gi\u00e8res). However, smaller campuses remain both downtown and in the northwestern part of the city known as the \"Polygone Scientifique\" (\"Scientific Polygon\").\nFrom 1970 to 2015, the university was divided into four separate institutions sharing the campus grounds, some buildings and laboratories, and even part of their administration:\nThe first three of those merged back on 1 January 2016 to form the , and the last one joined them on 1 January 2020.\nCampuses are also located in Grenoble for:\nScience and engineering.\nGrenoble is a major scientific centre, especially in the fields of physics, computer science, and applied mathematics: Universite Joseph Fourier (UJF) is one of the leading French scientific universities while the Grenoble Institute of Technology trains more than 5,000 engineers every year in key technology disciplines. Grenoble's high-tech expertise is organized mainly around three domains: information technology, biotechnologies, and new technologies of energy.\nMany fundamental and applied scientific research laboratories are conjointly managed by Joseph Fourier University, Grenoble Institute of Technology, and the French \"National Centre for Scientific Research\" (CNRS). Numerous other scientific laboratories are managed independently or in collaboration with the CNRS and the French \"National Institute for Research in Computer Science and Control\" (INRIA).\nOther research centres in or near Grenoble include the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF), the Institut Laue-Langevin (ILL), the European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), the Institut de radioastronomie millim\u00e9trique, one of the main research facilities of the Commissariat \u00e0 l'\u00c9nergie Atomique (Nuclear Energy Commission, CEA), the LNCMI and the European branch of Xerox Research (whose most notable center was PARC). and the recent development of Minatec, a centre for innovation in micro- and nano-technology, only increases Grenoble's position as a European scientific centre. Biotechnologies are also well represented in the Grenoble region with the molecular biology research center BioM\u00e9rieux, the Clinatec center, the regional center NanoBio and many ramifications of the global competitiveness cluster Lyonbiop\u00f4le.\nMeanwhile, Grenoble has large laboratories related to space and to the understanding and observation of the universe as the Institut de radioastronomie millim\u00e9trique, the Institut de plan\u00e9tologie et d'astrophysique de Grenoble, the Laboratoire de physique subatomique et de cosmologie de Grenoble, the Institut N\u00e9el but also to a lesser extent the Institut des sciences de la Terre (part of the Observatoire des Sciences de l'Univers de Grenoble).\nIn order to foster this technological cluster university institutions and research organizations united to create the https:// (Grenoble Innovation for Advanced New Technologies) Campus with the aim at becoming one of the world's top campuses in research (CEA, CNRS), higher education (INP-UGA, Grenoble Ecole de Management), and high tech.\nThe city benefits from the highest concentration of strategic jobs in France after Paris, with 14% of the employments, 35,186 jobs, 45% of which specialized in design and research. Grenoble is also the largest research center in France after Paris with 22,800 jobs (11,800 in public research, 7,500 in private research and 3,500 PhD students).\nGrenoble is also renowned for the excellence of its academic research in humanities and political sciences. Its universities, alongside public scientific institutions, host some of the largest research centres in France (in fields such as political science, urban planning or the sociology of organizations).\nKnowledge and innovation community.\nGrenoble is one of the co-location centres of the European Institute of Innovation and Technology's Knowledge and Innovation Communities for sustainable energy.\nEconomy.\nIndustry occupies a large part of the local economy. High-tech industries have a significant presence, especially in the field of semiconductors, electronics, and biotechnology. STMicroelectronics, Schneider Electric and Soitec have major manufacturing and R&amp;D facilities. Traditional industries in fields such as heavy equipment manufacturing and chemistry are still present and include Caterpillar, GE Renewable Energy, and Arkema.\nThe town was once famous for glove manufacturing, for which Xavier Jouvin introduced an innovative technique in the 19th century. A few small companies continue to produce gloves for a very high-end market.\nCompanies.\nIn 2011, the largest employers in the Grenoble metropolitan area were:\nThe presence of companies such as HP or Caterpillar in the area has drawn many American and British workers to Grenoble, especially in the surrounding mountain villages. The region has the second largest English-speaking community in France, after Paris. That community has an English-speaking Church and supports the International School. Many of these Americans, British, Australians etc. go to Grenoble with the intention of returning home after some time but the mountains and general lifestyle often keep them there. Some choose to put their children in the international school \"cit\u00e9 internationale\", while the \"American School of Grenoble\" is the alternative for those who prefer to have the core curriculum in English. With numerous associations like Open House, this large English-speaking population organizes family events making life in Grenoble harder to turn away from.\nPublisher Gl\u00e9nat has its head office in Grenoble. Inovall\u00e9e is a science park with about 12,000 jobs located at Meylan and Montbonnot-Saint-Martin near Grenoble.\nMedia.\nt\u00e9l\u00e9Grenoble Is\u00e8re is the local TV channel with France 3 Alpes. The local newspaper is \"Le Dauphin\u00e9 lib\u00e9r\u00e9\".\nSport.\nGrenoble hosted the 1968 Winter Olympics. The city is surrounded by ski resorts nestled in the surrounding mountains. Stade Lesdigui\u00e8res is located in Grenoble and has been the venue for international rugby league and rugby union games.\nGrenoble is the home of first rugby union, FC\u00a0Grenoble, and ice hockey teams, Br\u00fbleurs de loups, and a second-tier football team, Grenoble Foot\u00a038.\nThe abundance of natural sites around Grenoble as well as the particular influence of mountaineering practices and history make many Grenoble inhabitants very fond of sports and outdoor activities (e.g.,\u00a0hiking, mountain biking, backcountry skiing, rock climbing, and paragliding). The Tour de France cycling race regularly passes through the city.\nTransport.\nA comprehensive bus and tram service operates 26 bus routes and five tram lines. It serves much of greater Grenoble, while a new cable car system known as the M\u00e9troc\u00e2ble is considered for construction. Being essentially flat, Grenoble is also a bicycle-friendly city.\nThe Gare de Grenoble is served by the TGV rail network, with frequent high-speed services (3 hours) to and from Paris-Gare de Lyon, usually with a stop at Lyon Saint-Exup\u00e9ry Airport. While Grenoble is not directly on any high-speed line, TGVs can run at reduced speeds on the classic network and enable such connections. Local rail services connect Grenoble with Lyon, and less frequently to Geneva, to Valence, and to destinations to the south. Valence and Lyon to the west provides connections with TGV services along the Rh\u00f4ne Valley. Rail and road connections to the south are less developed.\nGrenoble can be accessed by air from Grenoble-Is\u00e8re Airport, Lyon Saint-Exup\u00e9ry Airport and Geneva International Airport, with the airport bus connections being most frequent to Lyon Saint-Exup\u00e9ry.\nHighways link Grenoble to the other major cities in the area including the A48\u00a0autoroute to the northwest toward Lyon, the A49 to the southwest toward the Rhone valley via Valence, the A41 to the northeast toward Chamb\u00e9ry, the Alps, and Italy and Switzerland.\nA partial ring road around the south of the city, the Rocade Sud, connects the motorway arriving from the northwest (A48) with that arriving from the northeast (A41). A project to complete the ring road, with a tunnel under the Bastille as part of the likely routes, was rejected after its environmental impact studies.\nFrom 2014 to 2017, the city of Grenoble tested the rental of seventy I-Road electric vehicles.\nIn 2016, the speed limit was lowered to on 80% of the streets of Grenoble and forty-two neighboring municipalities, to both improve safety and reduce pollution levels. The limit, however, remains on the main arteries.\nCulture.\nGrenoble hosts several festivals: the D\u00e9tours de Babel in March, the Open Air Short Film Festival in early July, and the \"Cabaret Frapp\u00e9\" music festival at the end of July.\nThe Summum is the biggest concert hall in Grenoble, and the most famous artists produce there. Another big hall, \"Le grand angle\", is located nearby in Voiron. Smaller halls in the city include the \"Salle Olivier Messiaen\" in the Minim Monastery.\nThe main cultural center of the city is called MC2 (for \"Maison de la culture, version 2\"), which hosts music, theater, and dance performances. The Conservatory of Grenoble is founded in 1935.\nThere are several theaters in Grenoble, the main one being Grenoble Municipal Theatre (\"Th\u00e9atre de Grenoble\"). Others are the \"Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de Cr\u00e9ation\", the \"Th\u00e9\u00e2tre Pr\u00e9mol\", and the \"Th\u00e9\u00e2tre 145\". Grenoble also hosts Upstage Productions, which performs once a year through an exclusively English speaking troupe.\nThere are two main art centres in Grenoble: the \"Centre national d'Art contemporain\" (also called \"Le Magasin\") and the \"Centre d'art Bastille\".\nGrenoble is known for its walnuts, Noix de Grenoble which enjoy an \"appellation\" of controlled origin.\nThe town also hosts a well-known comics publisher, Gl\u00e9nat.\nInternational relations.\nAfter World War I, one street in the centre of Smederevska Palanka (Serbia) was named French street https:// and one street in Grenoble was named https:// (Rue de Palanka). The same neighborhood also has a Belgrade Street https://.\nTwin towns and sister cities.\nGrenoble is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50973", "revid": "38167488", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50973", "title": "List of medical abbreviations", "text": "Abbreviations are used very frequently in medicine. They boost efficiency as long as they are used intelligently. The advantages of brevity should be weighed against the possibilities of obfuscation (making the communication harder for others to understand) and ambiguity (having more than one possible interpretation). Certain medical abbreviations are avoided to prevent mistakes, according to best practices (and in some cases regulatory requirements); these are flagged in the list of abbreviations used in medical prescriptions.\nOrthographic styling.\nPeriods (stops).\nPeriods (stops) are often used in styling abbreviations. Prevalent practice in medicine today is often to forgo them as unnecessary.\nPlurals.\nThe prevalent way to represent plurals for medical acronyms and initialisms is simply to affix a lowercase \"s\" (no apostrophe).\nPossessives.\nPossessive forms are not often needed, but can be formed using apostrophe + \"s\". Often the writer can also recast the sentence to avoid it.\nArrows.\nArrows may be used to indicate numerous conditions including elevation (\u2191), diminution (\u2193), and causation (\u2192, \u2190).\nPronunciation.\nPronunciation follows convention outside the medical field, in which acronyms are generally pronounced as if they were a word (\"JAMA\", \"SIDS\"), initialisms are generally pronounced as individual letters (\"DNA\", \"SSRI\"), and abbreviations generally use the expansion (\"soln.\" = \"solution\", \"sup.\" = \"superior\"). Abbreviations of weights and measures are pronounced using the expansion of the unit (\"mg\" = \"milligram\") and chemical symbols using the chemical expansion (\"NaCl\" = \"sodium chloride\").\nSome initialisms deriving from Latin may be pronounced either as letters (\"qid\" = \"cue eye dee\") or using the English expansion (\"qid\" = \"four times a day\").\nSome common medical abbreviations.\n Notation conventions\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50974", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50974", "title": "219", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 219 (CCXIX) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known in Rome as the Year of the Consulship of Antonius and Sacerdos (or, less frequently, year 972 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 219 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50980", "revid": "15934865", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50980", "title": "Computer assisted tomography", "text": ""}
{"id": "50981", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50981", "title": "906", "text": "Calendar year\nCalendar year\nYear 906 (CMVI) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nArmenia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50982", "revid": "17490333", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50982", "title": "CT scan", "text": "Medical imaging procedure\nA computed tomography scan (CT scan), formerly called computed axial tomography scan (CAT scan), is a medical imaging technique used to obtain detailed internal images of the body. The personnel that perform CT scans are called radiographers or radiology technologists.\nCT scanners use a rotating X-ray tube and a row of detectors placed in a gantry to measure X-ray attenuations by different tissues inside the body. The multiple X-ray measurements taken from different angles are then processed on a computer using tomographic reconstruction algorithms to produce tomographic (cross-sectional) images (virtual \"slices\") of a body. CT scans can be used in patients with metallic implants or pacemakers, for whom magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is contraindicated.\nSince its development in the 1970s, CT scanning has proven to be a versatile imaging technique. While CT is most prominently used in medical diagnosis, it can also be used to form images of non-living objects. The 1979 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine was awarded jointly to South African-American physicist Allan MacLeod Cormack and British electrical engineer Godfrey Hounsfield \"for the development of computer-assisted tomography\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTypes.\nOn the basis of image acquisition and procedures, various type of scanners are available in the market.\nSequential CT.\nSequential CT, also known as step-and-shoot CT, is a type of scanning method in which the CT table moves stepwise. The table increments to a particular location and then stops which is followed by the X-ray tube rotation and acquisition of a slice. The table then increments again, and another slice is taken. The table movement stops while taking slices. This results in an increased time of scanning.\nSpiral CT.\nSpinning tube, commonly called spiral CT, or helical CT, is an imaging technique in which an entire X-ray tube is spun around the central axis of the area being scanned. These are the dominant type of scanners on the market because they have been manufactured longer and offer a lower cost of production and purchase. The main limitation of this type of CT is the bulk and inertia of the equipment (X-ray tube assembly and detector array on the opposite side of the circle) which limits the speed at which the equipment can spin. Some designs use two X-ray sources and detector arrays offset by an angle, as a technique to improve temporal resolution.\nElectron beam tomography.\nElectron beam tomography (EBT) is a specific form of CT in which a large enough X-ray tube is constructed so that only the path of the electrons, travelling between the cathode and anode of the X-ray tube, are spun using deflection coils. This type had a major advantage since sweep speeds can be much faster, allowing for less blurry imaging of moving structures, such as the heart and arteries. Fewer scanners of this design have been produced when compared with spinning tube types, mainly due to the higher cost associated with building a much larger X-ray tube and detector array and limited anatomical coverage.\nDual energy CT.\nDual energy CT, also known as spectral CT, is an advancement of computed Tomography in which two energies are used to create two sets of data. A dual energy CT may employ dual source, single source with dual detector layer, single source with energy switching methods to get two different sets of data. \nCT perfusion imaging.\nCT perfusion imaging is a specific form of CT to assess flow through blood vessels whilst injecting a contrast agent. Blood flow, blood transit time, and organ blood volume, can all be calculated with reasonable sensitivity and specificity. This type of CT may be used on the heart, although sensitivity and specificity for detecting abnormalities are still lower than for other forms of CT. This may also be used on the brain, where CT perfusion imaging can often detect poor brain perfusion well before it is detected using a conventional spiral CT scan. This is better for stroke diagnosis than other CT types.\nPET CT.\nPositron emission tomography\u2013computed tomography is a hybrid CT modality which combines, in a single gantry, a positron emission tomography (PET) scanner and an X-ray computed tomography (CT) scanner, to acquire sequential images from both devices in the same session, which are combined into a single superposed (co-registered) image. Thus, functional imaging obtained by PET, which depicts the spatial distribution of metabolic or biochemical activity in the body can be more precisely aligned or correlated with anatomic imaging obtained by CT scanning.\nPET-CT gives both anatomical and functional details of an organ under examination and is helpful in detecting different type of cancers.\nMedical use.\nSince its introduction in the 1970s, CT has become an important tool in medical imaging to supplement conventional X-ray imaging and medical ultrasonography. It has more recently been used for preventive medicine or screening for disease, for example, CT colonography for people with a high risk of colon cancer, or full-motion heart scans for people with a high risk of heart disease. Several institutions offer full-body scans for the general population although this practice goes against the advice and official position of many professional organizations in the field primarily due to the radiation dose applied.\nThe use of CT scans has increased dramatically over the last two decades in many countries. An estimated 72 million scans were performed in the United States in 2007 and more than 80 million in 2015.\nHead.\nCT scanning of the head is typically used to detect infarction (stroke), tumors, calcifications, haemorrhage, and bone trauma. Of the above, hypodense (dark) structures can indicate edema and infarction, hyperdense (bright) structures indicate calcifications and haemorrhage and bone trauma can be seen as disjunction in bone windows. Tumors can be detected by the swelling and anatomical distortion they cause, or by surrounding edema. CT scanning of the head is also used in CT-guided stereotactic surgery and radiosurgery for treatment of intracranial tumors, arteriovenous malformations, and other surgically treatable conditions using a device known as the N-localizer.\nNeck.\nContrast CT is generally the initial study of choice for neck masses in adults. CT of the thyroid plays an important role in the evaluation of thyroid cancer. CT scans often incidentally find thyroid abnormalities, and so is often the preferred investigation modality for thyroid abnormalities.\nLungs.\nA CT scan can be used for detecting both acute and chronic changes in the lung parenchyma, the tissue of the lungs. It is particularly helpful because normal two-dimensional X-rays do not show such defects. A variety of techniques are used, depending on the suspected abnormality. For evaluation of chronic interstitial processes such as emphysema, and fibrosis, thin sections with high spatial frequency reconstructions are used; often scans are performed both on inspiration and expiration. This special technique is called high resolution CT that produces a sampling of the lung, and not continuous images.\nBronchial wall thickening can be seen on lung CTs and generally (but not always) implies inflammation of the bronchi.\nAn incidentally found nodule in the absence of symptoms (sometimes referred to as an incidentaloma) may raise concerns that it might represent a tumor, either benign or malignant. Perhaps persuaded by fear, patients and doctors sometimes agree to an intensive schedule of CT scans, sometimes up to every three months and beyond the recommended guidelines, in an attempt to do surveillance on the nodules. However, established guidelines advise that patients without a prior history of cancer and whose solid nodules have not grown over a two-year period are unlikely to have any malignant cancer. For this reason, and because no research provides supporting evidence that intensive surveillance gives better outcomes, and because of risks associated with having CT scans, patients should not receive CT screening in excess of those recommended by established guidelines.\nAngiography.\nComputed tomography angiography (CTA) is a type of contrast CT to visualize the arteries and veins throughout the body. This ranges from arteries serving the brain to those bringing blood to the lungs, kidneys, arms and legs. An example of this type of exam is CT pulmonary angiogram (CTPA) used to diagnose pulmonary embolism (PE). It employs computed tomography and an iodine-based contrast agent to obtain an image of the pulmonary arteries. CT scans can reduce the risk of angiography by providing clinicians with more information about the positioning and number of clots prior to the procedure. \nCardiac.\nA CT scan of the heart is performed to gain knowledge about cardiac or coronary anatomy. Traditionally, cardiac CT scans are used to detect, diagnose, or follow up coronary artery disease. More recently CT has played a key role in the fast-evolving field of transcatheter structural heart interventions, more specifically in the transcatheter repair and replacement of heart valves.\nThe main forms of cardiac CT scanning are:\nTo better visualize the anatomy, post-processing of the images is common. Most common are multiplanar reconstructions (MPR) and volume rendering. For more complex anatomies and procedures, such as heart valve interventions, a true 3D reconstruction or a 3D print is created based on these CT images to gain a deeper understanding.\nAbdomen and pelvis.\nCT is an accurate technique for diagnosis of abdominal diseases such as Crohn's disease, GIT bleeding, and diagnosis and staging of cancer, as well as follow-up after cancer treatment to assess response. It is commonly used to investigate acute abdominal pain.\nNon-contrast-enhanced CT scans are the gold standard for diagnosing kidney stone disease. They allow clinicians to estimate the size, volume, and density of stones, helping to guide further treatment; with size being especially important in predicting the time to spontaneous passage of a stone.\nAxial skeleton and extremities.\nFor the axial skeleton and extremities, CT is often used to image complex fractures, especially ones around joints, because of its ability to reconstruct the area of interest in multiple planes. Fractures, ligamentous injuries, and dislocations can easily be recognized with a 0.2\u00a0mm resolution. With modern dual-energy CT scanners, new areas of use have been established, such as aiding in the diagnosis of gout.\nBiomechanical use.\nCT is used in biomechanics to quickly reveal the geometry, anatomy, density and elastic moduli of biological tissues.\nOther uses.\nIndustrial use.\nIndustrial CT scanning (industrial computed tomography) is a process which uses X-ray equipment to produce 3D representations of components both externally and internally. Industrial CT scanning has been used in many areas of industry for internal inspection of components. Some of the key uses for CT scanning have been flaw detection, failure analysis, metrology, assembly analysis, image-based finite element methods and reverse engineering applications. CT scanning is also employed in the imaging and conservation of museum artifacts.\nAviation security.\nCT scanning has also found an application in transport security (predominantly airport security) where it is currently used in a materials analysis context for explosives detection CTX (explosive-detection device) and is also under consideration for automated baggage/parcel security scanning using computer vision based object recognition algorithms that target the detection of specific threat items based on 3D appearance (e.g. guns, knives, liquid containers). Its usage in airport security pioneered at Shannon Airport in March 2022 has ended the ban on liquids over 100\u00a0ml there, a move that Heathrow Airport plans for a full roll-out on 1 December 2022 and the TSA spent $781.2 million on an order for over 1,000 scanners, ready to go live in the summer.\nGeological use.\nX-ray CT is used in geological studies to quickly reveal materials inside a drill core. Dense minerals such as pyrite and barite appear brighter and less dense components such as clay appear dull in CT images.\nPaleontological use.\nTraditional methods of studying fossils are often destructive, such as the use of thin sections and physical preparation. X-ray CT is used in paleontology to non-destructively visualize fossils in 3D. This has many advantages. For example, we can look at fragile structures that might never otherwise be able to be studied. In addition, one can freely move around models of fossils in virtual 3D space to inspect it without damaging the fossil. \nCultural heritage use.\nX-ray CT and micro-CT can also be used for the conservation and preservation of objects of cultural heritage. For many fragile objects, direct research and observation can be damaging and can degrade the object over time. Using CT scans, conservators and researchers are able to determine the material composition of the objects they are exploring, such as the position of ink along the layers of a scroll, without any additional harm. These scans have been optimal for research focused on the workings of the Antikythera mechanism or the text hidden inside the charred outer layers of the En-Gedi Scroll. However, they are not optimal for every object subject to these kinds of research questions, as there are certain artifacts like the Herculaneum papyri in which the material composition has very little variation along the inside of the object. After scanning these objects, computational methods can be employed to examine the insides of these objects, as was the case with the virtual unwrapping of the En-Gedi scroll and the Herculaneum papyri. Micro-CT has also proved useful for analyzing more recent artifacts such as still-sealed historic correspondence that employed the technique of letterlocking (complex folding and cuts) that provided a \"tamper-evident locking mechanism\". Further examples of use cases in archaeology is imaging the contents of sarcophagi or ceramics.\nRecently, CWI in Amsterdam has collaborated with Rijksmuseum to investigate art object inside details in the framework called IntACT.\nMicroorganism research.\nVaried types of fungus can degrade wood to different degrees, one Belgium research group has used X-ray CT 3 dimension with sub-micron resolution unveiled fungi can penetrate micropores of 0.6 \u03bcm under certain conditions.\nTimber sawmill.\nSawmills use industrial CT scanners to detect round defects, for instance knots, to improve total value of timber productions. Most sawmills are planning to incorporate this robust detection tool to improve productivity in the long run, however initial investment cost is high.\nInterpretation of results.\nPresentation.\nThe result of a CT scan is a volume of voxels, which may be presented to a human observer by various methods, which broadly fit into the following categories:\nTechnically, all volume renderings become projections when viewed on a 2-dimensional display, making the distinction between projections and volume renderings a bit vague. The epitomes of volume rendering models feature a mix of for example coloring and shading in order to create realistic and observable representations.\nTwo-dimensional CT images are conventionally rendered so that the view is as though looking up at it from the patient's feet. Hence, the left side of the image is to the patient's right and vice versa, while anterior in the image also is the patient's anterior and vice versa. This left-right interchange corresponds to the view that physicians generally have in reality when positioned in front of patients.\nGrayscale.\nPixels in an image obtained by CT scanning are displayed in terms of relative radiodensity. The pixel itself is displayed according to the mean attenuation of the tissue(s) that it corresponds to on a scale from +3,071 (most attenuating) to \u22121,024 (least attenuating) on the Hounsfield scale. A pixel is a two dimensional unit based on the matrix size and the field of view. When the CT slice thickness is also factored in, the unit is known as a voxel, which is a three-dimensional unit. Water has an attenuation of 0 Hounsfield units (HU), while air is \u22121,000\u00a0HU, cancellous bone is typically +400\u00a0HU, and cranial bone can reach 2,000\u00a0HU. The attenuation of metallic implants depends on the atomic number of the element used: Titanium usually has an amount of +1000\u00a0HU, iron steel can completely block the X-ray and is, therefore, responsible for well-known line-artifacts in computed tomograms. Artifacts are caused by abrupt transitions between low- and high-density materials, which results in data values that exceed the dynamic range of the processing electronics.\nWindowing.\nCT data sets have a very high dynamic range which must be reduced for display or printing. This is typically done via a process of \"windowing\", which maps a range (the \"window\") of pixel values to a grayscale ramp. For example, CT images of the brain are commonly viewed with a window extending from 0 HU to 80 HU. Pixel values of 0 and lower, are displayed as black; values of 80 and higher are displayed as white; values within the window are displayed as a gray intensity proportional to position within the window. The window used for display must be matched to the X-ray density of the object of interest, in order to optimize the visible detail. Window width and window level parameters are used to control the windowing of a scan.\nMultiplanar reconstruction and projections.\nMultiplanar reconstruction (MPR) is the process of converting data from one anatomical plane (usually transverse) to other planes. It can be used for thin slices as well as projections. Multiplanar reconstruction is possible as present CT scanners provide almost isotropic resolution.\nMPR is used almost in every scan. The spine is frequently examined with it. An image of the spine in axial plane can only show one vertebral bone at a time and cannot show its relation with other vertebral bones. By reformatting the data in other planes, visualization of the relative position can be achieved in sagittal and coronal plane.\nNew software allows the reconstruction of data in non-orthogonal (oblique) planes, which help in the visualization of organs which are not in orthogonal planes. It is better suited for visualization of the anatomical structure of the bronchi as they do not lie orthogonal to the direction of the scan.\nCurved-plane reconstruction (or curved planar reformation = CPR) is performed mainly for the evaluation of vessels. This type of reconstruction helps to straighten the bends in a vessel, thereby helping to visualize a whole vessel in a single image or in multiple images. After a vessel has been \"straightened\", measurements such as cross-sectional area and length can be made. This is helpful in preoperative assessment of a surgical procedure.\nFor 2D projections used in radiation therapy for quality assurance and planning of external beam radiotherapy, including digitally reconstructed radiographs, see Beam's eye view.\nVolume rendering.\nA threshold value of radiodensity is set by the operator (e.g., a level that corresponds to bone). With the help of edge detection image processing algorithms a 3D model can be constructed from the initial data and displayed on screen. Various thresholds can be used to get multiple models, each anatomical component such as muscle, bone and cartilage can be differentiated on the basis of different colours given to them. However, this mode of operation cannot show interior structures.\nSurface rendering is limited technique as it displays only the surfaces that meet a particular threshold density, and which are towards the viewer. However, In volume rendering, transparency, colours and shading are used which makes it easy to present a volume in a single image. For example, Pelvic bones could be displayed as semi-transparent, so that, even viewing at an oblique angle one part of the image does not hide another.\nImage quality.\nDose versus image quality.\nAn important issue within radiology today is how to reduce the radiation dose during CT examinations without compromising the image quality. In general, higher radiation doses result in higher-resolution images, while lower doses lead to increased image noise and unsharp images. However, increased dosage raises the adverse side effects, including the risk of radiation-induced cancer \u2013 a four-phase abdominal CT gives the same radiation dose as 300 chest X-rays. Several methods that can reduce the exposure to ionizing radiation during a CT scan exist.\nArtifacts.\nAlthough images produced by CT are generally faithful representations of the scanned volume, the technique is susceptible to a number of artifacts, such as the following:Chapters 3 and 5\nAdvantages.\nCT scanning has several advantages over traditional two-dimensional medical radiography. First, CT eliminates the superimposition of images of structures outside the area of interest. Second, CT scans have greater image resolution, enabling examination of finer details. CT can distinguish between tissues that differ in radiographic density by 1% or less. Third, CT scanning enables multiplanar reformatted imaging: scan data can be visualized in the transverse (or axial), coronal, or sagittal plane, depending on the diagnostic task.\nThe improved resolution of CT has permitted the development of new investigations. For example, CT angiography avoids the invasive insertion of a catheter. CT scanning can perform a virtual colonoscopy with greater accuracy and less discomfort for the patient than a traditional colonoscopy. Virtual colonography is far more accurate than a barium enema for detection of tumors and uses a lower radiation dose.\nCT is a moderate-to-high radiation diagnostic technique. The radiation dose for a particular examination depends on multiple factors: volume scanned, patient build, number and type of scan protocol, and desired resolution and image quality. Two helical CT scanning parameters, tube current and pitch, can be adjusted easily and have a profound effect on radiation. CT scanning is more accurate than two-dimensional radiographs in evaluating anterior interbody fusion, although they may still over-read the extent of fusion.\nAdverse effects.\nCancer.\nThe radiation used in CT scans can damage body cells, including DNA molecules, which can lead to radiation-induced cancer. The radiation doses received from CT scans is variable. Compared to the lowest dose X-ray techniques, CT scans can have 100 to 1,000 times higher dose than conventional X-rays. However, a lumbar spine X-ray has a similar dose as a head CT. Articles in the media often exaggerate the relative dose of CT by comparing the lowest-dose X-ray techniques (chest X-ray) with the highest-dose CT techniques. In general, a routine abdominal CT has a radiation dose similar to three years of average background radiation.\nLarge scale population-based studies have consistently demonstrated that low dose radiation from CT scans has impacts on cancer incidence in a variety of cancers. For example, in a large population-based Australian cohort it was found that up to 3.7% of brain cancers were caused by CT scan radiation. Some experts project that in the future, between three and five percent of all cancers would result from medical imaging. An Australian study of 10.9\u00a0million people reported that the increased incidence of cancer after CT scan exposure in this cohort was mostly due to irradiation. In this group, one in every 1,800 CT scans was followed by an excess cancer. If the lifetime risk of developing cancer is 40% then the absolute risk rises to 40.05% after a CT. The risks of CT scan radiation are especially important in patients undergoing recurrent CT scans within a short time span of one to five years.\nSome experts note that CT scans are known to be \"overused,\" and \"there is distressingly little evidence of better health outcomes associated with the current high rate of scans.\" On the other hand, a recent paper analyzing the data of patients who received high cumulative doses showed a high degree of appropriate use. This creates an important issue of cancer risk to these patients. Moreover, a highly significant finding that was previously unreported is that some patients received &gt;100 mSv dose from CT scans in a single day, which counteracts existing criticisms some investigators may have on the effects of protracted versus acute exposure.\nThere are contrarian views and the debate is ongoing. Some studies have shown that publications indicating an increased risk of cancer from typical doses of body CT scans are plagued with serious methodological limitations and several highly improbable results, concluding that no evidence indicates such low doses cause any long-term harm.\nOne study estimated that as many as 0.4% of cancers in the United States resulted from CT scans, and that this may have increased to as much as 1.5 to 2% based on the rate of CT use in 2007. Others dispute this estimate, as there is no consensus that the low levels of radiation used in CT scans cause damage. Lower radiation doses are used in many cases, such as in the investigation of renal colic.\nA person's age plays a significant role in the subsequent risk of cancer. Estimated lifetime cancer mortality risks from an abdominal CT of a one-year-old is 0.1%, or 1:1000 scans. The risk for someone who is 40 years old is half that of someone who is 20 years old with substantially less risk in the elderly. The International Commission on Radiological Protection estimates that the risk to a fetus being exposed to 10 mGy (a unit of radiation exposure) increases the rate of cancer before 20 years of age from 0.03% to 0.04% (for reference a CT pulmonary angiogram exposes a fetus to 4\u00a0mGy). A 2012 review did not find an association between medical radiation and cancer risk in children noting however the existence of limitations in the evidences over which the review is based. CT scans can be performed with different settings for lower exposure in children with most manufacturers of CT scans as of 2007 having this function built in. Furthermore, certain conditions can require children to be exposed to multiple CT scans. \nCurrent recommendations are to inform patients of the risks of CT scanning. However, employees of imaging centers tend not to communicate such risks unless patients ask.\nContrast reactions.\nIn the United States half of CT scans are contrast CTs using intravenously injected radiocontrast agents. The most common reactions from these agents are mild, including nausea, vomiting, and an itching rash. Severe life-threatening reactions may rarely occur. Overall reactions occur in 1 to 3% with nonionic contrast and 4 to 12% of people with ionic contrast. Skin rashes may appear within a week to 3% of people.\nThe old radiocontrast agents caused anaphylaxis in 1% of cases while the newer, low-osmolar agents cause reactions in 0.01\u20130.04% of cases. Death occurs in about 2 to 30 people per 1,000,000 administrations, with newer agents being safer.\nThere is a higher risk of mortality in those who are female, elderly or in poor health, usually secondary to either anaphylaxis or acute kidney injury.\nThe contrast agent may induce contrast-induced nephropathy. This occurs in 2 to 7% of people who receive these agents, with greater risk in those who have preexisting kidney failure, preexisting diabetes, or reduced intravascular volume. People with mild kidney impairment are usually advised to ensure full hydration for several hours before and after the injection. For moderate kidney failure, the use of iodinated contrast should be avoided; this may mean using an alternative technique instead of CT. Those with severe kidney failure requiring dialysis require less strict precautions, as their kidneys have so little function remaining that any further damage would not be noticeable and the dialysis will remove the contrast agent; it is normally recommended, however, to arrange dialysis as soon as possible following contrast administration to minimize any adverse effects of the contrast.\nIn addition to the use of intravenous contrast, orally administered contrast agents are frequently used when examining the abdomen. These are frequently the same as the intravenous contrast agents, merely diluted to approximately 10% of the concentration. However, oral alternatives to iodinated contrast exist, such as very dilute (0.5\u20131% w/v) barium sulfate suspensions. Dilute barium sulfate has the advantage that it does not cause allergic-type reactions or kidney failure, but cannot be used in patients with suspected bowel perforation or suspected bowel injury, as leakage of barium sulfate from damaged bowel can cause fatal peritonitis.\nSide effects from contrast agents, administered intravenously in some CT scans, might impair kidney performance in patients with kidney disease, although this risk is now believed to be lower than previously thought.\nScan dose.\nThe table reports average radiation exposures; however, there can be a wide variation in radiation doses between similar scan types, where the highest dose could be as much as 22 times higher than the lowest dose. A typical plain film X-ray involves radiation dose of 0.01 to 0.15\u00a0mGy, while a typical CT can involve 10\u201320\u00a0mGy for specific organs, and can go up to 80\u00a0mGy for certain specialized CT scans.\nFor purposes of comparison, the world average dose rate from naturally occurring sources of background radiation is 2.4\u00a0mSv per year, equal for practical purposes in this application to 2.4\u00a0mGy per year. While there is some variation, most people (99%) received less than 7\u00a0mSv per year as background radiation. Medical imaging as of 2007 accounted for half of the radiation exposure of those in the United States with CT scans making up two thirds of this amount. In the United Kingdom it accounts for 15% of radiation exposure. The average radiation dose from medical sources is \u22480.6\u00a0mSv per person globally as of 2007. Those in the nuclear industry in the United States are limited to doses of 50\u00a0mSv a year and 100\u00a0mSv every 5 years.\nLead is the main material used by radiography personnel for shielding against scattered X-rays.\nRadiation dose units.\nThe radiation dose reported in the gray or mGy unit is proportional to the amount of energy that the irradiated body part is expected to absorb, and the physical effect (such as DNA double strand breaks) on the cells' chemical bonds by X-ray radiation is proportional to that energy.\nThe sievert unit is used in the report of the effective dose. The sievert unit, in the context of CT scans, does not correspond to the actual radiation dose that the scanned body part absorbs but to another radiation dose of another scenario, the whole body absorbing the other radiation dose and the other radiation dose being of a magnitude, estimated to have the same probability to induce cancer as the CT scan. Thus, as is shown in the table above, the actual radiation that is absorbed by a scanned body part is often much larger than the effective dose suggests. A specific measure, termed the computed tomography dose index (CTDI), is commonly used as an estimate of the radiation absorbed dose for tissue within the scan region, and is automatically computed by medical CT scanners.\nThe equivalent dose is the effective dose of a case, in which the whole body would actually absorb the same radiation dose, and the sievert unit is used in its report. In the case of non-uniform radiation, or radiation given to only part of the body, which is common for CT examinations, using the local equivalent dose alone would overstate the biological risks to the entire organism.\nEffects of radiation.\nMost adverse health effects of radiation exposure may be grouped in two general categories:\nThe added lifetime risk of developing cancer by a single abdominal CT of 8 mSv is estimated to be 0.05%, or 1 one in 2,000.\nBecause of increased susceptibility of fetuses to radiation exposure, the radiation dosage of a CT scan is an important consideration in the choice of medical imaging in pregnancy.\nExcess doses.\nIn October, 2009, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) initiated an investigation of brain perfusion CT (PCT) scans, based on radiation burns caused by incorrect settings at one particular facility for this particular type of CT scan. Over 200 patients were exposed to radiation at approximately eight times the expected dose for an 18-month period; over 40% of them lost patches of hair. This event prompted a call for increased CT quality assurance programs. It was noted that \"while unnecessary radiation exposure should be avoided, a medically needed CT scan obtained with appropriate acquisition parameter has benefits that outweigh the radiation risks.\" Similar problems have been reported at other centers. These incidents are believed to be due to human error.\nProcedure.\nCT scan procedure varies according to the type of the study and the organ being imaged. The patient lies on the CT table and the centering of the table is done according to the body part. The IV line is established in case of contrast-enhanced CT. After selecting proper and rate of contrast from the pressure injector, the scout is taken to localize and plan the scan. Once the plan is selected, the contrast is given. The raw data is processed according to the study and proper windowing is done to make scans easy to diagnose.\nPreparation.\nPatient preparation may vary according to the type of scan. The general patient preparation includes.\nMechanism.\nComputed tomography operates by using an X-ray generator that rotates around the object; X-ray detectors are positioned on the opposite side of the circle from the X-ray source. As the X-rays pass through the patient, they are attenuated differently by various tissues according to the tissue density. A visual representation of the raw data obtained is called a sinogram, yet it is not sufficient for interpretation. Once the scan data has been acquired, the data must be processed using a form of tomographic reconstruction, which produces a series of cross-sectional images. These cross-sectional images are made up of small units of pixels or voxels.\nPixels in an image obtained by CT scanning are displayed in terms of relative radiodensity. The pixel itself is displayed according to the mean attenuation of the tissue(s) that it corresponds to on a scale from +3,071 (most attenuating) to \u22121,024 (least attenuating) on the Hounsfield scale. A pixel is a two dimensional unit based on the matrix size and the field of view. When the CT slice thickness is also factored in, the unit is known as a voxel, which is a three-dimensional unit.\nWater has an attenuation of 0 Hounsfield units (HU), while air is \u22121,000\u00a0HU, cancellous bone is typically +400\u00a0HU, and cranial bone can reach 2,000\u00a0HU or more (os temporale) and can cause artifacts. The attenuation of metallic implants depends on the atomic number of the element used: Titanium usually has an amount of +1000\u00a0HU, iron steel can completely extinguish the X-ray and is, therefore, responsible for well-known line-artifacts in computed tomograms. Artifacts are caused by abrupt transitions between low- and high-density materials, which results in data values that exceed the dynamic range of the processing electronics. Two-dimensional CT images are conventionally rendered so that the view is as though looking up at it from the patient's feet. Hence, the left side of the image is to the patient's right and vice versa, while anterior in the image also is the patient's anterior and vice versa. This left-right interchange corresponds to the view that physicians generally have in reality when positioned in front of patients.\nInitially, the images generated in CT scans were in the transverse (axial) anatomical plane, perpendicular to the long axis of the body. Modern scanners allow the scan data to be reformatted as images in other planes. Digital geometry processing can generate a three-dimensional image of an object inside the body from a series of two-dimensional radiographic images taken by rotation around a fixed axis. These cross-sectional images are widely used for medical diagnosis and therapy.\nContrast.\nContrast media used for X-ray CT, as well as for plain film X-ray, are called radiocontrasts. Radiocontrasts for CT are, in general, iodine-based. This is useful to highlight structures such as blood vessels that otherwise would be difficult to delineate from their surroundings. Using contrast material can also help to obtain functional information about tissues. Often, images are taken both with and without radiocontrast.\nHistory.\nThe history of X-ray computed tomography goes back to at least 1917 with the mathematical theory of the Radon transform. In October 1963, William H. Oldendorf received a U.S. patent for a \"radiant energy apparatus for investigating selected areas of interior objects obscured by dense material\". The first commercially viable CT scanner was invented by Godfrey Hounsfield in 1972.\nIt is often claimed that revenues from the sales of The Beatles' records in the 1960s helped fund the development of the first CT scanner at EMI. The first production X-ray CT machines were in fact called EMI scanners.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"tomography\" is derived from the Greek 'slice' and 'to write'. Computed tomography was originally known as the \"EMI scan\" as it was developed in the early 1970s at a research branch of EMI, a company best known today for its music and recording business. It was later known as \"computed axial tomography\" (\"CAT\" or \"CT scan\") and \"body section r\u00f6ntgenography\".\nThe term \"CAT scan\" is no longer in technical use because current CT scans enable for multiplanar reconstructions. This makes \"CT scan\" the most appropriate term, which is used by radiologists in common vernacular as well as in textbooks and scientific papers.\nIn Medical Subject Headings (MeSH), \"computed axial tomography\" was used from 1977 to 1979, but the current indexing explicitly includes \"X-ray\" in the title.\nThe term \"sinogram\" was introduced by Paul Edholm and Bertil Jacobson in 1975.\nSociety and culture.\nCampaigns.\nIn response to increased concern by the public and the ongoing progress of best practices, the Alliance for Radiation Safety in Pediatric Imaging was formed within the Society for Pediatric Radiology. In concert with the American Society of Radiologic Technologists, the American College of Radiology and the American Association of Physicists in Medicine, the Society for Pediatric Radiology developed and launched the Image Gently Campaign which is designed to maintain high-quality imaging studies while using the lowest doses and best radiation safety practices available on pediatric patients. This initiative has been endorsed and applied by a growing list of various professional medical organizations around the world and has received support and assistance from companies that manufacture equipment used in Radiology.\nFollowing upon the success of the \"Image Gently\" campaign, the American College of Radiology, the Radiological Society of North America, the American Association of Physicists in Medicine and the American Society of Radiologic Technologists have launched a similar campaign to address this issue in the adult population called \"Image Wisely\".\nThe World Health Organization and International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) of the United Nations have also been working in this area and have ongoing projects designed to broaden best practices and lower patient radiation dose.\nPrevalence.\nUse of CT has increased dramatically over the last two decades. An estimated 72\u00a0million scans were performed in the United States in 2007, accounting for close to half of the total per-capita dose rate from radiologic and nuclear medicine procedures. Of the CT scans, six to eleven percent are done in children, an increase of seven to eightfold from 1980. Similar increases have been seen in Europe and Asia. In Calgary, Canada, 12.1% of people who present to the emergency with an urgent complaint received a CT scan, most commonly either of the head or of the abdomen. The percentage who received CT, however, varied markedly by the emergency physician who saw them from 1.8% to 25%. In the emergency department in the United States, CT or MRI imaging is done in 15% of people who present with injuries as of 2007 (up from 6% in 1998).\nThe increased use of CT scans has been the greatest in two fields: screening of adults (screening CT of the lung in smokers, virtual colonoscopy, CT cardiac screening, and whole-body CT in asymptomatic patients) and CT imaging of children. Shortening of the scanning time to around 1 second, eliminating the strict need for the subject to remain still or be sedated, is one of the main reasons for the large increase in the pediatric population (especially for the diagnosis of appendicitis). As of 2007, in the United States a proportion of CT scans are performed unnecessarily. Some estimates place this number at 30%. There are a number of reasons for this including: legal concerns, financial incentives, and desire by the public. For example, some healthy people avidly pay to receive full-body CT scans as screening. In that case, it is not at all clear that the benefits outweigh the risks and costs. Deciding whether and how to treat incidentalomas is complex, radiation exposure is not negligible, and the money for the scans involves opportunity cost.\nManufacturers.\nMajor manufacturers of CT scanning devices and equipment are:\nResearch.\nPhoton-counting computed tomography is a CT technique currently under development. Typical CT scanners use energy integrating detectors; photons are measured as a voltage on a capacitor which is proportional to the X-rays detected. However, this technique is susceptible to noise and other factors which can affect the linearity of the voltage to X-ray intensity relationship. Photon counting detectors (PCDs) are still affected by noise but it does not change the measured counts of photons. PCDs have several potential advantages, including improving signal (and contrast) to noise ratios, reducing doses, improving spatial resolution, and through use of several energies, distinguishing multiple contrast agents. PCDs have only recently become feasible in CT scanners due to improvements in detector technologies that can cope with the volume and rate of data required. As of February 2016, photon counting CT is in use at three sites. Some early research has found the dose reduction potential of photon counting CT for breast imaging to be very promising. In view of recent findings of high cumulative doses to patients from recurrent CT scans, there has been a push for scanning technologies and techniques that reduce ionising radiation doses to patients to sub-milliSievert (sub-mSv in the literature) levels during the CT scan process, a goal that has been lingering.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "50983", "revid": "41087829", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50983", "title": "907", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 907 (CMVII) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50984", "revid": "50197585", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50984", "title": "908", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 908 (CMVIII) was a leap year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50985", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50985", "title": "910", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 910 (CMX) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50986", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50986", "title": "AD 911", "text": "Calendar year\n911 (CMXI) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50987", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50987", "title": "Neorealism (international relations)", "text": "Theory of international relations\nNeorealism or structural realism is a theory of international relations that emphasizes the role of power politics in international relations, sees competition and conflict as enduring features and sees limited potential for cooperation. The anarchic state of the international system means that states cannot be certain of other states' intentions and their security, thus prompting them to engage in power politics.\nIt was first outlined by Kenneth Waltz in his 1979 book \"Theory of International Politics\". Alongside neoliberalism, neorealism is one of the two most influential contemporary approaches to international relations; the two perspectives dominated international relations theory from the 1960s to the 1990s. \nNeorealism emerged from the North American discipline of political science, and reformulates the classical realist tradition of E. H. Carr, Hans Morgenthau, George Kennan, and Reinhold Niebuhr. Neorealism is subdivided into defensive and offensive neorealism.\nOrigins.\nNeorealism is an ideological departure from Hans Morgenthau's writing on classical realism. Classical realism originally explained the machinations of international politics as being based on human nature and therefore subject to the ego and emotion of world leaders. Neorealist thinkers instead propose that structural constraints\u2014not strategy, egoism, or motivation\u2014will determine behavior in international relations. John Mearsheimer made significant distinctions between his version of offensive neorealism and Morgenthau in his book titled \"The Tragedy of Great Power Politics\".\nTheory.\nStructural realism holds that the nature of the international structure is defined by its ordering principle (anarchy), units of the system (states), and by the distribution of capabilities (measured by the number of great powers within the international system), with only the last being considered an independent variable with any meaningful change over time. The anarchic ordering principle of the international structure is decentralized, meaning there is no formal central authority; every sovereign state is formally equal in this system. These states act according to the logic of egoism, meaning states seek their own interest and will not subordinate their interest to the interests of other states.\nStates are assumed at a minimum to want to ensure their own survival as this is a prerequisite to pursue other goals. This driving force of survival is the primary factor influencing their behavior and in turn ensures states develop offensive military capabilities for foreign interventionism and as a means to increase their relative power. Because states can never be certain of other states' future intentions, there is a lack of trust between states which requires them to be on guard against relative losses of power which could enable other states to threaten their survival. This lack of trust, based on uncertainty, is called the security dilemma. \nStates are deemed similar in terms of needs but not in capabilities for achieving them. The positional placement of states in terms of abilities determines the distribution of capabilities. The structural distribution of capabilities then limits cooperation among states through fears of relative gains made by other states, and the possibility of dependence on other states. The desire and relative abilities of each state to maximize relative power constrain each other, resulting in a balance of power, which shapes international relations. It also gives rise to the security dilemma that all nations face. There are two ways in which states balance power: internal balancing and external balancing. Internal balancing occurs as states grow their own capabilities by increasing economic growth and/or increasing military spending. External balancing occurs as states enter into alliances to check the power of more powerful states or alliances.\nNeorealism sees states as black boxes, as the structure of the international system is emphasized rather than the units and their unique characteristics within it as being causal.\nNeorealists contend that there are essentially three possible systems according to changes in the distribution of capabilities, defined by the number of great powers within the international system. A unipolar system contains only one great power, a bipolar system contains two great powers, and a multipolar system contains more than two great powers. Neorealists conclude that a bipolar system is more stable (less prone to great power war and systemic change) than a multipolar system because balancing can only occur through internal balancing as there are no extra great powers with which to form alliances. Because there is only internal balancing in a bipolar system, rather than external balancing, there is less opportunity for miscalculations and therefore less chance of great power war. That is a simplification and a theoretical ideal.\nNeorealists argue that processes of emulation and competition lead states to behave in the aforementioned ways. Emulation leads states to adopt the behaviors of successful states (for example, those victorious in war), whereas competition leads states to vigilantly ensure their security and survival through the best means possible. Due to the anarchic nature of the international system and the inability of states to rely on other states or organizations, states have to engage in \"self-help.\"\nFor neorealists, social norms are considered largely irrelevant. This is in contrast to some classical realists which did see norms as potentially important. Neorealists are also skeptical of the ability of international organizations to act independently in the international system and facilitate cooperation between states.\nDefensive realism.\nStructural realism has become divided into two branches, defensive and offensive realism, following the publication of Mearsheimer's \"The Tragedy of Great Power Politics\" in 2001. Waltz's original formulation of neorealism is now sometimes called defensive realism, while Mearsheimer's modification of the theory is referred to as offensive realism. Both branches agree that the structure of the system is what causes states to compete, but defensive realism posits that most states concentrate on maintaining their security (i.e. states are security maximizers), while offensive realism claims that all states seek to gain as much power as possible (i.e. states are power maximizers). A foundational study in the area of defensive realism is Robert Jervis' classic 1978 article on the \"security dilemma.\" It examines how uncertainty and the offense-defense balance may heighten or soften the security dilemma. Building on Jervis, Stephen Van Evera explores the causes of war from a defensive realist perspective.\nOffensive realism.\nOffensive realism, developed by Mearsheimer differs in the amount of power that states desire. Mearsheimer proposes that states maximize relative power ultimately aiming for regional hegemony.\nIn addition to Mearsheimer, a number of other scholars have sought to explain why states expand when opportunities to do so arise. For instance, Randall Schweller refers to states' revisionist agendas to account for their aggressive military action. Eric Labs investigates the expansion of war aims during wartime as an example of offensive behavior. Fareed Zakaria analyzes the history of US foreign relations from 1865 to 1914 and asserts that foreign interventions during this period were not motivated by worries about external threats but by a desire to expand US influence.\nScholarly debate.\nWithin realist thought.\nWhile neorealists agree that the structure of the international relations is the primary impetus in seeking security, there is disagreement among neorealist scholars as to whether states merely aim to survive or whether states want to maximize their relative power. The former represents the ideas of Kenneth Waltz, while the latter represents the ideas of John Mearsheimer and offensive realism.\nOther debates include the extent to which states balance against power (in Waltz's original neorealism and classic realism), versus the extent to which states balance against threats (as introduced in Stephen Walt's 'The Origins of Alliances' (1987)), or balance against competing interests (as introduced in Randall Schweller's 'Deadly Imbalances' (1998)). Neorealists also disagree on the effects of polarity on great-power wars, with scholars such as Dale C. Copeland and Dylan Motin arguing that historical bipolar systems have often been more violent than multipolar ones.\nWith other schools of thought.\nNeorealists conclude that because war is an effect of the anarchic structure of the international system, it is likely to continue in the future. Indeed, neorealists often argue that the ordering principle of the international system has not fundamentally changed from the time of Thucydides to the advent of nuclear warfare. The view that long-lasting peace is not likely to be achieved is described by other theorists as a largely pessimistic view of international relations. One of the main challenges to neorealist theory is the democratic peace theory and supporting research, such as the book \"Never at War\". Neorealists answer this challenge by arguing that democratic peace theorists tend to pick and choose the definition of democracy to achieve the desired empirical result. For example, the Germany of Kaiser Wilhelm II, the Dominican Republic of Juan Bosch, and the Chile of Salvador Allende are not considered to be \"democracies of the right kind\" or the conflicts do not qualify as wars according to these theorists. Furthermore, they claim several wars between democratic states have been averted only by causes other than ones covered by democratic peace theory. \nAdvocates of democratic peace theory see the spreading of democracy as helping to mitigate the effects of anarchy. With enough democracies in the world, Bruce Russett thinks that it \"may be possible in part to supersede the 'realist' principles (anarchy, the security dilemma of states) that have dominated practice ... since at least the seventeenth century.\" John Mueller believes that it is not the spreading of democracy but rather other conditions (e.g., power) that bring about democracy and peace. In consenting with Mueller's argument, Kenneth Waltz notes that \"some of the major democracies\u2014Britain in the nineteenth century and the United States in the twentieth century\u2014have been among the most powerful states of their eras.\"\nOne of the most notable schools contending with neorealist thought, aside from neoliberalism, is the constructivist school, which is often seen to disagree with the neorealist focus on power and instead emphasises a focus on ideas and identity as an explanatory point for international relations trends. Recently, however, a school of thought called the English School merges neo-realist tradition with the constructivist technique of analyzing social norms to provide an increasing scope of analysis for international relations.\nCriticism.\nNeorealism has been criticized from various directions. Other major paradigms of international relations scholarship, such as liberal and constructivist approaches have criticized neorealist scholarship in terms of theory and empirics. Within realism, classical realists and neoclassical realists have also challenged some aspects of neorealism.\nAmong the issues that neorealism has been criticized over is the neglect of domestic politics, race, gains from trade, the pacifying effects of institutions, and the relevance of regime type for foreign policy behavior. \nDavid Strang argues that neorealist predictions fail to account for transformations in sovereignty over time and across regions. These transformations in sovereignty have had implications for cooperation and competition, as polities that were recognized as sovereign have seen considerably greater stability.\nIn response to criticisms that neorealism lacks relevance for contemporary international policy and does a poor job explaining the foreign policy behavior of major powers, Charles Glaser wrote in 2003, \"this is neither surprising nor a serious problem, because scholars who use a realist lens to understand international politics can, and have, without inconsistency or contradiction also employed other theories to understand issues that fall outside realism's central focus.\"\nIn 2025, Anthony Heron proposed \u2018regional neorealism\u2019, which emerged as a theoretical framework that reinterprets neorealism through a regional lens, emphasizing geography as a primary driver of geopolitical competition and state behavior \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50988", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50988", "title": "920", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 920 (CMXX) was a leap year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nClimate.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50989", "revid": "89336", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50989", "title": "Counties of the Republic of Ireland", "text": ""}
{"id": "50990", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50990", "title": "2 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 2 BC was a common year starting on Thursday or Friday of the Julian calendar (the sources differ, see leap year error for further information) and a common year starting on Wednesday of the Proleptic Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Silvanus (or, less frequently, year 752 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 2 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nArmenia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50991", "revid": "1316842702", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50991", "title": "USS Hawes", "text": "Perry-class frigate of the US Navy\nUSS \"Hawes\" (FFG-53) is a later model guided missile frigate. She is named for Rear admiral Richard E. Hawes (1894\u20131968) who was twice decorated with the Navy Cross for submarine salvage operations.\nConstruction.\nThe contract to build \"Hawes\" was awarded to Bath Iron Works, Bath, Maine, 22 May 1981, and her keel was laid 26 August 1983. She was launched 18 February 1984; sponsored by Mrs. Ruth H. Watson, daughter of the late Rear Adm. Hawes; delivered 1 February 1985, and commissioned 9 February 1985.\nService history.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the summer of 1987, Hawes deployed from a regular Sixth Fleet assignment in the Mediterranean to the Fifth Fleet in Persian Gulf to support Operation Earnest Will. Operation Earnest Will escorted reflagged Kuwaiti oil and natural gas tankers through the Persian Gulf during the Iran-Iraq War. Hawes led or participated in numerous convoy escort operations between September and November, 1987. In addition to its regular complement of crew, officers and an air detatchment of 2 SH-60B Seahawk helicopters, Hawes also embarked a detachment of 3 Task Force 160 (Delta Force) MH-6 helicopters, referred to as Sea Bats, as well as Stinger Missile crews for additional anti-air defense in the wake of the Iraqi attack on the USS Stark in May 1987.\nIn late September 1987 a small Iranian Revolutionary Guard ship, the Iran Ajr, was discovered sowing mines in shipping lanes northeast of Bahrain and was subsequently attacked by elements of Task Force 160 embarked on the USS Jarrett and captured by a US Navy SEAL team. Subsequently, the Hawes took the Ajr under tow to an undisclosed location where US Navy EOD sailors scuttled the ship.\nHawes also participated as an anti-air picket in support of Operation Nimble Archer, where US Navy destroyers and cruisers destroyed several Iranian natural gas platforms in response to a missile attack on the reflagged tanker Sea Isle City as she awaited the unloading of cargo at the Kuwait City terminal.\nOn 12 October 2000, \"Hawes\" was involved, along with , in providing repair and logistics support to , shortly after she was attacked in Aden, Yemen. Two al-Qaeda terrorists brought an inflatable Zodiac-type speedboat that carried a bomb alongside guided missile destroyer \"Cole\", while the ship refueled, and detonated their lethal cargo, killing 17 sailors and wounding 42 more. The crewmember's heroic damage control efforts saved \"Cole\". \"Hawes\", Cmdr. J. Scott Jones in command, joined (13 October \u2013 October) other ships that took part in Operation Determined Response to assist \"Cole\" including: amphibious assault ship ; dock landing ship ; amphibious transport dock ; guided missile destroyer \"Donald Cook\"; and the Military Sealift Command-operated tug ; along with British frigates and . The Navy subsequently enhanced global force protection training during crucial transits, and sailors qualified to fire M60 and Browning .50 caliber M2 machine guns to defend against assaults by low-slow flying aircraft and small boats.\n\"Hawes\", with Helicopter Antisubmarine Squadron (Light) HSL-48 Detachment 10 embarked, returned from a counter-narcotics deployment to the Caribbean and Western Atlantic to Naval Station Norfolk, Virginia, on 7 October 2009. The ship's operations resulted in the seizure of 200 barrels of cocaine.\nIn July 2010, \"Hawes\" docked for five days at Pier 4 of the Charlestown Navy Yard, participating in a Navy Week coordinated alongside Boston's Harborfest.\n\"Hawes\", operating with Destroyer Squadron 26 out of Norfolk, was decommissioned on 10 December 2010\nFate\nIn late 2020, \"Hawes\" was announced to be recycled by 2021, alongside USS \"Charles F. Adams\", USS \"Stephen Groves\", USS \"Barry\", and USS \"Ticonderoga\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0\"This article incorporates text from the public domain \"Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships\". The entry can be found http://.\""}
{"id": "50992", "revid": "50871345", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50992", "title": "Toulon", "text": "Prefecture in France\nToulon (, , ; (classical norm), (Mistralian norm), ) is a city in the Provence-Alpes-C\u00f4te d'Azur region of southeastern France. Located on the French Riviera and the historical Provence, it is the prefecture of the Var department.\nThe Commune of Toulon has a population of 176,198 people (2018), making it France's 13th-largest city, and third most populous French city on the Mediterranean, after Marseille and Nice. It is the centre of an urban unit with 580,281 inhabitants (2018), the ninth largest in France by population. \nToulon is an important centre for naval construction, fishing, wine making, and the manufacture of aeronautical equipment, armaments, maps, paper, tobacco, printing, shoes, and electronic equipment.\nThe military port of Toulon is the major naval centre on France's Mediterranean coast, home of the French aircraft carrier \"Charles de Gaulle\" and her battle group. The French Mediterranean Fleet is based in Toulon. The 1793 siege took place during the Federalist revolts.\nHistory.\nPrehistory to the Roman era.\nArchaeological excavations, such as those at the Cosquer Cave near Marseille, show that the coast of Provence was inhabited since at least the Paleolithic era. Greek colonists came from Phocaea, Asia Minor, in about the 7th century BC and established trading depots along the coast, including one, called Olbia, at Saint-Pierre de l'Almanarre south of Hy\u00e8res, to the east of Toulon. The Ligurians settled in the area beginning in the 4th century BC.\nIn the 2nd century BC, the residents of Massalia (present-day Marseille) called upon the Romans to help them pacify the region. The Romans defeated the Ligurians and began to start their own colonies along the coast. A Roman settlement was founded at the present location of Toulon, with the name Telo Martius \u2013 Telo, either for the local god of springs Telo or from the Latin \"tol\", the base of the hill \u2013 and Martius, for the god of war. Telo Martius became one of the two principal Roman dye manufacturing centres, producing the purple colour used in imperial robes, made from the local sea snail called murex, and from the acorns of the oak trees. Toulon harbour became a shelter for trading ships, and the name of the town gradually changed from Telo to Tholon, Tolon, and Toulon.\nArrival of Christianity and the Counts of Provence.\nToulon was Christianized in the 5th century, and the first cathedral built. Honoratus and Gratianus of Toulon (Gratien), according to the \"Gallia Christiana\", were the first bishops of Toulon, but Louis Duchesne gives Augustalis as the first historical bishop. He assisted at councils in 441 and 442 and signed in 449 and 450 the letters addressed to Pope Leo I from the province of Arles.\nA Saint Cyprian, disciple and biographer of St. C\u00e6sarius of Arles, is also mentioned as a Bishop of Toulon. His episcopate, begun in 524, had not come to an end in 541; he converted to Catholicism two Visigothic chiefs, Mandrier and Flavian, who became anchorites and martyrs on the peninsula of Mandrier. As barbarians invaded the region and Roman power crumbled, the town was frequently attacked by pirates and the Saracens.\nRoyal port (15th\u201318th centuries).\n \nIn 1486, Provence became part of France. Soon afterwards, in 1494, Charles VIII of France, with the intention of making France a sea power on the Mediterranean, and to support his military campaign in Italy, began constructing a military port at the harbor of Toulon. His Italian campaign failed, and in 1497, the rulers of Genoa, who controlled commerce on that part of the Mediterranean, blockaded the new port.\nIn 1524, as part of his longtime battle against Emperor Charles V and the Holy Roman Empire, King Fran\u00e7ois I of France completed a powerful new fort, the Tour Royale, Toulon, at the entrance of the harbour. However, a few months later the commander of the new fort sold it to the commander of an Army of the Holy Roman Empire, and Toulon surrendered.\nIn 1543, Francis I found a surprising new ally in his battle against the Holy Roman Empire. He invited the fleet of Ottoman Admiral Barbarossa to Toulon as part of the Franco-Ottoman alliance. The residents were forced to leave (except for the heads of household), and the Ottoman sailors occupied the town for the winter. See Ottoman occupation of Toulon.\nIn 1646, a fleet was gathered in Toulon for the major Battle of Orbetello, also known as the Battle of Isola del Giglio, commanded by France's first Grand Admiral, the young Grand Admiral Marquis of Br\u00e9z\u00e9, Jean Armand de Maill\u00e9-Br\u00e9ze of 36 galleons, 20 galleys, and a large complement of minor vessels. This fleet carried aboard an army of 8,000 infantry and 800 cavalry and its baggage under Thomas of Savoy, shortly before a general in Spanish service.\nKing Louis XIV was determined to make France a major sea power. In 1660, his Minister Jean-Baptiste Colbert ordered S\u00e9bastien Le Prestre de Vauban to build a new arsenal and to fortify the town. In 1707, during the War of the Spanish Succession, Toulon successfully resisted a siege by the Imperial Army led by Duke Victor Amadeus II of Sardinia of Savoy and Prince Eugene. However, in 1720, the city was ravaged by the black plague, coming from Marseille. Thirteen thousand people, or half the population, died.\nIn 1790, following the French Revolution, Toulon became the administrative centre of the d\u00e9partement of the Var. However, in 1793, the Jacobin administration of the city was swept from power, allowing Girondins and royalists to take their place; the city then rose up against the central administration of the First Republic and joined the Federalist revolts. The new Federalist administration surrendered the city and its fleet to the British. French Republican forces then undertook the siege of Toulon, forcing the British to withdraw, taking a number of ships with them and destroying the rest of them. Napoleon Bonaparte served as an artillery captain during the event. To punish Toulon for its rebellion, the town lost its status as department capital and was briefly renamed , after The Mountain faction.\n19th century.\nDuring the Napoleonic Wars, from 1803 until 1805 a British fleet led by Admiral Horatio Nelson blockaded Toulon.\nIn 1820, the statue which became known as the Venus de Milo was discovered on the Greek island of Milo and seen by a French naval officer, Emile Voutier. He persuaded the French Ambassador to Turkey to buy it, and brought it to Toulon on his ship, the \"Estafette\". From Toulon it was taken to the Louvre.\nIn 1849, Louis-Napoleon named Georges Eug\u00e8ne Haussmann as the new Prefect of the Var department. He served there only one year, but he laid out the current street plan for the city center, as he would later do for the city of Paris.\nIn the 1890s, there were the Kronstadt-Toulon naval visits.\n20th century.\nIn August 1935, a year before the reign of the Popular Front, violent uprisings of the workers of the Toulon shipyards opposed the policy of austerity. This resulted in a large number of deaths and injuries; a state of emergency was imposed.\nDuring World War II, after the Allied landings in North Africa (Operation Torch) the German Army occupied southern France (Case Anton), leading French naval officers to scuttle the French Fleet based at Toulon on 27 November 1942. The city was bombed by the Allies in November of the following year, with much of the port destroyed and five hundred residents killed.\nThe , centre of the administration of the city, was completed in 1970.\nIn 1979, the University of Toulon opened. Toulon was one of four French cities where the extreme-right Front National won the local elections in 1995. The Front National was voted out of power in 2001.\nMain sights.\nOld Town.\nThe old town of Toulon, the historic centre between the port, the Boulevard de Strasbourg and the Cours Lafayette, is a pedestrian area with narrow streets, small squares and many fountains. Toulon Cathedral is there. The area is also home of the celebrated Proven\u00e7al market, which takes place every morning on the Cours Lafayette and features local products. The old town decayed in the 1980s and 1990s, but recently many of the fountains and squares have been restored and many new shops have opened.\nFountains of Old Toulon.\nThe Old Town of Toulon is known for its fountains, found in many of the small squares, each with a different character. The original system of fountains was built in the late 17th century; most were rebuilt in the 18th or early 19th century and have recently been restored.\nUpper Town of Georges-Eug\u00e8ne Haussmann.\nThe upper town, between the Boulevard de Strasbourg and the railway station, was built in the mid-19th century under Louis Napoleon. The project was begun by Georges-Eug\u00e8ne Haussmann, who was prefect of the Var in 1849. Improvements to the neighbourhood included the Toulon Opera, the Place de la Libert\u00e9, the Grand H\u00f4tel, the Gardens of Alexander I, the Chalucet Hospital, the Palais de Justice, the train station, and the building now occupied by Galeries Lafayette, among others. Haussmann went on to use the same style on a much grander scale in the rebuilding of central Paris.\nHarbour and Arsenal.\nToulon harbour is one of the best natural anchorages on the Mediterranean and one of the largest harbours in Europe. A naval arsenal and shipyard was built in 1599, and a small sheltered harbour, the Veille Darse, was built in 1604\u20131610 to protect ships from the wind and sea. The shipyard was greatly enlarged by Cardinal Richelieu, who wished to make France a Mediterranean naval power. Further additions were made by Jean-Baptiste Colbert and Vauban.\nLe Mourillon.\nLe Mourillon is a small seaside neighbourhood to the east of Toulon, near the entrance of the harbour. It was once a fishing village, and then became the home of many of the officers of the French fleet. Mourillon has a small fishing port, next to a 16th-century fort, Fort Saint Louis, which was reconstructed by Vauban. In the 1970s, the city of Toulon built a series of sheltered sandy beaches in Mourillon, which today are very popular with the Toulonais and naval families. The Museum of Asian Art is in a house on the waterfront near Fort St. Louis.\nMount Faron.\nMount Faron () dominates the city of Toulon. The top can be reached by cable car from Toulon or by a narrow road that ascends from the west side and descends on the east side. The road is one of the stages of the annual Paris\u2013Nice and Tour M\u00e9diterran\u00e9en bicycle races.\nAt the top of Mount Faron is a memorial dedicated to the 1944 Allied landings in Provence (Operation Dragoon), and to the liberation of Toulon.\nVauban's fortifications.\nBeginning in 1678, Vauban constructed an elaborate system of fortifications around Toulon. Some parts, such as the section that once ran along the present-day Boulevard de Strasbourg, were removed in the mid-19th century so the city could be enlarged, but other parts remain. One part that can be visited is the Porte d'Italie, one of the old city gates. Napoleon Bonaparte departed on his triumphant Italian campaign from this gate in 1796.\nMuseums.\nToulon has a number of museums.\nThe Museum of the French Navy (Mus\u00e9e national de la marine) is located on Place Monsenergue, next on the west side of the old port, a short distance from the H\u00f4tel de Ville. The museum was founded in 1814, during the reign of the Emperor Napoleon. It is located today behind what was formerly the monumental gate to the Arsenal of Toulon, built in 1738. The museum building, along with the clock tower next to it, is one of the few buildings of the port and arsenal which survived Allied bombardments during World War II. It contains displays tracing the history of Toulon as a port of the French Navy. Highlights include large 18th-century ship models used to teach seamanship and models of the aircraft carrier \"Charles De Gaulle\".\nThe Museum of Old Toulon and its Region (Mus\u00e9e du vieux Toulon et de sa r\u00e9gion). The Museum was founded in 1912, and contains a collection of maps, paintings, drawings, models and other artifacts showing the history of the city.\nThe Museum of Asian Arts (Mus\u00e9e des arts asiatiques), in Mourillon. Located in a house with garden which once belonged to the son and later the grandson of author Jules Verne, the museum contains a small but interesting collection of art objects, many donated by naval officers from the time of the French colonization of Southeast Asia. It includes objects and paintings from India, China, Southeast Asia, China Tibet and Japan.\nThe Museum of Art (Mus\u00e9e d'art) was created in 1888, and contains collections of modern and contemporary art, as well as paintings of Provence from the 17th century to the beginning of the 20th century. It owns works by landscape artists of Provence from the late 19th century (Paul Guigou, Auguste Aiguier, Vincent Courdouan, F\u00e9lix Ziem), and the Fauves of Provence (Charles Camoin, Auguste Chabaud, Louis Mathieu Verdilhan). The contemporary collections contain works from 1960 to today representing the New Realism Movement (Arman, C\u00e9sar, Christo, Klein, Raysse); Minimalist Art (Sol LeWitt, Donald Judd); Support Surface (Cane, Viallat c\u00f4toient Arnal, Buren, Chacallis) and an important collection of photographs by Henri Cartier-Bresson, Dieuzaide, Edouard Boubat, Willy Ronis and Andr\u00e9 Kert\u00e9sz).\nThe Memorial Museum to the Landings in Provence (M\u00e9morial du d\u00e9barquement de Provence) is located on the summit of Mount Faron, this small museum, opened in 1964 by President Charles De Gaulle, commemorates the Allied landing in Provence in August 1944 with photos, weapons and models.\nThe Museum of Natural History of Toulon and the Var (Mus\u00e9e d'histoire naturelle de Toulon et du Var) was founded in 1888, has a large collection of displays about dinosaurs, birds, mammals, and minerals, mostly from the region.\nThe H\u00f4tel des arts was opened in 1998, presents five exhibits a year of works by well-known contemporary artists. Featured artists have included Sean Scully, Jannis Kounellis, Claude Viallat, Per Kirkeby, and Vik Muniz.\nClimate.\nToulon is subtropical, featuring a Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: Csa), characterised by abundant and strong sunshine, dry summers, and rain which is rare but sometimes torrential; and by hot summers and mild winters. Because of its proximity to the sea, the temperature is relatively moderate.\nThe average temperature in January, the coldest month, is , the warmest of any city in metropolitan France. In January, the maximum average temperature is . and the average minimum temperature is .\nThe average temperature in July, the warmest month, is , with an average maximum of . and an average minimal temperature of .\nAccording to data collected by M\u00e9t\u00e9o-France, Toulon is the second city (after Marseille) in metropolitan France with the most sunshine per year: an average of 2,854.1 hours a year from 1991 to 2020, compared with 2,695 hours a year for Nice and 2,472 hours for Perpignan. This is due to the wall of mountains that largely protects Toulon from the weather coming from the north. With a yearly average temperature of , it is also one of the warmest cities in metropolitan France.\nOne distinctive feature of the Toulon climate is the wind, with 115 days a year of strong winds; usually either the cold and dry Mistral or the Tramontane from the north, the wet Marin; or the Sirocco sometimes bearing reddish sand from Africa; or the wet and stormy Levant from the east. (See Winds of Provence.) The windiest month is January, with an average of 12.5 days of strong winds. The least windy month is September, with 7 days of strong winds.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEducation.\nToulon has a conservatory (Conservatoire TPM, part of Conservatoire \u00e0 rayonnement r\u00e9gional de Toulon) which teaches music, theater, dance and circus and an art academy called \u00c9cole sup\u00e9rieure d'art et de design Toulon Provence M\u00e9diterran\u00e9e. Toulon is also home to a number of institutes of the University of Toulon, known until 2013 as University of the South, Toulon-Var. Toulon has a campus of KEDGE Business School.\nLiterature.\nToulon figures prominently in Victor Hugo's \"Les Mis\u00e9rables\". It is the location of the infamous prison, the bagne of Toulon, in which the protagonist Jean Valjean spends nineteen years in hard labour. Toulon is also the birthplace of the novel's antagonist, Javert. One portion of the wall of the old bagne, or prison, where Jean Valjean was supposedly held still stands to the right of the entrance of the Old Harbour.\nIn Anthony Powell's novel \"What's Become of Waring\" the central characters spend a long summer holiday in Toulon's old town. Powell himself stayed at the Hotel du Port et des Negociants on two occasions in the early 1930s and writes in the second volume of his memoirs \"The naval port, with its small inner harbour, row of caf\u00e9s along the rade, was quite separate from the business quarter of the town. A paddle steamer plied several times a day between this roadstead and the agreeably unsophisticated plage of Les Sablettes\".\nJoseph Conrad's last novel, \"The Rover\", is also set around Toulon.\nThe last half of Dewey Lambdin's historical fiction novel, \"H.M.S. Cockerel\", (the sixth novel in his Alan Lewrie naval adventure series) details the Siege of Toulon from Lewrie's perspective, as he commands a commandeered French barge carrying sea mortars against Lieutenant-Colonel Bonaparte's forces.\nTransport.\nToulon is served by the Gare de Toulon railway station, offering suburban services to Marseille (1 train every 15 minutes during peak hours), regional services to Nice, and high speed connections to Paris, Strasburg, Luxemburg and Brussels. A daily night intercity train is also connecting the city to Nice, Marseille and Paris. &lt;br&gt;\nThe port of Toulon is the main port of departures for ferries to Corsica. &lt;br&gt;\nThe nearest airport is the regional Toulon-Hy\u00e8res Airport. The proximity of Marseille-Provence Airport located at 80 kms of the city, serving international destinations in Europe, Africa, Middle East, North America and Asia and linked to the city-center by direct trains daily offers a good international connectivity to the city. &lt;br&gt;\nThe A50 autoroute connects Toulon to Marseille, the A57 autoroute runs from Toulon to Le Luc, where it connects to the A8 autoroute.&lt;br&gt;\nThe local public transport service, R\u00e9seau Mistral de Toulon, operates 60 bus routes and 3 sea shuttle lines and is used by 30 million passengers annually.\nGastronomy.\nLocal food highlights include:\nSport.\nThe most successful of the city's clubs are the rugby union team RC Toulon and the women's handball team Toulon St-Cyr Var Handball, both playing in the top division of their respective sports. The basketball team Hy\u00e8res-Toulon Var Basket play in the second division of the French championship.\nThe city hosts the final four of the annual Toulon Tournament, an international under-21 football tournament.\nToulon's main football team is Sporting Club Toulon, which plays in Championnat National, the third level of French football. Famous players such as Delio Onnis, Jean Tigana, Christian Dalger, David Ginola and S\u00e9bastien Squillaci have all played for Sporting.\nThe city has been chosen by Groupama https:// as the venue for the fifth event in the Americas Cup World Series 2016, alongside international cities such as Portsmouth &amp; New York.\nNotable residents.\nToulon is the birthplace of:\nInternational relations.\nToulon is twinned with:\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50993", "revid": "49002572", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50993", "title": "Battle of Bannockburn", "text": "1314 battle during the First War of Scottish Independence\nThe Battle of Bannockburn ( or ) was fought on 23\u201324 June 1314, between the army of Robert the Bruce, King of Scots, and the army of King Edward II of England, during the First War of Scottish Independence. It was a decisive victory for Robert Bruce and formed a major turning point in the war, which ended 14 years later with the \"de jure\" restoration of Scottish independence under the Treaty of Edinburgh\u2013Northampton. For this reason, the Battle of Bannockburn is widely considered a landmark moment in Scottish history.\nKing Edward II invaded Scotland after Bruce demanded in 1313 that all supporters still loyal to ousted Scottish king John Balliol acknowledge Bruce as their king or lose their lands. Stirling Castle, a Scots royal fortress occupied by the English, was under siege by the Scottish army. King Edward assembled a formidable force of soldiers to relieve it\u2014the largest army ever to invade Scotland. The English summoned 25,000 infantry soldiers and 2,000 horses from England, Ireland and Wales against 6,000 Scottish soldiers, that Bruce had divided into three different contingents. Edward's attempt to raise the siege failed when he found his path blocked by a smaller army commanded by Bruce.\nThe Scottish army was divided into four divisions of schiltrons commanded by (1) Bruce, (2) his brother Edward Bruce, (3) his nephew, Thomas Randolph, the Earl of Moray, and (4) one jointly commanded by Sir James Douglas and the young Walter the Steward. Bruce's friend, Angus Og Macdonald, Lord of the Isles, brought thousands of Islesmen to Bannockburn, including galloglass warriors, and King Robert assigned them the place of honour at his side in his own schiltron with the men of Carrick and Argyll.\nAfter Robert Bruce killed Sir Henry de Bohun on the first day of the battle, the English withdrew for the day. That night, Sir Alexander Seton, a Scottish noble serving in Edward's army, defected to the Scottish side and informed King Robert of the English camp's low morale, telling him they could win. Robert Bruce decided to launch a full-scale attack on the English forces the next day and to use his schiltrons as offensive units, as he had trained them. This was a strategy his predecessor William Wallace had not employed. The English army was defeated in a pitched battle which resulted in the deaths of several prominent commanders, including the Earl of Gloucester and Sir Robert Clifford, and capture of many others, including the Earl of Hereford.\nThe victory against the English at Bannockburn is one of the most celebrated in Scottish history, and for centuries the battle has been commemorated in verse and art. The National Trust for Scotland operates the Bannockburn Visitor Centre (previously known as the Bannockburn Heritage Centre). Though the exact location for the battle is uncertain, a modern monument was erected in a field above a possible site of the battlefield, where the warring parties are believed to have camped, alongside a statue of Robert Bruce designed by Pilkington Jackson. The monument, along with the associated visitor centre, is one of the most popular tourist attractions in the area.\nBackground.\nEdward I had wanted to expand England to prevent a foreign power such as France from capturing territories in the British Isles. But he needed Scotland's allegiance, which led to his campaign to capture Scotland. The Wars of Scottish Independence between England and Scotland began in 1296. Initially, the English were successful under the command of Edward I: they won victories at the Battle of Dunbar (1296) and at the Capture of Berwick (1296). The removal of John Balliol from the Scottish throne also contributed to the English success. However, the Scots defeated the English at the Battle of Stirling Bridge in 1297. This was countered by Edward I's victory at the Battle of Falkirk (1298). By 1304, Scotland had been conquered, but in 1306 Robert the Bruce seized the Scottish throne and the war was reopened.\nAfter the death of Edward I in 1307, his son Edward II of England was crowned as king, but was incapable of providing the determined leadership his father had shown, and the English position soon became more difficult.\nIn 1313, Bruce demanded the allegiance of all remaining Balliol supporters, under threat of losing their lands. He also demanded the surrender of the English garrison at Stirling Castle, one of the most important castles held by the English, as it commanded the route north into the Scottish Highlands. It was besieged in 1314 by Bruce's younger brother Edward Bruce, and the English decided that if the castle was not relieved by mid-summer it would be surrendered to the Scots.\nThe English could not ignore this challenge, and prepared and equipped a substantial campaign. Edward II requested from England, Wales and Ireland 2,000 heavily armoured cavalry and 13,000 infantry. It is estimated that no more than half the infantry actually arrived, but the English army was still by far the largest ever to invade Scotland. The Scottish army probably numbered around 7,000 men, including no more than 500 mounted troops. Unlike the English, the Scottish cavalry was probably not equipped for charging enemy lines and suitable only for skirmishing and reconnaissance. The Scottish infantry was likely armed with axes, swords and pikes, and included only a few bowmen.\nThe precise numerical advantage of the English forces relative to the Scottish forces is unknown, but modern researchers estimate that the Scottish faced English forces one-and-a-half to three times their number.\nPrelude.\nOn the morning of 23 June 1314 it was still not certain if a battle was going to take place. The armies were still eight miles apart, giving King Robert the Bruce enough time to decide whether to move northwards beyond the Forth or westwards up the river into a district of mosses and hills. Robert knew that the latter decision would influence the plans of Edward II and his lords. Given the declared objective and the advancing march the previous week, it was obvious that the English would continue their advance on Stirling. In an effort to \"rescue\" Stirling, Edward II continued to hurry his troops: they marched seventy miles in one week. Many historians criticise Edward II for this move, as he was not acting as a leader of a well-trained army but was instead acting like a pilgrim. This bad decision-making by Edward II led to horses, horsemen, and infantry becoming extremely worn out with toil and hunger.\nNow Edward II was within reach of Stirling. Edward II and his advisors began to make plans for the upcoming battle. Edward and his advisors knew the places where the Scots were likely to challenge them, and sent orders for their troops to prepare for an enemy established in boggy ground near the River Forth, near Stirling. The English appear to have advanced in four divisions. The Scots assembled defensive formations known as schiltrons, which were strong defensive squares of men with pikes. Thomas Randolph, 1st Earl of Moray, commanded the Scottish vanguard, which was stationed about a mile south of Stirling, near the church of St. Ninian, while the king commanded the rearguard at the entrance to the New Park. His brother Edward led the third division. The fourth division was nominally under the youthful Walter the Steward, but actually under the command of Sir James Douglas. The Scottish archers used yew-stave longbows and, while these were equal to English longbows in strength, there were probably fewer Scottish archers, possibly only 500 although there is no evidence as to their number. These archers played little part in the battle. There is first-hand evidence in a poem, written just after the battle by the captured Carmelite friar Robert Baston, that one or both sides employed slingers and crossbowmen.\nBattle.\nLocation of the battlefield.\nThe exact site of both days of the battle has been debated for many years, but most modern historians agree that the traditional site for the first day, where a visitor centre and statue have been erected, is not correct.\nA large number of alternative locations for the second day have been considered, but modern researchers believe only two merit serious consideration:\nIt is likely that wherever the fighting began it ended on the Carse.\nImportance.\nThis battle was an attempt by Robert the Bruce to legitimise his kingship through combat. An article by Medieval Warfare states, \"Robert Bruce, King of Scots from 1306 until his death in 1329 aged around 55, was no stranger to the battlefield. He waged war to wear down his Scottish opponents and the English regime in Scotland, culminating in the Battle of Bannockburn in 1314, to legitimise his kingship and free his kingdom.\" It was a battle that Robert the Bruce hoped would confirm his place on the throne of Scotland and force Edward II to recognize him King. Bruce also faced internal struggles for the crown of Scotland among the \"Balliols, Bruces, and the Scottish political nation in a decades-long contest for the crown.\" As stated by W. M. Mackenzie, \"The victory at Bannockburn is of more than national interest and had other results than those immediately affecting Scotland. With Falkirk and Courtrai (1302), where the flemish footman shattered the chivalry of France\u2014and more than either of these it initiated the change which was to come over the mediaeval art of war, in demonstrating the superiority of infantry properly handled to the mounted men-at-arms upon whom the entire stress of fighting had hitherto been laid. The defeated were quick to learn their lesson and apply it in their own way. This shows the sheer importance of the Scottish spearman on the European stage as many countries began to adapt to this infantry dominated medieval battleground. They were moving away from cavalry and more towards the domination of the foot soldier. Another aspect is that this battle was for the rights to Stirling Castle essentially. Robert the Bruce did not want to give the castle up to the English as it was a major staging point. This is supported by Herbert Maxwell who stated that \"Bruce's position was taken up to bar King Edwards access to Stirling.\"\nFirst day of battle.\nMost medieval battles were short-lived, lasting only a few hours, so the Battle of Bannockburn is unusual in that it lasted two days. Shortly before the battle, King Robert picked a flat field flanked by woodland known as New Park to set up camp for the upcoming battle. This was because the woodland gave Bruce and his foot soldiers an advantage since the English were very adept at cavalry. The Scots split their army into four divisions and the Bruce commanded the four divisions to form a diamond formation. Bruce covered the rear to the south, Douglas to the east, Randolph to the north (the direction of Stirling), with 500 horsemen under Keith to the west, in reserve. On 23 June 1314, two English cavalry formations advanced. The first was commanded by the Earl of Gloucester and by the Earl of Hereford. They followed behind a smaller detachment of roughly 300 soldiers led by Sir Robert Clifford and Sir Henry de Beaumont who marched closer to the River Forth. Both of these detachments marched in front of the main fighting force. These two detachments were tasked with lifting the siege on Stirling. The Hereford-Gloucester force was the first to cross over the Bannockburn and marched toward the woodlands that hid the Scots and stood in the way of the English on their way to Stirling. Little did the English know that Bruce had ventured ahead away from his natural protection. King Robert was not then fully armed for combat, but was instead armed for reconnaissance with only a small horse, light armour, and a battle axe to defend himself. The Earl of Hereford's nephew Henry de Bohun spotted the king so poorly equipped and took advantage. Henry de Bohun charged forward in full combat gear with his lance, encountering Bruce's troops. Bruce and de Bohun faced off in what became a celebrated instance of single combat. Bohun charged at Bruce and, when the two passed side by side, Bruce split Bohun's head with his axe. However the Vita Edwardi Secundi gives a different account:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;'On Sunday, which was the vigil of St John's day, as they [the English] passed by a certain wood and were approaching Stirling Castle, the Scots were seen straggling under the trees as if in flight, and a certain knight, Henry de Boune pursued them with the Welsh to the entrance of the wood. For he had in mind that if he found Robert Bruce there he would either kill him or carry him off captive. But when he had come thither, Robert himself came suddenly out of his hiding-place in the wood, and the said Henry seeing that he could not resist the multitude of Scots, turned his horse with the intention of regaining his companions; but Robert opposed him and struck him on the head with an axe that he carried in his hand.\nHis squire, trying to protect or rescue his lord, was overwhelmed by the Scots.'\nThe Scots then rushed the English forces under Gloucester's and Hereford's command, who retreated, struggling back over the Bannockburn.\nThis story is important because it was a reflection of Robert the Bruce's leadership. It is stated in an article by Sidney Dean that \"While controversial among his peers, Bruce earned the respect of his soldiers by leading from the front and displaying physical courage.\"\nThe second English cavalry force was commanded by Robert Clifford and Henry de Beaumont. Their forces included Sir Thomas de Grey of Heaton, father of the chronicler Thomas Grey. The younger Grey described the battle:&lt;section begin=\"Beaumont-vs-Grey\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Robert Lord de Clifford and Henry de Beaumont, with three hundred men-at-arms, made a circuit upon the other side of the wood towards the castle, keeping the open ground. Thomas Randolph, 1st Earl of Moray, King Robert's nephew, who was the leader of the Scottish advanced guard, hearing that his uncle had repulsed the advanced guard of the English on the other side of the wood, thought that he must have his share, and issuing from the wood with his division marched across the open ground towards the two afore-named lords.\nSir Henry de Beaumont called to his men: \"Let us wait a little; let them come on; give them room\".\n\"Sir,\" said Sir Thomas Gray, \"I doubt that whatever you give them now, they will have all too soon\".\n\"Very well\" exclaimed the said Henry, \"if you are afraid, be off\".\n\"Sir,\" answered the said Thomas, \"it is not from fear that I shall fly this day.\"\nSo saying, he spurred in between Beaumont and Sir William Deyncourt and charged into the thick of the enemy. William was killed, Thomas was taken prisoner, his horse being killed on the pikes, and he himself carried off with the Scots on foot when they marched off, having utterly routed the squadron of the said two lords. Some of the English fled to the castle, others to the king's army, which having already left the road through the wood had debouched upon a plain near the water of Forth beyond Bannockburn, an evil, deep, wet marsh, where the said English army unharnessed and remained all night, having sadly lost confidence and being too much disaffected by the events of the day.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;section end=Beaumont-vs-Grey/&gt;\nSecond day of battle.\nDuring the night, the English forces crossed the stream known as the Bannockburn, establishing their position on the plain beyond it. A Scottish knight, Alexander Seton, who was fighting in the service of Edward II of England, deserted the English camp and told Bruce that English morale was low and encouraged him to attack.\nIn the morning, the Scots advanced from New Park. Not long after daybreak, Edward was surprised to see the Scottish pikemen emerge from the cover of the woods and advance towards his position. As Bruce's army drew nearer, they paused and knelt in prayer. Edward reportedly said in surprise, \"They pray for mercy!\" \"For mercy, yes,\" one of his attendants replied, \"but from God, not you. These men will conquer or die.\"\nThe Earl of Gloucester had argued with the Earl of Hereford over who should lead the vanguard into battle. He had also tried to persuade the king that the battle should be postponed. This led the king to accuse him of cowardice. Goaded by the accusation, Gloucester advanced to meet the Scots. Few accompanied Gloucester and, when he reached the Scottish lines, he was quickly surrounded and killed.\nThe English were gradually pushed back and ground down by the Scots' schiltrons. The English longbowmen attempted to support the advance of the knights, but were ordered to stop shooting to avoid additional friendly fire. The English then attempted to deploy their English and Welsh longbowmen to flank the advancing Scots, but they were dispersed by 500 Scottish cavalry under the marischal Sir Robert Keith. (Although the Scottish cavalry is sometimes described as light cavalry, this appears to be a misinterpretation of Barbour's statement that these were men-at-arms on lighter horses than those of their English counterparts.)\nThe English cavalry was hemmed in against the Bannockburn, making it difficult for them to manoeuvre. Unable to hold their formations, they broke rank. It soon became clear to Aymer de Valence and Giles d'Argentan (reputedly the third-best knight in Europe) that the English had lost the battle and Edward II needed at all costs to be led to safety. Seizing the reins of the king's horse, they dragged him away, closely followed by 500 knights of the royal bodyguard.\nOnce they were clear of the battle, d'Argentan turned to the king and said: \"Sire, your protection was committed to me, but since you are safely on your way, I will bid you farewell for never yet have I fled from a battle, nor will I now.\" He turned his horse to charge back into the ranks of Scottish, where he was overborne and slain.\nEnglish retreat.\nEdward fled with his personal bodyguard and panic spread among the remaining troops, turning their defeat into a rout. King Edward, with about 500 men, first fled for Stirling Castle where Sir Philip de Moubray, commander of the castle, turned him away as the castle would shortly be surrendered to the Scots. Then, pursued by James Douglas and a small troop of horsemen, Edward fled to Dunbar Castle, from which he took a ship to Berwick. From the carnage of Bannockburn, the rest of the army tried to escape to the safety of the English border, south. Many were killed by the pursuing Scottish army or by the inhabitants of the countryside they passed through.\nHistorian Peter Reese wrote that \"only one sizeable group of men\u2014all foot soldiers\u2014made good their escape to England.\" These were a force of Welsh spearmen who were kept together by their commander, Sir Maurice de Berkeley. The majority of them reached Carlisle. Weighing the available evidence, Reese concludes that \"it seems doubtful if even a third of the foot soldiers returned to England.\" If his estimate is accurate, of 16,000 English infantrymen, about 11,000 were killed. The English chronicler Thomas Walsingham gave the number of English men-at-arms who were killed as 700, while 500 more men-at-arms were spared for ransom. The Scottish losses appear to have been comparatively light, with only two knights among those killed.\nAftermath.\nThe immediate aftermath was the surrender of Stirling Castle, one of Scotland's most important fortresses, to King Robert. He then slighted (razed) it to prevent it from being retaken. Nearly as important was the surrender of Bothwell Castle, where a sizeable party of English nobles, including the Earl of Hereford, had taken refuge. At the same time, the Edwardian strongholds of Dunbar and Jedburgh were also being captured. By 1315, only Berwick remained outside of Robert's control. In exchange for the captured nobles, Edward II released Robert's wife Elizabeth de Burgh, sisters Christina Bruce, Mary Bruce and daughter Marjorie Bruce, and Robert Wishart, Bishop of Glasgow, ending their eight-year imprisonment in England. Following the battle, King Robert rewarded Sir Gilbert Hay of Erroll with the office of hereditary Lord High Constable of Scotland.\nThe defeat of the English opened up the north of England to Scottish raids and allowed the Scottish invasion of Ireland. These finally led, after the failure of the Declaration of Arbroath to secure diplomatic recognition of Scotland's independence by the Pope, to the Treaty of Edinburgh\u2013Northampton in 1328. Under the treaty, the English crown recognised the independence of the Kingdom of Scotland, and acknowledged Robert the Bruce as the rightful king.\nNotable casualties.\nThe following are the notable casualties and captives of the battle.\nDeaths.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCaptives.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLegacy.\nBannockburn Visitor Centre.\nIn 1932 the Bannockburn Preservation Committee, under Edward Bruce, 10th Earl of Elgin and Kincardine, presented lands to the National Trust for Scotland. Further lands were purchased in 1960 and 1965 to facilitate visitor access. A modern monument was erected in a field above the possible site of the battle, where the warring parties are believed to have camped on the night before the battle. The monument consists of two semicircular walls depicting the opposing parties. Nearby stands the 1960s statue of Bruce by Pilkington Jackson. Although the statue was conceived by Pilkington Jackson he commissioned Thomas Taylor Bowie of the Ontario College of Art in Toronto to create the statue. The monument, and the associated visitor centre, are some of the most popular tourist attractions in the area. The battlefield has been included in the Inventory of Historic Battlefields in Scotland and protected by Historic Scotland under the Historic Environment (Amendment) Act 2011.\nThe National Trust for Scotland operates the Bannockburn Visitor Centre (previously known as the Bannockburn Heritage Centre), which is open daily from March through October. On 31 October 2012 the original building was closed for demolition and replacement by a new design, inspired by traditional Scottish buildings, by Reiach and Hall Architects. The project is a partnership between the National Trust for Scotland and Historic Environment Scotland, funded by the Scottish Government and the Heritage Lottery Fund. The battlefield's new visitor centre\u2014now rebranded as the Bannockburn Visitor Centre\u2014opened in March 2014. One of the attractions created by a \u00a39m redevelopment of the centre and the nearby battlefield memorial is a computerised multiplayer game.\nOn 11 June 2020, during the George Floyd protests in the United Kingdom, the statue was defaced with graffiti.\nMusic.\nThe German heavy metal band Grave Digger included a song called \"The Battle Of Bannockburn\" on their 1998 album \"Knights of the Cross\".\nIn 2016 Swedish metal band Sabaton released a song, \"Blood of Bannockburn\", on their album \"The Last Stand\" about this battle.\nArts.\n\"Scots Wha Hae\" is the title of a patriotic poem by Robert Burns. The chorus of Scotland's unofficial national anthem \"Flower of Scotland\" refers to Scotland's victory over Edward and the English at Bannockburn.\nMany artworks depict the battle. John Duncan and Eric Harald Macbeth Robertson both painted Bruce's encounter with de Bohun. John Phillip painted Bruce receiving the sacrament on the eve of the battle. John Hassall painted a similar theme. A painting by William Findlay depicts Bruce at the battle.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50994", "revid": "3784107", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50994", "title": "Lelystad", "text": "City and municipality in Flevoland, Netherlands\nLelystad () is a Dutch municipality and the capital city of the province of Flevoland in the central Netherlands. The city, built on reclaimed land, was founded in 1967 and was named after Cornelis Lely, who engineered the Afsluitdijk that made the reclamation possible. Lelystad is situated approximately three metres (10 feet) below sea level.\nHistory.\nLelystad is built on the seabed of the former Zuiderzee. About 6,500 years ago, this wetland was above high tide level and inhabited; the Netherlands have steadily subsided since. Near Lelystad at Swifterbant, the oldest human skeletons in Western Europe were discovered. Due to rising water levels and storms, the peatlands were washed away, and the Lacus Flevo (in Roman times) grew to be the Almere (Middle Ages) and became the Zuiderzee. The Zuiderzee (Southern Sea) was the main transport route from Amsterdam to the North Sea and the Hanseatic League cities. Due to the many shipwrecks in Flevoland, Lelystad now houses the National Centre for Maritime History, with a museum and the shipyard that has built the \"Batavia\" replica.\nAfter the Second World War the Zuiderzee Works continued, constructing the polder of Eastern Flevoland. In 1950 work commenced on several construction islands in the middle of the IJsselmeer. \"Lelystad-Haven\" was the largest island, and its wooden barracks housed a community of dyke-builders. In 1955 they reached the mainland, which made it possible to drive to Lelystad by car. One of the three pumping stations, which drained the polder in June 1957, was the diesel-powered \"Wortman\" in Lelystad-Haven. Until 1967 the only inhabitants of Lelystad were technical engineers and laborers and superintendents, living on the former construction island.\nDemographics.\nEthnic composition.\nSource:\nLelystad has a large population of Surinamese origin (5,225); most residents of a non-Western background live in the east of the city. Lelystad also has significant Moroccan (2,615) and Turkish (2,278) communities, most of whom reside in the northeastern part of the city. There were 2,059 residents with an Antillean background.\nLandscape.\nLelystad is the largest municipality in the Netherlands in area, but a large part of that area is water: Markermeer and IJsselmeer. Another major area is the internationally famous nature park of Oostvaardersplassen, which arose naturally when the polder of South Flevoland was drained. Lelystad is also surrounded by a square of woodlands and parks and flat farmland. The importance of the landscape and sky is emphasized by several pieces of land art: engineers' work and works such as the \"Observatorium\" by Robert Morris (see below).\nThe artificial islands of Marker Wadden lie immediately to the northwest of Lelystad. Construction started in 2016, and the first islands have already become important wildlife sites, with many species of birds coming to the islands during the breeding season.\nTourism.\nLelystad has several tourist attractions, including:\nLelystad hosts many one-day events like the Lelystad Airshow, the Water Festival, the National Old Timer Day, Lelystad Speedway, Architecture day and several sports events. On the Midland Circuit many motor, kart and stock car racing events and several autoclub meetings are held. On the coast there are several marinas.\nTransport.\nLelystad can be reached by air, water, and land.\nAir.\nLelystad Airport is the biggest general aviation airport in the Netherlands. It is owned wholly by Schiphol Group. Lelystad Airport has undergone major expansion, including the construction of a passenger terminal for commercial flights, as well as an extension of the runway. The original plan for this airport was to become the main gateway for passengers into the country, to alleviate some of the pressure from Schiphol Airport in Amsterdam. In turn, Schiphol would be able to focus on its role as international hub for lay-overs. Although the expansion of Lelystad Airport has been finished, the airport has not yet opened for passengers due to various political reasons. As of 2022, the government has decided to delay the opening of the terminals with at least two years, and even then the opening will not be guaranteed.\nWater.\nLelystad has a small inland port, several marinas, and a canal system which also functions to aid in managing the water levels in the rest of the polder. The canal system connects to the Markermeer with a lock to the southwest of Lelystad, and connects the city and its industrial areas to all other towns and their respective industrial areas in the polder.\nRail.\nthe Weesp\u2013Lelystad railway (\"Flevolijn\") extends south from Lelystad Centrum railway station and connects the city with Almere, and to the Randstad region beyond. The Lelystad\u2013Zwolle railway (\"Hanzelijn\") extends north from Lelystad and connects it with Dronten, Kampen and Zwolle.\nMotorway.\nThe A6 motorway runs along Lelystad on the eastern side of the city. There are three on-ramps connecting this motorway to Lelystad, allowing traffic to travel northbound to Emmeloord and the province of Friesland, or southbound to Almere and the Randstad region.\nProvincial roads.\nThe N302 provincial road connects Lelystad to the south-east with Harderwijk and the province of Gelderland beyond. The N307 connects Lelystad across the Houtribdijk to Enkhuizen and the province of North Holland beyond, and to Dronten and beyond that to Kampen in the province of Overijssel. The N309 connects Lelystad to Dronten and beyond that to Elburg in the province of Gelderland.\nShield and flag.\nThe honeycomb grid in the arms of Lelystad represents the dykes, built with six-edged concrete or basalt blocks. The colour gold indicates the high costs of the project of making the polder. The centre shield is the arms of engineer Cornelis Lely. The sealions reflect the history of the land.\nIn the flag, the fleur-de-lis (lily) again takes a central point, referring to the name Lely. The yellow background reflects the precious land, and the blue lines the dykes and waterways. The flag of the province is similarly adorned with the fleur-de-lis to commemorate Lely.\nTwin city.\nLelystad maintains international relations with the Suriname twin city of Lelydorp.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50995", "revid": "28685788", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50995", "title": "IJsselmeer", "text": "Lake in the Netherlands\nThe IJsselmeer (; , ), also known as Lake IJssel in English, is a closed-off freshwater lake in the central Netherlands bordering the provinces of Flevoland, North Holland and Friesland. It covers an area of with an average depth of . The river IJssel, after which the lake was named, flows into the IJsselmeer.\nHistory.\nTwo thousand years ago Pomponius Mela, a Roman geographer, mentioned a complex of lakes at the current location of the IJsselmeer. He called it \"Lacus Flevo\". Over the centuries, the lake banks crumbled away due to flooding and wave action, and the lake, now called the Almere, grew considerably. During the 12th and 13th centuries, storm surges and rising sea levels flooded large areas of land between the lake and the North Sea, turning the lake into a bay of the North Sea, called the Zuiderzee. The Zuiderzee continued to be a threat to the Dutch, especially when northwesterly storms funnel North Sea waters towards the English Channel, creating very high tides along the Dutch coast. During the 17th century, Zuiderzee dykes collapsed several times, and plans were drawn up to eliminate the threat by draining the bay. Later drainage plans focused on creating fertile farmland, but they never progressed beyond the planning stage. It was only after the flood of 1916 that the legislature approved the Zuiderzee Works, a major hydraulic engineering project that involved building dykes, draining parts of the Zuiderzee, and constructing the Afsluitdijk to keep tides and high water out.\nIn 1932 the Zuiderzee was closed off by the Afsluitdijk, a dyke connecting Friesland and North Holland on either side of the Zuiderzee. The Zuiderzee was no longer a sea inlet and was renamed IJsselmeer (\"Lake IJssel\") after the IJssel river that flows into it, which is also the namesake of the province of Overijssel. The continuing flow of fresh river water soon flushed out the salt water. Part of the IJsselmeer was later closed off to form the Markermeer. \nFrom 1929 till 1967, over half the IJsselmeer was drained, creating of polders: Wieringermeerpolder, Noordoostpolder, East and South Flevoland.\nIn 1975, a dyke was built between Enkhuizen and Lelystad as the northern boundary of the Markerwaard, a planned but never realized polder in the IJsselmeer. This dyke, the \"Houtribdijk\" or \"Markerwaarddijk\", split the IJsselmeer into two parts. The former southern part of the IJsselmeer is now the hydrologically separate Markermeer. The proposed polderisation of the Markerwaard was abandoned after many of the Dutch population did not want the loss of the traditional seaside (now lakeside) environment and vistas. \nIn 1986 three polders in the IJsselmeer constituted the new province of Flevoland, the twelfth province of the Netherlands.\nThe water of the IJsselmeer is now almost completely fresh, the saline having long since been purged. This altered environment has had an impact on the fish and plant ecosystems. The change has been beneficial for Dutch boats, many of which are steel, as the freshwater significantly reduces rusting of the hulls, and there is far less build-up of marine growth (such as algae and barnacles below the barges' waterlines). This has the knock-on benefit that barges and yachts in the IJsselmeer need far less antifouling, a coating which is inevitably somewhat toxic to wildlife.\nCurrent use.\nDue to considerable amounts of water from the Rhine flowing through its distributary IJssel into the IJsselmeer, the closed-off bay functions as a large freshwater reservoir, serving as a source for agriculture and drinking water. Outlet sluices in the Afsluitdijk regulate the water level of the IJsselmeer.\nThe IJsselmeer is used for transport and fishing. It also offers a number of opportunities for recreational activity, both on the water and on its shores. Due to the shallowness of the IJsselmeer, the Markermeer, and the bordering lakes, its cities and fishing villages remained mostly unspoilt and have many historic buildings.\nThe IJsselmeer is home to the offshore segments of Windpark Noordoostpolder and to Windpark Frysl\u00e2n.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50996", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50996", "title": "Latins", "text": "Various groups of people with links to Ancient Rome\nThe term Latins has been used throughout history to refer to various peoples, ethnicities and religious groups using Latin or the Latin-derived Romance languages, as part of the legacy of the Roman Empire. In the Ancient World, it referred to the people of ancient Latium, including the Romans. Following the spread of Christianity, it came to indicate the Catholics of the Latin Church, especially those following Western liturgical rites. Currently, it defines the peoples using the Romance languages in Europe and the Americas.\nAntiquity.\nThe Latins were an ancient Italic people of the Latium region in central Italy (\"Latium Vetus\", \"Old Latium\"), in the 1st millennium BC. Although they lived in independent city-states, they spoke a common language (Latin), held common religious beliefs, and extended common rights of residence and trade to one another. Collectively, these Latin states were known as the Latin League.\nA rupture between Rome, one of the Latin states, and the rest of the Latin League emerged as a result of the former's territorial ambitions. The Latin League fought against Rome in the Latin War (340-338 BC), which ended in a Roman victory. Consequently, some of the Latin states were incorporated within the Roman state, and their inhabitants were given full Roman citizenship. Others became Roman allies and enjoyed certain privileges.\nThe Roman Empire would go on to dominate the Mediterranean region for the next several centuries, spreading the Latin language and Roman culture. The Latin-speaking Western Roman Empire ended in AD 476, while the Greek-speaking eastern half survived on until 1453.\nMiddle Ages.\nIn the Eastern Roman Empire, and the broader Greek-Orthodox world, \"Latins\" was a synonym for all people who followed the Roman Catholicism of Western Christianity, regardless of ethnicity. The term was related to the predominance of the Latin Church, which is the largest autonomous particular church within the broader Catholic Church, and took its name from its origins in the Latin-speaking world which had Rome as its center.\n\"Latin\" was generally a negative characterization, especially after the 1054 schism. The term is still used by the Orthodox church communities, but only in a theological context. Nonetheless, it did not share this negative connotation in the West, where many self-identified with the term, such as Petrarch, when he states \"Sumus enim non greci, non barbari, sed itali et latini.\" (\"We are not Greeks or barbarians; we are Italians and Latins.\").\nLatin peoples and regions.\nThe various Romance-speaking groups of the present day, usually those of Latin Europe and Latin America, have sometimes been collectively referred to as \"Latin peoples\". Other synonymous terms are \"Romance peoples\" or \"Romanic peoples\". Likewise, the Romance languages themselves are sometimes referred to as the Latin or Neo-Latin languages. The designation also specifically survived in the names of two Romance-speaking groups: the Ladin people of northern Italy and the Ladino people of Central America. \nThe term \"Latin Europe\" is sometimes used in reference to European nations and regions inhabited by Romance-speaking people.\n\"Latin America\" is the region of the Americas that was colonized by Latin Europeans, and came to be called so in the 19th century. The term is usually used to refer to Spanish- and Portuguese-speaking countries, namely Hispanic America and Brazil. Latin Americans are called \"latinoamericanos and\" \"latino-americanos\" in Spanish and Portuguese, respectively; the shortening of this term resulted in the name for Latinos, who are themselves sometimes just called \"Latin\". \nMany of the present-day independent states of Africa have main official languages that are Romance, as a result of colonization by Romance-speaking European nations in the 19th century. Barth\u00e9l\u00e9my Boganda, a politician of the Central African Republic, proposed a \"United States of Latin Africa\" in 1957 that would serve as a federation of the Romance-speaking countries in the region of Central Africa, which never came into fruition. African-American author Richard Wright, who criticized the proposal, said that \"Latin Africa\" correlated with \"Catholic Africa\" and would create an unnecessary religious division against the English-speaking \"Protestant Africa\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50997", "revid": "84276", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50997", "title": "Jenin", "text": "Palestinian city, northern West Bank\nJenin ( ; , ) is a city in the West Bank, Palestine, and is the capital of the Jenin Governorate. It is a hub for the surrounding towns. Jenin came under Israeli occupation in 1967, and was put under the administration of the Palestinian National Authority as Area A of the West Bank, a Palestinian enclave, in 1995.\nThe city had a population of approximately 50,000 people in 2017, whilst the Jenin refugee camp had a population of about 10,000, housing families of Palestinians who fled or were expelled from their homes during the 1948 Palestine War. The camp has since become a stronghold of Palestinian militants, being the location of several incidents relating to the Israeli\u2013Palestinian conflict.\nEtymology.\nJenin has been identified as the place \"Gina\" or \"Ginah\" mentioned in the Amarna letters from the 14th century BCE, as a town in Canaan. Jenin is commonly identified with the later biblical city of Ein-Ganim, from , meaning \"the spring of gardens\" or \"the spring of Ganim\", probably referring to the many springs located nearby. The present-day Arabic name is believed to preserve the city's ancient name.\nHistory.\nAncient period.\nJenin is identified with a number of important towns mentioned in ancient sources. Throughout history, it was referred to as \"Ein Ganim\", \"Beth Hagan\", \"Ginah\", and \"Ginae\", along other names.\nTell Jenin, believed to constitute the original settlement core of the city, is located at the center of what is today Jenin's business district. The tell is also known as \"Tell el-Nawar\", a term derived from the Arabic word for \"gypsies,\" due to former nomadic encampments in this site. The earliest settlement at the tell dates to the late Neolithic and the early Chalcolithic. In the early 20th century, the tell was occupied by a modern cemetery and a threshing floor.\nBronze Age.\nJenin has been identified as the place \"Gina\" or \"Ginah\" mentioned in the Amarna letters from the 14th century BCE. At the time, it was a vassal state of the New Kingdom of Egypt. The people of Gina managed to kill the warlord Labaya during the reign of Pharaoh Akhenaten.\nIron Age.\nJenin is identical to \"Ein-Ganim\", which the Hebrew Bible describes as a Levite city belonging to the Israelite Tribe of Issachar. It has also been associated with \"Beth-Haggan\", mentioned in 2 Kings in connection with Ahaziah's flight from Jehu, before he is wounded at Ibleam and later dies in Megiddo. The Book of Judith renders its name as \"Gini\".\nRoman and Byzantine periods.\nJosephus, a Roman-Jewish historian of the 1st-century CE, mentions \"Ginae\" as being in the great plain, on the northern border of Samaria. During the Roman period, \"Ginae\" was settled exclusively by Samaritans. The people of Galilee were disposed to pass through their city during the annual pilgrimages to Jerusalem. In 51 CE, a Galilean Jew was killed in Ginae by hostile Samaritans while en route to Jerusalem to celebrate Sukkot. With Roman procurator Cumanus failing to respond, Jewish Zealots led by Elazar the Son of Deinaeus (Ben Dinai) sought vengeance, and several Samaritan villages in Aqrabatene were destroyed.\nBiblical commentator F. W. Farrar raised the possibility that this Samaritan village, \"the first village at which [a traveler taking the road from Galilee to Judea over Mount Tabor] would arrive\", was the one which rejected the disciples of Jesus in Luke's Gospel at the point where Jesus and his followers begin his journey towards Jerusalem.\nCeramics dating from the Byzantine era have been found here. There is no mention of Jenin in the reports of the Muslim conquest of the Levant from the Byzantines, which, according to the historian Moshe Sharon, \"is not surprising, since it was a small place of minor importance\".\nCrusader, Ayyubid and Mamluk periods.\nJenin came under Crusader rule in 1103. The Crusaders called it \"Le Grand Guerin\" (Latin: \"Garinum\" or \"Gallina Major\"), to distinguish it from the town of Zir'in, which they called \"Petit Grin\". Under the Crusaders it was a small seigniory, forming part of the Principality of Galilee or the Kingdom of Jerusalem.\nShortly before the Battle of Hattin in 1187, Jenin was captured by the Ayyubid sultan Saladin, who destroyed the nearby fort, Castellum Beleismum. In the 1220s, the geographer Yaqut al-Hamawi described Jenin as \"a small and beautiful town, lying between Nabulus and Beisan, in the Jordan Province. There is much water, and many springs are found here, and often have I visited it.\" In 1229, a peace was concluded between Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor and Sultan al-Kamil, during the Sixth Crusade, whereby the city was given to the Crusaders, but Sultan as-Salih Ayyub was able to control it permanently in 1244 after the Battle of La Forbie.\nIn 1255, it was agreed between the Ayyubid sultan in Syria, an-Nasir Yusuf, and the first Mamluk sultan in Egypt, Izz al-Din Aybak, to give the latter all of the lands lying west of the Jordan River, and thus Jenin entered into the possession of the Mamluks. It was one of eleven subdistricts of Mamlakat Safad (Province of Safed). In the late 13th century, Mamluk emirs (commanders) stationed at Jenin were ordered by Sultan Qalawun (r.\u20091279\u00a0\u2013\u00a01290) \"to ride every day with their troops before the fortress of 'Akka, so as to protect the coast and the merchants.\" As one of the stations of the Mamluk \"barid\" (postal route) between the Mamluk capital Cairo and Damascus, it was one of the towns where fires were lit to warn of a Mongol attack. The geographer al-Dimashqi mentioned Jenin around 1300. From the time of Qalawun's son, Sultan an-Nasir Muhammad (r.\u20091299\u00a0\u2013\u00a01309,\u00a01310\u00a0\u2013\u00a01341), it was a station on the route where ice was transported to Cairo for the sultans' drink houses. The Mamluk historian al-Qalqashandi (d. 1418) described Jenin as \"an ancient spacious town which is riding on a shoulder of a nice valley in which there is a river of flowing water\" north of Qaqun \"on the top end of Marj Bani Amer [Jezreel Valley]\". He also noted that it contained the mausoleum of Dihyah al-Kalbi, a companion of the Islamic prophet Muhammad.\nOttoman era.\nThe Ottomans conquered Mamluk Syria in 1516. Jenin became the administrative center of a \"nahiya\" (subdistrict) of the Lajjun Sanjak (Lajjun District). The sanjak was officially called the Iqta (Fief) of Turabay until 1559 when it became officially known as the Lajjun Sanjak. The Turabay dynasty was the ruling house of the Bedouin Banu Haritha tribe, whose members held the governorship of Lajjun from the start of Ottoman rule through 1677.\nThe tax registers from 1548 to 1549 report that Jenin had a population of eight households, all Muslim. They paid a fixed tax rate of 25% on agricultural products, including wheat, barley, summer crops, goats and beehives, in addition to occasional revenues; a total of 2,000 ak\u00e7e. All of the revenue went to a \"waqf\" (religious endowment) in the name of the Mamluk sultan Qansuh al-Ghuri (r.\u20091501\u00a0\u2013\u00a01516). Turabay rule was occasionally interrupted, including in 1564, when a certain Kemal Bey was appointed \"sanjak-bey\" (district governor) by the Ottomans. On 15 October 1564 Kemal Bey requested from the \"beylerbey\" (provincial governor) of Damascus that the stone caravanserai of Jenin be repaired, garrisoned and serve as the chief headquarters of the Lajjun \"sanjak-bey\" in order for Lajjun to prosper and for the road connecting Damascus to Jerusalem and Egypt to become secure. The official response was that the caravanserai be turned into a fortress; the fortress became ruined at some later point and 19th-century residents of Jenin used to claim that certain large rocks strewn in the village were the remnants of the 16th-century fortress.\nThe Turabays, who remained nomads in the plain between Mount Carmel and Caesarea, made Jenin the administrative headquarters of Lajjun and used the town's Izz al-Din Cemetery to bury their dead. A large, domed mausoleum was built for the grave of one of the chiefs and \"sanjak-beys\" of the family, Turabay ibn Ali (d. 1601). Known as Qubbat al-Amir Turabay (Dome of the Emir Turabay), it was described in a 1941 report as a ruined structure, and Sharon, writing in 2017, notes that it \"does not exist anymore\". No other graves of the Turabays in Jenin had survived into the 20th century. During the conflict between Fakhr al-Din of the Ma'n dynasty, who governed the sanjaks of Sidon-Beirut and Safed, and the Turabays, in 1623, Fakhr al-Din captured Jenin and stationed his men there. In 1624 the most prominent Turabay chief and \"sanjak-bey\" of Lajjun, Ahmad ibn Turabay, drove out the Ma'nid troops from Jenin and established his personal residence in the town.\nIn the mid-18th century, Jenin was designated the administrative capital of the combined districts of Lajjun and Ajlun. There are indications that the area comprising Jenin and Nablus remained functionally autonomous under Ottoman rule and that the empire struggled to collect taxes there. During the Napoleonic Campaign in Egypt which extended into Syria and Palestine in 1799, a local official from Jenin wrote a poem enumerating and calling upon local Arab leaders to resist Bonaparte, without mentioning the Sultan or the need to protect the Ottoman Empire.\nIn the late 19th century, some members of the Jarrar family, who formed part of the \"mallakin\" (elite land-owning families) in Jenin, cooperated with merchants in Haifa to set up an export enterprise there. During the Ottoman era, Jenin was plagued by local warfare between members of the same clan. The French explorer Gu\u00e9rin visited in 1870. In 1882, the PEF's \"Survey of Western Palestine\" described Jenin as \"The capital of the district, the seat of a Caimacam, a town of about 3,000 inhabitants, with a small bazaar. The houses are well built of stone. There are two families of Roman Catholics; the remainder are Moslems. A spring rises east of the town and is conducted to a large masonry reservoir, near the west side, of good squared stonework, with a long stone trough. This reservoir was built by 'And el Hady, Mudir of Acre, in the first half of the century [..], north of the town is the little mosque of 'Ezz ed Din, with a good- sized dome and a minaret.\"\nBritish Mandate period.\nAccording to a census conducted in 1922 by the British Mandate authorities, Jenin had a population of 2,637 (2,307 Muslims, 212 Hindus, 108 Christians, seven Jews, and three Sikhs). A following census in 1931 showed a slight increase to 2,706 (2,610 Muslims, 103 Christians, two Jews, and one Druze) with another 68 in nearby suburbs (all Muslims). From 1936, Jenin became a center of rebellion against the British Mandatory authorities. By the summer of 1938, residents of the city embarked on \"an intensified campaign of murder, intimidation and sabotage\" that caused the British administration \"grave concern\", according to a British report to the League of Nations; the population had further increased to 3,100. The city played an important role in the 1936\u201339 Arab revolt in Palestine, prompted by the death of Izz ad-Din al-Qassam in a fire-fight with British colonial police at the nearby town of Ya'bad months prior to the start of the revolt. On 25 August 1938, the day after the British Assistant District Commissioner was assassinated in his Jenin office, a large British force with explosives entered the town. Despite having captured and killed the assassin, British forces ordered the inhabitants to leave, and blew up one quarter of the town as a form of punishment.\nJenin was used by Fawzi al-Qawuqji's Arab Liberation Army as a base.\nThe village statistics of 1945 list the population as 3,990 (3,840 Muslims and 150 Christians).\n1948 War.\nIn the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War, the city was defended by the Iraqi Army, then captured briefly by the forces from Israel's Carmeli Brigade during the \"Ten Days' fighting\" following the cancellation of the first cease-fire. Prior to the battle, the city's residents fled temporarily. The offensive was actually a feint designed to draw Arab forces away from the critical Battle for Jerusalem, and gains in that sector were quickly abandoned when Arab reinforcements arrived.\nJordanian control.\nIn the wake of the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War, and after the 1949 Armistice Agreements, Jenin came under Jordanian rule. It was annexed by Jordan in 1950.\nThe Jenin refugee camp was founded in 1953 by Jordan to house displaced Palestinians who fled or were expelled during the 1948 War. In 2014 the camp had a population of 16,000. For 19 years, the city was under Jordanian control. A war cemetery for Iraqi soldiers and local combatants is located on the outskirts of Jenin.\nThe Jordanian census of 1961 found 14,402 inhabitants in Jenin.\nIsraeli occupation 1967 to 2020.\nJenin has been under Israeli occupation since the Six-Day War, in 1967.\nOn 14 May 1989, during the early months of the First Intifada. Mohammad Jibrin, aged 45, died in Ramallah Hospital after being beaten by Israeli soldiers in Jenin. Three months later, in response to a question from a member of Knesset Defence Minister Yitzhak Rabin wrote that there was no investigation by the Military Police Investigator.\nAccording to Joel Beinin, Jenin was classified as under the administration of the Palestinian National Authority as Area A of the West Bank, a Palestinian enclave, in 1995. In 1996, Israel handed over control of the city to the Palestinian National Authority in keeping with the Oslo Accords.\nAccording to the BBC, the city is \"Known among Palestinians\" as \"the Martyrs' capital\", but the reason they gave was Israeli statistics about suicide bombings, the BBC did not identify any non-Israeli source for the name. During the Second Palestinian uprising (also known as the Al-Aqsa Intifada) the camp's militants, some 200 armed men, included members of Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades, Tanzim, Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) and Hamas. By Israel's count, at least 28 suicide bombers were dispatched from the Jenin camp from 2000 to 2003 during the Second Intifada. Israeli army weekly \"Bamahane\" attributes at least 31 militant attacks, totaling 124 victims, to Jenin during the same period, more than any other city in the West Bank.\nDuring the al-Aqsa Intifada, Israel launched Operation Defensive Shield with the stated aim of dismantling militant infrastructure so as to curb suicide bombings and other militant activities. The army encircled and entered six major Palestinian population centers in the West Bank, among them Jenin. During the Battle of Jenin (2002) in April 2002, 23 Israeli soldiers and 52 Palestinians, including civilians, were killed. Human Rights Watch reported that the refugee camp, which was the major battleground, suffered extensive damage. Witnesses stated unarmed people were shot and denied medical treatment, and as a result died. Human Rights Watch have regarded many killings to be unlawful such as the death of a 57-year-old wheelchair bound man who was shot and run over by a tank despite having attached a white flag on his wheelchair. A 37-year-old man who was paralysed was crushed under the rubble of his house, his family was not allowed to remove his body. A 14-year-old boy was killed as he travelled to purchase groceries during the temporary relief of the curfew that was imposed by the army. Medical staff were shot at (one nurse killed) while trying to reach the wounded even after clearly being in uniform displaying the red crescent symbol. There have also been reports of Israeli soldiers using Palestinians as human shields, one father described how a soldier rested his rifle on his 14-year-old son's shoulder as he shot. Israel denied the entry of rescue teams and journalists into Jenin even after they withdrew. Over the following years, Jenin was subject to extended curfews and targeted killings.\nDuring a gun-battle with Islamic Jihad militants whom Israel says were firing at troops from inside the UN compound, an Israeli military sniper shot and killed a UN Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) employee, Iain Hook (54) on November 22, 2002. The sniper reportedly mistook a cellphone in Hook's hands for a gun or grenade.\nIn the framework of the Valley of Peace initiative, a joint Arab-Israeli project is under way to promote tourism in the Jenin region. In 2010, 600 new businesses opened in Jenin. The Canaan Fair Trade is headquartered in Jenin. Director of The Freedom Theatre in Jenin, Juliano Mer-Khamis, was killed by masked gunmen in the city in April 2011. Mer-Khamis co-founded the theatre with Zakaria Zubeidi, former military chief of the al-Aqsa Brigades who had renounced violence.\nIsraeli occupation in the 2020s.\nOn 6 February 2020, a Palestinian policeman, Tarek Badwan, was shot dead by an Israeli sniper as he stood at the entrance to the Jenin police station and chatted with a colleague. No explanation has been forthcoming. The incident was recorded on video.\nOn 17 June 2022, Israeli forces conducted a raid in the al-Marah area of the city. During the raid, Israeli forces opened fire on a car, killing three Palestinians and seriously injuring another.\nOn 26 January 2023, Israeli forces killed nine in a clash with Islamic Jihad militants during a raid in the city and refugee camp of Jenin.\nOn 3 July 2023, shortly after 1 a.m., Israeli forces attacked the city's refugee camp using drone-fired missiles and ground troops. Eight Palestinians died from injuries sustained during the attack and a further eighty were injured, nine of them critically. Fifty Palestinians, whom Israeli forces labeled \"militants\", were arrested. Israeli forces cut off telecommunications and electricity in the area and medical professionals struggled to reach the injured. Israel claimed that while they were targeting suspected members of the Jenin Brigades, an armed group, they acknowledged that innocent people may have been injured or killed in the raid. Yoav Gallant, the Israeli Minister of Defense, said \"The operation is progressing as planned,\" and Eli Cohen, the Israeli Foreign Minister, said claimed the refugee camp had become a \"center for terrorist activity\" thanks to funding from Iranian sources. The refugee camp has a population of roughly 17,000 inhabitants and is about a quarter a square mile in size.\nOn 19 September 2023, four Palestinians were killed during another Israeli military invasion of the city \u2013 among them a 15-year-old Palestinian boy, chased and killed for having noticed the Israeli undercover soldiers sneaking into the Jenin refugee camp.\nGaza war.\nDuring the Gaza war, Israeli forces carried out multiple operations in Jenin. On October 22, 2023, the IDF conducted an airstrike targeting an underground compound beneath the Al-Ansar Mosque in the city. It was reported to be the first airstrike in the West Bank since the Second Intifada. The IDF stated that the strike aimed at operatives from Hamas and PIJ who were planning a terror attack.\nJenin was severely damaged during the Gaza war. By June 2024 repeated bombing attacks and incursions with bulldozers by Israeli forces razed every street and reduced every public square to rubble. In one incident on 21 May, according to journalist Gideon Levy, an Israeli sniper shot dead bystanders, including surgeon Oussaid Jabareen, who was shot while on his way to work at the Jenin Government Hospital.\nIn late August 2024 Israel launched a large-scale, multi-day raid on Jenin as part of Operation Summer Camps, with one resident saying that \"The water is cut off. The electricity is cut off, the sewage system is no longer working. All the infrastructure is destroyed, we no longer have any services that work.\" The governor of Jenin said that \"The Israelis are besieging the hospitals and cutting off the city from the refugee camp, which has become a military zone with no access...neither the civil defence, nor the ambulances, nor the journalists can go and see what is happening there.\" The IDF, on the other hand, says that this is operation is \"not extremely different from regular activity\". At least 20 Palestinians were killed by the IDF in this attack, including a Palestinian man in his 80s. Additionally, the Israeli forces fired at ambulances carrying \"a dead and a wounded person\", leading to the injury of 2 EMTs and a volunteer doctor.\nAlso in August, Israeli bulldozers destroyed miles of the city, including homes, businesses and infrastructure; Israeli soldiers blocked emergency responders from assisting residents. News reports include videos of this attack, as well as assertions by the Israel Defense Forces that it is rooting out terrorism; and that it \"undertakes all feasible precautions to avoid damaging essential infrastructure\u201d, while acknowledging that these \u201coperations in the area have caused unavoidable harm to certain civilian structures\".\nIn December 2024, the Palestinian Authority launched an anti-militant operation in Jenin, the largest in three decades, called \"Protect the Homeland\". The operation aims to regain control of the Jenin refugee camp, targeting militants and those fueling instability.\nOn January 21, 2025, the IDF launched its own operation in Jenin, dubbed Iron Wall, aimed at clearing Jenin of militants and putting a stop to light arms being smuggled into the city. Operations in Jenin were ongoing as of late February 2025. Around 100 homes had been demolished, residents were being prevented from returning to the area by military checkpoints, and Israeli tanks had been deployed.\nGeography.\nJenin is situated at the foot of the rugged northernmost hills (Jabal Nablus) of the West Bank, and along the southern edge of the Jezreel Valley (Marj Ibn Amer), which the city overlooks. Its highest elevation is about 250 meters above sea level and its lowest areas are 90 meters above sea level. Immediately southwest of Jenin is the Sahl Arraba plain (Dothan Valley), while further south is the Marj Sanur valley. About 1.5 kilometers to Jenin's east is Mount Gilboa (Jabal Faqqua).\nJenin is 42 kilometers north of Nablus, 18 kilometers to the south of Afula, and 51 kilometers southeast of Haifa. The nearest localities are Umm at-Tut and Jalqamus to the southeast, Qabatiya and Zababdeh to the south, Burqin to the southwest, Kafr Dan to the west, Arranah, Jalamah and the Arab Israeli village of Muqeible to the north, Deir Ghazaleh to the northeast, and Beit Qad and Deir Abu Da'if to the east.\nGovernment.\nJenin municipality was established in 1886 under the Ottoman rule with no more than 80 voters and elections were made every 4 years until 1982 when the Israeli government took control over the municipality until 1995. \nList of Jenin mayors:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMunicipal elections were held in Jenin on 15 December 2005. Six seats each were won by Hamas and the local coalition of Fatah and the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine. Jenin was one of several Palestinian cities where Hamas showed a dramatic growth in electoral support.\n Hadem Rida was then elected as Mayor of the city, until he was arrested by the Israel Forces and spent 3 years in jail. After his release, he resigned from the position and went back to practice in his clinic in Jenin city.\nDemographics.\nAccording to the 2017 census by the Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics, Jenin had a population of 49,908, the Jenin Refugee Camp of 10,417 on 373 dunams (92\u00a0acres). Some 42.3% of the population of the camp was under the age of 15.\nPublic institutions and landmarks.\nJenin is home to many institutions, landmarks, and works of art. The Khalil Suleiman Hospital is located in the city. The Freedom Theatre is a theatre and cinema in the Jenin refugee camp. The Jenin Horse is a famous work of art made of scrap metal from cars destroyed by Israeli forces, built in 2003 by German artist Thomas Kilpper and young people from the city. The horse was destroyed by the IDF in October 2023.\nThere is a monument honoring German pilots shot down in Jenin during the First World War, which incorporates an original wooden propeller. An old British Mandate landing strip, Muqeible Airfield, is located in the city.\nHoly sites.\nThe main and largest mosque of Jenin is the Fatima Khatun Mosque, built in 1566. Another mosque in Jenin is the Al-Ansar Mosque.\nThe ancient cemetery in Jenin houses the tomb of Sheikh Izz al-Din, a Sufi saint of the Rifa'i order. According to local traditions, he was a descendant of Ali Zayn al-Abidin, the grandson of Muhammad and the sixth Sh'ia Imam. According to a local tradition, Sheikh Izz al-Din fought alongside Saladin against the Crusaders. The tomb possibly predates the cemetery, which served as a burial site for the people of Jenin and the Turabay dynasty. Another tomb in the same cemetery is al-Sheikh Tarabiya, where the Turabay emir Ahmad ibn Turabay ibn Ali al-Harithi is buried.\nEducation and culture.\nThe Arab American University is located in Jenin's vicinity.\nCinema Jenin is the largest movie theater in the area. The cinema, which reopened in 2010 after a 23-year intermission, has indoor and outdoor screens, a film library and educational facilities.\nStrings of Freedom is an orchestra in Jenin founded by an Arab citizen of Israel, Wafaa Younis, who travels form her home in central Israel to teach music to the local youth.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50999", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50999", "title": "Din\u00e9", "text": ""}
{"id": "51007", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51007", "title": "Gaius Julius Vindex", "text": "Roman senator and governor (AD c. 25\u201368)\nGaius Julius Vindex (c.\u2009AD 25 \u2013 68), was a Roman governor in the province of Gallia Lugdunensis.\nBiography.\nFollowing normal Roman procedures, his name Gaius Julius indicated that his family had likely been given citizenship under Gaius Julius Caesar, or perhaps Emperor Augustus or Caligula. He was of a noble Gallic family of Aquitania (given senatorial status under Claudius) and was one of the men belonging to a faction of Empress Agrippina, the mother of Nero.\nVindex had taken part in a conspiracy against the emperor in 59.\nVindex Rebellion.\nIn either late 67 or early 68, Vindex rebelled against Emperor Nero. Though the aims of his followers may have been more complex, Vindex, as a senator, probably had the aim simply of replacing Nero with a better emperor and ending the tyranny that plagued the empire. \nRise of Emperor Galba.\nAccording to the historian Cassius Dio, Vindex \"was powerful in body and of shrewd intelligence, was skilled in warfare and full of daring for any great enterprise; and he had a passionate love of freedom and a vast ambition\". In order to gain support, he declared his allegiance to the then governor of Hispania Tarraconensis, Servius Sulpicius Galba. By June 68, military support for Galba eventually led to Nero's suicide. Galba, acclaimed by the Senate, struck coins to commemorate Vindex, to whom he owed his position as emperor.\nBattle of Vesontio.\nThe commander of the army from Germania Superior, governor Lucius Verginius Rufus, advanced against him. The Battle of Vesontio (68) took place near Vesontio (modern Besan\u00e7on). What occurred then is unclear, but, despite a meeting between Verginius and Vindex, the forces under Verginius appear to have decided on a battle without orders. Desire for plunder and the weakness of Verginius as a commander are possible explanations. Vindex was defeated in the resulting battle and subsequently killed himself.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51008", "revid": "35069", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51008", "title": "Vincent Foster", "text": ""}
{"id": "51011", "revid": "45201920", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51011", "title": "Rigging", "text": "Ropes, cables and chains which support masts of sailing ships\nRigging comprises the system of ropes, cables and chains, which support and control a sailing ship or sail boat's masts and sails. \"Standing rigging\" is the fixed rigging that supports masts including shrouds and stays. \"Running rigging\" is rigging which adjusts the position of the vessel's sails and spars including halyards, braces, sheets and vangs.\nEtymology.\nAccording to the Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica Eleventh Edition \"rigging\" derives from Anglo-Saxon \"wrigan\" or \"wringing\", \"to clothe\". The same source points out that \"rigging\" a sailing vessel refers to putting all the components in place to allow it to function, including the masts, spars, sails and the rigging.\nHistory.\nTheophrastus in his \"History of Plants\" (c. 300 BCE) states that the rigging on King Antigonus' fleet was made from papyrus reed.\nTypes of rigging.\nRigging is divided into two classes, \"standing\", which supports the mast (and bowsprit), and \"running\", which controls the orientation of the sails and their degree of reefing. Configurations differ for each type of rigging, between \"fore-and-aft rigged\" vessels and \"square-rigged\" vessels.\nStanding.\nStanding rigging is cordage which is fixed in position. Standing rigging is almost always between a mast and the deck, using tension to hold the mast firmly in place. Due to its role, standing rigging is now most commonly made of steel cable. It was historically made of the same materials as running rigging, only coated in tar for added strength and protection from the elements.\nFore-and-aft rigged vessels.\nMost fore-and-aft rigged vessels have the following types of standing rigging: \na forestay, a backstay, and upper and lower shrouds (side stays).\nLess common rigging configurations are diamond stays and jumpers. Both of these are used to keep a thin mast in column especially under the load of a large down wind sail or in strong wind.\nRigging parts include swageless terminals, swage terminals, shackle toggle terminals and fail-safe wire rigging insulators.\nSquare-rigged vessels.\nWhereas 20th-century square-rigged vessels were constructed of steel with steel standing rigging, prior vessels used wood masts with hemp-fiber standing rigging. As rigs became taller by the end of the 19th century, masts relied more heavily on successive spars, stepped one atop the other to form the whole, from bottom to top: the \"lower mast\", \"top mast\", and \"topgallant mast\". This construction relies heavily on support by a complex array of stays and shrouds. Each stay in either the fore-and-aft or athwartships direction has a corresponding one in the opposite direction providing counter-tension. Fore-and-aft the system of tensioning start with the stays that are anchored in front of each mast. Shrouds are tensioned by pairs of deadeyes, circular blocks that have the large-diameter line run around them, whilst multiple holes allow smaller line\u2014\"lanyards\"\u2014to pass multiple times between the two and thereby allow tensioning of the shroud. In addition to overlapping the mast below, the top mast and topgallant mast are supported laterally by shrouds that pass around either a platform, called a \"top\", or cross-wise beams, called \"crosstrees\". Each additional mast segment is supported fore and aft by a series of stays that lead forward. These lines are countered in tension by backstays, which are secured along the sides of the vessel behind the shrouds.\nRunning.\nRunning rigging is the cordage used to control the shape and position of the sails. Materials have evolved from the use of Manilla rope to synthetic fibers, which include dacron, nylon and kevlar. Running rigging varies between \"fore-and-aft rigged\" vessels and \"square-rigged\" vessels. They have common functions between them for supporting, shaping and orienting sails, which employ different mechanisms. For supporting sails, halyards (sometimes haulyards), are used to raise sails and control luff tension. On gaff-rigged vessels, topping lifts hold the yards across the top of the sail aloft. Sail shape is usually controlled by lines that pull at the corners of the sail, including the outhaul at the clew and the downhaul at the tack on fore-and-aft rigs. The orientation of sails to the wind is controlled primarily by sheets, but also by braces, which position the yard arms with respect to the wind on square-rigged vessels.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51012", "revid": "46850153", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51012", "title": "Charles K. Kao", "text": "Hong Kong electrical engineer (1933\u20132018)\nSir Charles Kuen Kao (; November 4, 1933 \u2013 September 23, 2018) was a Hong Kong electrical engineer who contributed to the development and use of fibre optics in telecommunications. In the 1960s, Kao created various methods to combine glass fibres with lasers in order to transmit digital data, which laid the groundwork for the evolution of the Internet and the eventual creation of the World Wide Web.\nBorn in 1933 in Shanghai, Kao and his family settled in Hong Kong in 1949. He graduated from St. Joseph's College in Hong Kong in 1952 and went to London to study electrical engineering. In the 1960s, he worked at Standard Telecommunication Laboratories, the research center of Standard Telephones and Cables (STC) in Harlow, and it was here in 1966 that he laid the groundwork for fibre optics in communication. Known as the \"godfather of broadband,\" the \"father of fibre optics,\" and the \"father of fibre optic communications,\" he continued his work in Hong Kong at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, and in the United States at ITT (the parent corporation of STC) and Yale University. \nIn 2009, Kao was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics \"for groundbreaking achievements concerning the transmission of light in fibres for optical communication.\" The following year, he was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II \"for services to fibre optic communications.\"\nKao was a permanent resident of Hong Kong, and a citizen of the United Kingdom and the United States.\nEarly life and education.\nCharles Kuen Kao was born on November 4, 1933, in Shanghai, China, and lived with his parents in the Shanghai French Concession. He studied Chinese classics at home with his brother, under a tutor. He also studied English and French at the Shanghai World School () that was founded by a number of progressive Chinese educators, including Cai Yuanpei.\nAfter the Communist Revolution in 1949, Kao's family settled in Hong Kong\u2014which at the time was a British crown colony. Much of his mother's siblings moved to Hong Kong in the late 1930s; among them, his mother's youngest brother took good care of him.\nKao's family lived on Lau Sin Street\u2014at the edge of the North Point\u2014a neighbourhood of Shanghai immigrants. During Kao's time in Hong Kong, he studied at St. Joseph's College for five years and graduated in 1952.\nKao obtained high score in the Hong Kong School Certificate Examination, which at the time was the territory's matriculation examination\u2014qualifying him for admission to the University of Hong Kong (HKU). However, electrical engineering wasn't a programme available at HKU, the territory's then only tertiary education institute.\nHence, in 1953, Kao went to London to continue his studies in secondary school and obtained his A-Level in 1955. He was later admitted to Woolwich Polytechnic (now the University of Greenwich) and obtained a B.Sc. in 1957. He then pursued research and received his Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering in 1965 from the University College London\u2014under the supervision of Harold Barlow\u2014as an external student while working at Standard Telecommunication Laboratories in Harlow, the research centre of Standard Telephones and Cables (STC).\nAncestry and family.\nKao's father Kao Chun-Hsiang (), originally from Jinshan City (now a district of Shanghai City), obtained his Juris Doctor from the University of Michigan Law School in 1925. He was a judge at the Shanghai Concession and later a professor at Soochow University (then in Shanghai) Comparative Law School of China.\nHis grandfather Kao Hsieh was a scholar, poet, and artist. Several writers including Kao Hs\u00fc, Yao Kuang (), and Kao Tseng () were also Kao's close relatives.\nHis father's cousin was astronomer Kao Ping-tse (Kao crater is named after him). Kao's younger brother Timothy Wu Kao () is a civil engineer and professor emeritus at the Catholic University of America; his research is in hydrodynamics.\nKao met his future wife Gwen May-Wan Kao (n\u00e9e Wong; ) in London after graduation, when they worked together as engineers at STC. She was British Chinese. They were married in 1959 in London, and had a son and a daughter, both of whom reside and work in Silicon Valley, California. According to Kao's autobiography, Kao was a Catholic who attended Catholic Church while his wife attended the Anglican Communion.\nAcademic career.\nFibre optics and communications.\nIn the 1960s at Standard Telecommunication Laboratories (STL) based in Harlow, Essex, England, Kao and his coworkers did their pioneering work in creating fibre optics as a telecommunications medium, by demonstrating that the high-loss of existing fibre optics arose from impurities in the glass, rather than from an underlying problem with the technology itself.\nIn 1963, when Kao first joined the optical communications research team he made notes summarising the background situation and available technology at the time, and identifying the key individuals involved. Initially Kao worked in the team of Antoni E. Karbowiak (Toni Karbowiak), who was working under Alec Reeves to study optical waveguides for communications. Kao's task was to investigate fibre attenuation, for which he collected samples from different fibre manufacturers and also investigated the properties of bulk glasses carefully. Kao's study primarily convinced him that the impurities in material caused the high light losses of those fibres. Later that year, Kao was appointed head of the electro-optics research group at STL. He took over the optical communication program of STL in December 1964, because his supervisor, Karbowiak, left to take the chair in Communications in the School of Electrical Engineering at the University of New South Wales (UNSW), Sydney, Australia.\nAlthough Kao succeeded Karbowiak as manager of optical communications research, he immediately decided to abandon Karbowiak's plan (thin-film waveguide) and overall change research direction with his colleague George Hockham. They not only considered optical physics but also the material properties. The results were first presented by Kao to the IEE in January 1966 in London, and further published in July with George Hockham (1964\u20131965 worked with Kao).[a] This study proposed the use of glass fibres for optical communication. The concepts described, especially the electromagnetic theory and performance parameters, are the basis of today's optical fibre communications.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"What Kao did in Harlow transformed the world and provided a backbone for the internet. He was the father of fiber optics.\"\n\u2014Harlow Museum's David Devine on Kao's pioneering work in fiber optics at STC's Standard Telecommunication Laboratories in Harlow\nIn 1965,[b] Kao with Hockham concluded that the fundamental limitation for glass light attenuation is below 20 \"dB/km\" (\"decibels per kilometer\", is a measure of the attenuation of a signal over a distance), which is a key threshold value for optical communications. However, at the time of this determination, optical fibres commonly exhibited light loss as high as 1,000\u00a0dB/km and even more. This conclusion opened the intense race to find low-loss materials and suitable fibres for reaching such criteria.\nKao, together with his new team (members including T. W. Davies, M. W. Jones and C. R. Wright), pursued this goal by testing various materials. They precisely measured the attenuation of light with different wavelengths in glasses and other materials. During this period, Kao pointed out that the high purity of fused silica (SiO2) made it an ideal candidate for optical communication. Kao also stated that the impurity of glass material is the main cause for the dramatic decay of light transmission inside glass fibre, rather than fundamental physical effects such as scattering as many physicists thought at that time, and such impurity could be removed. This led to a worldwide study and production of high-purity glass fibres. When Kao first proposed that such glass fibre could be used for long-distance information transfer and could replace copper wires which were used for telecommunication during that era, his ideas were widely disbelieved; later people realized that Kao's ideas revolutionized the whole communication technology and industry.\nHe also played a leading role in the early stage of engineering and commercial realization of optical communication. In spring 1966, Kao traveled to the U.S. but failed to interest Bell Labs, which was a competitor of STL in communication technology at that time. He subsequently traveled to Japan and gained support. Kao visited many glass and polymer factories, discussed with various people including engineers, scientists, businessmen about the techniques and improvement of glass fibre manufacture. In 1969, Kao with M. W. Jones measured the intrinsic loss of bulk-fused silica at 4\u00a0dB/km, which is the first evidence of ultra-transparent glass. Bell Labs started considering fibre optics seriously. As of 2017, fibre optic losses (from both bulk and intrinsic sources) are as low as 0.1419\u00a0dB/km at the 1.56\u00a0\u03bcm wavelength.\nKao developed important techniques and configurations for glass fibre waveguides, and contributed to the development of different fibre types and system devices which met both civil and military[c] application requirements, and peripheral supporting systems for optical fibre communication. In mid-1970s, he did seminal work on glass fibre fatigue strength. When named the first ITT Executive Scientist, Kao launched the \"Terabit Technology\" program in addressing the high frequency limits of signal processing, so Kao is also known as the \"father of the terabit technology concept\". Kao has published more than 100 papers and was granted over 30 patents, including the water-resistant high-strength fibres (with M. S. Maklad).\nAt an early stage of developing optic fibres, Kao already strongly preferred single-mode for long-distance optical communication, instead of using multi-mode systems. His vision later was followed and now is applied almost exclusively. Kao was also a visionary of modern submarine communications cables and largely promoted this idea. He predicted in 1983 that world's seas would be littered with fibre optics, five years ahead of the time that such a trans-oceanic fibre-optic cable first became serviceable.\nAli Javan's introduction of a steady helium\u2013neon laser and Kao's discovery of fibre light-loss properties now are recognized as the two essential milestones for the development of fibre-optic communications.\nLater work.\nKao joined the Chinese University of Hong Kong (CUHK) in 1970 to found the Department of Electronics, which later became the Department of Electronic Engineering. During this period, Kao was the reader and then the chair Professor of Electronics at CUHK; he built up both undergraduate and graduate study programs of electronics and oversaw the graduation of his first students. Under his leadership, the School of Education and other new research institutes were established. He returned to ITT Corporation in 1974 (the parent corporation of STC at that time) in the United States and worked in Roanoke, Virginia, first as Chief Scientist and later as Director of Engineering. In 1982, he became the first ITT Executive Scientist and was stationed mainly at the Advanced Technology Center in Connecticut. While there, he served as an adjunct professor and Fellow of Trumbull College at Yale University. In 1985, Kao spent one year in West Germany, at the SEL Research Center. In 1986, Kao was the Corporate Director of Research at ITT.\nHe was one of the earliest to study the environmental effects of land reclamation in Hong Kong, and presented one of his first related studies at the conference of the Association of Commonwealth Universities (ACU) in Edinburgh in 1972.\nKao was the vice-chancellor of the Chinese University of Hong Kong from 1987 to 1996. From 1991, Kao was an Independent Non-Executive Director and a member of the Audit Committee of the Varitronix International Limited in Hong Kong. From 1993 to 1994, he was the President of the Association of Southeast Asian Institutions of Higher Learning (ASAIHL). In 1996, Kao donated to Yale University, and the \"Charles Kao Fund Research Grants\" was established to support Yale's studies, research and creative projects in Asia. The fund currently is managed by Yale University Councils on East Asian and Southeast Asian Studies. After his retirement from CUHK in 1996, Kao spent his six-month sabbatical leave at the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering of Imperial College London; from 1997 to 2002, he also served as visiting professor in the same department.\nKao was chairman and member of the Energy Advisory Committee (EAC) of Hong Kong for two years, and retired from the position on July 15, 2000. Kao was a member of the Council of Advisors on Innovation and Technology of Hong Kong, appointed on April 20, 2000. In 2000, Kao co-founded the Independent Schools Foundation Academy, which is located in Cyberport, Hong Kong. He was its founding chairman in 2000, and stepped down from the board of the ISF in December 2008. Kao was the keynote speaker at IEEE GLOBECOM 2002 in Taipei, Taiwan. In 2003, Kao was named a Chair Professor by special appointment at the Electronics Institute of the College of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, National Taiwan University. Kao then worked as the chairman and CEO of Transtech Services Ltd., a telecommunication consultancy in Hong Kong. He was the founder, chairman and CEO of ITX Services Limited. From 2003 to January 30, 2009, Kao was an independent non-executive director and member of the audit committee of Next Media.\nAwards.\nKao received numerous awards such as the Nobel Prize in Physics, Grand Bauhinia Medal, Marconi Prize, Prince Philip Medal, Charles Stark Draper Prize, Bell Award, SPIE Gold Medal, Japan International Award, Faraday Medal, and the James C. McGroddy Prize for New Materials.\nAwards.\nKao donated most of his prize medals to the Chinese University of Hong Kong.\nLater life and death.\nKao's international travels led him to opine that he belonged to the world instead of any country. An open letter published by Kao and his wife in 2010 later clarified that \"Charles studied in Hong Kong for his high schooling, he has taught here, he was the Vice-Chancellor of CUHK and retired here too. So he is a Hong Kong belonger.\"\nPottery making was a hobby of Kao's. Kao also enjoyed reading Wuxia (Chinese martial fantasy) novels.\nKao suffered from Alzheimer's disease from early 2004 and had speech difficulty, but had no problem recognising people or addresses. His father suffered from the same disease. Beginning in 2008, he resided in Mountain View, California, United States, where he moved from Hong Kong in order to live near his children and grandchild.\nOn October 6, 2009, when Kao was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics for his contributions to the study of the transmission of light in optical fibres and for fibre communication, he said, \"I am absolutely speechless and never expected such an honor.\" Kao's wife Gwen told the press that the prize will primarily be used for Charles's medical expenses. In 2010 Charles and Gwen Kao founded the Charles K. Kao Foundation for Alzheimer's Disease to raise public awareness about the disease and provide support for the patients.\nIn 2016, Kao lost the ability to maintain his balance. At the end-stage of his dementia he was cared for by his wife and intended not to be kept alive with life support or have CPR performed on him. Kao died at Bradbury Hospice in Hong Kong on September 23, 2018, at the age of 84.\nNotes.\n^\u00a0a:\u00a0Kao's major task was to investigate light-loss properties in materials of optic fibers, and determine whether they could be removed or not. Hockham's was investigating light-loss due to discontinuities and curvature of fiber. Parameter #1 (name of content note) and parameter #2 (text of content note) must both be entered. Parameter #1 (name of content note) and parameter #2 (text of content note) must both be entered.\n^\u00a0d:\u00a0In the United States National Academy of Engineering Membership Website, Kao's country is indicated as \"People's Republic of China\".\n Parameter #1 (name of content note) and parameter #2 (text of content note) must both be entered.\n^\u00a0a:\u00a0Kao's major task was to investigate light-loss properties in materials of optic fibers, and determine whether they could be removed or not. Hockham's was investigating light-loss due to discontinuities and curvature of fiber.\n Parameter #1 (name of content note) and parameter #2 (text of content note) must both be entered.\n Parameter #1 (name of content note) and parameter #2 (text of content note) must both be entered.\n^\u00a0d:\u00a0In the United States National Academy of Engineering Membership Website, Kao's country is indicated as \"People's Republic of China\".\n Parameter #1 (name of content note) and parameter #2 (text of content note) must both be entered.^\u00a0f:\u00a0for making communication at optical frequencies practical by discovering, inventing, and developing the material, techniques and configurations for glass fibre waveguides and, in particular, for recognizing and proving by careful measurements in bulk glasses that silicon glass could provide the requisite low optical loss needed for a practical communication system^\u00a0g:\u00a0for contribution to the materials research and development that resulted in practical low loss optical fibres, one of the cornerstones of optical communications technology^\u00a0h:\u00a0in recognition of his pioneering work which led to the invention of optical fibre and for his leadership in its engineering and commercial realization; and for his distinguished contribution to higher education in Hong Kong^\u00a0i:\u00a0for pioneering research on wide-band, low-loss optical fibre communications^\u00a0j:\u00a0co-recipient with Robert D. Maurer and John B. MacChesney^\u00a0k:\u00a0for groundbreaking achievements concerning the transmission of light in fibres for optical communication\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51013", "revid": "42061919", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51013", "title": "Slurry pipeline", "text": "Pipeline used to move ores mixed with water\nA slurry pipeline is a specially engineered pipeline used to move ores, such as coal or iron, or mining waste, called tailings, over long distances. A mixture of the ore concentrate and water, called slurry, is pumped to its destination and the water is filtered out. Due to the abrasive properties of slurry, the pipelines can be lined with high-density polyethylene (HDPE), or manufactured completely from HDPE Pipe, although this requires a very thick pipe wall. Slurry pipelines are used as an alternative to railroad transportation when mines are located in remote, inaccessible areas, often requiring complex slurry pipeline design to avoid unnecessary wear.\nCanadian researchers at the University of Alberta are investigating the use of slurry pipelines to move agricultural and forestry wastes from dispersed sources to centralized biofuel plants. Over distances of 100 kilometres pipeline transport of biomass can be viable provided it is used in processes that can accept very wet feedstocks such as hydrothermal liquefaction or ethanol fermentation. Compared to an equivalently sized oil pipeline, a biomass slurry pipeline would carry around 8% of the energy.\nProcess.\nThe concentrate of the ore is mixed with water and then pumped over a long distance to a port where it can be shipped for further processing. At the end of the pipeline, the material is separated from the [slurry] in a filter press to remove the water. This water is usually subjected to a waste treatment process before disposal or return to the mine. Slurry pipelines offer an economic advantage over railroad transport and much less noise disturbance to the environment, particularly when mines are in extremely remote areas.\nPipelines must be suitably engineered to resist abrasion from the solids as well as corrosion from the soil. Some of these pipelines are lined with high-density polyethylene (HDPE).\nTypical materials that are transferred using slurry pipelines include coal, copper, iron, and phosphate concentrates, limestone, lead, zinc, nickel, bauxite and oil sands.\nSlurry pipelines are also used to transport tailings from a mineral processing plant after the ore has been processed in order to dispose of the remaining rocks or clays.\nFor oil sand plants, a mixture of oil sand and water may be pumped over a long distance to release the bitumen by ablation. These pipelines are also called hydrotransport pipelines.\nHistory.\nEarly modern slurry pipelines include The Ohio 'Consolidation' coal slurry pipeline (1957) and the Kensworth to Rugby limestone slurry pipeline (1965) \nThe 85\u00a0km Savage River Slurry pipeline in Tasmania, Australia, was possibly the world's first slurry pipeline to transport iron ore when it was built in 1967. It includes a 366m bridge span at 167m above the Savage River. It carries iron ore slurry from the Savage River open cut mine owned by Australian Bulk Minerals and was still operational as of 2011.\nPlanned projects.\nOne of the longest slurry pipelines was to be the proposed ETSI pipeline, to transport coal from Wyoming to Louisiana over a distance of 1036 miles (1675\u00a0km). It was never commissioned. It is anticipated that in the next few years some long distance slurry pipelines will be constructed in Australia and South America where mineral deposits are often a few hundred kilometers away from shipping ports.\nA 525\u00a0km slurry pipeline is planned for the Minas-Rio iron ore mine in Brazil.\nSlurry pipelines are also being considered to desilt or remove silts from deposits behind dams in man-made lakes. After the Hurricane Katrina disaster there were proposals to remedy the environment by pumping silt to the shore. Proposals have also been made to de-silt Lake Nubia-Nasser in Egypt and Sudan by slurry pipelines, as Egypt is now deprived of 95% of its alluvium, which used to arrive every year. These projects to remedy the environment might alleviate one of the major problems associated with large dams and man-made lakes.\nESSAR Steel India Limited owns two &gt;250\u00a0km slurry pipelines in India; the Kirandul-Vishakhapatnam (slurry pipeline) and Dabuna-Paradeep pipeline.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51014", "revid": "1312412759", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51014", "title": "Transit", "text": "Transit may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "51016", "revid": "40993790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51016", "title": "Brest", "text": "Brest most commonly refers to:\nBrest may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "51017", "revid": "49286257", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51017", "title": "Siren (mythology)", "text": "Creature in Greek mythology\nIn Greek mythology, sirens (Ancient Greek: singular: ; plural: ) are female humanlike beings with alluring voices; they appear in a scene in the \"Odyssey\" in which Odysseus saves his crew's lives. Roman poets place them on some small islands called Sirenum Scopuli. In some later, rationalized traditions, the literal geography of the \"flowery\" island of Anthemoessa, or Anthemusa, is fixed: sometimes on Cape Pelorum and at others in the islands known as the Sirenuse, near Paestum, or in Capreae. All such locations were surrounded by cliffs and rocks. While some versions have depicted Sirens as woman-headed birds, other versions depict them as mermaids.\nSirens were used in Christian art throughout the medieval era as a symbol of the dangerous temptation embodied by women. \"Siren\" can also be used as a slang term for a woman considered both very attractive and dangerous.\nNomenclature.\nThe etymology of the name is contested. Robert S. P. Beekes has suggested a Pre-Greek origin. Others connect the name to \u03c3\u03b5\u03b9\u03c1\u03ac (\"seir\u00e1\", \"rope, cord\") and \u03b5\u1f34\u03c1\u03c9 (\"e\u00edr\u014d\", \"to tie, join, fasten\"), resulting in the meaning \"binder, entangler\", i.e. one who binds or entangles through magic song. This could be connected to the famous scene of Odysseus being bound to the mast of his ship, to resist their song.\nSirens were later often used as a synonym for mermaids and portrayed with upper human bodies and fish tails. This combination became iconic in the medieval period. The circumstances leading to the commingling involve the treatment of sirens in the medieval \"Physiologus\" and bestiaries, both iconographically, as well as textually in translations from Latin to vulgar languages, as described below.\nIconography.\nClassical iconography.\nThe sirens of Greek mythology first appeared in Homer's \"Odyssey\", where Homer did not provide any physical descriptions, and their visual appearance was left to the readers' imagination. By the 7th century BC, sirens were regularly depicted in art as human-headed birds. Apollonius of Rhodes in \"Argonautica\" (3rd century BC) described the sirens in writing as part woman and part bird. They may have been influenced by the ba-bird of Egyptian religion. In early Greek art, the sirens were generally represented as large birds with women's heads, bird feathers and scaly feet. Later depictions shifted to show sirens with human upper bodies and bird legs, with or without wings. They were often shown playing a variety of musical instruments, especially the lyre, kithara, and aulos.\nThe tenth-century Byzantine dictionary \"Suda\" stated that sirens ( - ) had the form of sparrows from their chests up, and below they were women or that they were little birds with women's faces.\nOriginally, sirens were shown as male or female, but the male siren disappeared from art around the fifth century BC.\nEarly siren-mermaids.\nSome surviving Classical period examples had already depicted the siren as mermaid-like. The sirens are described as mermaids or \"tritonesses\" in examples dating to the 3rd century BC, including an earthenware bowl found in Athens and a terracotta oil lamp possibly from the Roman period.\nThe first known literary attestation of siren as a \"mermaid\" appeared in the Anglo-Latin catalogue \"Liber Monstrorum\" (early 8th century AD), where it says that sirens were \"sea-girls... with the body of a maiden, but have scaly fishes' tails\".\nMedieval Iconography.\nThe siren appeared in several illustrated manuscripts of the \"Physiologus\" and its successors called the bestiaries. The siren was depicted as a half-woman and half-fish mermaid in the 9th century Berne \"Physiologus\", as an early example, but continued to be illustrated with both bird-like parts (wings, clawed feet) and fish-like tail.\nClassical literature.\nFamily tree.\nAlthough a Sophocles fragment makes Phorcys their father, when sirens are named, they are usually as daughters of the river god Achelous, either by the Muse Terpsichore, Melpomene or Calliope or lastly by Sterope, daughter of King Porthaon of Calydon.\nIn Euripides's play \"Helen\" (167), Helen in her anguish calls upon \"Winged maidens, daughters of the Earth (Chthon).\" Although they lured mariners, the Greeks portrayed the sirens in their \"meadow starred with flowers\" and not as sea deities. Epimenides claimed that the sirens were children of Oceanus and Ge. Sirens are found in many Greek stories, notably in Homer's \"Odyssey\".\nList of sirens.\nTheir number is variously reported as from two to eight. In the \"Odyssey\", Homer says nothing of their origin or names, but gives the number of the sirens as two. Later writers mention both their names and number: some state that there were three, Peisinoe, Aglaope, and Thelxiepea or Aglaonoe, Aglaopheme, and Thelxiepea; Parthenope, Ligeia, and Leucosia; Apollonius followed Hesiod gives their names as Thelxinoe, Molpe, and Aglaophonos; the \"Suda\" gives their names as Thelxiepea, Peisinoe, and Ligeia; Hyginus gives the number of the sirens as four: Teles, Rhaidne, Molpe, and Thelxiope; Eustathius states that they were two, Aglaopheme and Thelxiepea; an ancient vase painting attests the two names as Himerope and Thelxiepea.\nTheir names are variously rendered in the later sources as Thelxiepea/Thelxiope/Thelxinoe, Molpe, Himerope, Aglaophonos/Aglaope/Aglaopheme, Pisinoe/Peisino\u00eb/Peisithoe, Parthenope, Ligeia, Leucosia, Rhaidne, Teles, etc.\nMythology.\nDemeter.\nAccording to Ovid (43 BC\u201317 AD), the sirens were the companions of young Persephone. Demeter gave them wings to search for Persephone when she was abducted by Hades. However, the \"Fabulae\" of Hyginus (64 BC\u201317 AD) has Demeter cursing the sirens for failing to intervene in the abduction of Persephone. According to Hyginus, sirens were fated to live only until the mortals who heard their songs could pass by them.\nThe Muses.\nIn the sanctuary of Hera in Coroneia was a statue created by Pythodorus of Thebes, depicting Hera holding the sirens. According to the myth, Hera persuaded the sirens to challenge the Muses to a singing contest. After the Muses won, they are said to have plucked the sirens' feathers and used them to make crowns for themselves. According to Stephanus of Byzantium, the sirens, overwhelmed by their loss, cast off their feathers from their shoulders, turned white and then threw themselves into the sea. As a result, the nearby city was named Aptera (\"featherless\") and the nearby islands were called the \"Leukai\" (\"the white ones\"). John Tzetzes recounts that after defeating the sirens, the Muses crowned themselves with the sirens' wings, except for Terpsichore who was their mother, adding that the city of Aptera named after this event. Furthermore, in one of his letters, Julian the Emperor mentions the Muses' victory over the sirens.\n\"Argonautica\".\nIn the \"Argonautica\" (third century BC), Jason had been warned by Chiron that Orpheus would be necessary in his journey. When Orpheus heard their voices, he drew out his lyre and played his music more beautifully than they, drowning out their voices. One of the crew, however, the sharp-eared hero Butes, heard the song and leapt into the sea, but he was caught up and carried safely away by the goddess Aphrodite.\n\"Odyssey\".\nOdysseus was curious as to what the sirens sang to him, and so, on the advice of Circe, he had all of his sailors plug their ears with beeswax and tie him to the mast. He ordered his men to leave him tied tightly to the mast, no matter how much he might beg. When he heard their beautiful song, he ordered the sailors to untie him but they bound him tighter. When they had passed out of earshot, Odysseus demonstrated with his frowns to be released. Some post-Homeric authors state that the sirens were fated to die if someone heard their singing and escaped them, and that after Odysseus passed by they therefore flung themselves into the water and perished.\nPliny.\nThe first-century Roman historian Pliny the Elder discounted sirens as a pure fable, \"although Dinon, the father of Clearchus, a celebrated writer, asserts that they exist in India, and that they charm men by their song, and, having first lulled them to sleep, tear them to pieces.\" \nSirens and death.\nStatues of sirens in a funerary context are attested since the classical era, in mainland Greece, as well as Asia Minor and Magna Graecia. The so-called \"Siren of Canosa\"\u2014Canosa di Puglia is a site in Apulia that was part of Magna Graecia\u2014was said to accompany the dead among grave goods in a burial. She appeared to have some psychopomp characteristics, guiding the dead on the afterlife journey. The cast terracotta figure bears traces of its original white pigment. The woman bears the feet, wings and tail of a bird. The sculpture is conserved in the National Archaeological Museum of Spain, in Madrid.\nThe sirens were called the Muses of the lower world. Classical scholar Walter Copland Perry (1814\u20131911) observed: \"Their song, though irresistibly sweet, was no less sad than sweet, and lapped both body and soul in a fatal lethargy, the forerunner of death and corruption.\" Their song is continually calling on Persephone.\nThe term \"siren song\" refers to an appeal that is hard to resist but that, if heeded, will lead to a bad conclusion. Later writers have implied that the sirens ate humans, based on Circe's description of them \"lolling there in their meadow, round them heaps of corpses rotting away, rags of skin shriveling on their bones.\" As linguist Jane Ellen Harrison (1850\u20131928) notes of \"The Ker as siren\": \"It is strange and beautiful that Homer should make the sirens appeal to the spirit, not to the flesh.\" The siren song is a promise to Odysseus of mantic truths; with a false promise that he will live to tell them, they sing,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;Once he hears to his heart's content, sails on, a wiser man.\nWe know all the pains that the Greeks and Trojans once endured\non the spreading plain of Troy when the gods willed it so\u2014\nall that comes to pass on the fertile earth, we know it all!&lt;/poem&gt;\n\"They are mantic creatures like the Sphinx with whom they have much in common, knowing both the past and the future\", Harrison observed. \"Their song takes effect at midday, in a windless calm. The end of that song is death.\" That the sailors' flesh is rotting away suggests it has not been eaten. It has been suggested that, with their feathers stolen, their divine nature kept them alive, but unable to provide food for their visitors, who starved to death by refusing to leave.\nEarly Christian to Medieval.\nBook of Enoch.\nAccording to the ancient Hebrew Book of Enoch, the women who were led astray by the fallen angels will be turned into sirens.\nLate antiquity.\nBy the fourth century, when pagan beliefs were overtaken by Christianity, \nSaint Jerome, who produced the Latin Vulgate version of the bible, used the word \"sirens\" to translate Hebrew \"tann\u012bm\" (\"jackals\") in the Book of Isaiah 13:22, and also to translate a word for \"owls\" in the Book of Jeremiah 50:39.\nThe siren is allegorically described as a beautiful courtesan or prostitute, who sings pleasant melodies to men, and is the symbolic vice of Pleasure in the preaching of Clement of Alexandria (2nd century). Later writers such as Ambrose (4th century) reiterated the notion that the siren stood as a symbol or allegory for worldly temptations and not an endorsement of the Greek myth.\nIsidorus.\nThe early Christian euhemerist interpretation of mythologized human beings received a long-lasting boost from the \"Etymologiae\" by Isidore of Seville (c. 560\u2013636):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;They [the Greeks] imagine that \"there were three sirens, part virgins, part birds,\" with wings and claws. \"One of them sang, another played the flute, the third the lyre. They drew sailors, decoyed by song, to shipwreck. According to the truth, however, they were prostitutes who led travelers down to poverty and were said to impose shipwreck on them.\" They had wings and claws because Love flies and wounds. They are said to have stayed in the waves because a wave created Venus.\nPhysiologus and bestiaries.\nAllegorical texts.\nThe siren and the onocentaur, two hybrid creatures, appear as the subject of a single chapter in the \"Physiologus\", as they appear together in the Septuagint translation of the aforementioned Isaiah 13:21\u201322, and 34:14. They also appear together in some Latin bestiaries of the First Family subgroup called B-Isidore (\"B-Is\").\nThe miniatures.\nThe siren's bird-like description from classical sources was retained in the Latin version of the \"Physiologus\" (6th century) and several subsequent bestiaries into the 13th century, but at some time during the interim, the mermaid shape was introduced to this body of works. \nDerivative literature.\nItalian poet Dante Alighieri depicts a siren in Canto 19 of \"Purgatorio\", the second canticle of the \"Divine Comedy\". Here, the pilgrim dreams of a female who is described as \"stuttering, cross-eyed, and crooked on her feet, with stunted hands, and pallid in color\". It is not until the pilgrim \"gazes\" upon her that she is turned desirable and is revealed by herself to be a siren. This siren then claims that she \"turned Ulysses from his course, desirous of my / song, and whoever becomes used to me rarely / leaves me, so wholly do I satisfy him!\" Given that Dante did not have access to the \"Odyssey\", the siren's claim that she turned Ulysses from his course is inherently false because the sirens in the \"Odyssey\" do not manage to turn Ulysses from his path. Ulysses and his men were warned by Circe and prepared for their encounter by stuffing their ears full of wax, except for Ulysses, who wishes to be bound to the ship's mast as he wants to hear the siren's song. Scholars claim that Dante may have \"misinterpreted\" the siren's claim from an episode in Cicero's \"De finibus.\" The pilgrim's dream comes to an end when a lady \"holy and quick\" who had not yet been present before suddenly appears and says, \"O Virgil, Virgil, who is this?\" Virgil, the pilgrim's guide, then steps forward and tears the clothes from the siren's belly which, \"awakened me [the pilgrim] with the stench that issued from it.\" This marks the ending of the encounter between the pilgrim and the siren.\nIn Geoffrey of Monmouth's \"Historia Regum Britanniae\" ({{circa|1136}}), Brutus of Troy encounters sirens at the Pillars of Hercules on his way to Britain to fulfil a prophecy that he will establish an empire there. The sirens surround and nearly overturn his ships until Brutus escapes to the Tyrrhenian Sea.\nRenaissance.\nBy the time of the Renaissance, female court musicians known as courtesans filled the role of an unmarried companion, and musical performances by unmarried women could be seen as immoral. Seen as a creature who could control a man's reason, female singers became associated with the mythological figure of the siren, who usually took a half-human, half-animal form somewhere on the cusp between nature and culture.\nLeonardo da Vinci wrote of them in his notebooks, stating \"The siren sings so sweetly that she lulls the mariners to sleep; then she climbs upon the ships and kills the sleeping mariners.\"\nAge of Exploration.\nHowever, in the 17th century, some Jesuit writers began to assert their actual existence, including Cornelius a Lapide, who said of woman, \"her glance is that of the fabled basilisk, her voice a siren's voice\u2014with her voice she enchants, with her beauty she deprives of reason\u2014voice and sight alike deal destruction and death.\" {{ill|Antonio de Lorea|es}} also argued for their existence, and Athanasius Kircher argued that compartments must have been built for them aboard Noah's Ark.\nLate Modernity (1801\u20131900).\nCharles Burney expounded {{circa|1789}}, in \"A General History of Music\": \"The name, according to Bochart, who derives it from the Phoenician, implies a \"songstress.\" Hence it is probable, that in ancient times there may have been excellent singers, but of corrupt morals, on the coast of Sicily, who by seducing voyagers, gave rise to this fable.\"\nJohn Lempri\u00e8re in his \"Classical Dictionary\" (1827) wrote, \"Some suppose that the sirens were several lascivious women in Sicily, who prostituted themselves to strangers, and made them forget their pursuits while drowned in unlawful pleasures. The etymology of Bochart, who deduces the name from a Phoenician term denoting a \"songstress,\" favours the explanation given of the fable by Damm. This distinguished critic makes the sirens to have been excellent singers, and divesting the fables respecting them of all their terrific features, he supposes that by the charms of music and song, they detained travellers, and made them altogether forgetful of their native land.\"\nArts and influence.\nThe French impressionist composer, Claude Debussy, composed the orchestral work \"Nocturnes\" in which the third movement, \"Sir\u00e8nes\", depicts sirens. According to Debussy, {{\"'}}Sir\u00e8nes' depicts the sea and its countless rhythms and presently, amongst the waves silvered by the moonlight, is heard the mysterious song of the Sirens as they laugh and pass on\".\nIn 1911, French composer Lili Boulanger composed \"Les sir\u00e8nes\" for mezzo-soprano soloist, choir, and piano.\nContemporary British composer and former child prodigy, Alma Deutscher, composed \"Waltz of the Sirens\", an orchestral work based on the mythology creature.\nEnglish artist William Etty portrayed the sirens as young women in fully human form in his 1837 painting \"The Sirens and Ulysses\", a practice copied by future artists.\n |alt1=Painting of Ulysses tempted by sirens\n |\"The Sirens and Ulysses\" (1837) by William Etty\n |alt2=Painting of Ulysses tempted by sirens\n |\"Odysseus and the Sirens\" (1867) by L\u00e9on Belly\n |alt3=Painting of a siren\n |\"The Siren\" (1888) by Edward Armitage\n |alt4=Painting of Ulysses tempted by sirens\n |\"Ulysses and the Sirens\" (1891) by John William Waterhouse\n |alt5=Painting of a siren depicted as a fish-chimera\n |\"The Siren\" ({{circa|1900}}) by John William Waterhouse\n |alt6=Painting of Ulysses tempted by sirens\n |\"Ulysses and the Sirens\" ({{circa|1909}}) by Herbert James Draper\nReferences.\n "}
{"id": "51018", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51018", "title": "Civil defense siren", "text": "Outdoor warning device used to audibly warn about incoming or ongoing danger\nThe civil defense siren is a form of siren used to warn civilians of approaching danger - a form of Emergency population warning. Initially designed to warn city dwellers of air raids (air-raid sirens) during World War II, they were later used to warn of nuclear attack and natural disasters, such as tornadoes (tornado sirens). The generalized nature of sirens led to many of them being replaced with more specific warnings, such as the broadcast-based Emergency Alert System and the Cell Broadcast-based Wireless Emergency Alerts and EU-Alert mobile technologies.\nBy use of varying tones or binary patterns of sound, different alert conditions can be called. Electronic sirens can transmit voice announcements in addition to alert tone signals. Siren systems may be electronically controlled and integrated into other warning systems.\nIntegrated public warning systems.\nSirens are sometimes integrated into a warning system that links sirens with other warning media, such as the radio and TV Emergency Alert System, NOAA Weather Radio, telephone alerting systems, Reverse 911, Cable Override, and wireless alerting systems in the United States and the National Public Alerting System, Alert Ready, in Canada. This fluid approach enhances the credibility of warnings and reduces the risk of assumed false alarms by corroborating warning messages through multiple forms of media. The Common Alerting Protocol is a technical standard for this sort of multi-system integration.\nSiren installations have many ways of being activated. Commonly used methods are dual-tone multi-frequency signaling (DTMF) or public switched telephone network (PSTN) using telephone lines, but activation can also be done via radio broadcast. This method opens up vulnerability for exploitation, but there are protections from false alarms. These sirens can also be tied into other networks such as a fire department's volunteer notification/paging system. The basics of this type of installation would consist of a device (possibly the same pager the firefighters have) connected to the controller/timer system of the siren. When a page is received, the siren is activated.\nTypes.\nMechanical.\nBasic design.\nA mechanical siren uses a rotor and stator to chop an air stream, which is forced through the siren by radial vanes in the spinning rotor. An example of this type of siren is the Federal Signal 2T22, which was originally developed during the Cold War and produced from the early 1950s to the late 1980s. This particular design employs dual rotors and stators to sound each pitch. Because the sound power output of this type of siren is the same in every direction at all times, it is described as omnidirectional. The Federal Signal 2T22 was also marketed in a three-signal configuration known as the Federal Signal 3T22, with the capability for a \"high\u2013low\" signal.\nWhile some mechanical sirens produce sound in all directions simultaneously, other designs produce sound in only one direction, while employing a rotator mechanism to turn the siren head through 360 degrees of rotation. One rare type of mechanical siren, the Federal Signal RSH-10 (\"Thunderbeam\"), does not rotate or produce equal sound output in all directions. It instead uses a slowly rotating angled disc below the siren which directs the siren's output throughout 360 degrees.\nSupercharged.\nA variation of the electromechanical siren is a \"supercharged\" siren. A supercharged siren uses a separate source, usually a supercharger-like blower, which forces air into the rotor assembly of the siren. This increases the air pressure in the rotor assembly, causing the sound output of the siren to increase heavily, which in return increases the sound range by a large amount. The blower is generally driven by an electric motor, but in rare cases it is driven by an engine. Federal Signal took advantage of this design and created their Thunderbolt Siren Series, utilizing Sutorbilt Roots Blowers of different varieties and outputs.\nA very early model was the Thunderbolt 2000. The difference between the Thunderbolt 2000 and later editions is that its blower is driven by an Onan two cylinder gas engine. Another example of a siren that has a separate blower is the Alerting Communicators of America (ACA) Hurricane. One more example of a siren with a blower is the SoCal Edison Model 120, utilizing a Centrifugal Style Blower, built specifically for the San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station. The SoCal Edison Model 120 is no longer standing out in public, as only one exists, and is owned privately.\nPneumatic.\nAnother variation on the electromechanical siren is the pneumatic siren. Similar to supercharged sirens, pneumatic sirens also force air into the rotor assembly of the siren. However, these sirens use a pressurized air reservoir instead of a motor-driven blower. (HLS), first produced by the German firm Pintsch-Bamag and later by the German firm H\u00f6rmann. Soon afterward, H\u00f6rmann improved on the design to create the HLS 273, which did away with the massive siren head of the original in favor of a more compact head and cast aluminum exponential-profile horns. These sirens stored a reservoir of compressed air, recharged periodically by a diesel engine-driven compressor in a vault in the base of the massive siren unit. The later HLS 273 placed the large (6,000 liter) air tank underground beside the machinery vault, instead of in the mast itself as in the earlier HLS units.\nElectronic.\nElectronic sirens consist of an electronic tone generator, a high-power amplifier, and a horn loudspeaker. Typically, the loudspeaker unit incorporates horn loading, causing them to be similar in appearance to some electromechanical sirens. Many of these loudspeakers incorporate a vertical array of horns to achieve pattern control in the vertical plane. Each cell of the loudspeaker horn is driven by one or more compression drivers. One type of compression driver for this type of loudspeaker uses two doughnut-shaped permanent magnet slugs to provide magnetic flux. For siren applications, high-fidelity sound is a secondary concern to high output, and siren drivers typically produce large amounts of distortion which would not be tolerable in an audio system where fidelity is important. Most newer (and some older) electronic sirens have the ability to store digital audio files. These audio files could be custom sounds, or emergency messages. Depending on the situation, the stored sound file can broadcast through the siren. These sirens could also come with a Microphone Jack to broadcast live messages via microphone.\nAs with electromechanical sirens, there are both omnidirectional, directional, and rotating categories. Whelen Engineering produces sirens which oscillate through 360 degrees, rotating in one direction and then in the other to allow a hard-wired connection between the amplifiers and the siren drivers. These sirens can also be set to rotate any amount from 0 to 360 degrees, allowing sirens to broadcast only in certain directions.\nElectronic sirens may be mechanically rotated to cover a wide area, or may have transducers facing in all directions to make an omnidirectional pattern. A directional siren may be applied where notification is only required for a defined area in one direction.\nAround the world.\nMiddle East.\nIran, Kuwait, and Iraq.\nKuwait has an entire siren system of Federal Signal Modulators. They once had an entire system of Thunderbolt system 7000's, until they all got replaced. However, one System 7000 remains on display.\nIsrael.\nIsrael has more than 3,100 warning sirens. Most of the sirens in urban areas are German-made HLS sirens, models F71 and ECN3000. All the other sirens are HPSS32 models made by Acoustic Technologies (ATI). During the early 2010s, mechanical sirens were gradually phased out and replaced by electronic ones, although the mechanical ones were generally left standing. The air-raid sirens are called , 'alarm', and consist of a continuous ascending and descending tone. The \"all clear\" signal, called , is a constant single-pitch sound. In recent conflicts, use of the \"all clear\" signal has been discontinued, as it was seen as causing unnecessary confusion and alarm. In certain regions in the south of Israel, which regularly undergo rocket attacks from Gaza, a specialized system called Red Color is used.\nThere is an earthquake warning system in Israel, which uses the sirens, called ().\nThe \"all clear\" signal is used three times per year to denote a moment of silence (of one or two minutes): once on Israel's Holocaust Remembrance Day and twice on the Day of Remembrance.\nSaudi Arabia.\nMost minaret speakers are used as sirens. The purpose of warnings is to notify the population of a danger that threatens their lives. Individuals must go to shelters or their homes, lock doors and windows, take appropriate protective actions, and listen through the radio and television for instructions of civil defense. The entire siren system is ASC I-Force and Whelen WPS-2900 series. As well as some Federal Signal Modulators in Air Force Bases, and a FS EOWS 1212 in Dammam.\nTurkey.\nTurkey has Nationwide Siren System of Mechanical Sirens and Loudspeakers, though minaret speakers also are used as sirens sometimes. Models for mechanical sirens used across country are Selay SL-1170's. Even though the main models of the warning speakers are unknown, there is a slightly common presence of Federal Signal, Whelen and H\u00f6rmann, Sonnenburg, despite very rare cases of some Elektror or Siemens-Schuckert models remaining. They sound-off during the memorial of Atat\u00fcrk's death on November 10 at 9:05 AM and often sound off for common emergencies such as Earthquakes, Tsunamis, Tornadoes, Chemical plant issues or incoming enemy attack. Sirens are controlled by AFAD. Sirens can also be mounted on roofs, or sometimes on 30m long Towers.\nUnited Arab Emirates.\nThe United Arab Emirates uses an integrated national Early Warning System (EWS) which was developed in 2017 and utilizes a network of cell broadcast, variable-message signs on roads, radio alerts, television alerts, and loudspeakers in mosque minarets as sirens. The warning system is managed by the National Emergency Crisis and Disaster Management Authority (NCEMA) and is used to warn the public during times of an emergency or a disaster.\nAsia.\nThe People's Republic of China.\nChina has sirens located in most cities and towns, particularly those located in or near disputed territories. If the state declares a state of emergency due to attacks or invasion, or when there is a very high risk of military conflict, sirens will warn the public of possible attacks or invasion. The sirens are controlled by the People's Liberation Army.\nThere are annual or semi-annual test runs, often occurring on commemorative dates that are associated with the Second Sino-Japanese War. For example, Nanjing annually tests air raid sirens at 10\u00a0a.m. on 13 December, followed by a moment of silence to commemorate the Nanking Massacre. There have also been some commemorative tests during the memorial periods of major disasters, such as on 19 May 2008 in memory of victims of the 2008 Sichuan Earthquake.\nThe air raid warning comes in three types:\nTaiwan.\nTaiwanese civil defense sirens are erected on police stations and commanded by the nation's Civil Defense Office (). The government issues air raid warnings, as well as tsunami warnings, through the sirens in conjunction with their own Public Warning System that utilizes 4G LTE cell signals. The Taiwanese government also holds annual air-raid drills called Wan-an drills () so the populace can be familiar with what to do in an air raid, given the high risk of war with neighboring mainland China.\nIndia.\nMumbai has around 200\u2013250 functional sirens. The government is planning to change the system by incorporating modern wireless and digital technology in place of the present landline switching system.\nIn Mumbai, civil defence sirens were used during the Indo-Pakistan wars of 1965 and 1971, warning civilians about air raids by the Pakistan Air Force. At night, sirens were also used to indicate blackouts, when all lights in Mumbai were switched off. Daily tests of the sirens at 9\u00a0a.m. were recently reduced to once per month. They are controlled by the Regional Civil Defence Control Center, Mumbai, with input from Indian Defence Services. Sirens are also used to denote a minute's worth of silence on special occasions.\nJapan.\nJapan utilizes a system of mainly electronic \"Bosai Musen\" electronic sirens to warn of impending missile strikes or natural disasters such as Tsunamis. The system was installed by J-Alert in 2007 as one of their many other methods of warning the public of incoming dangers.\nSome of these sirens are also used to play music at certain times of day, presumably as an \"end of day\" signal.\nIn Japan, where natural disasters occur frequently, civil defense alerts play an important role. These alert systems are located in towns and cities all over the country and are connected to J-Alert, which makes it possible to send alerts to the whole country in the shortest possible time. Unlike the traditional blaring sirens, the Japanese government usually plays soothing music. These are usually played at 5:00\u00a0p.m. and play a variety of music including children's songs. The music played varies from region to region, and in some areas foreign music, such as Edelweiss, become part of people's daily lives, reminding children to come home and signaling the end of the workday for employees. In addition, some towns use it as a public announcement system for local news, events, etc. However, these announcements are made in the morning. This has led to resentment among some residents.\nJapan also had a large mechanical siren system not used to warn residents, made by Yamaha, called the \"Yamaha Music Siren\", sounded at certain times of day presumably as an \"end of day\" signal. These sirens had many mechanical choppers with different port ratios to match a certain musical note. These choppers would have rotating stators in order to let each note play individually, in order to play music.\nPhilippines.\nPhilippines has flood, typhoon, tsunami and air force base sirens. The entire system is the TOA speakers for flood warnings, Telegrafia Pavian for typhoon warnings, a Federal Signal 3T22 at the Clark Air Base, and a Sircom SIBT along with ATI HPSS-16/32 for the tsunami warnings.\nIndonesia.\nIndonesia has sirens to warn about earthquakes, volcano, floods or tsunamis following the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake. Other sirens in Indonesia used as a Ramzan siren in mosques, and a 3-horn mechanical siren which is located in Java island. A Independence Day siren was also used in the country for anniversary, like the North American-made sirens, it uses a 1-horn mechanical siren that spins fast. The entire sirens for the natural disasters in Indonesia (Indonesian: Peringatan Dini) are Whelen WPS-2804, TOA loudspeakers for volcanoes, TOA loudspeakers for landslides and floods just like the one in Jakarta,\nand a Sircom SIBT, TOA speakers, and Federal Signal Modulator 6024, for tsunami warnings.\nThailand.\nLike the Indonesian siren, Thailand has sirens to warn about tsunamis following the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake. The entire system of a Thailand's tsunami sirens are Sircom, Alerting Communications of America (ACA), and American Signal Corporation (ASC). The entire system for the Thailand's tsunami warning siren systems are ACA Quadren, Sircom SIBT, and ASC E-Class (a similar siren to ATI HPSS-16/32).\nMalaysia.\nMalaysia has a lot of sirens in Peninsular Malaysia, and Borneo (Sabah and Sarawak), to warn about disasters such as tsunami just like with the Indonesia, flood, and dam failure. (Other sirens in Malaysia will be a Malaysian Civil Defense Force's civil defense siren at the top of the building in both Semenanjung, Sabah and Sarawak, it uses a World War II Carter Air-Raid Siren, which is similar siren sound to a Federal Signal 3T22/2T22). The civil defense siren can be used as a Ramzan siren. The entire system for the disaster in Malaysia including the E2S A141, Telegrafia Pavian, a mysterious surveillance, antenna, PA speaker siren and a HSS Engineering TWS-295 (a under license Whelen WPS 2805) for the tsunami warnings, a TOA speaker, mysterious PA speaker, metal box siren, and a Telegrafia Pavian for the flood, and other will be a air force base siren such as a Federal Signal Modulator 3012 in RMAF Gong Kedak Air Base, and a dam failure warning system include the Federal Signal ThunderBeam RSH-10 in Bersia Kenyir Dam, and Federal Signal 2001-SRN in Chenderoh Dam which was the first rotating US-Made tornado siren in Malaysia.\nSingapore.\nSingapore currently has a network of 284 stationary sirens named the Public Warning System which warns the entire country of air raids, as well as human-made and natural disasters (except earth tremors). Singapore's sirens are tested at noon on the first day of every month. During the test, the sirens sound a light cheerful chime instead of any of the three signals. The sirens look very similar to the H\u00f6rmann ECN3000 (See picture).\nSouth Korea.\nNearly all towns and cities are equipped with civil defense sirens in case of natural disasters or missile attacks from North Korea. South Korea holds civil defense drills every month to prepare for such scenarios.\nEurope.\nAustria.\nAustria is fully covered with an operational air-raid siren system consisting of 8,203 devices as of 2012. They are tested weekly at noon on Saturdays (except in Vienna) with the signal, a 15-second continuous tone. Every year on the first Saturday of October, the whole range of alarm signals (with the exception of the fire alert) is sounded as a system test () and to familiarize the population with the signals.\nBelgium.\nBelgium used to test its air raid sirens every first Thursday of the trimester (three-month period). Sirens are Sonnenburg Electronic sirens. When the air-raid sirens are tested, the message or is broadcast every time the sirens sound. There are 540 sirens all across the country. A non-audible test was performed every day, and the last test occurred on 4 October 2018. Afterwards, the network was decommissioned. The sirens remain around nuclear facilities, but no tests are performed. The official recommendation is that people subscribe to BE-Alert, a system where information is provided via SMS, e-mail or phone.\nBulgaria.\nBulgaria has over 4000 sirens deployed around in the country, especially Sofia. These are likely used to warn people of earthquakes . Sirens were first installed during WW2 to warn people of incoming attacks by Nazi Germany; these were replaced by electronic ones during the 1990s. The sirens are tested on the first workday of April and November every year to see if they are functioning properly. On 2 June every year, the day of Hristo Botev and demised ones for the liberation and independence of Bulgaria is commemorated with a two-minute signal, different from the usual tone. The public is informed about the test beforehand. The sirens are mainly electronic ones (German made type ECN units or other high powered speaker systems on top of public buildings). The signals may include\u00a0\u2013 attack (a one-minute wailing tone used to indicate an incoming danger) and alert (sometimes referred to as the \"all clear\" signal which is a continuous single tone). Strong tremors in Bulgaria are quite rare, so a special earthquake warning system is not needed.\nCzech Republic.\nThe Czech Republic has around 6,000 sirens. Within these 6,000 sirens which include mechanical sirens and electronic sirens, are tested every first Wednesday of the month. There are three warning signals, which are accompanied by a verbal message in Czech and usually with an English and German translation on electronic sirens. There is also an emergency broadcast on TV channels, maintained by Czech Television, and radio channels, maintained by Czech Radio.\nDenmark.\nThere are 1,078 electronic warning sirens have been installed in Denmark by HSS Engineering and were actually license built Whelen WPS 2800 sirens. The sirens are placed on the tops of buildings or on masts. This warning system makes it possible to warn the populations of all urban areas with more than 1,000 inhabitants. This means that about 80% of Denmark's population can be warned using stationary sirens. The remaining 20% are warned by mobile sirens mounted on police cars. The function of the sirens is tested every night, but does not produce any sound. Once every year, on the first Wednesday of May at 12:00, the sirens are tested with sound.\nFinland.\nA general alarm consists of a repeating one-minute sound, made up of tones that ascend for seven seconds and descend for seven seconds. The end of danger is signaled by a one-minute continuous tone. Warning sirens are tested on the first Monday of every month at noon. The testing alarm is shorter than the general alarm (only lasting for seven or fourteen seconds) and may be a flat tone. The system commonly uses Teho-Ulvo sirens, which are electronic and are powered by horn loudspeaker arrays. They are known for their very distinctive wind-ups and wind-downs.\nFrance.\nIn France, the emergency population warning network is called the (\"RNA\"). The system is inherited from the air raid siren network () developed before World WarII. It consists of about 4,500 electronic or electromechanical sirens placed all over France. The system is tested each month at noon on the first Wednesday. The most common siren type is the electromechanical KM Europ eight-port single-tone siren. These sirens have a very characteristic sound: a very fast wind-up and a lower pitch than most sirens (the pitch is comparable to a Federal Signal STL-10 on a lower frequency). A recording of these sirens was used in the movie \"Silent Hill\".\nGermany.\nIn Germany, the ('warning authorities') were closed in the 1990s after the threat of the Cold War was over, since the ability to alert the public was then considered unnecessary. As the civil defense sirens were also frequently used to alert volunteer firefighters, many sirens were sold to municipalities for a symbolic price; others were dismantled. In the 2000s, it was realized that the ability to warn the public is not only necessary in cases of war, but also in events like natural disasters, chemical or nuclear accidents, or terrorist attacks. As a result, some cities like D\u00fcsseldorf and Dresden began to rebuild their warning sirens. In Hamburg, the sirens are still operational. They also warn the public during storm surges; for instance, all towns in the Moselle Valley continue to operate and test their warning sirens. The majority of operational sirens in Germany are either electric-mechanical type E57 or electronic sirens.\nThere are no precise official numbers as to how many sirens there used to be, as most of the documents regarding the system's construction and upkeep have been disposed of after the Cold War ended. However, estimates place the number of operational sirens during the system's peak at around 80,000 in West Germany alone. Accounts as to how many of those sirens are still in operation vary significantly depending on the source. The most prominent German company regarding manufacturing and maintenance of sirens, H\u00f6rmann Industries, states on its website that they are in charge of maintaining over 60,000 sirens. Granted, that includes mobile sirens that can be mounted on vehicles, but one can deduct from this information that there could be at least around 50,000 stationary sirens still in operation today, many of the once electro-mechanical sirens having been replaced with newer electronic models.\nDuring World WarII, Berlin's air raid sirens became known by the city's residents as \"Meier's trumpets\" or \"Meier's hunting horns\" due to Luftwaffe chief Hermann Goering's boast that \"If a single bomb ever falls on Berlin, you can call me Meier!\".\nHungary.\nThe installation of sirens across the country was requested by the Minister of National Defense in 1938. Various models from several companies were used, and some were manufactured locally in Hungary under license from the companies owning the designs. The FM Si 41 model originates from Germany, the TESLA/Braun-Bovery siren originates from a Swiss company, and the EKA series and DINAMO sirens were manufactured locally in Hungary.\nThere were 25 air raid warning zones in Hungary. Only the larger towns and cities were afforded electric sirens, the rest of the country used hand-crank sirens, in addition to warnings broadcast by radio. The electric sirens were controlled via phone lines and were operated from a central location, such as a city hall, fire station, post office, or local military base or outpost.\nInitially, there were only two siren signals, similar to the signals used in Britain at the time: \"Red Alert\", or \"Air Raid Warning\" signal, indicating an imminent threat, and \"All Clear\", indicating the danger had passed.\nIn 1944, the signal system was updated to four total signals:\nAfter the conclusion of World War II siren installation continued throughout the country. Previously unfurnished towns were equipped with the same type of sirens that were installed during the war, as those models were still kept in production. In the 1960s, after allying with the Soviet Union, Hungary planned to replace the aging siren systems installed during the war with sirens that were produced in other communist countries like Czechoslovakia and East Germany. In the early 1970s, a massive siren replacement program began. Nearly all sirens were replaced with the DDR DS977 and MEZ models. Some of the siren models that were used during the war were still in production, so some areas did receive \"WW2-Type\" sirens.\nThe sirens installed during the 70s were and remain as property of the National Civil Defense. These more modern installations weren't controlled via telephone lines, but by sound-activated receivers. Each installation had a remote control unit at the local police station, fire station or Civil Defense Office that would transmit the specific frequencies that would activate the sirens in the surrounding areas. Testing and maintaining this system was problematic, as the remote control unit was not allowed to be used to run tests and only to be operated in legitimate use cases of war or emergency. Civil Defense workers had to manually go to and test each individual siren in the system that was registered to their station. With only a few Civil Defense stations per county, any given station would be responsible for several cities, towns and villages, making maintenance take significant amounts of time. A rare few of these Cold-War\u2013era siren systems were equipped with phone line control systems, these were mostly located around nuclear shelters.\nIn the late 1990s, the remote control system was deemed unstable and unreliable. With the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991, the likelihood of war was low, and the National Warning System was abandoned.\nIn the mid 2000s, the MoLaRi System was built around factories that work with hazardous materials, to warn surrounding areas in case of emergency or risk to public health or safety. These systems continue to be installed near facilities that work with hazardous materials.\nIn 2011, a National Civil Defense Drill was held to see how many of the sirens abandoned for decades still functioned. Many of them did not work, and while some counties decided to repair the sirens and start doing yearly growl tests again, others decided to leave the abandoned systems as they were. A few cities and counties kept their sirens active and in good condition, and still perform repairs, maintenance, and yearly tests, like Gy\u0151r-Moson-Sopron county, Heves county, Hajd\u00fa-Bihar county, and J\u00e1sz-Nagykun-Szolnok county.\nIn 2014 regular testing of the MoLaRi sirens near hazardous materials facilities began, testing is performed on the first Monday of each month at 11:00, this is most easily heard in and around Budapest, where a large number of these facilities are located\nThe remaining siren systems that were found to be non-functional have been dismantled or left in place. Emergency Plan documents for some towns still state that citizens will be warned with the use of sirens, despite these systems being defunct.\nThe government has attempted to destroy all old siren systems that were dismantled, out of fear that intact systems could be activated and cause panic. The Civil Defense Office currently relies on radio, TV, and phone alerts to warn the population in case of emergency, and in some emergency plans, church bells are included as a potential warning system.\nThere are four current siren signals, used by the MoLaRi system, H\u00d6RMANN sirens, and on the old siren systems where they are still maintained:\nItaly.\nThe Italian War Ministry began installing air raid sirens and issuing air defence regulations in 1938. Production was entrusted to La Sonora, founded in 1911 and still active today.\nDuring World WarII, every town had a siren, and several were present in each large city. Even after the danger of bombings had ended, they were kept to provide warning in case of any threat (e.g. high water in Venice).\nAs of 2015, some of them still survive. For instance, as many as 34 have been located in Rome using crowdsourcing. Up until the 1980s, they underwent routine maintenance and sounded at noon.\nAdditionally, the Protezione Civile (Civil Protection) operates sirens to warn the public in case of a threat to the citizen population. Protezione Civile also provides transport needs and military defence for the Government of Italy. These defence systems were put in place in the 1990s and are occasionally still used today.\nUrbania, Italy has a British Secomak GP3 air raid siren which is annually activated in honor of the Bombing in Urbania, which took place during World War II.\nFerrara, Italy has a system of Whelen (remodeled HSS-TWS series) sirens that warn of industrial risks in the area.\nLithuania.\nLithuania operates sirens from the Cold War mainly in suburban areas of big cities such as Vilnius, Klaip\u0117da, Kaunas, \u0160iauliai, Panev\u0117\u017eys and or others. The most common models are Elektror, Siemens and H\u00f6rmann, even though Federal Signal is not too rare in these areas. These sirens can be found in fire stations, factories, police stations and city halls. The attack and all clear signal is used for tests even though tests aren't as frequent as in other areas across Northern Europe. They soundnoff in case of fires, chemical issues, floods, incoming enemy attack, etc. Testing date for most areas is most likely yearly.\nNetherlands.\nThe Netherlands tests its air-raid sirens once per month, on the first Monday at noon, to keep the public aware of the system. There are about 4,200 sirens placed all across the country.\nIn March 2015 it was announced that, due to high maintenance costs, the sirens will be taken out of service by the end of 2020. The government has implemented a Cell Broadcast system called NL-Alert, compliant to the mandatory European regulation EU-Alert, to replace the sirens by 2021. However, as of early 2022, the sirens will continue to be heard until another decision has been made.\nNorway.\nNorway has about 1,250 operational sirens (mostly Kockums air horn units rather than motorized sirens), primarily located in cities. Three different signals are used:\nThe sirens are tested twice each year, at noon on the second Wednesday of January and June. As of 2014, only the \"critical message\" signal is used during tests. Previously, the signal tested in June would use the \"air raid\" and \"all clear\" signals. The latter two are no longer used in peacetime.\nThere are also sirens in the Storfjorden area in M\u00f8re og Romsdal county to warn about an avalanche from the mountain \u00c5kerneset. These sirens are not operated by Norwegian Civil Defense department; instead, they are operated by \u00c5ksnes/Tafjord Beredskap. These sirens can be found in the villages of Stranda, Tafjord, Geiranger, Hellesylt, Linge, and Valldal.\nPoland.\nThere are numerous civil defense sirens employed throughout Poland. Though the testing schedule is unclear, sirens are commonly sounded on the anniversary of the Warsaw Uprising. As in other parts of the world, many of the country's volunteer fire stations utilize civil defense sirens for fire calls. Many of these stations will use a two siren set-up; one unit being high pitched, the other being low pitched. \nPortugal.\nPortugal has hundreds of sirens placed across the country. Urban areas most likely use a few electronic sirens even though the presence of warning sirens is more common in suburban or rural areas, where fire stations use them for fire calls. These kinds of sirens are dual-tone and mechanical and are the most common kind of warning siren in Portugal. Between the 2000s and the early 2010s, a few fire sirens were decommissioned due to maintenance upkeep even though most of them remain active.\nRomania.\nIn Romania, civil defense sirens have been used since the early 1930s. Originally, each street had a small siren on top of a high-rise building, which could be powered mechanically. During World WarII, the sirens had a single continuous tone to warn of an air strike.\nThroughout the Cold War, larger sirens were manufactured locally and installed on various public buildings and residences. The sirens were able to transmit a comprehensive variety of tones, each with a different meaning such as a chemical disaster, an earthquake, a flood, or an imminent air or nuclear strike; each of these tones required the population to either move to higher ground or an ABC shelter. An \"all clear\" signal was played after the area had been deemed safe for the general public.\nSince the 1990s, civil defense sirens have been replaced by electronic sirens and the procedure has been simplified. As of 2013, there are four playable tones: a natural disaster warning, an upcoming air/nuclear strike, an imminent air/nuclear strike, and an \"all clear\" signal. Taking shelter is no longer a legal requirement, although ABC shelters are still operational.\nIn August 2017, Romanian authorities started to perform monthly defence siren tests. The first such test took place on 2 August 2017 and is scheduled to be repeated on the first Wednesday of each month, between 10:00 and 11:00am local time. Such tests have been stopped in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic.\nRussia.\nDuring the siege of Leningrad, the radio network carried information for the population about raids and air alerts. The famous \"metronome\" went down in the history of the siege of Leningrad as a cultural monument of resistance of the population.\nAt that time, there were more than a thousand loudspeakers and four hundred thousand radio streams operating in the city. If there were no broadcast programs, then the metronome was broadcast with a slow rhythm of 50\u201355 beats per minute. The network was switched on around the clock, which allowed the population and services to be confident in the operation of the network. By order of the MPVO headquarters, the duty officer of the Central station of the radio network interrupted the broadcast of the program, turned on an electric player with a record of the alarm text. This record was supplemented by 400 electric sirens. At the end of the recording, the metronome was switched on with a rapid rhythm of 160\u2013180 beats per minute. When the danger was over, the electric player was switched on again by order of the staff, and the alarm was sounded in the streets and houses, accompanied by the sound of fanfares.\nSlovenia.\nSlovenia has 1,563 operable civil defence sirens. Most of them are electronic sirens, although there are some mechanical ones. Civil defence sirens are mounted on fire stations, town halls, or other structures.\nThree siren tones are used in the country:\nSince 1 September 1998, there are two additional siren tones, which are used in certain Slovenian municipalities. The municipalities of Hrastnik and Trbovlje use a special signal (called \"Neposredna nevarnost nesre\u010de s klorom\") for the immediate danger in case of an accident involving chlorine when there is a danger of chlorine leaks in the environment. The 100-second-long signal consists of a 30-second wailing tone immediately followed by a 40-second steady tone and again of a 30-second wailing tone. The municipalities of Muta, Vuzenica, Podvelka, Radlje ob Dravi, Bre\u017eice, Kr\u0161ko and Sevnica use a 100-second-long wailing signal (named \"Neposredna nevarnost poplavnega vala\") (consisting of four-second bursts separated by four seconds of silence) for the immediate danger of flash floods, used in case of overflow or collapse of a hydroelectric dam.\nIn case of emergencies when air raid sirens are deployed (natural disasters, severe floods, air raid etc.) people are advised to tune into regional or local radio/TV station(s) serving the affected area. The first channel of the public Radio Slovenia, Val 202 and the first and second channel of the public broadcaster RTV Slovenija also distribute such public warnings and information, especially if a calamity affects multiple regions at the same time, or the whole country. Public channels can also distribute calamity-related warnings and information related to calamities of smaller extent (local/regional) if that is determined in written municipal public emergency response and preparedness-related procedure plans \nUntil 1 January 1998, air-raid sirens were tested each Saturday at noon. The formerly used warning signals were:\nSpain.\nFew sirens that were used for civil defence against bombings during the Spanish Civil War are preserved. The Guernica siren has a highly symbolic value because of the impact of the Bombing of Guernica. Barcelona City History Museum preserves one related to the Bombing of Barcelona, and another siren from civil war years is also preserved in Valencia. There are another sirens that still sound in Barbastro and Logro\u00f1o. Another hidden siren is located at Garibai Street in San Sebasti\u00e1n and it still tests at 12:00 in the noon.\nSweden.\nThe Swedish alarm system uses outdoor sirens in addition to information transmitted through radio and television and sent by text messages and mobile apps. Special radio receivers are handed out to residents living near nuclear power plants. The outdoor system , also known as ('Hoarse Fredrik', alluding to the sound of the siren) to the Swedish population, consists of 4,600 sirens. These sirens were first tested in 1931, and were mounted to cars and bikes sent out by the government. The sirens can be found on tall buildings all around Sweden. They are driven by compressed air in giant tanks, but are successively being replaced by modern electronic sirens which use speakers. The emergency services are also able to send out spoken messages through the new sirens. The outdoor signals used are as follows:\nThe outdoor sirens are tested four times a year on the first non-holiday Monday of March, June, September, and December at 15:00 local time. The test consists of the general alarm for two minutes, followed by a 90-second gap before the \"all clear\" is sounded.\nThere are usually around 15 to 20 general alarms, occurring locally, per year. The most common cause of general alarms is fire, specially in situations that involve industries, landfills, and other facilities containing dangerous substances which can create hazardous smoke. The 2018 peak in alarms (54 that year) is attributed to the 2018 Sweden wildfires which alone caused over 20 general alarms. Other possible attributing factors could be the increased public safety awareness after the 2017 Stockholm truck attack.\nSwitzerland.\nSwitzerland currently has 8,500 mobile and stationary civil defense sirens, which can alert 99% of the population. There are also 700 sirens located near dams. Every year on the first Wednesday of February, Switzerland's sirens are tested to see if they are functioning properly. During this test, general alert sirens as well as sirens near dams are checked. The population is informed of the test in the days leading up to the tests by radio, television, teletext, and newspapers, and the siren tests do not require the population to take any special measures.\nThe tones of the different sirens are provided on the last page of all phone books as well as on the Internet.\nUkraine.\nUkraine has employed civil defense sirens to warn citizens of danger during the Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nThe observed use of sirens in Ukraine has been the following:\nUkraine's air raid alert system is one of the most advanced in the world. It is coordinated and operated by the Ukrainian National Emergency Service Center (DSNS) in order to provide rapid warning to the population and reduce casualties in the event of a sustained Russian attack. The system is operated in concert by a network of sirens, mobile apps, and social media push notifications, and integrates intelligence from the army. Its most unique point is the ability to make different warning lengths depending on the type of threat and the trajectory of the attack. When Russian warplanes begin taxiing or warships are about to leave a harbor, the alert goes off immediately. Sometimes, the warning can also be made 4\u20136 hours in advance. In the case of Iranian-made Shahed missile patrols, the warning is given one hour in advance. However, for ballistic and supersonic missiles, the warning time is only 5\u201310 minutes, but even a few seconds of warning is important.In addition, in order to increase the effectiveness of warnings, Ukraine has developed an app called Alarm Map, which displays in real time the status of air raid warnings throughout the country. This allows residents to have quick access to up-to-date security information so that they can take timely protective measures.\nAir Alert is an air raid warning app developed by Ukrainian company Ajax Systems and web development company Stfalcon. In early 2022, at the beginning of the Russian-Ukrainian war, the app was quickly launched and integrated government data to provide real-time air raid alerts. As of July 2023, the app has been downloaded more than 15 million times. According to research, the app can reduce civilian casualties by 35%-45%.\nSince the Russian invasion of Ukraine in 2022, air raid sirens have sounded more than 40,000 times, and these alert citizens to seek shelter. However, the frequency is so high that many residents no longer choose asylum. This usually depends on the time, place and personal situation, and some people give up because it is too late to seek asylum. The continued attacks pose a serious threat to the physical and psychological health of the residents.\nUnited Kingdom.\nDuring World WarII, Britain had two warning tones:\nThese tones would be initiated by the Royal Observer Corps after spotting Luftwaffe aircraft coming toward Britain, with the help of coastal radar stations. The \"red warning\" would be sounded when the Royal Observer Corps spotted enemy aircraft in the immediate area. The sirens were tested periodically by emitting the tones in reverse order, with the \"all clear\" tone followed by the \"red warning\" tone. This ensured the public would not confuse a test with a real warning.\nEvery village, town, and city in the United Kingdom used to have a network of dual-tone sirens to warn of incoming air raids during World WarII. The operation of the sirens was coordinated by a wire broadcast system via police stations. In towns and cities with a population of over 3,000, powered sirens were used, whereas in rural areas hand-operated sirens were used (which were later put to use as warnings for nuclear attack during the Cold War). At the end of the Cold War in 1992, the siren network was decommissioned, and very few remain. These sirens, mostly built by Carter, Gents, Castle Castings, and Secomak (now Klaxon Signal Co.), have 10 and 12 ports to create a minor third interval (B\u266d and D\u266d notes) and are probably the world's most recognised World WarII air raid siren sound. Recordings of British sirens are often dubbed into movies set in countries which never used this type of siren.\nAround 1,200 sirens remain, mostly used to warn the public of severe flooding. They are also used for public warning near gas or nuclear power plants, nuclear submarine bases, oil refineries and chemical plants. The remaining sirens are a mix of older motor driven models (usually from World WarII), such as the Carter siren manufactured by Carter's of Nelson or the \"syren\" manufactured by Gent's of Leicester, and Cold War like Castle Castings and Secomak (now Klaxon Signal Co.) and newer electronic sirens like Hormann ECN, Whelen, Federal Signal Modulator, ATI HPSS and COOPER WAVES. Most of them usually tested annually between August and September if they're not in a siren system. They are also used to start and finish silences on Armistice Day and Remembrance Sunday\nThere was a siren system consisted mainly of Castle Castings and two Secomak GP3s for their flood warning system sector. When MoD was decommissioning these systems across the country, Norfolk kept their sector back for flood warning. With the advent of digital services and mobile technology, many local authorities are now retiring their siren networks in favour of contacting people by telephone. In January 2007, proposals to retire a network of sirens in Norfolk were made by the Norfolk Resilience Forum. In November 2007, residents were angered after the sirens had not sounded following a tidal surge in Walcott. In 2008, a review of the current and future role of flood warning sirens was undertaken by Norfolk County Council, after plans to retire them were halted following concerns from nearby residents. Although some of the sirens were initially withdrawn, 40 out of the 57 were eventually temporarily reinstated. Despite this, in July 2010 the flood warning sirens were finally retired in favour of alerting people by telephone, SMS or e-mail. After three years of consultations, the council had failed to demonstrate that refurbishing the sirens would be a worthwhile investment. The whole siren system was completely gone by late 2013, with only two sirens remaining, which are both inactive with one of them refurbished and put on display on a beach not far from its original location, and another, in Mundesley Fire Station, just standing there, extremely unlikely to ever sound again.\nLincolnshire, which had one of the largest siren systems in the country consisting of Carters, had 46 sirens based in North Somercotes, Mablethorpe, Boston, Skegness, Spalding and Sutton Bridge, as well as inland at Louth, Horncastle, Middle Rasen and Gainsborough, the areas most at risk of being hit by floods. Following serious flooding in the summer of 2007, investigations took place into how the flood warning system could be improved. The Environment Agency admitted that the warning system in Louth had not sounded early enough. In April 2008, Lincolnshire County Council began to investigate the possibility of replacing the flood warning sirens with mobile phone alerts. A council report in November 2009 described the sirens as being \"outdated, in the wrong places and difficult to repair\". The sirens were eventually decommissioned in November 2011 and replaced with Floodline.\nIn January 2010, 13 public warning sirens on the island of Guernsey that had first been installed in 1937 were due to be retired and replaced by text messages. This followed claims by the Home Department that the sirens had \"reached the end of their useful working life\". The sirens had previously been used to warn of major incidents. From 1950 to 2010, the Civil Defence Committee took responsibility for the sirens, and had tested them annually since 9 May 1979. Members of the public had criticised the decision, and Deputy Janine Le Sauvage claimed that sirens were the only way everyone knew there was an emergency. In February 2010, 40 islanders formed a protest march opposing the proposal to retire the sirens. The campaigners accused the government of not listening to them, as an online petition calling for the sirens to be saved was signed by more than 2,000 people. In April 2010, it was decided to dismantle the public warning system. Emergency planners had proposed to use a new warning system that would contact residents by telephone; however, this was abandoned due to technical limitations and local media and other communication methods are used instead. Only two remain in Guernsey, one in Victoria Tower, which sounded off once at around 2017, and another, active for a quarry.\nFollowing severe flooding in Upper Calder Valley in June 2000, the Environment Agency replaced its network of sirens, with eight being placed around Walsden, Todmorden, Hebden Bridge and Mytholmroyd. The network was designed to complement the agency's Floodline service. These sirens became what is now known as the Todmorden Flood Warning System. There are nine sirens that are part of the system, five of them being Secomak, three of them being Klaxon and one of them being Carter (which was recently confirmed to be inactive according to the local environment agency).\nIn November 2010, 36 flood warning sirens in Essex, including nine on Canvey, were retired following concerns from the county council that the system was \"no longer fit for purpose\". The sirens were due to become obsolete in 2014. Only five sirens from the entire system remain, two of them in Canvey Island.\nIn September 2012, new flood warning sirens were installed in the Dunhills Estate in Leeds, as part of flood defence work at Wyke Beck. In January 2014, flood sirens sounded for the first time in 30 years on the Isle of Portland.\nBroadmoor Hospital used 13 sirens installed in 1952, which were tested weekly. These were consisted of Secomak CS8s, which were similar to a Secomak GP8 except the CS8 had coded shutters which could do an alternating hi-lo signal, and if designed to do so, could also do a pulse signal. For emergencies, they sounded the hi-lo and for all clear, they sounded a steady tone. In tests, they would sound the all-clear. In July 2014, plans were put forward to retire seven of the thirteen alarms, which had last been properly activated in 1993. The alarms are located in areas such as Sandhurst, Wokingham, Bracknell, Camberley and Bagshot. In June 2016, the West London Mental Health Trust, who manages the hospital, proposed decommissioning the sirens altogether and replacing them with social media alerts through websites such as Twitter. In December 2019, this entire system was decommissioned, in favour of a new Electronic siren located at the hospital. This siren is tested silently; however, on occasion (with prior notice from the hospital) it is audibly tested, but not at full volume.\nA similar siren system in Carstairs, Scotland, called the Carstairs Hospital Siren System, uses nine sirens, seven of them being Secomak CS8, one being a Klaxon GP8 and one being Secomak GP12. The hi-lo signal is rarely used since during emergencies they sound a continuous tone for eight minutes, and in \"all clear\" they sound a long wail, consisting of thirty seconds of startup and alert and a thirty-second wind-down, three times. The test schedule is the third Thursday of every month at 1PM with the \"all clear\".\nThere are several sirens in use around Avonmouth near Bristol to warn of chemical incidents from industry in the area. These are known as the Severnside Sirens. These sirens consist of Federal Signal Modulators and two DSAs, which were installed in 1997 for the public. The system is tested every third day of every month at 3PM. This consists of rising tones and a steady pulsing tone, followed by a steady tone for all clear. In emergencies, they will run for as long as the batteries can allow since they are off-grid powered.\nNorth America.\nCanada.\nIn Canada, a nationwide network of Canadian Line Materials sirens was established in the 1950s to warn urban populations of a possible Soviet nuclear attack. This system was tested nationwide twice in 1961, under the codenames \"Exercise Tocsin\" and \"Tocsin B\". The system was maintained until the 1970s, when advancements in military technology reduced the Soviet nuclear missile strike time from 3\u20135 hours to less than 15 minutes. Sirens can still be found in many Canadian cities, all in various states of repair. In Toronto, for instance, the network has been abandoned to the point where no level of government will take responsibility for its ownership. A handful of sirens still remain in Toronto in older established neighbourhoods:\nSirens have recently been built within three kilometers (two miles) of the Darlington and Pickering nuclear power plants in the province of Ontario. (Both plants are within 30 kilometers; 20 miles of each other.) These sirens will sound in the event of a nuclear emergency that could result in a release of radioactivity. Sirens have also been placed (and are tested weekly) in Sarnia, Ontario due to the large number of chemical plants in the vicinity. These consist mainly of ATI HPSS32 sirens, as well as a Federal Signal Modulator in the rail yards and three Thunderbolt 1003s located at the Suncor plant.\nSirens have also been installed in and around the Grey Bruce Nuclear Generating Station. The sirens are on the plant and in the surrounding communities such as Tiverton, Ontario. One notable siren is a Federal Signal Modulator at the Bruce Nuclear Visitor's Centre. The Public Siren network as it is called, consists of mostly Whelens, Modulators, and Model 2s. One of the sirens in this network (a Model 2) is at Tiverton, which is about 10\u00a0km (6 miles) from the plant.\nMany warning sirens in Ontario, Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta are now used as tornado warning instruments. Smithers, British Columbia uses an old air raid siren as a noon-day whistle. New Waterford, Nova Scotia uses a siren to signal the daily curfew. One of the warning sirens was even used as a goal horn for the Quebec Nordiques between the mid-1980s and 1991. Caledonia, Ontario routinely uses an air raid siren to call in their local volunteer firefighters to the fire hall. NOAA Weather Radios in Canada are often used for advance warnings about future severe storms whenever people are at home, at a business or in a car.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, several sets of warning tones have been used that have varied due to age, government structure, and manufacturer. The initial alerts used during World WarII were the alert signal (a 3\u20135-minute steady, continuous siren tone) and the attack signal (a 3\u20135-minute warbling tone, or series of short tone bursts on devices incapable of warbling, such as whistles). The Victory Siren manual stated that when a manual generation of the warbling tone was required, it could be achieved by holding the \"Signal\" switch on for eight seconds and off for four seconds. In 1950, the Federal Civil Defense Administration revised the signals, naming the alert signal \"red alert\" and adding an \"all clear\" signal, characterized by three one-minute steady blasts with two minutes of silence between the blasts.\nBeginning in 1952, the Bell and Lights Air Raid Warning System, developed by AT&amp;T, was made available to provide automated transmission of an expanded set of alert signals:\nThe \"yellow alert\" and \"red alert\" signals correspond to the earlier \"alert\" signal and \"attack\" signal, respectively, and the early Federal Signal AR timer siren control units featured the \"take cover\" button labeled with a red background and the \"alert\" button labeled with a yellow background. Later AF timers changed the color-coding, coloring the \"alert\" button blue, the \"take cover\" button yellow, and the \"fire\" button red (used to call out volunteer firefighters), thus confusing the color-coding of the alerts. In 1955, the Federal Civil Defense Administration again revised the warning signals, altering them to deal with concern over nuclear fallout. The new set of signals were the \"alert\" signal (unchanged) and the \"take cover\" signal (previously the \"attack\" signal). The \"all clear\" signal was removed because leaving a shelter while fallout was present would prove hazardous.\nSirens began to replace bells for municipal warning in the early 1900s, but became commonplace following America's entry into World WarII. Most siren models of this time were single-tone models which often sounded almost an octave higher in pitch than their European counterparts. Dual-tone sirens became more common in the 1950s, but had been used in some areas since about 1915. During the Cold War, standard signals were used throughout the country for civil defense purposes, referred to as \"alert\" and \"attack\". Volunteer fire departments generally used a different siren signal. Many towns, especially in California and New England, used coded air horns or diaphones for fire calls and reserved sirens for civil defense use.\nToday, signals are determined by state and local authorities, and can vary from one region to another. The most common tones produced by sirens in the United States are \"alert\" (steady) and \"attack\" (wail). Other tones include Westminster Chimes (commonly used for the testing of electronic sirens), hi-lo (high-low), whoop, pulse (pulsing), air horn, and fast wail.\nThe U.S. federal standard regarding emergency warning signals is defined in FEMA's Outdoor Warning Systems Guide, CPG 1\u201317, published on March 1, 1980, which describes the Civil Defense Warning System (CDWS) and its warning signals. The language was slightly revised by FEMA's National Warning System Operations Manual, Manual 1550.2 published 03-30-2001:\nThe most common tone, \"alert\", is widely used by municipalities to warn citizens of impending severe weather, particularly tornadoes which have earmarked the sirens as \"tornado sirens\". This practice is nearly universal in the Midwest and parts of the Deep South, where intense and fast-moving thunderstorms that can produce tornadoes occur frequently. The \"alert\" sound is a steady, continuous note. In seaside towns, \"alert\" may also be used to warn of a tsunami. Sirens that rotate will have a rising-and-falling tone as the direction of the horn changes. The \"attack\" tone is the rising and falling sound of an air raid or nuclear attack, frequently heard in war movies. It was once reserved for imminent enemy attack, but is today sometimes used to warn of severe weather, tsunamis, or even fire calls, depending on local ordinance. Criteria to sound sirens during severe weather events are established by regional National Weather Service offices and do not have an \"all clear\" signal.\nThere is no standard \"fire\" signal in the United States, and while the use of sirens by volunteer fire departments is still common, it is diminishing. In the dry areas of the American West, residents may be required to shut off outdoor water systems to ensure adequate pressure at fire hydrants upon hearing the signal. The \"fire\" signal can vary from one community to another. Three long blasts on a siren is one common signal, similar to the signal used by volunteer brigades in Germany and other countries, while other locales use the hi-lo (high-low) signal described above. Some communities, particularly in New England and northern California, make use of coded blasts over a diaphone or air horn for fire signals, reserving the use of sirens for more serious situations. Still others use the \"attack\" tone as their fire call. Some communities make use of an \"all clear\" signal, or sound separate signals for fire calls and ambulance runs. Some fire signals in the U.S. are often blasted at least once a day, mostly at noon, to test the system, and are often referred to as \"noon sirens\" or \"noon whistles\". These also function as a time tick for setting clocks.\nCPG 1-17 recommends that a monthly test be conducted, consisting of the steady \"attention\" signal for no more than one minute, one minute of silence, and the \"attack\" signal for no more than one minute. A \"growl test\" signal is also described by CPG 1\u201317, when a siren must be tested more than once a month. This is typically a one-second burst of sound to verify the proper operation of the siren without causing a significant number of people to interpret the test as an actual alert. Many cities in the U.S. periodically sound their sirens as a test, either weekly, monthly, or yearly, at a day and hour set by each individual city.\nIn the United States, there is no national level alert system. Normally, sirens are controlled on a county or local level, but some are controlled on a state level, such as in Hawaii. Sirens are usually used to warn of impending natural disaster; while they are also used to warn of threats of military attacks, these rarely occur in the United States. Throughout the Great Plains, Midwest, and South, they are typically used to warn the public to take cover when a tornado warning is issued, sometimes even for severe thunderstorm warnings, and very rarely used for anything else. They are generally required in areas within a ten-mile radius of nuclear power plants. In the South and on the East Coast (except for Texas, Maine, Florida and New Hampshire), sirens are used to inform people about approaching hurricanes.\nIn Pierce County, Washington there is a system of sirens set up along the Puyallup and Carbon River valleys to warn residents of volcanic eruptions and lahars (giant mudslides) from Mt. Rainier.\nCoastal communities, especially those in northern California, Oregon, Washington, Alaska, and Hawaii, use siren systems to warn of incoming tsunamis. In 2011, the city of Honolulu created an \"Adopt-a-Siren\" website for its tsunami sirens. The site is modeled after Code for America's \"Adopt-a-Hydrant\", which helps volunteers in Boston sign up to shovel out fire hydrants after storms.\nSome U.S. volunteer fire departments, particularly in rural areas, use sirens to call volunteers to assemble at the firehouse. This method is being used less frequently as technology advances and local residents within earshot often file complaints with their town boards. Some areas utilize their sirens as a last resort, relying more on cellular and paging technology; however, a decreasing number of rural departments are still outside the range of wireless communications and rely on sirens to activate the local volunteer departments.\nMany college campuses in the U.S., especially in the wake of the Virginia Tech shooting, have begun installing sirens to warn students in the event of dangerous incidents. Sirens in the United States have been replaced by NOAA Weather Radios for advance warnings about future severe storms whenever people are inside cars or buildings.\nSouth America.\nArgentina\nAround mainly suburban areas of big cities like Bahia Blanca, Mar De Plata, Rosario, Cordoba and Comodoro Rivadavia, in police stations, fire stations, factories, weather stations, city halls and amongst common public neighbourhoods, warning sirens can be found. Most of the common models are a special model which isn't completely identified yet as of now, which however, looks like a vertical Klaxon GP6/10, a Mechtric MS22 or a vertically installed mechanical or electro-mechanical eight-, nine-, eleven-, or twelve-port single-tone siren, most of which have six rectangular horns and are most often identified as a Kingvox. They sound off for terrorism attacks, bushfires, dam leakages, chemical plant issues, life-threatening/extremely severe weather alerts which are certain to happen, incoming enemy attack and any other common natural disasters. Other models present in the country's warning system include Federal Signal, Elektror/Siemens, Whelen, Telegrafia, Klaxon and H\u00f6rmann. In extremely urban areas like Buenos Aires, most of the mechanical sirens which used to operate in a large amount were decommissioned and replaced with a smaller amount of electronic sirens, SMS alerts to phones and in some cases, as EAS alerts to TV. In some areas around the suburban areas of the big cities, over the years and since the 2010s, some sirens were decommissioned due to maintenance upkeep even though most of them remain active.\nTwo signals are commonly used. Here are the signals:\nThe \"all clear\" signal is mainly used during the nationwide siren testing in Argentine Volunteer Firefighters' Day on 2\u00a0June, and sometimes, in some sirens, the general warning is tested after the all-clear.\nOceania.\nAustralia.\nA series of 98 electronic sirens, making up a large-scale public-address system (the Sydney CBD Emergency Warning System) and including thirteen variable-message signs, are installed in the Sydney central business district. While installed in the months preceding the 2007 APEC conference, they are designed to be a permanent fixture and are tested on a monthly basis.\nSome large-scale sirens are also deployed, like the Grifco Model 888, Grifco Model 777, and Klaxon SO4, which are used at fire stations for call-outs and at Sydney's beaches for shark alarms. Alarms are also used around prisons for breakouts and at many factories and schools to announce start and finish times.\nA siren is located at the Kwinana BP plant south of Perth; this siren is tested every Monday. It is used to evacuate the plant in case of an emergency and can be heard in Kwinana and certain parts of Rockingham. It can also be used to warn of severe weather and potentially dangerous emergencies on the Kwinana Industrial Strip.\nIn South Australia, a number of Country Fire Service stations have sirens on or near the stations. These are only activated when the brigade are responding to bushfire or grassfire events and for testing. They are not activated for every call, only as a public alert for the presence of bushfires.\nThere are electronic sirens that include Whelen, Telegrafia, SiRcom, Klaxon and Grifco.\nIn Victoria, many Country Fire Authority stations have sirens installed that are used to summon volunteers to an emergency callout, as well as consequently alerting the local community of brigade activity. Due to a variety of siren models in use across the state, there are two signals that are used, differentiated by length:\nIn Melbourne's CBD, there is a set of sirens installed to warn of attack and extreme flooding. These became necessary after the Bourke and Flinders St. attacks, where people were killed as a result of a person intentionally driving a vehicle into pedestrians.\nIn Queensland, Whelen Vortex-R4 sirens have been installed as part of the Somerset Regional Council Flood Warning System. At nearby Grantham, Queensland, a Whelen WPS-2906, which features both warning tones and pre-recorded messages provides early warning in the event of flooding. As well, Cairns Regional Council have installed nine Whelen WPS-2900 series sirens to alert to a dam breach of the nearby Copperlode Falls Dam. A map of the system can be found here, as well as additional information. Other Whelen WPS-2900 series sirens can be found in a few towns around Queensland as well.\nNew Zealand.\nLower Hutt, Napier, Whanganui, and the former Waitakere City (now Waitakere Ranges) of Auckland each have a network of civil defense sirens. The networks in Lower Hutt and Napier are bolstered by fire sirens that also function as civil defense sirens. Lower Hutt's network is further bolstered by selected industrial sirens that double as civil defence sirens. In the western Bay of Plenty Region, several fire sirens also serve as civil defense sirens, and there are dedicated civil defense sirens at the Bay Park Raceway in Mount Maunganui, Tokoroa, and Whangamat\u0101 (which has two). Additionally, Tokoroa, Put\u0101ruru, T\u012brau, and Whangamat\u0101 have fire sirens serving double duty as civil defense sirens. In the years following the tsunamis of the Indian Ocean earthquake in 2004, Meerkat electronic sirens were installed in all populated areas of the west coast lower than 10 metres.\nWarning sounds vary from area to area, including rising and falling notes and Morse code sirens. Communities with volunteer fire brigades use a continuous note on all sirens for civil defense, and a warbling siren on the fire station siren only for fire callouts. Civil defense uses a distinctive \"sting\" siren that is used by all radio stations nationwide, but is currently only used for civil defense sirens in Wanganui.\nAfrica.\nMorocco.\nMorocco, like many other countries, has civil defense sirens installed in several cities and towns such as Casablanca, Oujda, Asilah, M'diq, Chefchaouen, and Qalaat Sraghna. However, not all cities are equipped with this system. These sirens are typically located at fire stations and city halls. They were first introduced during the French and Spanish colonial era, and while some have been dismantled, many continue to operate to this day.\nThese sirens are strategically positioned in areas with high population densities like Casablanca, or in regions that are susceptible to natural disasters like floods, such as the Eureka siren. Additionally, they can also be found in tourist areas such as M'Diq and Chefchaouen, as well as in areas where dangerous industries are located.\nAlthough these sirens are seldom used due to the rarity of imminent danger, they were recently utilized during the quarantine period of the pandemic. Sirens sounded in various cities, including Oujda, to alert the population of the nightly curfew. During the holy month of Ramadan, these sirens are employed to signal the arrival of the Fotour time.\nIn the past, these sirens were used in small towns to call for volunteer paramedics in emergencies such as fires or drowning incidents. However, in cities without sirens, the state utilizes alternative means to alert the public, such as broadcasting warning messages on television or radio, or sending SMS messages to citizens' phone numbers. In dangerous situations, police patrol car horns are also used to warn the public.\nSurprisingly, the state does not allocate any specific days to test the sirens, and the reasons behind this remain unknown.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51019", "revid": "42464", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51019", "title": "William S. Donaldson", "text": ""}
{"id": "51020", "revid": "25859633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51020", "title": "Napier's constant", "text": ""}
{"id": "51021", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51021", "title": "Tutsis", "text": ""}
{"id": "51022", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51022", "title": "North Norfolk Railway", "text": "Heritage railway in Norfolk, England\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Routemap/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe North Norfolk Railway (NNR) \u2013 also known as the \"Poppy Line\" \u2013 is a heritage steam railway in Norfolk, England, running between the towns of Sheringham and Holt. The North Norfolk Railway is owned and operated as a public limited company, originally called Central Norfolk Enterprises Limited. The railway is listed as exempt from the UK Railways (Interoperability) Regulations 2000.\nHistory.\nRoute history.\nThe line once formed part of the Midland and Great Northern Joint Railway's Melton Constable to Cromer Beach branch line. The first section, from Melton to Holt, was opened on 1 October 1884. After a suspension of work, the Holt to Cromer section of line was completed by direct labour and opened on 16 June 1887. A through Kings Cross to Cromer express started running in August 1887 and, although the construction had been expensive, the boost to revenue from the new line was considerable. A second train was put on the following year, in the down direction, consisting of coaches slipped at Peterborough from a GNR Manchester train. The time from Kings Cross to Cromer was typically &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;4+1\u20442 hours, but the GER achieved Liverpool Street to Cromer in &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3+1\u20442 hours.\nThe Lynn &amp; Fakenham Railway had proposed a branch from this line, at Kelling, to Blakeney, via Cley and Wiveton. The decision was taken not to go ahead with this line, but land for the proposed junction at Kelling had already been secured. Ballast sidings for the company developed in the Kelling area to service the needs of the company. In 1903, a station was added at Weybourne, having previously been refused.\nUnder the Railways Act 1921, the line, along with the rest of the M&amp;GN, was jointly managed by the LMS and LNER, retaining its own directors and staff. This continued until 1935, when the parent companies agreed that local administration should be undertaken by the LNER. The line became part of the Eastern Region of British Railways under the Transport Act 1947.\nIn 1954, British Railways announced the closure of the former Great Eastern Railway terminus at Cromer High, with all traffic being routed into the M&amp;GN station at Cromer Beach. The majority of the M&amp;GN system was closed to passengers on 28 February 1959, although the line between Melton Constable and Cromer retained a good level of passenger service - becoming an extension of the former GER line from Norwich.\nThe Beeching Report of April 1963 called for the end of passenger services between Melton Constable and Sheringham; this was approved by the government on 6 April 1964.\nPreservation history.\nThe Midland &amp; Great Northern Joint Railways Preservation Society formed in April 1959, initially hoping to save the 22-mile long North Walsham Town to Yarmouth Beach section; later, the North Walsham to Aylsham North and Themelthorpe to Melton Constable sections. After these plans proved impossible, attention turned to the section of line between Sheringham and Weybourne. In 1963, the Society formed \"North Norfolk Railways Limited\", initially required to be titled the \"Central Norfolk Enterprises\" due to not owning any railway, to preserve and operate the line.\nSheringham station was still being used by British Rail services and, by the time the purchase had been completed, track lifting had taken place at Weybourne and some way towards Sheringham. Work on rebuilding the line started in 1965 and Sheringham station was leased by the society following closure in 1967 with two steam locomotives, two diesel railbuses and the LNER Quad-Art set being delivered on 4 June 1967.\nInitially, trains were only operated for members. Operations over the line were later authorised through a Light Railway Order; the first was issued in 1975, under control of British Rail, and independently from 1976. An amendment order was issued in 1987, relating to the extension of the NNR to a new station site at Holt - using a parcel of land originally purchased as the junction for the never-built Blakeney branch.\nAt Sheringham, the line has now been reconnected to the town's main station on the National Rail network, via an occasional-use level crossing; crossings by charter trains and visiting rolling stock are anticipated not to exceed 12 times a year. The North Norfolk Railway also operate a number of dining trains over the entire surviving section of the M&amp;GN, between Holt and Cromer, during summer months. Services began in 2016, working in partnership with the North Yorkshire Moors Railway, who were already a licensed operator on Network Rail. The Tourist information Centre and public toilets, that sat on the footprint of part of the trackbed between the station and the network rail link, were demolished and rebuilt in the style of the station, releasing the trackbed alignment for this development.\nClosure threat.\nIn 2001, it was announced that the railway was in danger of closure; this was due to the landlords of Sheringham station reportedly wanting to sell the site for redevelopment and the railway's lease on the site expiring in June of that year. The railway was able to raise \u00a3290,000 to purchase the site, with offered funding including an interest-free, 5-year private loan of \u00a3150,000.\nPresent day.\nThere are two stations between Sheringham and Holt: Weybourne, which is about away from the village, and Kelling Heath Park.\nThe NNR operates both steam- and diesel-hauled services; it organises a programme of seasonal special events including steam galas, diesel galas, Santa and Norfolk Lights expresses. \nThe main restoration sheds, including the former locomotive shed from Norwich City, are at Weybourne. They have room to accommodate four standard length British Railways Mark 1 coaches and six large steam or diesel locomotives. New carriage storage sheds have been built near Holt with \u00a3308,000 Heritage Lottery funding. These have the capacity to store the equivalent of 18 Mark 1 coaches.\nA museum has been built at Holt to display artifacts from the Midland and Great Northern Joint Railway. The station building at Holt was originally built at Stalham in 1883; it was moved, brick by brick, in 2002 and was re-erected in its current location. This project was awarded second place in the 2006 railway buildings competition by the Heritage Railway Association of the UK. The signal box at the station is over 100 years old and was restored on-site. The full signalling system at Holt, with 14 signals as well as the box, was commissioned in 2009 \u2013 winning the HRA signalling award for that year. The box was formerly at Upper Portland Sidings in the East Midlands. The Holt site also includes a reconstructed carriage house, which was completed in late 2009; it is a relocated example of the houses made with old railway carriages in the war years and a weighbridge recovered from Cambridge.\nThe railway is operated mainly by volunteers.\nRoute details.\nStarting from Sheringham station, the lines follows the coast westwards, soon passing over the Automatic Open Crossing at Sweetbriar Lane, where the private road leading to \"Sheringham Golf Club\" crosses the line. The line climbs a 1 in 97 gradient, with the golf course, and Skelding Hill, on the seaward side of trains, while the A149 can be seen on the landward side of trains, roughly paralleling the tracks with Upper Sheringham visible in the distance. During WW2, Skelding Hill was the location for an emergency coastal battery, complete with an underground headquarters bunker.\nThe train then begins a 1 in 100 descent, passing under a farm occupation bridge and passing through a cutting on the edge of Deadman's Hill, reputedly the burial place for plague victims from Weybourne village. After crossing over the A149 on Bridge 303 the train begins to climb a 1 in 80 gradient, and turns slightly inland. The village of Weybourne can be seen on the seaward side of the line.\nThe train next arrives at Weybourne, where the large locomotive and carriage works can be seen on the seaward side of the running line. The signal box was recovered from Holt, as the original was accidentally demolished by British Railways contractors after the line had been purchased by the North Norfolk Railway.\nLeaving Weybourne, the train continues to climb a 1 in 80 gradient, passing the wooded site of the former \"Weybourne Springs Hotel\" that the station was built to serve. Kelling Heath Park is soon reached. This is a single coach platform, built during the restoration of the line, and sits on the gradient, so most locomotive-hauled trains only stop here when running in the down direction (towards Sheringham).\nAfter passing through a deep cutting, the gradient eases and the train passes over a level crossing on Kelling Heath, turning further inland as it heads towards Holt. After passing under a road bridge, a modern carriage shed is passed on the inland side of the line. This area had once featured a number of ballast sidings used by the M&amp;GN.\nThe train now approaches the Holt station, with a signal box and reconstructed goods shed visible on the \"seaward\" side of the train. The line terminates here, but it is possible to see where the line originally continued towards Melton Constable.\nThe future.\nWith the level crossing at Sheringham reinstated, one of the next projects is to rebuild the demolished buildings on platform 2 at Sheringham station; the stanchions for the project are at Weybourne. This is seen as a medium to long-term project, but a start may be made soon on erecting the stanchions. The project has already seen a footbridge replaced.\nHolt station is also being developed, with projects including erecting a footbridge. Currently awaiting restoration and installation is a 60\u00a0ft turntable from Hull (Botanic Gardens), purchased from the South Devon Railway.\nRolling stock.\nThere are a variety of preserved steam and diesel locomotives, diesel multiple units, passenger coaches and goods wagons. Most of these are typical of the London and North Eastern Railway (LNER) branch lines in Norfolk. Some are owned by the railway itself, but most are owned by various individuals or voluntary groups. The line is also regularly visited by locomotives based elsewhere; some locomotives come for a day on a railtour, others for a few days or weeks to take part in a special gala, but a few stay for many months and form part of the stock working scheduled trains.\nFunding and associated bodies.\nThe railway relies on a variety of sources to fund its operation. Funding sources have included:\nA \u00a3419,000 carriage store (Bridge Road Carriage Sheds) was constructed close to Holt with the help of a 2006 grant of \u00a3308,000 from the Heritage Lottery Fund. A path from Holt station was included, but stops just before the sheds, with no public access to the site being possible.\nIn April 2013, the line was awarded \u00a399,500 from the National Lottery Heritage Fund (NLHF) to further its restoration and education programmes, specifically to show the impact railways had on the development of the London suburbs.\nIn 2016, the line was celebrating the completion of a new Tourist Information Centre at Sheringham and a new boiler shop at Weybourne, which were made possible by a \u00a3498,000 award from the government's Coastal Community Fund. North Norfolk District Council also awarded \u00a3154,000 towards the work.\nIn April 2020, the Midland and Great Northern Joint Railway Society, backers of the North Norfolk Railway, purchased Hunslet 0-6-0ST locomotive No. 1982, \"Ring Haw\" and a crane from the company in order to release funds for the line and ensure that the vehicles remained on the North Norfolk Railway.\nIn July 2020, the line was given a grant of \u00a346,500 towards reinstating train services from the NLHF Emergency appeal.\nIn October 2020, the line was awarded \u00a3360,000 from the Culture Recovery Fund (from the Heritage and the Heritage Stimulus Fund), funded by the government and administered by Historic England and the NLHF.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51023", "revid": "37763648", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51023", "title": "Chicago Illinois", "text": ""}
{"id": "51024", "revid": "18956658", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51024", "title": "Kropotkin (disambiguation)", "text": "Peter Kropotkin (1842\u20131921) was a Russian prince, scientist, philosopher, and anarchist.\nKropotkin may also refer to:\nPeople with the surname.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "51025", "revid": "36690311", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51025", "title": "Electroplating", "text": "Electrochemical process for coating with metal\nElectroplating, also known as electrochemical deposition or electrodeposition, is a process for producing a metal coating on a solid substrate through the reduction of cations of that metal by means of a direct electric current. The part to be coated acts as the cathode (negative electrode) of an electrolytic cell; the electrolyte is a solution of a salt whose cation is the metal to be coated, and the anode (positive electrode) is usually either a block of that metal, or of some inert conductive material. The current is provided by an external power supply.\nElectroplating is widely used in industry and decorative arts to improve the surface qualities of objects\u2014such as resistance to abrasion and corrosion, lubricity, reflectivity, electrical conductivity, or appearance. It is used to build up thickness on undersized or worn-out parts and to manufacture metal plates with complex shape, a process called electroforming. It is used to deposit copper and other conductors in forming printed circuit boards and copper interconnects in integrated circuits. It is also used to purify metals such as copper.\nThe aforementioned electroplating of metals uses an electroreduction process (that is, a negative or cathodic current is on the working electrode). The term \"electroplating\" is also used occasionally for processes that occur under electro-oxidation (i.e positive or anodic current on the working electrode), although such processes are more commonly referred to as anodizing rather than electroplating. One such example is the formation of silver chloride on silver wire in chloride solutions to make silver/silver-chloride (AgCl) electrodes.\nElectropolishing, a process that uses an electric current to selectively remove the outermost layer from the surface of a metal object, is the reverse of the process of electroplating.\n\"Throwing power\" is an important parameter that provides a measure of the uniformity of electroplating current, and consequently the uniformity of the electroplated metal thickness, on regions of the part that are near to the anode compared to regions that are far from it. It depends mostly on the composition and temperature of the electroplating solution, as well as on the operating current density. A higher throwing power of the plating bath results in a more uniform coating.\nHistory.\nElectroplating was invented in Europe by Italian chemist Luigi Valentino Brugnatelli in 1805. Brugnatelli used his colleague Alessandro Volta's invention of five years earlier, the voltaic pile, to facilitate the first electrodeposition. Brugnatelli's inventions were suppressed by the French Academy of Sciences and did not become used in general industry for the following thirty years. By 1839, scientists in Britain and Russia had independently devised metal-deposition processes similar to Brugnatelli's for the copper electroplating of printing press plates.\nResearch from the 1930s had theorized that electroplating might have been performed in the Parthian Empire using a device resembling a Baghdad Battery, but this has since been refuted; the items were fire-gilded using mercury.\nBoris Jacobi in Russia not only rediscovered galvanoplastics, but developed electrotyping and galvanoplastic sculpture. Galvanoplastics quickly came into fashion in Russia, with such people as inventor Peter Bagration, scientist Heinrich Lenz, and science-fiction author Vladimir Odoyevsky all contributing to further development of the technology. Among the most notorious cases of electroplating usage in mid-19th century Russia were the gigantic galvanoplastic sculptures of St. Isaac's Cathedral in Saint Petersburg and gold-electroplated dome of the Cathedral of Christ the Saviour in Moscow, the third tallest Orthodox church in the world.\nSoon after, John Wright of Birmingham, England discovered that potassium cyanide was a suitable electrolyte for gold and silver electroplating. Wright's associates, George Elkington and Henry Elkington were awarded the first patents for electroplating in 1840. These two then founded the electroplating industry in Birmingham from where it spread around the world. The Woolrich Electrical Generator of 1844, now in Thinktank, Birmingham Science Museum, is the earliest electrical generator used in industry. It was used by Elkingtons.\nThe Norddeutsche Affinerie in Hamburg was the first modern electroplating plant starting its production in 1876.\nAs the science of electrochemistry grew, its relationship to electroplating became understood and other types of non-decorative metal electroplating were developed. Commercial electroplating of nickel, brass, tin, and zinc were developed by the 1850s. Electroplating baths and equipment based on the patents of the Elkingtons were scaled up to accommodate the plating of numerous large-scale objects and for specific manufacturing and engineering applications.\nThe plating industry received a big boost with the advent of the development of electric generators in the late 19th century. With the higher currents available, metal machine components, hardware, and automotive parts requiring corrosion protection and enhanced wear properties, along with better appearance, could be processed in bulk.\nThe two World Wars and the growing aviation industry gave impetus to further developments and refinements, including such processes as hard chromium plating, bronze alloy plating, sulfamate nickel plating, and numerous other plating processes. Plating equipment evolved from manually operated tar-lined wooden tanks to automated equipment capable of processing thousands of kilograms per hour of parts.\nOne of the American physicist Richard Feynman's first projects was to develop technology for electroplating metal onto plastic. Feynman developed the original idea of his friend into a successful invention, allowing his employer (and friend) to keep commercial promises he had made but could not have fulfilled otherwise.\nProcess.\nThe electrolyte in the electrolytic plating cell should contain positive ions (cations) of the metal to be deposited. These cations are reduced at the cathode to the metal in the zero valence state. For example, the electrolyte for copper electroplating can be a solution of copper(II) sulfate, which dissociates into Cu2+ cations and SO42- anions. At the cathode, the Cu2+ is reduced to metallic copper by gaining two electrons.\nWhen the anode is made of the metal that is intended for coating onto the cathode, the opposite reaction may occur at the anode, turning it into dissolved cations. For example, copper would be oxidized at the anode to Cu2+ by losing two electrons. In this case, the rate at which the anode is dissolved will equal the rate at which the cathode is plated, and thus the ions in the electrolyte bath are continuously replenished by the anode. The net result is the effective transfer of metal from the anode to the cathode.\nThe anode may instead be made of a material that resists electrochemical oxidation, such as lead or carbon. Oxygen, hydrogen peroxide, and some other byproducts are then produced at the anode instead. In this case, ions of the metal to be plated must be replenished (continuously or periodically) in the bath as they are drawn out of the solution.\nThe plating is most commonly a single metallic element, not an alloy. However, some alloys can be electrodeposited, notably brass and solder. Plated \"alloys\" are not \"true alloys\" (solid solutions), but rather they are tiny crystals of the elemental metals being plated. In the case of plated solder, it is sometimes deemed necessary to have a true alloy, and the plated solder is melted to allow the tin and lead to combine into a true alloy. The true alloy is more corrosion-resistant than the as-plated mixture.\nMany plating baths include cyanides of other metals (such as potassium cyanide) in addition to cyanides of the metal to be deposited. These free cyanides facilitate anode corrosion, help to maintain a constant metal ion level, and contribute to conductivity. Additionally, non-metal chemicals such as carbonates and phosphates may be added to increase conductivity.\nWhen plating is not desired on certain areas of the substrate, \"stop-offs\" are applied to prevent the bath from coming in contact with the substrate. Typical stop-offs include tape, foil, lacquers, and waxes.\nStrike.\nInitially, a special plating deposit called a \"strike\" or \"flash\" may be used to form a very thin (typically less than 0.1\u00a0\u03bcm thick) plating with high quality and good adherence to the substrate. This serves as a foundation for subsequent plating processes. A strike uses a high current density and a bath with a low ion concentration. The process is slow, so more efficient plating processes are used once the desired strike thickness is obtained.\nThe striking method is also used in combination with the plating of different metals. If it is desirable to plate one type of deposit onto a metal to improve corrosion resistance but this metal has inherently poor adhesion to the substrate, then a strike can be first deposited that is compatible with both. One example of this situation is the poor adhesion of electrolytic nickel on zinc alloys, in which case a copper strike is used, which has good adherence to both.\nPulse electroplating.\nThe pulse electroplating or pulse electrodeposition (PED) process involves the swift alternating of the electrical potential or current between two different values, resulting in a series of pulses of equal amplitude, duration, and polarity, separated by zero current. By changing the pulse amplitude and width, it is possible to change the deposited film's composition and thickness.\nThe experimental parameters of pulse electroplating usually consist of peak current/potential, duty cycle, frequency, and effective current/potential. Peak current/potential is the maximum setting of electroplating current or potential. Duty cycle is the effective portion of time in a certain electroplating period with the current or potential applied. The effective current/potential is calculated by multiplying the duty cycle and peak value of the current or potential. Pulse electroplating could help to improve the quality of electroplated film and release the internal stress built up during fast deposition. A combination of the short duty cycle and high frequency could decrease surface cracks. However, in order to maintain the constant effective current or potential, a high-performance power supply may be required to provide high current/potential and a fast switch. Another common problem of pulse electroplating is that the anode material could get plated and contaminated during the reverse electroplating, especially for a high-cost, inert electrode such as platinum.\nOther factors that affect the pulse electroplating include temperature, anode-to-cathode gap, and stirring. Sometimes, pulse electroplating can be performed in a heated electroplating bath to increase the deposition rate, since the rate of most chemical reactions increases exponentially with temperature per the Arrhenius law. The anode-to-cathode gap is related to the current distribution between anode and cathode. A small gap-to-sample-area ratio may cause uneven distribution of current and affect the surface topology of the plated sample. Stirring may increase the transfer/diffusion rate of metal ions from the bulk solution to the electrode surface. The ideal stirring setting varies for different metal electroplating processes. \nBrush electroplating.\nA closely related process is brush electroplating, in which localized areas or entire items are plated using a brush saturated with plating solution. The brush, typically a graphite body wrapped with an absorbent cloth material that both holds the plating solution and prevents direct contact with the item being plated, is connected to the anode of a low-voltage and 3-4 ampere direct-current power source, and the item to be plated (the cathode) is grounded. The operator dips the brush in plating solution and then applies it to the item, moving the brush continually to get an even distribution of the plating material.\nBrush electroplating has several advantages over tank plating, including portability, the ability to plate items that for some reason cannot be tank plated (one application was the plating of portions of very large decorative support columns in a building restoration), low or no masking requirements, and comparatively low plating solution volume requirements. It is mainly used industrially in part repair, with worn bearing surfaces getting a nickel or silver deposit. With technological advancement deposits up to .025\" have been achieved and retained uniformity. Disadvantages compared to tank plating can include greater operator involvement (tank plating can frequently be done with minimal attention and the solutions used are often toxic), and the inconsistency in achieving as great a plate thickness.\nBarrel plating.\nThis technique of electroplating is one of the most common used in the industry for large numbers of small objects. The objects are placed in a barrel-shaped non-conductive cage and then immersed in a chemical bath containing dissolved ions of the metal that is to be plated onto them. The barrel is then rotated, and electrical currents are run through the various pieces in the barrel, which complete circuits as they touch one another. The result is a very uniform and efficient plating process, though the finish on the end products will likely suffer from abrasion during the plating process. It is unsuitable for highly ornamental or precisely engineered items.\nCleanliness.\nCleanliness is essential to successful electroplating, since molecular layers of oil can prevent adhesion of the coating. ASTM B322 is a standard guide for cleaning metals prior to electroplating. Cleaning includes solvent cleaning, hot alkaline detergent cleaning, electrocleaning, ultrasonic cleaning and acid treatment. The most common industrial test for cleanliness is the waterbreak test, in which the surface is thoroughly rinsed and held vertical. Hydrophobic contaminants such as oils cause the water to bead and break up, allowing the water to drain rapidly. Perfectly clean metal surfaces are hydrophilic and will retain an unbroken sheet of water that does not bead up or drain off. ASTM F22 describes a version of this test. This test does not detect hydrophilic contaminants, but electroplating can displace these easily, since the solutions are water-based. Surfactants such as soap reduce the sensitivity of the test and must be thoroughly rinsed off.\nTest cells and characterization.\nThrowing power.\n\"Throwing power\" (or \"macro throwing power\") is an important parameter that provides a measure of the uniformity of electroplating current, and consequently the uniformity of the electroplated metal thickness, on regions of the part that are near the anode compared to regions that are far from it. It depends mostly on the composition and temperature of the electroplating solution. \"Micro throwing power\" refers to the extent to which a process can fill or coat small recesses such as through-holes. Throwing power can be characterized by the dimensionless Wagner number:\nformula_1\nwhere \"R\" is the universal gas constant, \"T\" is the operating temperature, \"\u03ba\" is the ionic conductivity of the plating solution, \"F\" is the Faraday constant, \"L\" is the equivalent size of the plated object, \"\u03b1\" is the transfer coefficient, and \"i\" the surface-averaged total (including hydrogen evolution) current density. The Wagner number quantifies the ratio of kinetic to ohmic resistances. A higher Wagner number produces a more uniform deposition. This can be achieved in practice by decreasing the size (\"L\") of the plated object, reducing the current density , adding chemicals that lower \"\u03b1\" (make the electric current less sensitive to voltage), and raising the solution conductivity (e.g. by adding acid). Concurrent hydrogen evolution usually improves the uniformity of electroplating by increasing ; however, this effect can be offset by blockage due to hydrogen bubbles and hydroxide deposits. \nThe Wagner number is rather difficult to measure accurately; therefore, other related parameters, that are easier to obtain experimentally with standard cells, are usually used instead. These parameters are derived from two ratios: the ratio \"M\" \n \"m\"1 / \"m\"2 of the plating thickness of a specified region of the cathode \"close\" to the anode to the thickness of a region \"far\" from the cathode and the ratio \"L\" \n \"x\"2 / \"x\"1 of the distances of these regions through the electrolyte to the anode. In a Haring-Blum cell, for example, \"L\" \n 5 for its two independent cathodes, and a cell yielding plating thickness ratio of \"M\" = 6 has Harring-Blum throwing power 100% \u00d7 (\"L\" \u2212 \"M\") / \"L\" \n \u221220%. Other conventions include the Heatley throwing power 100% \u00d7 (\"L\" \u2212 \"M\") / (\"L\" \u2212 1), Field throwing power 100% \u00d7 (\"L\" \u2212 \"M\") / (\"L\" + \"M\" \u2212 2), and Luke throwing power 100% \u00d7 \"L\" / (\"L\" + \"M\" \u2212 1). A more uniform thickness is obtained by making the throwing power larger (less negative), except for Luke's throwing power, which has the advantage of having a minimum of 0 and a maximum of 100, in terms of the less negative value, according to any of these definitions.\nParameters that describe cell performance such as throwing power are measured in small test cells of various designs that aim to reproduce conditions similar to those found in the production plating bath.\nHaring\u2013Blum cell.\nThe Haring\u2013Blum cell is used to determine the macro throwing power of a plating bath. The cell consists of two parallel cathodes with a fixed anode in the middle. The cathodes are at distances from the anode in the ratio of 1:5. The macro throwing power is calculated from the thickness of plating at the two cathodes when a direct current is passed for a specific period of time. The cell is fabricated out of perspex or glass.\nHull cell.\nThe Hull cell is a type of test cell used to semi-quantitatively check the condition of an electroplating bath. It measures useable current density range, optimization of additive concentration, recognition of impurity effects, and indication of macro throwing power capability. The Hull cell replicates the plating bath on a lab scale. It is filled with a sample of the plating solution and an appropriate anode which is connected to a rectifier. The \"work\" is replaced with a Hull cell test panel that will be plated to show the \"health\" of the bath.\nThe Hull cell is a trapezoidal container that holds 267 milliliters of a plating bath solution. This shape allows one to place the test panel on an angle to the anode. As a result, the deposit is plated at a range current densities along its length, which can be measured with a Hull cell ruler. The solution volume allows for a semi-quantitative measurement of additive concentration: 1\u00a0gram addition to 267\u00a0mL is equivalent to 0.5\u00a0oz/gal in the plating tank.\nEffects.\nElectroplating changes the chemical, physical, and mechanical properties of the workpiece. An example of a chemical change is when nickel plating improves corrosion resistance. An example of a physical change is a change in the outward appearance. An example of a mechanical change is a change in tensile strength or surface hardness, which is a required attribute in the tooling industry. Electroplating of acid gold on underlying copper- or nickel-plated circuits reduces contact resistance as well as surface hardness. Copper-plated areas of mild steel act as a mask if case-hardening of such areas are not desired. Tin-plated steel is chromium-plated to prevent dulling of the surface due to oxidation of tin.\nAlternatives.\nThere are a number of alternative processes to produce metallic coatings on solid substrates that do not involve electrolytic reduction:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51027", "revid": "19089174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51027", "title": "Patronymic", "text": "Component of a personal name based on the given name of one's male ancestor\nA patronymic, or patronym, is a component of a personal name based on the given name of one's father, grandfather (more specifically an avonymic), or an earlier male ancestor. It is the male equivalent of a matronymic.\nPatronymics are used, by custom or official policy, in many countries worldwide, although elsewhere their use has been replaced by or transformed into patronymic surnames. Examples of such transformations include common English surnames such as Johnson (son of John).\nOrigins of terms.\nThe usual noun and adjective in English is \"patronymic\", but as a noun this exists in free variation alongside \"patronym\". The first part of the word \"patronym\" comes from Greek \u03c0\u03b1\u03c4\u03ae\u03c1 \"pat\u0113r\" 'father' ( \u03c0\u03b1\u03c4\u03c1\u03cc\u03c2 \"patros\" whence the combining form \u03c0\u03b1\u03c4\u03c1\u03bf- \"patro\"-); the second part comes from Greek \u1f44\u03bd\u03c5\u03bc\u03b1 \"onyma\", a variant form of \u1f44\u03bd\u03bf\u03bc\u03b1 \"onoma\" 'name'. In the form \"patronymic\", this stands with the addition of the suffix -\u03b9\u03ba\u03cc\u03c2 (\"-ikos\"), which was originally used to form adjectives with the sense 'pertaining to' (thus 'pertaining to the father's name'). These forms are attested in Hellenistic Greek as \u03c0\u03b1\u03c4\u03c1\u03ce\u03bd\u03c5\u03bc\u03bf\u03c2 (\"patr\u014dnymos\") and \u03c0\u03b1\u03c4\u03c1\u03c9\u03bd\u03c5\u03bc\u03b9\u03ba\u03cc\u03c2 (\"patr\u014dnymikos\"). The form \"patronym\", first attested in English in 1834, was borrowed into English from French \"patronyme\", which had previously borrowed the word directly from Greek. \"Patronymic\", first attested in English in 1612, has a more complex history. Both Greek words had entered Latin, and, from Latin, French. The English form \"patronymic\" was borrowed through the mutual influence of French and Latin on English.\nHistory.\nIn many areas around the world, patronyms predate the use of family names. Family names in many Celtic, Germanic, Iberian, Georgian, Armenian and Slavic languages originate from patronyms, e.g. Wilson (son of William), FitzGerald (son of Gerald), Powell (from \"ap Hywel\"), Fern\u00e1ndez (son of Fernando), Rodr\u00edguez (son of Rodrigo), Andersson or Andersen (son of Anders, Scandinavian form of Andrew), Carlsen (son of Carl), Ilyin (of Ilya), Petrov (of Peter), Grigorovich (son of Grigory, Russian form of Gregory), Stefanovi\u0107 (son of Stefan, little Stefan), MacAllister (from \"mac Alistair\", meaning son of Alistair, anglicized Scottish form of Alexander) and O'Conor (from \"\u00d3 Conchobhair\", meaning grandson/descendant of Conchobhar). Other cultures which formerly used patronyms have switched to the more widespread style of passing the father's last name to the children (and wife) as their own.\nIn Iceland, family names are unusual; Icelandic law favours the use of patronyms (and more recently, matronyms) over family names.\nHistorical and current use.\nAfrica.\nTraditionally Muslim and non-Arabic speaking African people, such as Hausa and Fulani people, usually (with some exceptions) follow the Arab naming pattern. The word or phrase meaning \"son of\" is, however, omitted. As such, Mohamed son of Ibrahim son of Ahmed is \"Mohamed Ibrahim Ahmed\", and Mohamed Ibrahim Ahmed's son Ali is \"Ali Mohamed Ibrahim\".\nEthiopia and Eritrea.\nThe naming convention used in Eritrea and Ethiopia does not have family names and surnames. A person is referred to by a single name: this is always the person's given name. Ethiopians and Eritreans use a naming pattern very similar to the Arab naming pattern, but with one exception: no suffix or prefix. The full name of a person is usually two but officially registered with three names. The person's given name comes first, followed by their father's given name and (optionally, for official purposes) their grandfather's name last. For example, a person named Lemlem Mengesha Abraha has Lemlem as her given name, Mengesha (from her father's name) Abraha (grandfather's name). The grandfather's name is usually only added in official documents and not used in everyday life. The father's name is not considered a middle name but a last name, without it being a family name or surname. Married women do not take their husband's last name. They continue to go independently by their given name, followed by their father's name, and then their grandfather's name, even after marriage. In both Ethiopia and Eritrea, a person is always addressed by their first name; for example Mrs. Lemlem or Dr. Lemlem.\nKenya.\nSome Kenyan communities used patronyms. As of 2010, the practice has largely dropped off with the use of just the father's last name as a surname.\nKalenjin use 'arap' meaning 'son of'; \nKikuyu used 'wa' meaning 'of'. Because of polygamy, matronyms were also used and 'wa' used to identify which wife the child was born of; \nMaasai use 'ole' meaning 'son of'; \nMeru use 'mto' abbreviated M' thus son of Mkindia would be M'Mkindia, pronounced Mto Mkindia.\nMozambique.\nPatronymic naming is very common in parts of Mozambique. Although the practice is not universal, patronymic naming has been documented in the Zambezia province.\nNigeria.\nAlthough not as prominent as during the pre-colonial period, some Nigerians (particularly in the North) continue using patronymics \u2014 either as a middle name, as the first part of a hyphenated surname, or as a surname. An example of the use of patronymic middle names would be a man named Adamu Abdulkabiru Jibril \u2014 whereby \"Adamu\" would be his given first name, \"Abdulkabiru\" would be his father's given name as a patronymic middle name, and \"Jibril\" would be his hereditary family surname. Other people hyphenate their surname to include a patronymic, in which case the example would be named Adamu Abdulkabiru-Jibril with \"Abdulkabiru-Jibril\" acting as his surname. Using patronymics as the sole surname is also possible, with the example being named Adamu Abdulkabiru with \"Abdulkabiru\" acting as his surname.\nSomalia.\nSomalis use their paternal grandfather's given name as their legal surname for documentation purposes. They also use the term \"ina\" or \"i\u00f1a\" meaning \"the son of\" or \"the daughter of,\" which is similar to other African and Arab naming patterns. For example, the name \"Ahmed Mohamed Ali Farah\" means \"Ahmed son of Mohamed son of Ali son of Farah.\" When stating one's lineage, one will say \"Ahmed ina Mohamed\" (meaning Ahmed, the son of Mohamed). To identify themselves and the sub-clan they belong to, Somalis memorize their long lineage back to a common ancestor. Women never adopt their husband's patronym but keep their own for life.\nSouth Africa.\nAmong the Zulu, patronymics were used in the pre-colonial era. The prefix \"ka\" was attached to the father's name, for example Shaka kaSenzangakhona means Shaka son of Senzangakhona. The practice disappeared from everyday use with the introduction of the European-style surname system but still remains part of traditional cultural practices, particularly in the case of chieftains and royalty where reciting lineages forms a part of many ceremonial occasions.\nCentral Asia.\nSince the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the citizens of the Central Asian republics have been attempting to de-Russify their surnames and patronymics.\nUzbekistan.\nThough the process of changing or modifying one's full name is not costly or time-consuming, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty reports that adult Uzbeks do not attempt to de-Russify the \"-ovna\" and \"-ovich\" patronymic suffixes to \"-qizi\" and \"-o\u2018g\u2018li\", though newborns get fully Uzbek names right away.\nKazakhstan.\nIn 1996, the \"About procedure for the solution of the questions connected with writing of surnames and middle names of persons of the Kazakh nationality\" law was introduced in Kazakhstan. It aimed to allow the ammendment of surnames and patronymics \"in accordance with the historically established traditions of the Kazakh people\". Before Kazakhstan's independence in 1991, Kazakhs could not hold full names or, as it traditionally was beforehand, use patronymics instead of surnames. Bauyrjan Momy\u015f\u016bly, who refused the surname \"Momyshev\", opting for his patronymic, was a notable oppositionist to any Russified naming pre-Independence.\nAt times, the qandas Kazakhs from China and Mongolia may have no patronymic and no surname. This, at times, complicates the process of Kazakh naturalisation.\nKyrgyzstan.\nIn 2022 and 2023, almost 12 thousand Kyrgyz people Russified their surnames to include \"-ova\" and \"-ov\". This Russification also extended to patronymics, which were previously gendered as \"-kyzy\" for women and \"-uulu\" for men. This wave of Russification is linked to increased migrant work of Kyrgyz people in Russia, where the Kyrgyz naming was unfamiliar and \"complicated\". The opposing effect is observed as well, one notable example being the 2025 name change of Supreme Council Speaker Nurlanbek Shakiev to Nurlanbek Turgunbek uulu.\nIn June 2023, the Constitutional Court of Kyrgyzstan allowed the usage of a matronymic in \"special cases\". After social uproar, the Court cancelled its own decision in November of the same year.\nTajikistan.\nSince 2007, a trend of name de-Russification grew after President Emomali Sharipovich Rakhmonov changed his full name to Emomali Rahmon. Many civil servants followed suit, though, like in Kyrgyzstan, a reverse effect took place later as well, linked to migrant work in Russia.\nEast Asia.\nTaiwanese Aborigines.\nAtayal people's given names are followed by the name of their father; both son and daughter use patronymics. \nAmis people's sons' given names are also followed by their father's name, while daughters' given names are followed by their mother's name. By contrast, the Seediqs often get to choose which parent's name goes after their own.\nMongolia.\nMongol people's names are preceded by the name of their father and possessive marker; both son and daughter are patronymics.\nChina.\nMany indigenous ethnic groups in Yunnan, such as Yi, Hani, Jingpo, Jino, Derung, Nu, Wa, Hmong and Yao, use a son-father patronymic naming system (). Historically, Naxi and Bai have also used the patronymic system. The last one or two syllables of the father's name transfers to become the first one or two syllables of the son's name. The last one or two syllables of the son's name is then used as the first one or two syllables of the grandson's name. The naming tradition is closely tied to Tibeto-Burman traditions.\nThis system can be seen in the names of Nanzhao, Dali and Lijiang rulers.\nNanzhao kings: Xinuluo (\u7d30\u5974\u908f)\uff0d\"Luo\"sheng (\u908f\u76db)\uff0d\"Sheng\"luopi (\u76db\u908f\u76ae)\uff0d\"Pi\"luoge (\u76ae\u908f\u95a3)\uff0d\"Ge\"luofeng (\u95a3\u908f\u9cf3)\uff0d\"Feng\"jiayi (\u9cf3\u8fe6\u7570)\uff0d\"Yi\"mouxun (\u7570\u725f\u5c0b)\uff0d\"Xun\"gequan (\u5c0b\u95a3\u52f8)\uff0d\"Quan\"longsheng (\u52f8\u9f8d\u665f)\nDali kings: Duan Zhixiang (\u6bb5\u667a\u7965)\uff0dDuan \"Xiang\"xing (\u6bb5\u7965\u8208)\uff0dDuan \"Xing\"zhi (\u6bb5\u8208\u667a)\nRegents of Dali Kingdom: Gao Shengtai (\u9ad8\u5347\u6cf0)\uff0dGao \"Tai\"ming (\u9ad8\u6cf0\u660e)\uff0dGao \"Ming\"shun (\u9ad8\u660e\u9806)\uff0dGao \"Shun\"zhen (\u9ad8\u9806\u8c9e)\uff0dGao \"Zhen\"shou (\u9ad8\u8c9e\u58fd)\uff0dGao \"Shou\"chang (\u9ad8\u58fd\u660c)\nLijiang chiefs: A-ts'ung A-liang (\u963f\u742e\u963f\u826f)\uff0d\"A-liang\" A-hu (\u963f\u826f\u963f\u80e1)\uff0d\"A-hu\" A-lieh (\u963f\u80e1\u963f\u70c8)\uff0d\"A-lieh\" A-chia (\u963f\u70c8\u963f\u7532)\uff0d\"A-chia\" A-te (\u963f\u7532\u963f\u5f97)\uff0d\"A-te\" A-ch'u (\u963f\u5f97\u963f\u521d)\uff0d\"A-ch'u\" A-t'u (\u963f\u521d\u963f\u571f)\uff0d\"A-t'u\" A-ti (\u963f\u571f\u963f\u5730)\uff0d\"A-ti\" A-hsi (\u963f\u5730\u963f\u7fd2)\uff0d\"A-hsi\" A-ya (\u963f\u7fd2\u963f\u7259)\uff0d\"A-ya\" A-ch'iu (\u963f\u7259\u963f\u79cb)\uff0d\"A-ch'iu\" A-kung (\u963f\u79cb\u963f\u516c)\uff0d\"A-kung\" A-mu (\u963f\u516c\u963f\u76ee)\uff0d\"A-mu\" A-tu (\u963f\u76ee\u963f\u90fd)\uff0d\"A-tu\" A-sheng (\u963f\u90fd\u963f\u52dd)\uff0d\"A-sheng\" A-chai (\u963f\u52dd\u963f\u5b85)\uff0d\"A-chai\" A-ssu (\u963f\u5b85\u963f\u5bfa)\uff0d\"A-ssu\" A-ch'un (\u963f\u5bfa\u963f\u6625)\uff0d\"A-ch'un\" A-su (\u963f\u6625\u963f\u4fd7)\uff0d\"A-su\" A-wei (\u963f\u4fd7\u963f\u80c3)\uff0d\"A-wei\" A-hui (\u963f\u80c3\u963f\u63ee)\uff0d\"A-hui\" A-chu (\u963f\u63ee\u963f\u4f4f)\nSouth Asia.\nIndia.\nA patronymic is common in parts of India. For example, if a father is named Ramprasad Sachin Pandey (a masculine name), he might name his son Sunil Ramprasad Pandey, who in turn might name his son Sanjeev Sunil Pandey. As a result, unlike surnames, patronymics will not pass down through many generations.\nIn Tamil Nadu and some parts of Kerala and South Karnataka, patronymy is predominant. This is a significant departure from the rest of the country where caste names are mostly employed as surnames. This came into common use during the 1950s and 1960s when the Dravidian movement campaigned against the use of one's caste as part of the name.\nHowever, rather than using the father's full name, only the first letter, popularly known as the initial, is prefixed to the given name. For example, if a person's given name is \"Nikhilesh\" and his father's \"Rajaraman\", then the full name is \"R. Nikhilesh\" and is seldom expanded, even in official records. Only if absolutely necessary, such as when applying for an Indian passport, which does not usually allow initials, is the initial expanded and the name rendered in reverse order as \"Nikhilesh Rajaraman\" or sometime in the original order as \"Rajaraman Nikhilesh\". Some families follow the tradition of retaining the name of the hometown, the grandfather's name, or both as initials. The celebrated Indian English novelist R. K. Narayan's name at birth was Rasipuram Krishnaswami Ayyar Narayanaswami, which was shortened at the behest of his writer friend Graham Greene. Rasipuram is a toponym, and Krishnaswami Ayyar is a patronym.\nIn Tamil Nadu, the patronymic naming convention diverges significantly from other regions of India, influenced by a social justice movement aimed at eliminating caste-based discrimination. Traditionally, many Indian states used patronyms or surnames to reflect familial heritage and caste, but Tamil Nadu's system intentionally disrupts this structure.\nIn this system, individuals often use their father's given name as an initial or surname. For example, \"R. Karthik\" signifies Karthik, son of Rajesh, with \"R\" representing his father's name. Unlike other Indian states, where the patronym serves as a marker of lineage or social status, Tamil Nadu's system allows for the patronym to change with each generation, ensuring that no permanent surname is passed down. This shift reflects the state's broader efforts to dismantle caste markers in society, a key initiative of the Dravidian movement led by figures like Periyar E.V. Ramasamy in the 20th century.\nHowever, the use of initials and surnames in Tamil Nadu remains flexible, leaving it to the individual's discretion. For instance, the late Chief Minister M. Karunanidhi preferred to be addressed as M. Karunanidhi, where \"M\" stood for his father, Muthuvel's, name. His son, M. K. Stalin, incorporates both his father's and grandfather's names, while Stalin's son chooses to go by Udhayanidhi Stalin, using his father's name as his surname rather than as an initial.\nThis flexibility extends beyond political figures. In sports, cricketer Ravichandran Ashwin, whose father's name is Ravichandran, prefers to be known as \"R. Ashwin\" or \"Ravichandran Ashwin.\" This choice is particularly relevant in sports commentary, where players are often referred to by their surnames. Since it would be incorrect to call him by his father's name alone, Ashwin uses his given name in conjunction with his father's name.\nThere is also a growing trend in Tamil Nadu to expand initials in ways that align with how names sound in the Tamil language. For example, some choose to expand names phonetically, such as \"Pala. Karuppiah\" instead of \"P. Karuppiah,\" or \"Pa. Ranjith\" rather than \"P. Ranjith,\" to reflect a closer approximation of the name in Tamil.\nIn the academic and professional world, scientists like M. Annadurai expand their names to \"Mayilsami Annadurai,\" though it would be inappropriate to address him by his father's name, Mayilsami. Instead, he is referred to by his given name, Annadurai, underscoring the unique flexibility and personalization that Tamil Nadu's naming conventions allow.\nThis evolution in Tamil naming practices highlights both the influence of social justice reforms and the cultural adaptability within the state. While Tamil Nadu has largely moved away from caste-based surnames, the naming system retains a focus on individual identity, free from rigid lineage-based structures, distinguishing it from other Indian states.\nWhile the usage of caste names as surnames/last names is discouraged (but not banned) in Tamil Nadu, such usage by out-of-state people is greeted with indifference. So, Lakshmi Menon, Shilpa Shetty, etc. are referred by their preferred names which include their caste names. Likewise, old Tamil names with the caste in them are also fully used while referring to them such as Pasumpoan Muthuramalinga Thevar, U.Ve. Swaminatha Iyer, V.O Chidambaram Pillai etc.\nTo further reinforce Tamil Nadu's efforts in promoting social equality through its naming conventions, the Madras High Court recently directed the removal of community and caste names from government school names across the state. This move aligns with the state's long-standing policies to reduce caste-based distinctions in public life, including naming practices. The court's decision reflects the state's dedication to social justice by eliminating caste markers, particularly in institutions that shape young minds. This legal step ensures that the caste system is not perpetuated through the education system, aligning with the larger movement that has shaped Tamil Nadu's approach to names and identity over the past century.\nThis final ruling serves as an important reminder of the state's commitment to dismantling caste-based identity and promoting a more egalitarian social structure, further cementing Tamil Nadu's unique position in its approach to names, identity, and social justice.\nIn Andhra Pradesh and Telangana, the naming pattern is a family name, given name and caste name in that order, but sometimes the caste name is omitted. If a name appears like Alugupally Sudhir Reddy, Alugupally is the family name, Sudhir is the given name and Reddy is the caste name. If you find a name like Gorle Sunil Kumar, Gorle is the family name, and Sunil Kumar the given name. Here, the caste name is omitted. Of late, some people are writing their names in the order of given name, caste name, and family name. Sometimes, the caste name is omitted here too. It can be seen in names like Satyanarayana Bandi, where Satyanarayana is the given name, and Bandi the family name.\nIn Maharashtra, Karnataka,Sindh and Gujarat, a very common convention among the Hindu communities is to have the patronymic as the middle name. Examples:\nThis system works for both boys and girls, except that after marriage, a woman takes her husband's given name as her middle name \u2013 her new middle name is no longer a patronymic. East Slavic naming customs are similar, except that the suffix \"-yevich\", \"-yevna\", or something similar is used in a Russian language patronymic.\nIndians of the Muslim Isma'ili sect also have patronymic middle names that use the father's first name and the grandfather's first name plus a family name. Someone called \"Ramazan Rahim Ali Manji\" might call his son \"Karim Ramazan Rahim Manji\" and his granddaughter might be called \"Zahra Karim Ramazan Manji\".\nIndian diaspora.\nIndians in Singapore and Malaysia, particularly those of Tamil descent, often continue the patronymic tradition. This entails having a single given name, followed by son/daughter of, followed by their father's name.\nPashtuns.\nPashtuns have a -zai or -zay suffix meaning \"son of\", with tribe names being formed over it.\nSoutheast Asia.\nIn Malaysia, Singapore and Brunei, ethnic Malays generally follow the Arabic patronymic naming system of \"given name\" + bin/binti or son of/daughter of (often abbreviated SO/DO) + \"father's name\". Non-Muslim indigenous Sarawakians use the \"anak\" in place of bin/binti or SO/DO, \"anak\" being the Malay word for \"child\", while indigenous Sabahans may use \"bin\" or \"binti\". However, not all Malays use patronymics, in Thailand they have adopted surnames, while in Indonesia they do not usually have either. Tamil Malaysians have this naming system, but they use \"a/l\" (\"anak lelaki\") and \"a/p\" (\"anak perempuan\") instead, and in some cases, patronymics may be placed first and abbreviated like Indian counterparts.\nSingaporean Indians use the abbreviations s/o (son of) or d/o (daughter of), while Malaysian Indians typically use the respective Malay variations \"anak lelaki\" (abbreviated \"a/l\") or \"anak perempuan\" (abbreviated \"a/p\"). In some cases, individuals may opt to omit the patronymic indicator and abbreviate the patronymic for ease of usage. For example, a former deputy minister of Malaysia Pathmanaban a/l Kunjamboo was more commonly referred to as K. Pathmanaban and veteran Singaporean politicians Shanmugam Kasiviswanathan and Suppiah Dhanabalan went by K. Shanmugam and S. Dhanabalan respectively. The individual may opt not to include \"son of\" or \"daughter of\" in their legal name, as in the case of Shanmugam and Dhanabalan.\nIn Brunei, the ruling family of the monarch uses \"given name\" + \"ibni\" + \"father's name\" instead of using bin/binti.\nIn Indonesia, there are a number of ethnic groups with different naming systems. The Batak of North Sumatra (Sumatra Utara) give every child the family's name. Sometimes the family's name is prefixed by Huta-, Batu-, etc., but most use Si-, such as Sitanggang, Sihombing, Sibutar-butar, Sinaga, or Sitohang. The family's name is given from the father's family. For example, if the father's name is Boggi Sinaga who married Moetia Siregar then all children will be given the family's name of Sinaga.\nIn Sunda, a similar cultural rule is used to that of the Batak. The family's name for Sunda is -Wijaya, but that is not true for all Sundanese families.\nWest Asia.\nArmenian.\nThe use of patronymics was introduced in Armenia by Russians during the times of the Russian Empire and the Soviet Union. Before that period, the use of patronymics was very limited. Patronymics are usually formed by the addition of \"i\" (\"of\", pronounced as \"ee\") to the father's name, e.g. if the father's name is \"Armen\", the corresponding patronymic would be \"Armeni\" (of Armen). The Russified version of the same patronymic would be \"Armenovich\" for males and \"Armenovna\" for females. After Armenia regained its independence from the Soviet Union in 1991 there was a massive decline in the use of Russified patronymics; nowadays few Armenians use patronymics outside of official contexts.\nMany Armenian surnames were once patronymics first used by distant ancestors or clan founders. These are characterized by the suffix \"-ian\" in Western Armenian, often transliterated as \"-yan\" in Eastern Armenian. These are appended to the given name, i.e. Kardashian, Asdvadzadourian, Tankian, Hagopian, Khachadourian, Mardirosian, Bedrosian, Sarkissian, etc. Note that the suffix \"-ian\" was also appended to trades, as in Adakhtsakordzian (issued from the carpenter), Chalian (issued from the candlemaker), Darbinian (issued from the smith).\nOf particular note are the surnames of the children of married priests, or . Though not as common nowadays, it was customary for a long time for these children (particularly the sons) to change their last names to the name-in-religion of their father. For example, the son of Ter (Reverend) Bartev would change his last name to Ter Bartevian.\nAzerbaijani.\nIn Azeri, patronymics are formed through \"-o\u011flu\" (sometimes transliterated as \"ogly\") for males and \"q\u0131z\u0131\" (often transliterated as \"gizi\" or \"kizi\") for females. Before the late 19th\u2013early 20th century, patronymics were used as an essential part of a person's full name, i.e. \"S\u0259rdar \u0130lyas o\u011flu\" (\"Sardar, son of Ilyas\") and \"Mina Nebi q\u0131z\u0131\" (\"Mina, daughter of Nabi\"), since surnames were mostly non-existent before Sovietization (with the exception of the upper and some middle-class families). After surnames were commonly adopted in Azerbaijan in the 1920s, patronymics still remained parts of full names, i.e. \"Sardar Ilyas o\u011flu Aliyev\" (\"Sardar Aliyev, son of Ilyas\"). Nowadays in Azerbaijan, patronymics sometimes replace surnames in unofficial use. Normally in such case, they are spelled as one word (i.e. \"Eldar Mammado\u011flu\", \"Sabina Yusifq\u0131z\u0131\"). Many Azeri surnames are also derived from Persian-style patronymics ending in \"-zadeh\" (\"Kazimzadeh\", \"Mehdizadeh\", etc.). They are found among both Caucasian and Iranian Azeris. However, unlike the former, Azeris in Iran do not generally use patronymics in \"oglu\" / \"qizi\". Azeri patronymics are not to be confused with Turkish surnames in \"-o\u011flu\" and Greek surnames in -\u03bf\u03b3\u03bb\u03bf\u03cd (\"-oglou\"), which do not have specific female versions and do not reflect names of fathers.\nSemitic cultures.\nA common feature of historical Semitic names is use of a patronymic system. Since ancient times, men and women have been named using this system. This was not limited to any certain region or religion. It was only in the 17th and 18th centuries when laws were put in place in European nations demanded that those of Semitic descent abandoned the patronymic naming scheme in favor of consistent legal surnames. It was only after these laws were ratified that most of the Jews and Muslims in these nations received surnames.\nArabic.\nIn Arabic, the word ( or : , and sometimes and to show the grammatical case of the noun) is the equivalent of the \"-son\" suffix discussed above, and () means \"daughter of\". Thus, for example, means \"Ali son of \u02bfAmr\". In Classical Arabic, the word is written as between two names, since the case ending of the first name then supplies a vowel. is often written as , and as , in name formulas rendered from Arabic into Roman characters. Thus Hisham ibn al-Kalbi is alternatively written as . However, the pronunciation is dialectal and has nothing to do with either the spelling or pronunciation in Classical Arabic. The word ( or in different grammatical cases) means \"father of\", so is another name for .\nIn Northwest Africa, the patronymic is romanized as , reflecting local pronunciation. See for example () and \"Ben Ali\" ().\nIn medieval times, an illegitimate child of unknown parentage would sometimes be termed , \"son of his father\" (notably Ziyad ibn Abihi.) In the Qur'an, Jesus (Isa in Arabic) is consistently termed \u2013 a matronymic (in the Qur'an, Jesus has no father; see Jesus in Islam). An Arabic patronymic can be extended as far back as family tree records will allow: thus, for example, Ibn Khaldun gave his own full name as .\nPatronymics are still standard in parts of the Arab world, notably Saudi Arabia and Iraq (in the case of Iraq, with or omitted.) However, some of the Arab world has switched to a family name system. As in English, the new family names are sometimes based on what was formerly a patronymic. The form most used in the Arab world is the usage of both the patronymic and a family name, often using both the father's and paternal grandfathers given name in sequence after the own given name, and then the family name. In Iraq, for example, full names are formed by combining the given name of an individual with the given name of their father (sometimes the father is skipped and the paternal grandfather's given name is used instead, sometimes both father and paternal grandfather are used), along with the town, village, or clan name. For instance, Hayder Karar Hussein al-Mousawi is named Hayder, the son of Karrar, the grandson of Hussein, and from the family of Mousawi (This is the surname given to the offspring of the Imam Musa al-Kazim). \nIn Saudi Arabia, naming conventions are similar to Iraq's but family names are used much more often.\nAramaic.\nIn Aramaic, the prefix bar- means \"son\" and is used as a prefix meaning \"son of\". In the Bible, Peter is called Bar-Jonah in and Nathanael is possibly called Bartholomew because he is the son of Tolmai (or son of Ptolemy, with \"P\" being reduced). The titles can also be figurative, for example in Acts 4:36\u201337 a man named Joseph is called Barnabas meaning \"son of consolation\". The feminine equivalent, b'rat-, is found in the Targumim.\nMandaean names also often make use of the prefix \"bar-\".\nHebrew.\nIn the Hebrew patronymic system, commonly used by Jews, the first name is followed by ben- (\"son of\") or bat- (\"daughter of\"), and then the father's or mother's name, or both.\nAssyrian.\nThe Assyrians for centuries have used the patronymic bet or bit literally meaning \"house\" in Assyrian Neo-Aramaic; however, in the context of the name it means \"from the house of [the father's name].\"\nPersian.\nIn Persian, patronymics are formed by names ending with the suffix \"-pur\" for men and \"-dokht\" for women. For example: Shahpur (son of king) and Sinapur (son of Sina). Depending on country, some suffixes are more common than others. For example, in Iran, the suffix \"-pur\" is common while in Afghanistan, the suffix \"-Zadah\" or \"-Zad\" is common, although --Zadeh is common in Iran.\nKurdish.\nIn Kurdish Language, generally, a triple name system is used which is patronymic and avonymic. That is the name of the individual followed by the father's name and the paternal grandfather's name without any modification of the names and are completely gender neutral. This style of naming is used in all official documentation in the Iraqi Kurdistan Region. Surnames are not officially used and most people do not even have a surname or family name, those who do, they usually derive their surnames from the name of their place of birth, place of origin, clan or tribe names, etc. The Kurdish names in Turkey, Iran and Syria are heavily influenced by the official naming systems in the respective countries.\nEurope.\nIn Europe, patronyms were formerly widespread but later became confined to Scandinavia, Iceland, and some Eastern Slavic cultures.\nEnglish.\nIn England, names ending with the suffix \"-son\" or \"-ing\" were often originally patronymic. In addition, the archaic French (more specifically, Norman) prefix \"fitz\" (cognate with the modern French \"fils\", meaning \"son\") appears in England's aristocratic family lines dating from the Norman Conquest, and also among the Anglo-Irish. Thus there are names such as Fitzgerald, Fitzmaurice and Fitzhugh. In addition, the name \"Fitzroy\", meaning \"son of [the] king\" (\"roy\"), was sometimes used by illegitimate royal children.\nIrish, Scottish, and Manx.\nThe use of \"Mac\" in some form was prevalent in Scottish Gaelic, Irish, and Manx, in all of which it denotes \"son.\" \"Mc\" is also a frequent anglicisation in both Scotland and Ireland. In Ireland, the forms \"Mag\" and \"M'\" are encountered. The prefix \"Mac\" is used to form a patronym, such as \"Mac Coinnich\"\u2014or the anglicized \"Mackenzie\"\u2014son of Coinneach/Kenneth. The female equivalent of \"Mac\" is \"Nic\", condensed from \"nighean mhic\" (in Scottish Gaelic) or \"in\u00edon mhic\" (in Irish), both meaning daughter. For example, the Scottish Gaelic surname, \"Nic Dh\u00f2mhnaill\" meaning \"daughter of a son of D\u00f2mhnall\" (in English, Donald), as in \"Mairi Nic Dh\u00f2mhnaill\", or Mary MacDonald.\nAt the north end of the Irish Sea, in Ulster, the Isle of Man, and Galloway (indeed as far north as Argyll), \"Mac\" was frequently truncated in speech to /k/. This led to such anglicisations as \"Qualtrough\" (Son of Walter) and \"Quayle\" (son of Paul, cf. MacPhail), usually beginning with \"C,\" \"K,\" or \"Q.\" In Ireland, this truncation resulted in surnames such as \"Guinness\" (son of Aonghus, cf. MacAonghusa), beginning usually in \"C\" or \"G\" for patronymics prefixed with Mac, and in \"H\" (e.g., \"Hurley\" [descendant of Iarlath, cf. Ua h-Iarfhlatha/O'Hurley]) for surnames prefixed with \"O.\" Colloquial Scottish Gaelic also has other patronymics of a slightly different form for individuals, still in use (for more information please see: Scottish Gaelic personal naming system).\nWelsh and Cornish.\nBefore the 1536 Act of Union, the Welsh did not generally employ surnames, but instead used epithets (e.g. Selyf Sarffgadau, \"Selyf the Battle-Serpent\"), patronyms (e.g. Rhodri ap Merfyn, \"Rhodri son of Merfyn\"), and (much less often) matronyms (e.g. Rhodri map Nest, \"Rhodri son of Nest\") to identify people.\nWelsh, as a P-Celtic language, originally used \"map\" or \"mab\" instead of the Q-Celtic \"mac\" employed in Ireland and Scotland. These were later simplified to the modern Welsh \"ap\" and \"ab\". A common practice is to use \"mab\"/\"ab\" before a father's name beginning with a vowel (e.g., Llywelyn mab Iorwerth), but the two alternative forms are also employed arbitrarily in many sources.\nDaughters were indicated by \"ferch\" or \"verch\" (mutated from \"merch\", \"girl, daughter\"). \"Angharad verch Owain\" would be \"Angharad, daughter of Owain\".\nAfter the Acts of Union, this led to many Welsh surnames being variants of their father or ancestor's personal name: \"ap\" or \"ab Ieuan\" often became \"Evans\"; \"ap Rhys\", \"Price\"; \"ap\" or \"ab Owain\", \"Bowen\"; \"ap Hywel\", \"Powell\" or \"Howell\". In addition to these Anglicised baptismal and official names, patronyms continued to be commonly employed in Welsh until the Industrial Revolution, particularly in the north and west of Wales. Patronyms were sometimes employed within the English names as well by using the father's personal name as the sons' middle name.\nPerhaps because Cornwall was legally incorporated into England earlier than Wales was, patronyms (e.g.) are less common there than toponyms (e.g. Tresillian, Trevithick, Nanskeval/Nankeville) and occupational surnames (e.g. An Gof, [An] Gove, \"(Blacksmith)\"; Helyer (Cornish dialect \u2013 possibly a slater or huntsman ()).\nDutch.\nIn Dutch, patronymics were often used in place of family names or as middle names. Patronymics were composed of the father's name plus an ending \"-zoon\" for sons, \"-dochter\" for daughters. For instance, Abel Janszoon Tasman is \"Abel son of Jan Tasman\", and Kenau Simonsdochter Hasselaer: \"Kenau, daughter of Simon Hasselaer\". In written form, these endings were often abbreviated as \"-sz.\" and \"-dr.\" respectively e.g. Jeroen Cornelisz. \"Jeroen son of Cornelis\", or Dirck Jacobsz. The endings \"-s\", \"-se\" and \"-sen\" were also commonly used for sons and often for daughters too. In the northern provinces, \"-s\", as genitive case, was almost universally used for both sons and daughters. The suffix -\"x\" as in \"Tacx\" or \"Hendrix\" also denoted the son or daughter of... and is now integrated as a complete name.\nPatronymics were common in the Dutch United Provinces until the French invasion in 1795 and subsequent annexation in 1810. As the Netherlands were now a province of France, a registry of births, deaths and marriages was established in 1811, whereupon emperor Napoleon forced the Dutch to register and adopt a distinct surname.\nFrench.\nIn France, the terms \"patronyme\" and \"nom patronymique\" had long been used interchangeably to designate the family name, meaning that it is inherited from the father.\nThe tradition of patronymic lineage is still used among some Canadian descendants of French colonists: in the oral tradition of many Acadians, for example, \"Marc \u00e0 Pierre \u00e0 G\u00e9rard\" (lit.\u2009'Marc of Pierre of G\u00e9rard'), means \"Marc, son of Pierre, grandson of G\u00e9rard\".\nItalian.\nThe Italian language used to designate patronymics in formal writing up to 1975 using the preposition \"di\" (English \"of\") for a living father and \"fu\" (English \"late\") for a deceased one. That is, \"Mario di Giovanni Rossi\" meant that Mario Rossi is the son of a living man named Giovanni; \"Francesco fu Pietro Verdi\" meant that Francesco Verdi is the son of a deceased man named Pietro. When the father's name was unknown, institutions could use the formula N.N. (\"Nomen nescio\", Latin for \"I don't know the name\") or use the mother's name or omit this part entirely.\nIn parish records written in Latin, the father's name would be written in genitive with no preposition. For a deceased father, the particle \"quondam\" (English \"once/formerly\") was added. The examples above would have been translated as \"Marius Johannis Rossi\" and \"Franciscus quondam Petri Verdi\".\nPatronymics are not in common usage in modern Italian. However, some of them have been the source of various surnames. As an example, the individuals descended from a man named \"Paolo\" could have gained the patronymic surnames \"Paolo\", \"Di Paolo\", \"De Paoli\", \"Paoli\", \"Polo\", \"Pagolo\", \"Pagoli\", \"Paolino\", \"Lino\", etc.\nIberian languages.\nIn the past, both in Spanish and Portuguese, the endings \"-ez\" and \"-es\" tended to be conflated since pronunciation was quite similar in the two languages. Today, Portuguese has been fully standardized to \"-es\"; Spanish is also standardized to \"-ez\", but it is very common to see archaic endings in \"-es\". For instance, Pires/Peres and P\u00e9rez are the modern equivalents of English \"Peterson\" in Portuguese and Spanish.\nIn Portugal, there are some surnames that had a patronymic genesis but, while still common, no longer indicate patronymic usage. For instance, \"\u00c1lvares\" was the son of \"\u00c1lvaro\" and \"Gon\u00e7alves\" was the son of \"Gon\u00e7alo\" (it was the case of Nuno \u00c1lvares Pereira, son of \u00c1lvaro and Gon\u00e7alves Pereira, son of Gon\u00e7alo Pereira). Other cases include \"Rodrigues\" (\"son of Rodrigo\"), \"Nunes\" (\"son of Nuno\") and \"Fernandes\" (\"son of Fernando\").\nIn the same way, the surname Soares means son of Soeiro (in Latin Suarius). It comes from Latin Suaricius (son of Suarius); the Latin genitive suffix \"-icius/a\" was used to indicate a patronymic. Later it became Su\u00e1riz, Su\u00e1rez (both Spanish), and eventually Soares (Portuguese). Another theory attributes the Iberian -ez style patronymics to Germanic (Visigothic) rather than Latin influence.\nSpanish patronyms follow a similar pattern to the Portuguese (e.g., L\u00f3pez: son of Lope; Fern\u00e1ndez: son of Fernando; Mart\u00ednez: son of Mart\u00edn; Rodr\u00edguez: son of Rodrigo; \u00c1lvarez: son of \u00c1lvaro). Common endings include -ez, -az, -iz, -is and -oz. However, not all surnames with similar endings are necessarily patronymic. For example, Ch\u00e1vez is not the son of \"Chavo\", but comes from Galician or Portuguese \"chaves\", meaning \"keys\", with the \"s\" denoting the plural form of \"chave\", as is the case of key/keys in English.\nHowever, these kinds of surnames were unusual outside the Crown of Castile. Apart from natural spelling variations (such as using Gim\u00e9nez or Xim\u00e9nez), modern orthographic standardisation in each Iberian dialect brought a number of crossed versions. It is possible to find the Catalan language politician Jordi S\u00e0nchez (whose surname, while Spanish, has a grave accent \u2013 characteristic of Catalan \u2013 instead of the acute accent used in Spanish) or the journalist Vicen\u00e7 Sanchis (who spells his surname in a way that is closer to Catalan, but with the ch digraph characteristic of Spanish).\nDue to the letters, z and s being pronounced alike in Latin American dialects of Spanish, many non-patronymic surnames with an -es have come to be written with an -ez. In Hispano-American Spanish, the -ez spellings of Ch\u00e1vez (Hugo Ch\u00e1vez), Cortez (Alberto Cortez) and Valdez (Nelson Valdez) are not patronymic surnames, but simply variant spellings of the Iberian Spanish spelling with -es, as in the names of Manuel Chaves, Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s and V\u00edctor Vald\u00e9s. For more on the -z surnames in Spanish see Influences on the Spanish language.\nA list of some Iberian patronymics:\nNorse languages.\nIn Norse custom, patronyms and matronyms were formed by using the ending -son (later -s\u00f8n and -sen in Danish, Norwegian and German) to the genitive form of the father's name to indicate \"son of\", and -d\u00f3ttir (Icelandic and Faroese -d\u00f3ttir, Swedish and Norwegian -dotter, Danish and Norwegian -datter) for \"daughter of\". The resulting patronymic was generally not used as a surname; however, a third name, a so-called byname based on location or personal characteristic, was often added to differentiate people and could eventually develop into a kind of family name. Some Early Modern examples of the latter practice, where the patronymic was placed after the given name and was followed by the surname, are Norwegian Peder Clauss\u00f8n Friis, the son of Nicolas Thorolfsen Friis (Claus in Clauss\u00f8n being short for Nicolas) and Danish Thomas Hansen Kingo, the son of Hans Thomsen Kingo.\nEventually, most Nordic countries replaced or complemented this system with the prevailing \"international\" standard of inherited family names. In Norway, for example, the parliament passed a family name act in 1923, citing the rising population and the need to avoid the confusion of new last names in every generation. The law does allow a person to retain a patronymic as a middle name in addition to the surname, as was common in Early Modern times; this is not a common practice but does occur, a modern example being Audhild Gregoriusdotter Rotevatn. The Danish government outlawed the practice in 1856 and eased the regulations in 1904 to deal with the limited number of patronymics. In Sweden the practice of children keeping their father's and wives taking their husband's patronymic as a surname occurred in the 18th century but was first prevalent in the late 19th century. Patronymics were normal in Sweden, at least in rural Sweden, until the 19th century. From the end of the 19th-century patronymics gradually became less common in Sweden until they were abolished in 1966. In 1982 the right to use patronyms (and matronyms) was partially restored; a person (or the parents of a child) had to apply and pay a fee. From 1 July 2017 parents in Sweden are free to give their children patronyms/matronyms at birth instead of inherited family names, and any person can change their last name to a matronymic or patronymic.\nMatronyms were used exceptionally if the child was born out of wedlock, or if the mother was much more high-born or well-known than the father, a historical example being Sweyn Estridsson.\nIn Iceland, patronymics or matronymics are still used as last names, and this is, in fact, required by law, with a handful of exceptions. For almost all cases, the father's name (usually in the genitive case) is used, plus the word \"son\" for sons or \"d\u00f3ttir\" for daughters. For example, J\u00f3hanna Sigur\u00f0ard\u00f3ttir (i.e. \"J\u00f3hanna, daughter of Sigur\u00f0[ur]\"). People who do not identify as male or female (nonbinary people) can also use the suffix \"-bur\", which means \"child of\"\".\nIn 2022, the Swedish Tax Agency denied a Gotland woman's application to change her surname to one with the Gutnish ending \"-dotri\" (instead of \"-dotter\") on the grounds that it did not follow Swedish conventions. The administrative court in Stockholm decided in her favour on appeal, with the Tax Agency in turn taking the case to the Court of Appeal; in early 2023, the Court of Appeal finally ruled that she was allowed to use a Gutnish surname.\nFinnish.\nIn Finland, the use of patronymics was a result of relatively-recent Swedish influence and remained uncommon outside official documents. It was only in the 19th century that the use of patronymics gained any sort of popularity among the Finnish-speaking lower classes. Family names became obligatory in Finland by law in 1920.\nHistorically, patronymics were composed in Swedish fashion: the father's name and the suffix \"-n\" for genitive plus the word \"poika\" for sons, \"tyt\u00e4r\" for daughters. For example, Tuomas Abrahaminpoika means \"Tuomas, Abraham's son\", and Martta Heikintyt\u00e4r means \"Martta, Heikki's daughter\".\nBulgarian.\nIn Bulgarian, the patronymics are \"-ov\" / \"-ev\" for men and \"-ova\" / \"-eva\" for women. They are identical to the endings of family names in Bulgarian and some other Slavic family names, such as those in Russian and Czech. In Bulgarian official documents, the patronymic comes before the surname, so \"Ivan Marinov Yordanov\" would be \"Ivan\", son of \"Marin Yordanov\".\nGeorgian.\nIn Georgian, patronymics, when used, add \"s\" to the end of the father's name, followed by \"dze\" for a man and \"asuli\" for a woman. For example, Joseph Stalin's original name was Ioseb Besarionis Dze Jugashvili. After the end of the Soviet Union, patronymics in Georgia have become disused as a Russian tradition.\nGeorgian family names derive mostly from patronymics, nicknames and places of origin. Two common elements, \"dze\" and \"shvili\" mean \"son of\" and \"child\" respectively.\nGreek.\nMost Greek surnames are patronymics by origin albeit in various forms depending on the ancestral locality. Diminutive suffixes that denote \"son of\" or, more generally, \"descendant of\" start with the given name such as \u0394\u03b7\u03bc\u03ae\u03c4\u03c1\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2 \"D\u0113m\u00e9trios\" and then have the patronymic surname such as D\u0113m\u0113tr\"\u00f3poulos\" (Peloponnese), D\u0113m\u0113tr\"\u00e1kos\" (Laconia), D\u0113m\u0113tr\"\u00e9as\" (Messenian Mani), D\u0113m\u0113tr\"\u00e1tos\" (Cephalonia), D\u0113m\u0113tr\"\u00e1k\u0113s\" (Crete), D\u0113m\u0113tr\"i\u00e1d\u0113s\"/D\u0113m\u0113tr\"-\u00edd\u0113s\" (Pontus, Asia Minor), D\u0113m\u0113tr\"\u00e9ll\u0113s\" (Lesbos), D\u0113m\u00e9tr\"oglou\" (Asia Minor) (identical to Turkish patronym \"-o\u011flu\"), or simply \"D\u0113m\u0113tr\u00edou\" (especially common in Cyprus, with the first name in the genitive) are formed. The same principle can apply to surnames deriving from professions. For example, as from \u03c0\u03b1\u03c0\u03ac\u03c2, \"pap\u00e1s\" \"priest\", are derived the surnames \"Papad\u00f3poulos\", \"Papad\u00e1kos\", \"Papad\u00e9as\", \"Papad\u00e1tos\", \"Papad\u00e1k\u0113s\", \"Papad\u00e9ll\u0113s\", \"Papazoglou\" etc., all of which signify a \"priest's son\". The same principle(s) may apply in combination: \"Papanikol\u00e1ou, Papanikol\u00f3poulos\", \"the son of the priest Nikolaos\". A daughter's family name is the same as the son's but is \"always\" declined in the genitive: \"D\u0113m\u0113tropo\u00falou, Papanikol\u00e1ou\".\nIn addition to those surnames, actual patronymics are used in official documents as \"middle names\" preceding the surname. For example, the children of a \"Io\u00e1nnis Papad\u00f3poulos\" can be \"Mar\u00eda Io\u00e1nnou Papadopo\u00falou\" and \"Andr\u00e9as Io\u00e1nnou Papad\u00f3poulos\" (\"Io\u00e1nnou\" is the genitive of \"Io\u00e1nnis\"). Traditionally, a married woman would adopt her husband's family name. Now, however, women in Greece can keep their own surnames if they choose.\nHungarian.\nIn Hungarian, patronyms were traditionally formed with the ending \"-fi\" (sometimes spelled as \"-fy\" or \"-ffy\"). That system is no longer in common use, but traces can still be found in some frequent current surnames such as \"P\u00e1lfi\" (son of Paul), \"Gy\u0151rfi\", \"B\u00e1nfi\" or S\u00e1ndor Pet\u0151fi (a famous poet who chose the Hungarian form instead of his Slavic birth name, \"Petrovics\"). In the Old Hungarian period (10th\u201316th century, see History of Hungarian), surnames were not in common use, and the full genitive was represented as in \"P\u00e9ter fia Andr\u00e1s\" (\"Peter's son Andrew\"). Such forms are in frequent use in charters and legal documents from that time. In Hungarian, the surname precedes the given name.\nRomanian.\nIn Romanian, the endings \"-escu\" and \"-eanu\" were used, as in \"Petrescu\", 'son of Petre (Peter)'; many modern Romanian family names were formed from such patronymics. Less commonly, matronymics formed with the genitive form (using the prefix \"a-\") were used, as in \"Amariei\", '(son/daughter) of Maria'.\nRussian.\nIn Russian the endings and \"-ich\" are used to form patronymics for men. It would be cognate to the Latin genitive -ici, used for marking the family line, and also as equivalent to 'little' -Vladic= 'the little Vlad'. For women, the respective endings are or . For example, in Russian, a man named Ivan with a father named Nikolay would be known as Ivan Nikolayevich or \"Ivan, son of Nikolay\" (\"Nikolayevich\" being a patronymic). Likewise, a woman named Lyudmila with a father named Nikolay would be known as Lyudmila Nikolayevna or \"Lyudmila, daughter of Nikolay\" (\"Nikolayevna\" being a patronymic). For masculine names ending in a vowel, such as Ilya or Foma, when they are used as a base for the patronymic, the corresponding endings are \"-ich\" (for men) and (for women). Examples in titles of classical Russian literature include\" The Tales of the Late Ivan Petrovich Belkin\", \"The Death of Ivan Ilyich\" and \"The Tale of How Ivan Ivanovich Quarreled with Ivan Nikiforovich\".\nIn Russia, the patronymic is an official part of the name, used in all official documents, and when addressing somebody both formally and among friends. The correct written order of a full name is surname, given name, then patronymic \u2013 this order would be found on official documents, business cards, and formal addresses. For example, a woman named Mariya Iosifovna Zhukova would hand you a business card that says Zhukova Mariya Iosifovna. Use of the given name followed by the patronymic in Russian is always the neutral, correct and polite way to address any person except close friends, family members, or children \u2013 in such cases usage of the patronymic adds humorous intonation of exaggerated but well-meant respect. This form would be congruent to the Western use of Mr. and the surname for the polite and proper use and reference. Instead of schoolchildren calling their teacher Ms. and surname, the proper form would be given name and patronymic. For example, a teacher named Anna Borisovna Kopylova would always be called Anna Borisovna by her pupils. When addressing a much younger person, only the first name is commonly used. Individuals are addressed by their given name followed by the patronymic (e.g., \"Mikhail Nikolayevich\") in many situations including on formal occasions, by colleagues at work, by acquaintances, or when being addressed by someone younger in age. It is becoming more common for younger individuals (under 50) to drop the patronymic at work. In informal situations, if a person is called by a diminutive (such as Misha for Mikhail or Nastya for Anastasia), the patronymic is not used.\nIn colloquial, informal speech, it is also possible to contract the ending of a patronymic: thus Nikolayevich becomes Nikolaich, and Stepan Ivanovich becomes Stepan Ivanych or simply Ivanych as the given name may be omitted altogether. In this case, the contraction, if possible, is obligatory: Ivan Sergeyevich Sidorov may be called \"Sergeich\" or, more rarely, \"Sergeyevich\". In contrast to male names, if a woman is called by her patronymic name without a given name, the patronymic is usually not contracted: \"Ivanovna\" but \"Mar' Ivanna\"; \"Sergeyevna\" or \"Sergevna\" is one exception, where both forms are fine. Typically, a patronymic name alone is a familiar form of addressing an older female.\nSerbian.\nVuk Karad\u017ei\u0107 reported in the 19th century that Serbs sometimes used their old family names, and sometimes patronymics. Vuk Karad\u017ei\u0107 himself used patronymic \u201cStefanovi\u0107\u201d (son of Stefan, equivalent of Steven), and sometimes Karad\u017ei\u0107, old family name. However, nowadays, the patronymic names in Serbia are mostly used on legal documents, and have the form of the father's name that says the child is 'of so and so'... example: Marija Dragoljuba Pavlovi\u0107, where Dragoljub is the father's name and 'Dragoljuba' literally means 'of Dragoljub'. There are also other forms, like to include \u2013 the father's name \u2013 in brackets: Maria (Dragoljub) Pavlovi\u0107.\nIt became more common to include the name of any one of the parents in legal documents ('ime jednog roditelja') \u2013 in practice this is usually still the father's name.\nIn Serbia, Croatia and Bosnia, the patronymic names do not change form between masculine and feminine. Example: Marija Dragoljuba Pavlovi\u0107 (Dragoljub is the father's name; Dragoljuba is the form that says she is his daughter or literally 'of Dragoljub'). However, in the past, unmarried Serbian women's surnames ended in -eva, while married Serbian women's surnames ended in -ka.\nTurkish.\nIn Turkish, the suffixes used to indicate paternal ancestry are \"-o\u011flu\" and \"-zade\", which indicate the ancestry as coming from a certain man. Like many other patronymics in other languages, with the formalization of naming conventions by laws in the late modern contemporary age many turned into surnames. After the 'Surname revolution' in 1934, many people chose professions or habitat as surnames with or without the suffix \"-o\u011flu\", such as \"Elbeyio\u011flu\", \"Bakkalo\u011flu\" or \"Giritlio\u011flu\" and with \"-zade\" such as \"Beyzade\", \"Mehmedzade\", \"Yusufzade\".\nUkrainian.\nIn Ukrainian, the female patronymic always ends with - (-\"ivna\") or - (-\"yivna\"). The male patronymic always ends with - (-\"ovych\") or - (-\"yovych\"). Exception: \"Illia\" () \u2192 \"Illich\" () (e.g. Illia Illich Mechnikov), \"Sava\" () \u2192 \"Savych\" (), \"Yakiv\" () \u2192 \"Yakovych\" ().\nPatronyms are part of the full name and are obligatory in formal messages. They are frequent in common speech, such as to call a person in a respectful manner (by using the name, followed by the patronym) and to accent an informal message in formal environments, as between colleagues with good relationships at work (by using the patronym with neither the name nor the family name).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51028", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51028", "title": "Cinematographer", "text": "Creative head of a motion picture's camera and lighting decisions\nThe cinematographer or director of photography (sometimes shortened to DP or DOP) is the person responsible for the recording of a film, television production, music video or other live-action piece. The cinematographer is the chief of the camera and light crews working on such projects. They would normally be responsible for making artistic and technical decisions related to the image and for selecting the camera, film stock, lenses, filters, etc. Furthermore the cinematographer is commonly involved with the color grading to shape the final look of a film. The study and practice of this field are referred to as \"cinematography\".\nThe cinematographer is a subordinate of the director, tasked with capturing a scene in accordance with the director's vision. Relations between the cinematographer and director vary. In some instances, the director will allow the cinematographer complete independence, while in others, the director allows little to none, even going so far as to specify exact camera placement and lens selection. Such a level of involvement is less common when the director and cinematographer have become comfortable with each other. The director will typically convey to the cinematographer what is wanted from a scene visually and allow the cinematographer latitude in achieving that effect.\nThe scenes recorded by the cinematographer are passed to the film editor for editing.\nHistory.\nIn the infancy of motion pictures, the cinematographer was usually also the director and the person physically handling the camera. As the art form and technology evolved, a separation between director and camera operator emerged. With the advent of artificial lighting and faster (more light-sensitive) film stocks, in addition to technological advancements in optics, the technical aspects of cinematography necessitated a specialist in that area.\nCinematography was key during the silent movie era; with no sound apart from background music and no dialogue, the films depended on lighting, acting, and set.\nThe American Society of Cinematographers (ASC) was formed in 1919 in Hollywood, and was the first trade society for cinematographers. Similar societies were formed in other countries, for example the British Society of Cinematographers (BSC). Their aims include the recognition of the cinematographer's contribution to the art and science of motion picture making.\nSocieties and trade organizations.\nThere are a number of national associations of cinematographers that represent members (irrespective of their official titles) and are dedicated to the advancement of cinematography, including:\nThe A.S.C. defines cinematography as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A creative and interpretive process that culminates in the authorship of an original work of art rather than the simple recording of a physical event. Cinematography is not a subcategory of photography. Rather, photography is but one craft that the cinematographer uses in addition to other physical, organizational, managerial, interpretive and image-manipulating techniques to effect one coherent process.\nNoted cinematographers.\nThe Academy Award for Best Cinematography is an Academy Award awarded each year to a cinematographer for work on one particular motion picture.\nA number of cinematographers have become directors, including Reed Morano who lensed \"Frozen River\" and Beyonc\u00e9's \"Lemonade\" before winning an Emmy for directing \"The Handmaid's Tale\". Barry Sonnenfeld, originally the Coen brothers' DP; Jan de Bont, cinematographer on films such as \"Die Hard\" and \"Basic Instinct\", directed \"Speed\" and \"Twister\". Nicolas Roeg, cinematographer on films such as \"The Caretaker\" (1963) and \"The Masque of the Red Death\" (1964), directed \"Don't Look Now\" (1973) and \"The Man Who Fell to Earth\" (1976). Ellen Kuras, ASC photographed \"Eternal Sunshine of The Spotless Mind\" as well as a number of Spike Lee films such as \"Summer of Sam\" and \"He Got Game\" before directing episodes of \"Legion\" and \"Ozark.\" In 2014, Wally Pfister, cinematographer on Christopher Nolan's three \"Batman\" films, made his directorial debut with \"Transcendence,\" whilst British cinematographers Jack Cardiff and Freddie Francis regularly moved between the two positions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51029", "revid": "31831", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51029", "title": "George Alec Effinger", "text": "American science fiction author (1947\u20132002)\nGeorge Alec Effinger (January 10, 1947 \u2013 April 27, 2002) was an American science fiction author, born in Cleveland, Ohio.\nWriting career.\nEffinger was born in Cleveland, Ohio, on January 10, 1947. His father was a United States Navy veteran and his mother was a prostitute; he grew up very poor.\nHe attended Yale University on a scholarship, but failed organic chemistry and dropped out of the pre-med program. He moved to New York City and began writing. His first wife, Diana, sometimes babysat for Damon Knight and Kate Wilhelm, a married couple who were both science fiction writers. He joined the Clarion Writers' Workshop which they sponsored.\nEffinger's first three stories were published in the first Clarion anthology in 1971. The first was \"The Eight-Thirty to Nine Slot\" in \"Fantastic\" in 1971. During his early period, he also published under a variety of pseudonyms.\nHis first novel, \"What Entropy Means to Me\" (1972), was nominated for the Nebula Award. He achieved his greatest success with the trilogy of Mar\u00eed Audran novels set in the Middle East in the 22nd century, with cybernetic implants and modules allowing individuals to change their personalities or bodies. The novels are in fact set in a thinly veiled version of the French Quarter of New Orleans. The three published Audran novels were \"When Gravity Fails\" (1987), \"A Fire in the Sun\" (1989), and \"The Exile Kiss\" (1991); Effinger also contributed to the computer game \"Circuit's Edge\" (1990), based on \"When Gravity Fails\". He began a fourth Budayeen novel, \"Word of Night\", but completed only the first two chapters. Those two chapters were reprinted in the anthology \"Budayeen Nights\" (2003) which has all of Effinger's short material from the Mar\u00eed Audran setting.\nHis novelette \"Schr\u00f6dinger's Kitten\" (1988) received both the Hugo and the Nebula Award, as well as the Japanese Seiun Award. A collection of his stories was published posthumously in 2005, entitled \"George Alec Effinger Live! From Planet Earth\"; includes the complete stories Effinger wrote under the pseudonym \"O. Niemand\" and many of Effinger's best-known stories. Each O. Niemand story is a pastiche in the voice of a different major American writer (Flannery O'Connor, Damon Runyon, Mark Twain, etc.), all set on the asteroid city of Springfield. \"Niemand\" is from the German word for \"nobody\", and the initial O was intended by Effinger as a visual pun for Zero, and possibly also as a reference to the author O. Henry.\nEffinger also wrote a series of Maureen (Muffy) Birnbaum parodies, which placed a preppy into a variety of science fictional, fantasy, and horror scenarios.\nHe made brief forays into writing comic books in the early 1970s, mostly in Marvel Comics' science fiction, fantasy, and horror titles; and again in the late 1980s, including the first issue of a series of his own creation entitled \"Neil and Buzz in Space &amp; Time\", about two fictional astronauts who travel to the edge of the universe to find it contains nothing but an ocean planet with a replica of a small New Jersey town on its only island. The first issue was the only issue, and the story ended on a cliffhanger. It was released by Fantagraphics. He also wrote a story based in the Zork universe.\nPersonal life.\nEffinger was known to close friends as \"Piglet\", a nickname from his youth which he later came to dislike.\nThroughout his life Effinger suffered health problems. These caused enormous medical bills he could not pay, resulting in bankruptcy. Because Louisiana law descends from the Napoleonic Code rather than English Common Law, the possibility existed that copyrights to Effinger's works and characters might revert to his creditors, in this case the hospital. However, no representative of the hospital appeared at the bankruptcy hearing, and Effinger retained the rights to his intellectual property.\nEffinger suffered about 70 % hearing loss from childhood infections, but was helped by hearing aids for his last 10\u00a0years. He did not drive most of his life, and only got a driver's license around age 39 for check-cashing identification.\nEffinger met his first wife Diana in the 1960s. He was married from the mid-1970s to the mid-1980s to artist Beverly K. Effinger, and from 1998 to 2000 to fellow science fiction author Barbara Hambly. He died in New Orleans, Louisiana in 2002.\nWorks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNovels (non-series)\nNick of Time series\nMar\u00eed Audran series\nPlanet of the Apes Television series adaptations\nCollections\nShort stories\n Comics \n\"Note:\" The titles of the first two books of the Mar\u00eed Audran series are both taken from Bob Dylan lyrics. \"When Gravity Fails\" is from the song \"Just Like Tom Thumb's Blues\" and \"A Fire in the Sun\" from \"It's All Over Now, Baby Blue\". Permission was denied to use a Dylan quote for the third book's title, so Effinger chose a public domain quote from Shakespeare.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51032", "revid": "11096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51032", "title": "Braunschweig", "text": "City and urban agglomeration in Lower Saxony, Germany\nBraunschweig () or Brunswick ( ; from Low German , local dialect: ) is a city in Lower Saxony, Germany, north of the Harz Mountains at the farthest navigable point of the river Oker, which connects it to the North Sea via the rivers Aller and Weser. In 2024, it had a population of 272,417. The Braunschweig-Wolfsburg-Salzgitter region had 1.02 million residents including the cities Wolfsburg and Salzgitter, it is the second largest urban center in Lower Saxony after Hanover. The urban agglomeration of Braunschweig had a population of 551,000 with almost 45% having a migration background, making it the most diverse urban agglomeration in the whole state. The city consists of 37.5% immigrants (approximately 102,000) with a high number of migrants coming from other European countries, Asia and Africa. 73% of the Germans residing in Braunschweig come from different parts of the country, particularly North Rhine Westphalia, Hessen and the former states of East Germany. Braunschweig is considered an important regiopolis. It is one of the largest regiopolitan cities in Northern Germany and the largest regiopolis in Lower Saxony. The city is seen as a major hub within the region due to it having multiple characteristics of a metropolitan city in a smaller scale or in a comparative amount to other metropolitan cities in Germany.\n127.12\u00a0km\u00b2 (49 sq. mi.) of the city's area is made up of greenspaces such as parks and forests. Braunschweig has a population density of 4,121 per km\u00b2 (10,673 per sq. mi.) excluding the green areas because only about 66\u00a0km\u00b2 (25\u00bd sq. mi.) of the total area is properly urban, making it quite a dense city. Many districts of the city have a density over 4,450 people per square kilometer (11,525 per sq. mi.) such as Weststadt, Innenstadt, Westliches Ringgebiet, Nordstadt, or \u00d6stliches Ringgebiet. Due to the city's limited urban core and efforts in preserving green spaces, 81% of the residential buildings are multi-storey apartments limiting 74% of the flats with a space below 100 square meters (1000 sq. ft.). The city is constructing more residential areas within city limits so that by 2030 the population increases by 15.000 from 2014.\nA powerful and influential centre of commerce in medieval Germany, Brunswick was a member of the Hanseatic League from the 13th until the 17th century. It was the capital city of three successive states: the Principality of Brunswick-Wolfenb\u00fcttel (1269\u20131432, 1754\u20131807, and 1813\u20131814), the Duchy of Brunswick (1814\u20131918), and the Free State of Brunswick (1918\u20131946).\nToday, Brunswick is the second-largest city in Lower Saxony and a major centre of scientific research and development.\nHistory.\nFoundation and early history.\nThe date and circumstances of the town's foundation are unknown. Tradition maintains that Brunswick was created through the merger of two settlements, one founded by Brun(o), a Saxon count who died in 880, on one side of the River Oker \u2013 the legend gives the year 861 for the foundation \u2013 and the other the settlement of a legendary Count Dankward, after whom Dankwarderode Castle (the \"Castle of Dankward's clearing\"), which was reconstructed in the 19th century, is named.\nThe town's original name of \"Brunswik\" may be a combination of the name Bruno and Low German \"wik\" (related to the Latin \"vicus\"), a place where merchants rested and stored their goods. The town's name, therefore, may indicate a resting place, consistent with its location by a ford across the Oker River. An alternative explanation of the city's name is that it comes from \"Brand\", or burning, indicating a place which developed after the landscape was cleared through burning. The city was first mentioned in documents from the St. Magni Church from 1031, which give the city's name as \"Brunesguik\".\nMiddle Ages and early modern period.\nUp to the 12th century, Brunswick was ruled by the Saxon noble family of the Brunonids; then, through marriage, the town fell to the House of Welf. In 1142, Henry the Lion of the House of Welf became duke of Saxony and made Braunschweig the capital of his state (which, from 1156 on, also included the Duchy of Bavaria). He turned Dankwarderode Castle, the residence of the counts of Brunswick, into his own \"Pfalz\" and developed the city further to represent his authority. Under Henry's rule, the Cathedral of St. Blasius was built and he also had the statue of a lion, his heraldic animal, erected in front of the castle. The lion subsequently became the city's landmark.\nHenry the Lion became so powerful that he dared to refuse military aid to the Emperor Frederick I Barbarossa, which led to his banishment in 1182. Henry went into exile in England. He had previously established ties to the English crown in 1168, through his marriage to King Henry II of England's daughter Matilda, sister of Richard the Lionheart. However, Henry's son Otto, who regained influence and was eventually crowned Holy Roman Emperor, continued to foster the city's development.\nDuring the Middle Ages, Brunswick was an important center of trade, one of the economic and political centers in Northern Europe and a member of the Hanseatic League from the 13th century to the middle of the 17th century. By the year 1600, Brunswick was the seventh largest city in Germany. Although formally one of the residences of the rulers of the Duchy of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg, a constituent state of the Holy Roman Empire, Brunswick was \"de facto\" ruled independently by a powerful class of patricians and the guilds throughout much of the Late Middle Ages and the Early modern period. Because of the growing power of Brunswick's burghers, the Princes of Brunswick-Wolfenb\u00fcttel, who ruled over one of the subdivisions of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg, finally moved their \"Residenz\" out of the city and to the nearby town of Wolfenb\u00fcttel in 1432. The Princes of Brunswick-Wolfenb\u00fcttel did not regain control over the city until the late 17th century, when Rudolph Augustus, Duke of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg, took the city by siege.\nIn the 18th century Brunswick was not only a political, but also a cultural centre. Influenced by the philosophy of the Enlightenment, dukes like Anthony Ulrich and Charles I became patrons of the arts and sciences. In 1745, Charles I founded the \"Collegium Carolinum\", predecessor of the Brunswick University of Technology, and in 1753 he moved the ducal residence back to Brunswick. With this he attracted poets and thinkers such as Lessing, Leisewitz, and Jakob Mauvillon to his court and the city. \"Emilia Galotti\" by Lessing and Goethe's \"Faust\" were performed for the first time in Brunswick.\n19th century.\nIn 1806, the city was captured by the French during the Napoleonic Wars and became part of the short-lived Napoleonic Kingdom of Westphalia in 1807. The exiled Duke Frederick William raised a volunteer corps, the Black Brunswickers, who fought the French in several battles.\nAfter the Congress of Vienna in 1815, Brunswick was made capital of the re-established independent Duchy of Brunswick, later a constituent state of the German Empire from 1871. In the aftermath of the July Revolution in 1830, in Brunswick duke Charles II was forced to abdicate. His absolutist governing style had previously alienated the nobility and bourgeoisie, while the lower classes were disaffected by the bad economic situation. During the night of 7\u20138 September 1830, the ducal palace in Brunswick was stormed by an angry mob, set on fire, and destroyed completely. Charles was succeeded by his brother William VIII. During William's reign, liberal reforms were made and Brunswick's parliament was strengthened.\nDuring the 19th century, industrialisation caused a rapid growth of population in the city, eventually causing Brunswick to be for the first time significantly enlarged beyond its medieval fortifications and the River Oker. On 1 December 1838, the first section of the Brunswick\u2013Bad Harzburg railway line connecting Brunswick and Wolfenb\u00fcttel opened as the first railway line in Northern Germany, operated by the Duchy of Brunswick State Railway.\nEarly to mid-20th century.\nOn 8 November 1918, at the end of World War I, a socialist workers' council forced Duke Ernest Augustus to abdicate. On 10 November, the council proclaimed the Socialist Republic of Brunswick under one-party government by the Independent Social Democratic Party of Germany (USPD); however, the subsequent \"Landtag\" election on 22 December 1918 was won by the Majority Social Democratic Party of Germany (MSPD), and the USPD and MSPD formed a coalition government. An uprising in Braunschweig in 1919, led by the communist Spartacus League, was defeated when \"Freikorps\" troops under Georg Ludwig Rudolf Maercker took over the city on order of the German Minister of Defence, Gustav Noske. An MSPD-led government was subsequently established; in December 1921, a new constitution was approved for the Free State of Brunswick, now a parliamentary republic within the Weimar Republic, again with Braunschweig as its capital.\nAfter the \"Landtag\" election of 1930, Brunswick became the second state in Germany where the Nazis participated in government, when the National Socialist German Workers' Party (NSDAP) formed a coalition government with several conservative and right-wing parties. With the support of Dietrich Klagges, Brunswick's minister of the interior, the NSDAP organized a large SA rally in Braunschweig. On 17\u201318 October 1931, 100,000 SA stormtroopers marched through the city; street fights between Nazis, socialists, and communists left several dead or injured. On 25 February 1932, the state of Brunswick granted Adolf Hitler German citizenship to allow him to run in the 1932 German presidential election. In Braunschweig, Nazis carried out several attacks on political enemies, with the acquiescence of the state government.\nAfter the Nazi seizure of power in 1933, several state institutions were placed in Braunschweig, including the \"Luftfahrtforschungsanstalt\" in V\u00f6lkenrode, the Hitler Youth Academy for Youth Leadership, and the SS-Junkerschule Braunschweig. With the Reichswerke Hermann G\u00f6ring in Salzgitter and the Stadt des KdF-Wagens, as well as several factories in the city itself (including B\u00fcssing and the Volkswagenwerk Braunschweig), the Braunschweig region became one of the centres of the German arms industry.\nDuring the Second World War, Braunschweig was a sub-area headquarters of Wehrkreis XI (one of Germany's military districts), and was the garrison city of the 31st Infantry Division that took part in the invasions of Poland, Belgium, and France, largely being destroyed during its retreat following the invasion of Russia. In this period, thousands of Eastern workers were brought to the city as forced labor, and in the 1943\u20131945 period at least 360 children taken away from such workers died in the \"Entbindungsheim f\u00fcr Ostarbeiterinnen\" (\"Maternity Ward for Eastern Workers\").\nIn 1944, two subcamps of the Neuengamme concentration camp were established in Braunschweig. The subcamp \"Schillstra\u00dfe\" or \"B\u00fcssing-NAG/Schillstra\u00dfe\", located where the BraWo Park's parking lot is today, held about 800 male prisoners, who were forced to work in the arms production at B\u00fcssing-NAG. After about 300 had died due to disease, hunger, and maltreatment over the course of just a few months, a further 200 were transferred to the infirmary of a nearby subcamp in early January 1945 in order to reduce the number of deaths. However, this was only effective to some degree, as another 80 bodies landed in the city's crematory until the subcamp's closing in March 1945, when B\u00fcssing-NAG had to halt production due to severe bombing damages. Today the \"https://,\" located very close to the former premises of the subcamp, documents Braunschweig's history during the Third Reich. B\u00fcssing-NAG also had another subcamp in the nearby Vechelde, which held a further 400 male prisoners.\nThe subcamp \"SS-Reitschule\", named so as it was located on the former premises of the SS-Junker School's riding school, held approximately 800 prisoners, all female, who were tasked with clearing away rubble. This subcamp was commissioned by the city of Braunschweig. Although it was only open for two months - from December 1944 until February 1945, there were at least 17 deaths and a transfer of about 50 prisoners to a nearby subcamp's infirmary. The number of survivors is unknown.\nPiera Sonnino (1922\u20131999), an Italian author, writes of her imprisonment in Braunschweig in her book, \"This Has Happened\", published in English in 2006 by MacMillan Palgrave.\nThe Allied air raid on October 15, 1944, destroyed most of the city's churches, and the \"Altstadt\" (old town), the largest homogeneous ensemble of half-timbered houses in Germany. 100 out of 800 half-timbered houses survived as well as the most important places and streets, preserved in 5 areas of the old town.\nThe city's cathedral, which had been converted to a \"Nationale Weihest\u00e4tte\" (national shrine) by the Nazi government, still stood.\nPostwar period to the 21st century.\nAbout 10% of the inner city survived Allied bombing and remain to represent its distinctive architecture. The cathedral was restored to its function as a Protestant church. Outside the old town city centre large historic quarters remain like \u00d6stliches Ringgebiet with its Gr\u00fcnderzeit architecture.\nPolitically, after the war, the Free State of Brunswick was dissolved by the Allied occupying authorities, Braunschweig ceased to be a capital, and most of its lands were incorporated in the newly formed state of Lower Saxony.\nDuring the Cold War, Braunschweig, then part of West Germany, suffered economically due to its proximity to the Iron Curtain. The city lost its historically strong economic ties to what was then East Germany; for decades, economic growth remained, on average, below the rest of the country while unemployment was above-average for West Germany.\nOn 28 February 1974, as part of a district reform in Lower Saxony, the rural district of Braunschweig, which had surrounded the city, was disestablished. The major part of the former district was incorporated into the city of Braunschweig, increasing its population by roughly 52,000 people.\nIn the 1990s, efforts increased to reconstruct historic buildings that had been destroyed in the air raid. The fa\u00e7ade of the \"Braunschweiger Schloss\" was rebuilt, and buildings such as the \"Alte Waage\" (originally built in 1534) now stand again.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBraunschweig has a population of 272,000 and is the 2nd largest city in Lower Saxony. Braunschweig is considered as one of the oldest cities in Germany, founded in 1031 by Henry the Lion. Braunschweig first reached its peak of over 100,000 in 1890. In the 1960s and 1970s industrialization boomed in Braunschweig due to automobile and other companies coming to Braunschweig and surrounding cities like Wolfsburg and Salzgitter. Braunschweig's population reached its highest peak of population in 1975 with population of about 273,000 and is expected to exceed this count during the year 2025 and other years. Braunschweig's population started to decline in the 1980s. In the 1990s - after the German reunification - it began to grow again as many East Germans moved there due to its close proximity to former East Germany, 75% of the Germans living in Braunschweig come from different parts of Germany; most are from Former East Germany, Hessen and North Rhine Westphalia. Currently, Braunschweig has a strong focus on research and development. According to 2019 data, it has the highest R&amp;D intensity (ratio of R&amp;D expenditure to GDP) in the entire EU and over 4% of all employed people are R&amp;D personnel.\nReligion.\nIn 2015, 91,785 people (or 36.3% of the population) were Protestant and 34,604 (13.7%) people were Roman Catholic; 126,379 people (50.0%) either adhered to other denominations or followed no religion.\nIslam.\nRoughly 27,000 Muslims (9.8% of the population)\nwere in Braunschweig during 2024. Mosques like DMK Moschee, Fatih Moschee Braunschweig and cultural clubs are present throughout the city but mosque buildings with minerates have not been built in Braunschweig but can be seen in its urban area for example the Gr\u00fcne Moschee in Wolfenb\u00fcttel, Fatih Moschee Salzgitter and the Albanischer-Kulturverein in Gifhorn. The region had around 95,000 to 105,000 Muslims, accounting to approximately 10% of the total region's population.\nImmigration.\nA total of 102,156 of Braunschweig's residents, including citizens with second passport, had a migration background in 2024 (37.5% of the total population). People from over 175 nations live in Braunschweig, contributing to its cosmopolitan atmosphere and demographics. Among the 37.5% of people with a migration background, 26% or 70,828 were Non-German citizens or Germans with a second passport but without a migration background. A high proportion of foreigners in the city come from Asia and Africa, something not seen in many cities in a similar size range. One of the main asylums, for refugees and asylum seekers, of Lower Saxony is located in Braunschweig as well as multiple smaller asylums are present throughout the city too, contributing to a higher amount of migrants and refugees in the city compared to other parts of the state though a high number of them are not counted as residents. The city's universities and interest in increasing the number of families from foreign countries has led to a higher trend in immigration. Braunschweig has had a relatively stable population because of multiple housing restrictions and other factors but many Germans are leaving the city so in order to take up their spaces, many foreigners are coming to the city. Multiple residential areas are being constructed in order to withstand the high inflow of migrants to the city.\nBy the year 2030, over 44% of the population in Braunschweig is projected to have a foreign background, this includes first and second generation foreigners and naturalized foreigners due to around 51% of the population below 18 having foreign ancestry and high immigration rate. The population is also expected to increase by 20% by the year 2030 from 2020.\nWeststadt has the highest migration percentage of all districts being 63.2%, followed by Nordstadt-Schunteraue with 55.8%, Westliches Ringgebiet with 52.4% and Mitte with 49.6%. The following table lists up the largest minority groups, including citizens with a migration background from a specific nation or region:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\n43,537 residents in the city are from Asia and largest groups of people from Asia are Turkey (10.665), Syria (5.770), Kazakhstan (4.235), China (3.100) and India (3.085).\nFrom other European countries, there are 38,734 residents with majority of the people coming from Poland (13.365), Russia (8.278), Italy (3.630) and Ukraine (3.462).\n15,398 people with African descent live in the city.\nMajority are from Cameroon (2.233), Tunisia (2.215), Algeria (1.207), Ghana (1.100) and Nigeria (871).\nThe combined population of residents with descent from both Americas is 4,233 with the two most common nations present being Brazil (786) and Colombia (713).\nUrban agglomeration.\nThe urban agglomeration area of Braunschweig is approximately 551,000 in 2024, making it one of the largest regiopolis in Germany and the largest one in Lower Saxony. This area includes Wolfenb\u00fcttel, Meine, northern parts of Salzgitter, , Sickte, , Lengede and other towns and regions within a 15 kilometer (10 mile) radius though Salzgitter is an exception being 20 kilometers (12 miles) away. The field area and green spaces are not counted because a high amount of the areas are not registered. Braunschweig's urban area makes it a bigger city compared to others with a similar size e.g. Aachen, Wiesbaden or Gelsenkirchen, and since the urban area is not significantly smaller than Hanover, it makes itself an important and major city in Lower Saxony. Companies like New Yorker, Salzgitter AG, J\u00e4germeister, Siemens, Bosch, Volkswagen, Nordzucker, Continental, Kosatec and others are headquartered or have a branch in this area.\nThe metropolitan population of Braunschweig is 1.66 million and is considered as Region Braunschweig, including cities and towns such as Wolfsburg, Goslar or Gifhorn, which is the further range of Braunschweig and is not the same as the smaller ranged urban aggomeration.\nThe metropolitan region of Braunschweig is a subdivision of the larger Metropolregion Hannover-Braunschweig-G\u00f6ttingen-Wolfsburg.\nInformation about the urban agglomeration in 2024.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nThe population of the urban aggomeration with a migration background in 2024 was 246,995: almost 45% of the population.\n This makes the agglomeration one of the most diverse in Germany and the most in Lower Saxony. Over 70% of the Germans in the urban agglomeration come from different parts of Germany with most of them coming from eastern States due to the proximity. The city is unique because unlike most cities with immigrant populations concentrated inside the city itself, higher number of migrant populations are also found in surrounding areas. Braunschweig's urban agglomeration has a higher migration percentage compared to its city due to industrialization and other major factors since 2011. One of the largest Chinese, Indian, Cameroonian, Russians, Polish, Vietnamese and Tunisian communities in Germany are located in the surroundings and within Braunschweig.\nBraunschweig-Salzgitter-Wolfsburg Area.\nThe three cities form a Oberzentren and a sub-metropolitan area.\nThe area is primarily dependent on the steel, automotive and R&amp;D industries. The population of the area is a bit over 1 million (1,014,477) as of 2023. The three main cities have a total population of 512,600, where over half the population lives. The area has 40.6% of the population with a migration background. The area contributes highly to the economy of the country especially due to Volkswagen, Siemens, Salzgitter AG and other companies. The area has one of the highest GDP per Capita in the whole of Europe with Wolfsburg having the highest in the whole country and Braunschweig having one of the highest. \nClimate.\nBraunschweig's climate is classified as oceanic (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\"; Trewartha: \"Dobk\"). The average annual temperature in Braunschweig is . The average annual rainfall is with July as the wettest month. The temperatures are highest on average in July, at around , and lowest in January, at around .\nThe Braunschweig weather station has recorded the following extreme values:\nMain sights.\nParks and gardens.\nParks and gardens in the city include the botanical garden \"Botanischer Garten der Technischen Universit\u00e4t Braunschweig\", founded in 1840 by Johann Heinrich Blasius, the \"B\u00fcrgerpark\", the \"L\u00f6wenwall\" with an obelisk from 1825, the \"Prinz-Albrecht-Park\", and the \"Inselwallpark\". Other parks and recreation areas are \"Stadtpark\", \"Westpark\", \"Theaterpark\", \"Museumpark\", \"Heidbergsee\", \"S\u00fcdsee\", \"\u00d6lpersee\", the zoological garden \"Arche Noah Zoo Braunschweig\" and the nearby Essehof Zoo.\nPolitics.\nSubdivisions.\nBraunschweig is made up of 19 boroughs (German: \"Stadtbezirke\"), which themselves may consist of several quarters (German: \"Stadtteile\") each. The 19 boroughs, with their official numbers, are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMayor.\nThe current mayor of Braunschweig is Thorsten Kornblum of the Social Democratic Party (SPD); he has been mayor since 2021. The most recent mayoral election was held on 12 September 2021, with a runoff held on 26 September, and the results were as follows:\nCity council.\nThe Braunschweig city council governs the city alongside the Mayor. The most recent city council election was held on 12 September 2021, and the results were as follows:\nTransport.\nBraunschweig's city centre is mostly a car-free pedestrian zone.\nRoad.\nTwo main autobahns serve Braunschweig, the A2 (Berlin\u2014Hanover\u2014Dortmund) and the A39 (Salzgitter\u2014Wolfsburg) togethor with the A391 and A36. City roads are generally wide, as they were built after World War II to support the anticipated use of the car. There are several car parks in the city. Around 163,000 vehicles use the northern Highway cloverleaf intersect and 115,000 use the southern cloverleaf Highway intersect. \nBicycle.\nMany residents travel around town by bicycle using an extensive system of bicycle-only lanes. The main train station includes a bicycle parking area.\nTrain.\nThe city is on the main rail line between Frankfurt and Berlin, as well as a small hub on a few South- and North-bound branches to Bad Harzburg; Salzgitter; Gifhorn and two electrified 2 track branches towards Lehrte (and the Hannover-Berlin mainline), and towards Wolfsburg linking to the same mainline.\nAround 66,000 to 110,000 people use the main station daily.\nDeutsche Bahn (German Railways, with their DB Regio Subsidiary) serves the city with a few local services, although Errix towards Uelzen (Northwards) and Bad Harzburg (Southwards) operate the aforementioned directions, as well as Hildesheim and Wolfsburg (West-East respectively) trains having been handed to Enno, and the RE70 service to Hannover being run by the Westfalenbahn.\nDeutsche Bahn (German Railways, in this case their Fehrnverkehr subsidiary) operates inter-city and high-speed InterCityExpress (ICE) trains, with frequent stops at Braunschweig Central Station, with usual next/last stops being Hannover; Hildesheim; Magdeburg (on the Frankfurt-Berlin mainline)or Wolfsburg.\n(German: \"Braunschweig Hauptbahnhof\").\nTram and bus.\nThe Braunschweig tramway network is an inexpensive and extensive long electric tramway system. First opened in 1897, it has been modernized, including a extension in 2007. The network has an gauge, unique for a European railway or tramway network. However, it is being supplemented in stages by a third rail, to allow future joint working with the main railway network. Projects to extend the tram system 18 Kilometers (12 miles) more are planned to be completed by the year 2030. The daily ridership of the trams in Braunschweig is 135,000 and 75,000 for the Busses with an approximate count of 65 million annual passengers using the public transport system.\nThe municipally owned Braunschweiger Verkehrs-AG currently operates six tram lines and several bus lines. The tram lines are:\nAir.\nBraunschweig Airport (BWE / EDVE) is located north of the city at , elev. . However, there are no scheduled public passenger or cargo services at the airport. The nearest passenger airport is Hannover Airport, located north west of Braunschweig.\nName.\nMany other geographical locations around the world are named Brunswick, after the historical English name of Braunschweig. Between 1714 and 1837, the House of Hanover ruled Great Britain in personal union with the Electorate of Hanover. The House of Hanover was formally known as the House of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg, Hanover line. As a result, many places in the British colonies were named after Brunswick, such as the province of New Brunswick in Canada.\nIronically, the city of Braunschweig was not ruled by the Hanoverians while its name was being given to other Brunswicks around the world. Starting in 1269, the Duchy of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg underwent a series of divisions and mergers, with parts of the territory being transferred between various branches of the family. The city of Braunschweig went to the senior branch of the house, the Wolfenb\u00fcttel line, while L\u00fcneburg eventually ended up with the Hanover line. Although the territory had been split, all branches of the family continued to style themselves as the House of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg. In 1884, the senior branch of the House of Welf became extinct. The Hanover line, being the last surviving line of the family, subsequently held the throne of the Duchy of Brunswick from November 1913 until November 1918.\nGovernment offices.\nThe offices of the Luftfahrt-Bundesamt (LBA, \"Federal Aviation Office\") and the German Federal Bureau of Aircraft Accident Investigation (BFU) are located in Braunschweig.\nResearch and science.\nBraunschweig has been an important industrial area.\nToday it is known for its University and research institutes, mainly the \"Johann Heinrich von Thuenen Institute\", the \"Julius K\u00fchn-Institut\", and the \"Institute for Animal Food\" of the Friedrich Loeffler Institute, until the end of 2007 all part of the Federal Agricultural Research Centre, the German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, the Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, and the Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt (PTB). The PTB Braunschweig maintains the atomic clock responsible for the DCF77 time signal and the official German time. In 2006 the region of Braunschweig was the most R&amp;D-intensive area in the whole European Economic Area, investing 7.1% of its GDP for research &amp; technology. In 2019, the figure had risen to 7.79%, making Braunschweig retain its ranking as the most R&amp;D-intensive region in Germany. In 2007 Braunschweig was presented the City of Science award by the Stifterverband f\u00fcr die Deutsche Wissenschaft.\nBraunschweig University of Technology (German: \"Technische Universit\u00e4t Braunschweig\") was founded in 1745 and is the oldest member of TU9, an incorporated society of the nine most prestigious, oldest, and largest universities focusing on engineering and technology in Germany. With approximately 18,000 students, Braunschweig University of Technology is the third largest university in Lower Saxony.\nEducation.\nAlso located in Braunschweig is the Martino-Katharineum, a secondary school founded in 1415. It has had several notable pupils, such as Carl Friedrich Gauss, Hoffmann von Fallersleben, Richard Dedekind and Louis Spohr. Since 2004, Braunschweig also has an \"International School\". Other notable secondary schools include the Gymnasium Neue Oberschule, Gymnasium Gaussschule, Gymnasium Kleine Burg, Hoffmann-von-Fallersleben-Schule Braunschweig, Integrierte Gesamtschule Franzsches Feld, and Wilhelm-Gymnasium.\nLower Saxony's only university of art, founded in 1963, can be found in Braunschweig, the \"Hochschule f\u00fcr Bildende K\u00fcnste Braunschweig\" (Braunschweig College of Fine Arts). The HBK is an institution of higher artistic and scientific education and offers the opportunity to study for interdisciplinary artistic and scientific qualifications. Additionally, one of the campuses of the Eastphalia University of Applied Sciences (German: \"Ostfalia Hochschule f\u00fcr angewandte Wissenschaften\", formerly \"Fachhochschule Braunschweig/Wolfenb\u00fcttel\") was located in the city until 2010.\nEconomy.\nIn 2015, the German weekly business news magazine \"Wirtschaftswoche\" ranked Braunschweig as one of the most dynamic economic spaces in all of Germany.\nBraunschweig was one of the centres of the industrialization in Northern Germany. During the 19th and early 20th century the canning and railroad industries and the sugar production were of great importance for Braunschweig's economy, but eventually other branches such as the automotive industry became more important, while especially the canning industry began to vanish from the city after the end of World War II. The defunct truck and bus manufacturer B\u00fcssing was headquartered in Braunschweig. Current factories in the city include Volkswagen, Siemens, Bombardier Transportation, and Bosch.\nThe fashion label NewYorker, the publishing house Westermann Verlag, Nordzucker, Volkswagen Financial Services and Volkswagen Bank have their headquarters in the city as well as the Volkswagen utility vehicle holding. Also two major optical companies were headquartered in Braunschweig: Voigtl\u00e4nder and Rollei.\nDuring the 1980s and early 1990s the computer companies Atari and Commodore International both had branches for development and production within the city.\nBraunschweig is the home of two piano companies, both known worldwide for the high quality of their instruments: Schimmel and Grotrian-Steinweg. Both companies were founded in the 19th century. Additionally is based in Braunschweig.\nCulture.\nBraunschweig is famous for \"Till Eulenspiegel\", a medieval jester who played many practical jokes on its citizens.\nIt also had many breweries, and still a very peculiar kind of beer is made called \"Mumme\", first quoted in 1390, a malt-extract that was shipped all over the world. Two major breweries still produce in Braunschweig, the Hofbrauhaus Wolters, founded in 1627, and the former Feldschl\u00f6\u00dfchen brewery, founded in 1871, now operated by Oettinger Beer.\nBraunschweiger Mettwurst, a soft, spreadable smoked pork sausage, is named after the city. Other traditional local dishes include white asparagus, \"Braunschweiger Lebkuchen\", \"Braunkohl\" (a variant of kale served with Bregenwurst), and \"Uhlen un Apen\" (Low German for \"Owls and Guenons\", a pastry).\nMedia.\nBraunschweig's major local newspaper is the \"Braunschweiger Zeitung\", first published in 1946. Papers formerly published in Braunschweig include the \"Braunschweigische Anzeigen\"/\"Braunschweigische Staatszeitung\" (1745\u20131934), the \"Braunschweigische Landeszeitung\" (1880\u20131936) and the \"Braunschweiger Stadtanzeiger\"/\"Braunschweiger Allgemeiner Anzeiger\" (1886\u20131941), and the social-democratic \"Braunschweiger Volksfreund\" (1871\u20131933).\nNear Braunschweig at Cremlingen-Abbenrode, there is a large medium wave transmitter, which transmits the program of \"Deutschlandfunk\" on 756\u00a0kHz, the Cremlingen transmitter.\nFestivals.\n\"\", a medieval Northern German form of carnival was celebrated in Braunschweig as early as the 13th century. Since 1979 an annual Rosenmontag parade is held in Braunschweig, the largest in Northern Germany, which is named Schoduvel in honour of the medieval custom.\nAn annual \"Weihnachtsmarkt\" (Christmas market) is held in late November and December on the Burgplatz in the centre of Braunschweig. In 2008 the market had 900,000 visitors.\nMuseums and galleries.\nThe city's most important museum is the Herzog Anton Ulrich Museum, a well known art museum and the oldest public museum in Germany, founded in 1754. It houses a collection of masters of Western art, including D\u00fcrer, Giorgione, Cranach, Holbein, Van Dyck, Vermeer, Rubens, and Rembrandt.\nThe State Museum of Brunswick (\"Braunschweigisches Landesmuseum\"), founded in 1891, houses a permanent collection documenting the history of the Brunswick area ranging from its early history to the present.\nThe Municipal Museum of Brunswick (\"St\u00e4dtisches Museum Braunschweig\"), founded in 1861, is a museum for art and cultural history, documenting the history of the city of Braunschweig.\nThe State Natural History Museum is a zoology museum founded in 1754.\nOther museums in the city include the Museum of Photography (\"Museum f\u00fcr Photographie\"), the Jewish Museum (\"J\u00fcdisches Museum\"), the Museum for Agricultural Technology \"Gut Steinhof\", and the Gerst\u00e4cker-Museum. Frequent exhibitions of contemporary art are also held by the Art Society of Braunschweig (German: \"Kunstverein Braunschweig\"), housed in the \"Villa Salve Hospes\", a classicist villa built between 1805 and 1808.\nMusic and dance.\nThe \"Braunschweig Classix Festival\" was an annual classical music festival. It is the largest promoter of classical music in the region and one of the most prominent music festivals in Lower Saxony.\nFrom 2001 to 2009, and again since 2013, the annual finals of the international breakdance competition Battle of the Year have been held at the Volkswagen Halle in Braunschweig.\n\"Braunschweiger TSC\" is among the leading competitive formation dance teams in the world and has won multiple World and European championship titles.\nSports.\nBraunschweig's major local football team is Eintracht Braunschweig. Founded in 1895, Eintracht Braunschweig can look back on a long and chequered history. Eintracht Braunschweig won the German football championship in 1967, and currently plays in the 2. Bundesliga, the second tier of German football, and attracts a large number of supporters. Braunschweig was also arguably the city in which the first ever game of football in Germany took place. The game had been brought to Germany by the local school teacher Konrad Koch, also the first to write down a German version of the rules of football, who organized the first match between pupils from his school \"Martino-Katharineum\" in 1874. The 2011 German drama film Lessons of a Dream is based on Koch.\nEintracht Braunschweig also fields a successful women's field hockey team that claimed nine national championship titles between 1965 and 1978. In the past, the club also had first or second-tier teams in the sports of ice hockey, field handball, and water polo.\nThe New Yorker Lions (formerly Braunschweig Lions) are the city's American football team, winning a record number of 12 German Bowl titles, as well as five Eurobowls (a shared record).\nThe city's professional basketball team, the Basketball L\u00f6wen Braunschweig, plays in the Basketball Bundesliga, the highest level in Germany. The L\u00f6wen's predecessor SG Braunschweig had previously played in the Bundesliga as well. Eintracht Braunschweig's women's basketball team plays in the 2. Damen-Basketball-Bundesliga, the second tier of women's basketball in Germany.\nIn handball, MTV Braunschweig, the city's oldest sports club (founded in 1847), plays in the semi-professional .\nOther sports clubs from Braunschweig that play or have played at the Bundesliga or 2nd Bundesliga level include Spot Up 89ers (baseball), Braunschweiger THC (field hockey), SV S\u00fcd Braunschweig (handball), Rugby-Welfen Braunschweig (rugby union), and USC Braunschweig (volleyball).\nAnnual sporting events held in Braunschweig include the international equestrian tournament \"L\u00f6wen Classics\", \"Rund um den Elm\", Germany's oldest road bicycle race, and the professional tennis tournament \"Sparkassen Open\".\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nBraunschweig is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51033", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51033", "title": "Director of photography", "text": ""}
{"id": "51036", "revid": "6326132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51036", "title": "Drug prohibition", "text": "Prohibition of drugs through law \nThe prohibition of drugs through sumptuary legislation or religious law is a common means of attempting to prevent the recreational use of certain intoxicating substances.\nAn area has a prohibition of drugs when its government uses the force of law to punish the use or possession of drugs which have been classified as controlled. A government may simultaneously have systems in place to regulate both controlled and non controlled drugs. Regulation controls the manufacture, distribution, marketing, sale, and use of certain drugs, for instance through a prescription system. For example, in some states, the possession or sale of amphetamines is a crime unless a patient has a physician's prescription for the drug; having a prescription authorizes a pharmacy to sell and a patient to use a drug that would otherwise be prohibited. Although prohibition mostly concerns psychoactive drugs (which affect mental processes such as perception, cognition, and mood), prohibition can also apply to non-psychoactive drugs, such as anabolic steroids. Many governments do not criminalize the possession of a limited quantity of certain drugs for personal use, while still prohibiting their sale or manufacture, or possession in large quantities. Some laws (or judicial practice) set a specific volume of a particular drug, above which is considered \"ipso jure\" to be evidence of trafficking or sale of the drug.\nSome Islamic countries prohibit the use of alcohol (see list of countries with alcohol prohibition). Many governments levy a tax on alcohol and tobacco products, and restrict alcohol and tobacco from being sold or gifted to a minor. Other common restrictions include bans on outdoor drinking and indoor smoking. In the early 20th century, many countries had alcohol prohibition. These include the United States (1920\u20131933), Finland (1919\u20131932), Norway (1916\u20131927), Canada (1901\u20131948), Iceland (1915\u20131922) and the Russian Empire/USSR (1914\u20131925). In fact, the first international treaty to control a psychoactive substance adopted in 1890 actually concerned alcoholic beverages (Brussels Conference). The first treaty on opium only arrived two decades later, in 1912.\nDefinitions.\n\"Drugs\", in the context of \"prohibition,\" are any of a number of psychoactive substances whose use a government or religious body seeks to control. What constitutes a \"drug\" varies by century and belief system. What is a psychoactive substance is relatively well known to modern science. Examples include a range from caffeine found in coffee, tea, and chocolate, nicotine in tobacco products; botanical extracts morphine and heroin, and synthetic compounds MDMA and fentanyl. Almost without exception, these substances also have a medical use, in which case they are called pharmaceutical drugs or just \"pharmaceuticals.\" The use of medicine to save or extend life or to alleviate suffering is uncontroversial in most cultures. \"Prohibition\" applies to certain conditions of possession or use. \"Recreational use\" refers to the use of substances primarily for their psychoactive effect outside of a clinical situation or doctor's care.\nIn the twenty-first century, caffeine has pharmaceutical uses. Caffeine is used to treat bronchopulmonary dysplasia. In most cultures, caffeine in the form of coffee or tea is unregulated. Over 2.25 billion cups of coffee are consumed in the world every day. Some religions, including the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, prohibit coffee. They believe that it is both physically and spiritually unhealthy to consume coffee.\nA government's interest to control a drug may be based on its negative effects on its users, or it may simply have a revenue interest. The British parliament prohibited the possession of untaxed tea with the imposition of the Tea Act of 1773. In this case, as in many others, it is not a substance that is prohibited, but the conditions under which it is possessed or consumed. Those conditions include matters of intent, which makes the enforcement of laws difficult. In Colorado possession of \"blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices\" is illegal if there was \"intent\" to use them with drugs.\nMany drugs, beyond their pharmaceutical and recreational uses, have industrial uses. Nitrous oxide, or \"laughing gas\" is a dental anesthetic, also used to prepare whipped cream, fuel rocket engines, and enhance the performance of race cars. Ethanol, or drinking alcohol, is also used as a fuel, industrial solvent and disinfectant.\nHistory.\nThe cultivation, use, and trade of psychoactive and other drugs has occurred since ancient times. Concurrently, authorities have often restricted drug possession and trade for a variety of political and religious reasons. In the 20th century, the United States led a major renewed surge in drug prohibition called the \"war on drugs\".\nEarly drug laws.\nThe prohibition on alcohol under Islamic \"Sharia\" law, which is usually attributed to passages in the \"Qur'an\", dates back to the early seventh century. Although Islamic law is often interpreted as prohibiting all intoxicants (not only alcohol), the ancient practice of hashish smoking has continued throughout the history of Islam, against varying degrees of resistance. A major campaign against hashish-eating Sufis were conducted in Egypt in the 11th and 12th centuries resulting among other things in the burning of fields of cannabis.\nThough the prohibition of illegal drugs was established under Sharia law, particularly against the use of hashish as a recreational drug, classical jurists of medieval Islamic jurisprudence accepted the use of hashish for medicinal and therapeutic purposes, and agreed that its \"medical use, even if it leads to mental derangement, should remain exempt [from punishment]\". In the 14th century, the Islamic scholar Az-Zarkashi spoke of \"the permissibility of its use for medical purposes if it is established that it is beneficial\".\nIn the Ottoman Empire, Murad IV attempted to prohibit coffee drinking to Muslims as \"haraam\", arguing that it was an intoxicant, but this ruling was overturned soon after he died in 1640. The introduction of coffee in Europe from Muslim Turkey prompted calls for it to be banned as the devil's work, although Pope Clement VIII sanctioned its use in 1600, declaring that it was \"so delicious that it would be a pity to let the infidels have exclusive use of it\". Bach's Coffee Cantata, from the 1730s, presents a vigorous debate between a girl and her father over her desire to consume coffee. The early association between coffeehouses and seditious political activities in England led to the banning of such establishments in the mid-17th century.\nA number of Asian rulers had similarly enacted early prohibitions, many of which were later forcefully overturned by Western colonial powers during the 18th and 19th centuries. In 1360, for example, King Ramathibodi I, of Ayutthaya Kingdom (now Thailand), prohibited opium consumption and trade. The prohibition lasted nearly 500 years until 1851 when King Rama IV allowed Chinese migrants to consume opium. The Konbaung Dynasty prohibited all intoxicants and stimulants during the reign of King Bodawpaya (1781\u20131819). After Burma became a British colony, the restrictions on opium were abolished and the colonial government established monopolies selling Indian-produced opium.\nIn late Qing China, opium imported by foreign traders, such as those employed by Jardine Matheson and the East India Company, was consumed by all social classes in Southern China. Between 1821 and 1837, imports of the drug increased fivefold. The wealth drain and widespread social problems that resulted from this consumption prompted the Chinese government to attempt to end the trade. This effort was initially successful, with Lin Zexu ordering the destruction of opium at Humen in June 1839. However, the opium traders lobbied the British government to declare war on China, resulting in the First Opium War. The Qing government was defeated and the war ended with the Treaty of Nanking, which legalized opium trading in Chinese law\nFirst modern drug regulations.\nThe first modern law in Europe for the regulating of drugs was the Pharmacy Act 1868 in the United Kingdom. There had been previous moves to establish the medical and pharmaceutical professions as separate, self-regulating bodies, but the General Medical Council, established in 1863, unsuccessfully attempted to assert control over drug distribution. The act set controls on the distribution of poisons and drugs. Poisons could only be sold if the purchaser was known to the seller or to an intermediary known to both, and drugs, including opium and all preparations of opium or of poppies, had to be sold in containers with the seller's name and address.\nDespite the reservation of opium to professional control, general sales did continue to a limited extent, with mixtures with less than 1 percent opium being unregulated.\nAfter the legislation passed, the death rate caused by opium immediately fell from 6.4 per million population in 1868 to 4.5 in 1869. Deaths among children under five dropped from 20.5 per million population between 1863 and 1867 to 12.7 per million in 1871 and further declined to between 6 and 7 per million in the 1880s.\nIn the United States, the first drug law was passed in San Francisco in 1875, banning the smoking of opium in opium dens. The reason cited was \"many women and young girls, as well as young men of a respectable family, were being induced to visit the Chinese opium-smoking dens, where they were ruined morally and otherwise.\" This was followed by other laws throughout the country, and federal laws that barred Chinese people from trafficking in opium. Though the laws affected the use and distribution of opium by Chinese immigrants, no action was taken against the producers of such products as laudanum, a tincture of opium and alcohol, commonly taken as a panacea by white Americans. The distinction between its use by white Americans and Chinese immigrants was thus a form of racial discrimination as it was based on the form in which it was ingested: Chinese immigrants tended to smoke it, while it was often included in various kinds of generally liquid medicines often (but not exclusively) used by Americans of European descent. The laws targeted opium smoking, but not other methods of ingestion.\nBritain passed the All-India Opium Act of 1878, which limited recreational opium sales to registered Indian opium-eaters and Chinese opium-smokers and prohibiting its sale to emigrant workers from British Burma.\nFollowing the passage of a regional law in 1895, Australia's Aboriginals Protection and Restriction of the Sale of Opium Act 1897 addressed opium addiction among Aborigines, though it soon became a general vehicle for depriving them of basic rights by administrative regulation. Opium sale was prohibited to the general population in 1905, and smoking and possession were prohibited in 1908.\nDespite these laws, the late 19th century saw an increase in opiate consumption. This was due to the prescribing and dispensing of legal opiates by physicians and pharmacists to relieve menstruation pain. It is estimated that between 150,000 and 200,000 opiate addicts lived in the United States at the time, and a majority of these addicts were women.\nChanging attitudes and the drug prohibition campaign.\nForeign traders, including those employed by Jardine Matheson and the East India Company, smuggled opium into China in order to balance high trade deficits. Chinese attempts to outlaw the trade led to the First Opium War and the subsequent legalization of the trade at the Treaty of Nanking. Attitudes towards the opium trade were initially ambivalent, but in 1874 the Society for the Suppression of the Opium Trade was formed in England by Quakers led by the Rev. Frederick Storrs-Turner. By the 1890s, increasingly strident campaigns were waged by Protestant missionaries in China for its abolition. The first such society was established at the 1890 Shanghai Missionary Conference, where British and American representatives, including John Glasgow Kerr, Arthur E. Moule, Arthur Gostick Shorrock and Griffith John, agreed to establish the Permanent Committee for the Promotion of Anti-Opium Societies.\nDue to increasing pressure in the British parliament, the Liberal government under William Ewart Gladstone approved the appointment of a Royal Commission on Opium to India in 1893. The commission was tasked with ascertaining the impact of Indian opium exports to the Far East, and to advise whether the trade should be banned and opium consumption itself banned in India. After an extended inquiry, the Royal Commission rejected the claims made by the anti-opium campaigners regarding the supposed societal harm caused by the trade and the issue was finalized for another 15 years.\nThe missionary organizations were outraged over the Royal Commission on Opium's conclusions and set up the Anti-Opium League in China; the league gathered data from every Western-trained medical doctor in China and published \"Opinions of Over 100 Physicians on the Use of Opium in China\". This was the first anti-drug campaign to be based on scientific principles, and it had a tremendous impact on the state of educated opinion in the West. In England, the home director of the China Inland Mission, Benjamin Broomhall, was an active opponent of the opium trade, writing two books to promote the banning of opium smoking: \"The Truth about Opium Smoking\" and \"The Chinese Opium Smoker\". In 1888, Broomhall formed and became secretary of the Christian Union for the Severance of the British Empire with the Opium Traffic and editor of its periodical, \"National Righteousness\". He lobbied the British parliament to ban the opium trade. Broomhall and James Laidlaw Maxwell appealed to the London Missionary Conference of 1888 and the Edinburgh Missionary Conference of 1910 to condemn the continuation of the trade. As Broomhall lay dying, an article from \"The Times\" was read to him with the welcome news that an international agreement had been signed ensuring the end of the opium trade within two years.\nIn 1906, a motion to 'declare the opium trade \"morally indefensible\" and remove Government support for it', initially unsuccessfully proposed by Arthur Pease in 1891, was put before the House of Commons. This time the motion passed. The Qing government banned opium soon afterward.\nThese changing attitudes led to the founding of the International Opium Commission in 1909. The First International Opium Convention was signed by 13 nations at The Hague on January 23, 1912, during the First International Opium Conference. This was the first international drug control treaty and it was registered in the \"League of Nations Treaty Series\" on January 23, 1922. The Convention provided that \"The contracting Powers shall use their best endeavors to control or to cause to be controlled, all person manufacturing, importing, selling, distributing, and exporting morphine, cocaine, and their respective salts, as well as the buildings in which these persons carry such an industry or trade.\"\nThe treaty became international law in 1919 when it was incorporated into the Treaty of Versailles. The role of the commission was passed to the League of Nations, and all signatory nations agreed to prohibit the import, sale, distribution, export, and use of all narcotic drugs, except for medical and scientific purposes.\nProhibition.\nIn the UK the Defence of the Realm Act 1914, passed at the onset of the First World War, gave the government wide-ranging powers to requisition the property and to criminalize specific activities. A moral panic was whipped up by the press in 1916 over the alleged sale of drugs to the troops of the British Indian Army. With the temporary powers of DORA, the Army Council quickly banned the sale of all psychoactive drugs to troops, unless required for medical reasons. However, shifts in the public attitude towards drugs\u2014they were beginning to be associated with prostitution, vice and immorality\u2014led the government to pass further unprecedented laws, banning and criminalising the possession and dispensation of all narcotics, including opium and cocaine. After the war, this legislation was maintained and strengthened with the passing of the Dangerous Drugs Act 1920 (10 &amp; 11 Geo. 5. c. 46). Home Office control was extended to include raw opium, morphine, cocaine, ecogonine and heroin.\nHardening of Canadian attitudes toward Chinese-Canadian opium users and fear of a spread of the drug into the white population led to the effective criminalization of opium for nonmedical use in Canada between 1908 and the mid-1920s.\nThe Mao Zedong government nearly eradicated both consumption and production of opium during the 1950s using social control and isolation. Ten million addicts were forced into compulsory treatment, dealers were executed, and opium-producing regions were planted with new crops. Remaining opium production shifted south of the Chinese border into the Golden Triangle region. The remnant opium trade primarily served Southeast Asia, but spread to American soldiers during the Vietnam War, with 20 percent of soldiers regarding themselves as addicted during the peak of the epidemic in 1971. In 2003, China was estimated to have four million regular drug users and one million registered drug addicts.\nIn the US, the Harrison Act was passed in 1914, and required sellers of opiates and cocaine to get a license. While originally intended to regulate the trade, it soon became a prohibitive law, eventually becoming legal precedent that any prescription for a narcotic given by a physician or pharmacist \u2013 even in the course of medical treatment for addiction \u2013 constituted conspiracy to violate the Harrison Act. In 1919, the Supreme Court ruled in \"Doremus\" that the Harrison Act was constitutional and in \"Webb\" that physicians could not prescribe narcotics solely for maintenance. In \"Jin Fuey Moy v. United States\", the court upheld that it was a violation of the Harrison Act even if a physician provided prescription of a narcotic for an addict, and thus subject to criminal prosecution. This is also true of the later Marijuana Tax Act in 1937. Soon, however, licensing bodies did not issue licenses, effectively banning the drugs.\nThe American judicial system did not initially accept drug prohibition. Prosecutors argued that possessing drugs was a tax violation, as no legal licenses to sell drugs were in existence; hence, a person possessing drugs must have purchased them from an unlicensed source. After some wrangling, this was accepted as federal jurisdiction under the interstate commerce clause of the U.S. Constitution.\nAlcohol prohibition.\nThe prohibition of alcohol commenced in Finland in 1919 and in the United States in 1920. Because alcohol was the most popular recreational drug in these countries, reactions to its prohibition were far more negative than to the prohibition of other drugs, which were commonly associated with ethnic minorities, prostitution, and vice. Public pressure led to the repeal of alcohol prohibition in Finland in 1932, and in the United States in 1933. Residents of many provinces of Canada also experienced alcohol prohibition for similar periods in the first half of the 20th century.\nIn Sweden, a referendum in 1922 decided against an alcohol prohibition law (with 51% of the votes against and 49% for prohibition), but starting in 1914 (nationwide from 1917) and until 1955 Sweden employed an alcohol rationing system with personal liquor ration books (\"motbok\").\nWar on drugs.\nIn response to rising drug use among young people and the counterculture movement, government efforts to enforce prohibition were strengthened in many countries from the 1960s onward. Support at an international level for the prohibition of psychoactive drug use became a consistent feature of United States policy during both Republican and Democratic administrations, to such an extent that US support for foreign governments has often been contingent on their adherence to US drug policy. Major milestones in this campaign include the introduction of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs in 1961, the Convention on Psychotropic Substances in 1971 and the United Nations Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances in 1988. A few developing countries where consumption of the prohibited substances has enjoyed longstanding cultural support, long resisted such outside pressure to pass legislation adhering to these conventions. Nepal only did so in 1976.\nIn 1972, United States President Richard Nixon announced the commencement of the so-called \"war on drugs\". Later, President Reagan added the position of drug czar to the President's Executive Office. In 1973, New York introduced mandatory minimum sentences of 15 years to life imprisonment for possession of more than of a so-called hard drug, called the Rockefeller drug laws after New York Governor and later Vice President Nelson Rockefeller. Similar laws were introduced across the United States.\nCalifornia's broader 'three strikes and you're out' policy adopted in 1994 was the first mandatory sentencing policy to gain widespread publicity and was subsequently adopted in most United States jurisdictions. This policy mandates life imprisonment for a third criminal conviction of any felony offense. A similar 'three strikes' policy was introduced to the United Kingdom by the Conservative government in 1997. This legislation enacted a mandatory minimum sentence of seven years for those convicted for a third time of a drug trafficking offense involving a class A drug.\nCalls for legalization, relegalization or decriminalization.\nThe terms relegalization, legalization, legal regulations, or decriminalization are used with very different meanings by different authors, something that can be confusing when the claims are not specified. Here are some variants:\nThere are efforts around the world to promote the relegalization and decriminalization of drugs. These policies are often supported by proponents of liberalism and libertarianism on the grounds of individual freedom, as well as by leftists who believe prohibition to be a method of suppression of the working class by the ruling class. \nProhibition of drugs is supported by proponents of conservatism as well various NGOs. A number of NGOs are aligned in support of drug prohibition as members of the World Federation Against Drugs. In the WFAD constitution, the \"Declaration of the World Forum Against Drugs\" (2008) advocates for \"no other goal than a drug-free world\", and states that a balanced policy of drug abuse prevention, education, treatment, law enforcement, research, and supply reduction provides the most effective platform to reduce drug abuse and its associated harms and calls on governments to consider demand reduction as one of their first priorities. It supports the UN drug conventions, the inclusion of cannabis as one of the \"hard drugs\", and the use of criminal sanctions \"when appropriate\" to deter drug use. It opposes legalization in any form, and harm reduction in general.\nAccording to some critics, drug prohibition is responsible for enriching \"organised criminal networks\" while the hypothesis that the prohibition of drugs generates violence is consistent with research done over long time-series and cross-country facts.\nIn the United Kingdom, where the principal piece of drug prohibition legislation is the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971, criticism includes:\nIn February 2008 the then-president of Honduras, Manuel Zelaya, called on the world to legalize drugs, in order, he said, to prevent the majority of violent murders occurring in Honduras. Honduras is used by cocaine smugglers as a transiting point between Colombia and the US. Honduras, with a population of 7 million, suffers an average of 8\u201310 murders a day, with an estimated 70% being a result of this international drug trade. The same problem is occurring in Guatemala, El Salvador, Costa Rica and Mexico, according to Zelaya. In January 2012 Colombian President Juan Manuel Santos made a plea to the United States and Europe to start a global debate about legalizing drugs. This call was echoed by the Guatemalan President Otto P\u00e9rez Molina, who announced his desire to legalize drugs, saying \"What I have done is put the issue back on the table.\"\nIn a report dealing with HIV in June 2014, the World Health Organization (WHO) of the UN called for the decriminalization of drugs particularly including injected ones. This conclusion put WHO at odds with broader long-standing UN policy favoring criminalization. Eight states of the United States (Alaska, California, Colorado, Maine, Massachusetts, Nevada, Oregon, and Washington), as well as the District of Columbia, have legalized the sale of marijuana for personal recreational use as of 2017, although recreational use remains illegal under U.S. federal law. The conflict between state and federal law is, as of 2018, unresolved.\nSince Uruguay in 2014 and Canada in 2018 legalized cannabis, the debate has known a new turn internationally.\nOn March 14th, 2025, the United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs decided to create a panel of independent experts to rethink the global drug control regime.\nDrug prohibition laws.\nThe following individual drugs, listed under their respective family groups (e.g., barbiturates, benzodiazepines, opiates), are the most frequently sought after by drug users and as such are prohibited or otherwise heavily regulated for use in many countries:\nThe regulation of the above drugs varies in many countries. Alcohol possession and consumption by adults is today widely banned only in Islamic countries and certain states of India. Although alcohol prohibition was eventually repealed in the countries that enacted it, there are, for example, still parts of the United States that do not allow alcohol sales, though alcohol possession may be legal (see dry counties). New Zealand has banned the importation of chewing tobacco as part of the Smoke-free Environments Act 1990. In some parts of the world, provisions are made for the use of traditional sacraments like ayahuasca, iboga, and peyote. In Gabon, iboga (tabernanthe iboga) has been declared a national treasure and is used in rites of the Bwiti religion. The active ingredient, ibogaine, is proposed as a treatment of opioid withdrawal and various substance use disorders.\nIn countries where alcohol and tobacco are legal, certain measures are frequently undertaken to discourage use of these drugs. For example, packages of alcohol and tobacco sometimes communicate warnings directed towards the consumer, communicating the potential risks of partaking in the use of the substance. These drugs also frequently have special \"sin taxes\" associated with the purchase thereof, in order to recoup the losses associated with public funding for the health problems the use causes in long-term users. Restrictions on advertising also exist in many countries, and often a state holds a monopoly on manufacture, distribution, marketing, and/or the sale of these drugs.\nLegal dilemmas.\nThe sentencing statutes in the United States Code that cover controlled substances are complicated. For example, a first-time offender convicted in a single proceeding for selling marijuana three times, and found to have carried a gun on him all three times (even if it were not used) is subject to a minimum sentence of 55 years in federal prison.\nIn \"Hallucinations: Behavior, Experience, and Theory (1975)\", senior US government researchers Louis Jolyon West and Ronald K. Siegel explain how drug prohibition can be used for selective social control:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLinguist Noam Chomsky argues that drug laws are currently, and have historically been, used by the state to oppress sections of society it opposes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Very commonly substances are criminalized because they're associated with what's called the dangerous classes, poor people, or working people. So for example in England in the 19th century, there was a period when gin was criminalized and whiskey wasn't, because gin is what poor people drink.\nLegal highs and prohibition.\nIn 2013 the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction reported that there are 280 new legal drugs, known as \"legal highs\", available in Europe. One of the best known, mephedrone, was banned in the United Kingdom in 2010. On November 24, 2010, the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration announced it would use emergency powers to ban many synthetic cannabinoids within a month. An estimated 73 new psychoactive synthetic drugs appeared on the UK market in 2012. The response of the Home Office has been to create a temporary class drug order which bans the manufacture, import, and supply (but not the possession) of named substances.\nCorruption.\nIn certain countries, there is concern that campaigns against drugs and organized crime are a cover for corrupt officials tied to drug trafficking themselves. In the United States, Federal Bureau of Narcotics chief Harry Anslinger's opponents accused him of taking bribes from the Mafia to enact prohibition and create a black market for alcohol. More recently in the Philippines, one death squad hitman told author Niko Vorobyov that he was being paid by military officers to eliminate those drug dealers who failed to pay a 'tax'. Under President Rodrigo Duterte, the Philippines has waged a bloody war against drugs that may have resulted in up to 29,000 extrajudicial killings.\nWhen it comes to social control with cannabis, there are different aspects to consider. Not only do we assess legislative leaders and the way they vote on cannabis, but we also must consider the federal regulations and taxation that contribute to social controls. For instance, according to a report on the U.S. customs and border protections, the American industry, although banned the main usage of marijuana, was still using products similar such as hemp seeds, oils etc. leading to the previously discussed marijuana tax act.\nThe Tax act provisions required importers to register and pay an annual tax of $24 and receive an official stamp. Stamps for Products were then affixed to each original order form and recorded by the state revenue collector. Then, a customs collector was to maintain the custody of imported marijuana at entry ports until required documents were received, reviewed and approved.Shipments were subject to searches, seizures and forfeitures if any provisions of the law were not met. Violations would result in fines of no more than $2000 or potential imprisonment for up to 5 years. Oftentimes, this created opportunity for corruption, stolen imports that would later lead to smuggling, oftentimes by state officials and tight knit elitists.\nPenalties.\nUnited States.\nDrug possession is the crime of having one or more illegal drugs in one's possession, either for personal use, distribution, sale or otherwise. Illegal drugs fall into different categories and sentences vary depending on the amount, type of drug, circumstances, and jurisdiction. In the U.S., the penalty for illegal drug possession and sale can vary from a small fine to a prison sentence. In some states, marijuana possession is considered to be a petty offense, with the penalty being comparable to that of a speeding violation. In some municipalities, possessing a small quantity of marijuana in one's own home is not punishable at all. Generally, however, drug possession is an arrestable offense, although first-time offenders rarely serve jail time. Federal law makes even possession of \"soft drugs\", such as cannabis, illegal, though some local governments have laws contradicting federal laws.\nIn the U.S., the war on drugs is thought to be contributing to a prison overcrowding problem. In 1996, 59.6% of prisoners were drug-related criminals. The U.S. population grew by about +25% from 1980 to 2000. In that same 20 year time period, the U.S. prison population tripled, making the U.S. the world leader in both percentage and absolute number of citizens incarcerated. The United States has 5% of the world's population, but 25% of the prisoners.\nAbout 90% of United States prisoners are incarcerated in state jails. In 2016, about 572,000, over 44%, of the 1.3 million people in these state jails, were serving time for drug offenses. 728,000 were incarcerated for violent offenses.\nThe data from Federal Bureau of Prisons online statistics page states that 45.9% of prisoners were incarcerated for drug offenses, as of December 2021.\nEuropean Union.\nIn 2004, the Council of the European Union adopted a framework decision harmonizing the minimum penal provisions for illicit drug-related activities. In particular, article 2(9) stipulates that activities may be exempt from the minimum provisions \"when it is committed by its perpetrators exclusively for their own personal consumption as defined by national law.\" This was made, in particular, to accommodate more liberal national systems such as the Dutch coffee shops (see below) or the Spanish Cannabis Social Clubs.\nThe Netherlands.\nIn the Netherlands, cannabis and other \"soft\" drugs are decriminalised in small quantities. The Dutch government treats the problem as more of a public health issue than a criminal issue. Contrary to popular belief, cannabis is still technically illegal. Coffee shops that sell cannabis to people 18 or above are tolerated, and pay taxes like any other business for their cannabis and hashish sales, although distribution is a grey area that the authorities would rather not go into as it is not decriminalised. Many \"coffee shops\" are found in Amsterdam and cater mainly to the large tourist trade; the local consumption rate is far lower than in the US. \nThe administrative bodies responsible for enforcing the drug policies include the Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport, the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations, and the Ministry of Finance. Local authorities also shape local policy, within the national framework.\nWhen compared to other countries, Dutch drug consumption falls in the European average at six per cent regular use (twenty-one per cent at some point in life) and considerably lower than the Anglo-Saxon countries headed by the United States with an eight per cent recurring use (thirty-four at some point in life).\nAustralia.\nA Nielsen poll in 2012 found that only 27% of voters favoured decriminalisation. Australia has steep penalties for growing and using drugs even for personal use. with Western Australia having the toughest laws. There is an associated anti-drug culture amongst a significant number of Australians. Law enforcement targets drugs, particularly in the party scene. In 2012, crime statistics in Victoria revealed that police were increasingly arresting users rather than dealers, and the Liberal government banned the sale of bongs that year.\nIndonesia.\nIndonesia carries a maximum penalty of death for drug dealing, and a maximum of 15 years prison for drug use. In 2004, Australian citizen Schapelle Corby was convicted of smuggling 4.4 kilograms of cannabis into Bali, a crime that carried a maximum penalty of death. Her trial reached the verdict of guilty with a punishment of 20 years imprisonment. Corby claimed to be an unwitting drug mule. Australian citizens known as the \"Bali Nine\" were caught smuggling heroin. Two of the nine, Andrew Chan and Myuran Sukumaran, were executed April 29, 2015 along with six other foreign nationals. In August 2005, Australian model Michelle Leslie was arrested with two ecstasy pills. She pleaded guilty to possession and in November 2005 was sentenced to 3 months imprisonment, which she was deemed to have already served, and was released from prison immediately upon her admission of guilt on the charge of possession.\nAt the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, Indonesia, along with India, Turkey, Pakistan and some South American countries opposed the criminalisation of drugs.\nRepublic of China (Taiwan).\nTaiwan carries a maximum penalty of death for drug trafficking, while smoking tobacco and wine are classified as legal entertainment drug. The Department of Health is in charge of drug prohibition.\nCost.\nIn 2020, the direct cost of drug prohibition to United States taxpayers was estimated at over $40 billion annually. Prohibition can increase organized crime, government corruption, and mass incarceration via the trade in illegal drugs, while racial and gender disparities in enforcement are evident.\nAlthough drug prohibition is often portrayed by proponents as a measure to improve public health, evidence is lacking. In 2016, the Johns Hopkins\u2013Lancet Commission concluded that the \"harms of prohibition far outweigh the benefits\", citing increased risk of overdoses and HIV infection and detrimental effects on the social determinants of health. Some proponents argue that drug prohibition's effect on suppressing usage rates (although the magnitude of this effect is unknown) outweighs the negative effects of prohibition.\nAlternative approaches to prohibition include drug legalization, drug decriminalization, and government monopoly.\nSee also.\nUS specific:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51037", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51037", "title": "High-temperature superconductors", "text": ""}
{"id": "51038", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51038", "title": "Technological applications of superconductivity", "text": " \nSuperconductors function with almost no electrical resistance, making them useful for a variety of rapidly advancing technological applications. One common application is superconducting electromagnets, which utilize a series of superconducting coils to generate a magnetic field. Additionally, the electric power transmission system takes advantage of the low electrical resistance of superconductors to improve efficiency when transferring and storing electrical energy.\nTechnological applications of superconductivity include:\nLow-temperature superconductivity.\nMagnetic resonance imaging and nuclear magnetic resonance.\nThe biggest application for superconductivity is in producing the large-volume, stable, and high-intensity magnetic fields required for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). This represents a multi-billion-US$ market for companies such as Oxford Instruments and Siemens. The magnets typically use low-temperature superconductors (LTS) because high-temperature superconductors are not yet cheap enough to cost-effectively deliver the high, stable, and large-volume fields required, notwithstanding the need to cool LTS instruments to liquid helium temperatures. Superconductors are also used in high field scientific magnets.\nAs of 2023, there are some cryogen-free MRI magnets that operate within a safe temperature range for an LTS instrument. Rather than using a cryogen, such as liquid helium or nitrogen, that must be continually replenished, this design utilizes a GM cryocooler, which is a closed system containing helium gas. Through a combination of insulation techniques and a series of cooling stages, the GM cryocooler keeps the magnet at low enough temperatures without the additional cost of refilling a traditional cryogen. The design of this magnet uses superconducting coils to generate an electromagnetic field, which can be used to capture images of the human body. However, unlike a typical MRI magnet, this design is unable to continue functioning as long as a typical cryogen-based MRI magnet in the event of a power outage.\nParticle accelerators.\nBecause of their low electrical resistance, superconductors are more efficient at producing electromagnetic fields than typical conductors, making them a cost-effective choice for use in physics research. In the first LTS particle accelerators, Nb-Ti was the preferred superconductor because of its ductility and ability to carry a considerable amount of electric current. However, future research is planned regarding the possibility of replacing Nb-Ti with niobium-tin, which is able to carry a greater current but is also more brittle. By overcoming the challenge of designing coils from a brittle material such as Nb-Ti, researchers may be able to develop a more efficient superconducting particle accelerator.\nParticle accelerators such as the Large Hadron Collider can include many high field electromagnets requiring large quantities of LTS. To construct the LHC magnets required more than 28 percent of the world's niobium-titanium wire production for five years, with large quantities of NbTi also used in the magnets for the LHC's huge experiment detectors.\nMagnetic fusion devices.\nDuring fusion processes, electromagnets can be used to contain plasma. Superconducting electromagnets produce stronger magnetic fields from a lower energy input than their traditional counterparts, but also involve higher initial costs.\nConventional fusion machines (JET, ST-40, NTSX-U and MAST) use blocks of copper. This limits their fields to 1-3 Tesla. Several superconducting fusion machines are planned for the 2024-2026 timeframe. These include ITER, ARC and the next version of ST-40. The addition of High Temperature Superconductors should yield an order of magnitude improvement in fields (10-13 tesla) for a new generation of Tokamaks.\nThe cable-in-conduit (CIC) design for superconductors is also commonly utilized for electromagnetic confinement. The CIC conductor is able to withstand large amounts of force, is efficient at transferring electrical current, and is a good insulator, making it well-suited for use in fusion processes.\nGenerators.\nSuperconducting wires and electromagnetic fields generated from superconducting coils can be utilized in some generators. Superconducting versions of these elements are more efficient than their counterparts, allowing for greater electricity generation from a smaller and lighter generator. The superconducting coils in these generators are typically made from NbTi and are used to generate an electromagnetic field. Since NbTi is a LTS, liquid helium is typically used as a cryogen to keep the generator at a cool enough temperature. This type of superconducting generator has been applied to power offshore wind turbines since the design optimizes energy output from a relatively small and lightweight generator.\nSuperconducting electromagnet iron separator (SEIS).\nIn coal purification, electromagnets are employed to remove ferromagnetic substances, primarily iron, from coal. Superconductors are more energy-efficient than typical conductors, so they are used to create superconducting coils that generate an electromagnetic field. These LTS coils require cryogenic cooling from liquid helium to safely operate. These superconducting magnets require less energy input and take up a smaller volume than a typical magnet.\nHigh-temperature superconductivity.\nThe commercial applications so far for high-temperature superconductors (HTS) have been limited by other properties of the materials discovered thus far. HTS require only liquid nitrogen, not liquid helium, to cool to superconducting temperatures. However, currently known high-temperature superconductors are brittle ceramics that are expensive to manufacture and not easily formed into wires or other useful shapes.\nTherefore, the applications for HTS have been where it has some other intrinsic advantage, e.g. in:\nHTS-based systems.\nHTS has application in scientific and industrial magnets, including use in NMR and MRI systems. Commercial systems are now available in each category.\nAlso one intrinsic attribute of HTS is that it can withstand much higher magnetic fields than LTS, so HTS at liquid helium temperatures are being explored for very high-field inserts inside LTS magnets.\nPromising future industrial and commercial HTS applications include Induction heaters, transformers, fault current limiters, power storage, motors and generators, fusion reactors (see ITER) and magnetic levitation devices.\nEarly applications will be where the benefit of smaller size, lower weight or the ability to rapidly switch current (fault current limiters) outweighs the added cost. Longer-term as conductor price falls HTS systems should be competitive in a much wider range of applications on energy efficiency grounds alone. (For a relatively technical and US-centric view of state of play of HTS technology in power systems and the development status of Generation 2 conductor see http://.)\nMagnesium diboride.\nMagnesium diboride is a much cheaper superconductor than either BSCCO or YBCO in terms of cost per current-carrying capacity per length (cost/(kA*m)), in the same ballpark as LTS, and on this basis many manufactured wires are already cheaper than copper. Furthermore, MgB2 superconducts at temperatures higher than LTS (its critical temperature is 39\u00a0K, compared with less than 10\u00a0K for NbTi and 18.3\u00a0K for Nb3Sn), introducing the possibility of using it at 10-20\u00a0K in cryogen-free magnets or perhaps eventually in liquid hydrogen. However MgB2 is limited in the magnetic field it can tolerate at these higher temperatures, so further research is required to demonstrate its competitiveness in higher field applications.\nTrapped field magnets.\nExposing superconducting materials to a brief magnetic field can trap the field for use in machines such as generators. In some applications they could replace traditional permanent magnets.\nElectric power transmission.\nBoth LTS and HTS can conduct electricity with virtually no electrical resistance, making them suitable for a variety of uses within the electricity distribution industry.\nSuperconducting cables.\nBecause of their low electrical resistance, superconducting cables are more efficient at transferring electricity than a typical cable. Although HTS and LTS cables are initially more expensive than any of their traditional counterparts, the savings associated with lower losses of current make the prices more comparable in the long term. However, these high start-up costs still provide a challenge for cities considering making the transition to superconducting cables within the power grid. \nSuperconducting fault-current limiters (SCFCLs).\nFault currents occur when a failure at some point in the power grid causes an unusually large and potentially damaging current to flow through the grid. The ideal fault-current limiter (FCL) would be able to respond to a fault current by quickly transitioning to a state of low resistance and absorbing the extra current caused by the fault. An FCL would require some mechanism for detecting a fault to trigger it to switch \u201con\u201d and then some way to return to a normal state after the fault current is contained. Because superconductors have a low electrical resistance, they are well suited for use in a potential FCL design. These SCFCL designs are still under development, but have the potential to provide greater safety to the electric grid if widely implemented. \nSuperconducting magnetic energy storage (SMES).\nAgain, this concept takes advantage of the low resistance of superconductors as a method for electricity storage. A SMES has the ability to repeatedly discharge its stored energy and then recover this energy, storing it again. In an SMES design, a superconducting coil generates an electromagnetic field, effectively storing electricity that can be discharged with virtually no loss of current due to resistance. SMES systems typically utilize LTS, meaning they require a refrigeration system. LTS, typically\u00a0 niobium titanium alloys, can operate in a higher magnetic field than HTS, making LTS more effective for SMES.\nHistorical Projects.\nThe Holbrook Superconductor Project, also known as the LIPA project, was a project to design and build the world's first production superconducting transmission power cable. The cable was commissioned in late June 2008 by the Long Island Power Authority (LIPA) and was in operation for two years. The suburban Long Island electrical substation is fed by a underground cable system which consists of about of high-temperature superconductor wire manufactured by American Superconductor chilled to with liquid nitrogen, greatly reducing the cost required to deliver additional power. In addition, the installation of the cable bypassed strict regulations for overhead power lines, and offered a solution for the public's concerns on overhead power lines.\nThe Tres Amigas Project was proposed in 2009 as an electrical HVDC interconnector between the Eastern Interconnection, the Western Interconnection and Texas Interconnection. It was proposed to be a multi-mile, triangular pathway of superconducting electric cables, capable of transferring five gigawatts of power between the three U.S. power grids. The project lapsed in 2015 when the Eastern Interconnect withdrew from the project. Construction was never begun.\nEssen, Germany has the world's longest superconducting power cable in production at 1 kilometer. It is a 10 kV liquid nitrogen cooled cable. The cable is smaller than an equivalent 110 kV regular cable and the lower voltage has the additional benefit of smaller transformers.\nIn 2020, an aluminium plant in Voerde, Germany, announced plans to use superconductors for cables carrying 200 kA, citing lower volume and material demand as advantages.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
