{"id": "53034", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53034", "title": "WebCrawler", "text": "Web search engine\nWebCrawler is a search engine, and one of the oldest surviving search engines on the web today. For many years, it operated as a metasearch engine. WebCrawler was the first web search engine to provide full text search.\nHistory.\nBrian Pinkerton first started working on WebCrawler, which was originally a desktop application, on January 27, 1994 at the University of Washington. On March 15, 1994, he generated a list of the top 25 websites.\nWebCrawler launched on April 21, 1994, with more than 4,000 different websites in its database and on November 14, 1994, WebCrawler served its 1 millionth search query for \"nuclear weapons design and research\".\nOn December 1, 1994, WebCrawler acquired two sponsors, DealerNet and Starwave, which provided money to keep WebCrawler operating. Starting on October 3, 1995, WebCrawler was fully supported by advertising, but separated the adverts from search results.\nOn June 1, 1995, America Online (AOL) acquired WebCrawler. After being acquired by AOL, the website introduced its mascot \"Spidey\" on September 1, 1995.\nStarting in April 1996, WebCrawler also included the human-edited internet guide GNN Select, which was also under AOL ownership.\nOn April 1, 1997, Excite acquired WebCrawler from AOL for $12.3 million.\nWebCrawler received a redesign on June 16, 1997, adding WebCrawler Shortcuts, which suggested alternative links to material related to a search topic.\nWebCrawler was maintained by Excite as a separate search engine with its own database until 2001, when it started using Excite's own database, effectively putting an end to WebCrawler as an independent search engine. Later that year, Excite (then called Excite@Home) went bankrupt and WebCrawler was bought by InfoSpace in 2001.\nPinkerton, WebCrawler's creator, led the Amazon A9.com search division as of 2012.\nIn July 2016, InfoSpace was sold by parent company Blucora to OpenMail for $45 million, putting WebCrawler under the ownership of OpenMail. OpenMail was later renamed System1.\nIn 2018, WebCrawler was redesigned from scratch and its logo was changed.\nTraffic.\nWebCrawler was highly successful early on. At one point, it was unusable during peak times due to server overload. It was the second most visited website on the internet in February 1996, but it quickly dropped below rival search engines and directories such as Yahoo!, Infoseek, Lycos, and Excite in 1997.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53036", "revid": "2267950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53036", "title": "Network address translation", "text": "Technique for traversing IP address spaces without routing\nNetwork address translation (NAT) is a method of mapping an IP address space into another by modifying network address information in the IP header of packets while they are in transit across a traffic routing device. The technique was initially used to bypass the need to assign a new address to every host when a network was moved, or when the upstream Internet service provider was replaced but could not route the network's address space. It is a popular and essential tool in conserving global address space in the face of IPv4 address exhaustion. One Internet-routable IP address of a NAT gateway can be used for an entire private network.\nAs network address translation modifies the IP address information in packets, NAT implementations may vary in their specific behavior in various addressing cases and their effect on network traffic. Vendors of equipment containing NAT implementations do not commonly document the specifics of NAT behavior.\nHistory.\nInternet Protocol version 4 (IPv4) uses 32-bit addresses, capable of uniquely addressing about 4.3 billion devices on the network. By 1992, it became evident that that would not be enough. The 1994 describes NAT as a \"short-term solution\" to the two most compelling problems facing the Internet Protocol at that time: IP address depletion and scaling in routing. By 2004, NAT had become widespread.\nThe technique also became known as IP masquerading. which suggests a technique that hides an entire IP address space, usually consisting of private IP addresses, behind a single IP address in another, usually public address space. Because of the popularity of this technique to conserve IPv4 address space, the term \"NAT\" became virtually synonymous with IP masquerading.\nIn 1996, port-address translation (PAT) was introduced, which expanded the translation of addresses to include port numbers.\nBasic NAT.\nThe simplest type of NAT provides a one-to-one translation of IP addresses (RFC 1631). refers to this type of NAT as \"basic NAT\", also called a \"one-to-one NAT\". In this type of NAT, only the IP addresses, IP header checksum, and any higher-level checksums that include the IP address are changed. Basic NAT can be used to interconnect two IP networks with incompatible addresses.\nOne-to-many NAT.\nMost network address translators map multiple private hosts to one publicly exposed IP address. \nIn a typical configuration, a local network uses one of the designated \"private\" IP address subnets (RFC 1918). The network has a router having network interfaces on both the private and the public network. The public address is typically assigned by an Internet service provider. As traffic passes from the private network to the Internet, NAT translates the source address in each packet from a private address to the router's public address. The NAT facility tracks each active connection. When the router receives inbound traffic from the Internet, it uses the connection tracking data obtained during the outbound phase to determine to which private address it should forward the reply.\nPackets passing from the private network to the public network will have their source address modified, while packets passing from the public network back to the private network will have their destination address modified. To avoid ambiguity in how replies are translated, further modifications to the packets are required. The vast bulk of Internet traffic uses Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) or User Datagram Protocol (UDP). For these protocols, the port numbers are changed so that the combination of IP address (within the IP header) and port number (within the Transport Layer header) on the returned packet can be unambiguously mapped to the corresponding private network destination. RFC 2663 uses the term network address and port translation (NAPT) for this type of NAT. Other names include port address translation (PAT), \"IP masquerading\", \"NAT overload\", and \"many-to-one NAT\". This is the most common type of NAT and has become synonymous with the term \"NAT\" in common usage.\nThis method allows communication through the router only when the conversation originates in the private network, since the initial originating transmission establishes the required information in the translation tables. Thus, a web browser within the private network is able to browse websites that are outside the network, whereas web browsers outside the network are unable to browse a website hosted within. Protocols not based on TCP and UDP require other translation techniques.\nThe primary benefit of one-to-many NAT is mitigation of IPv4 address exhaustion by allowing entire networks to be connected to the Internet using a single public IP address.\nMethods of translation.\nNetwork address and port translation may be implemented in several ways. Some applications that use IP address information may need to determine the external address of a network address translator. This is the address that its communication peers in the external network detect. Furthermore, it may be necessary to examine and categorize the type of mapping in use, for example when it is desired to set up a direct communication path between two clients both of which are behind separate NAT gateways.\nFor this purpose, RFC 3489 specified the protocol \"Simple Traversal of UDP over NATs\" (STUN) in 2003. It classified NAT implementations as \"full-cone NAT\", \"(address) restricted-cone NAT\", \"port-restricted cone NAT\" or \"symmetric NAT\", and proposed a methodology for testing a device accordingly. However, these procedures have since been deprecated from standards status, as the methods are inadequate to correctly assess many devices. RFC 5389 standardized new methods in 2008 and the acronym \"STUN\" since represents the new title of the specification: \"Session Traversal Utilities for NAT\".\nAs many NAT implementations combine multiple types, it is better to refer to specific individual NAT behavior instead of using the Cone/Symmetric terminology. RFC 4787 attempts to alleviate confusion by introducing standardized terminology for observed behaviors. For the first bullet in each row of the above table, the RFC would characterize Full-Cone, Restricted-Cone, and Port-Restricted-Cone NATs as having an \"Endpoint-Independent Mapping\", whereas it would characterize a Symmetric NAT as having an \"Address- and Port-Dependent Mapping\". For the second bullet in each row of the above table, RFC 4787 would also label Full-Cone NAT as having an \"Endpoint-Independent Filtering\", Restricted-Cone NAT as having an \"Address-Dependent Filtering\", Port-Restricted Cone NAT as having an \"Address- and Port-Dependent Filtering\", and Symmetric NAT as having either an \"Address-Dependent Filtering\" or \"Address- and Port-Dependent Filtering\". Other classifications of NAT behavior mentioned in the RFC include whether they preserve ports, when and how mappings are refreshed, whether external mappings can be used by internal hosts (i.e., its hairpinning behavior), and the level of determinism NATs exhibit when applying all these rules. Specifically, most NATs combine \"symmetric NAT\" for outgoing connections with \"static port mapping\", where incoming packets addressed to the external address and port are redirected to a specific internal address and port.\nNAT mapping vs NAT filtering.\nRFC 4787 distinguishes between NAT mapping and NAT filtering.\nSection 4.1 of the RFC covers NAT mapping and specifies the translation of an external IP address and port number into an internal IP address and port number. It defines endpoint-independent mapping, address-dependent mapping and address- and port-dependent mapping, explains that these three possible choices do not relate to the security of the NAT as security is determined by the filtering behavior and then specifies \"A NAT MUST have an 'Endpoint-Independent Mapping' behavior.\"\nSection 5 of the RFC covers NAT filtering and describes the criteria used by the NAT to filter packets originating from specific external endpoints. The options are endpoint-independent filtering, address-dependent filtering and address- and port-dependent filtering. Endpoint-independent filtering is recommended where maximum application transparency is required while address-dependent filtering is recommended where more stringent filtering behavior is most important.\nSome NAT devices are not compliant with RFC 4787 as they treat NAT mapping and filtering in the same way so that their configuration option for changing the NAT filtering method also changes the NAT mapping method (e.g. https://).\nType of NAT and NAT traversal, role of port preservation for TCP.\nNAT traversal problems arise when peers behind different NATs try to communicate. One way to solve this problem is to use port forwarding. Another way is to use various NAT traversal techniques. The most popular technique for TCP NAT traversal is TCP hole punching.\nTCP hole punching requires the NAT to follow the \"port preservation\" design for TCP. For a given outgoing TCP communication, the same port numbers are used on both sides of the NAT. NAT port preservation for outgoing TCP connections is crucial for TCP NAT traversal because, under TCP, one port can only be used for one communication at a time. Programs that bind distinct TCP sockets to ephemeral ports for each TCP communication, make NAT port prediction impossible for TCP.\nOn the other hand, for UDP, NATs do not need port preservation. Indeed, multiple UDP communications (each with a distinct endpoint) can occur on the same source port, and applications usually reuse the same UDP socket to send packets to distinct hosts. This makes port prediction straightforward, as it is the same source port for each packet.\nFurthermore, port preservation in NAT for TCP allows P2P protocols to offer less complexity and less latency because there is no need to use a third party (like STUN) to discover the NAT port since the application itself already knows the NAT port.\nHowever, if two internal hosts attempt to communicate with the same external host using the same port number, the NAT may attempt to use a different external IP address for the second connection or may need to forgo port preservation and remap the port., roughly 70% of the clients in peer-to-peer (P2P) networks employed some form of NAT.\nImplementation.\nEstablishing two-way communication.\nEvery TCP and UDP packet contains a source port number and a destination port number. Each of those packets is encapsulated in an IP packet, whose IP header contains a source IP address and a destination IP address. The IP address/protocol/port number triple defines an association with a network socket.\nFor publicly accessible services such as web and mail servers the port number is important. For example, port 443 connects through a socket to the web server software and port 465 to a mail server's SMTP daemon. The IP address of a public server is also important, similar in global uniqueness to a postal address or telephone number. Both IP address and port number must be correctly known by all hosts wishing to successfully communicate.\nPrivate IP addresses as described in RFC 1918 are usable only on private networks not directly connected to the internet. Ports are endpoints of communication unique to that host, so a connection through the NAT device is maintained by the combined mapping of port and IP address. A private address on the inside of the NAT is mapped to an external public address. Port address translation (PAT) resolves conflicts that arise when multiple hosts happen to use the same source port number to establish different external connections at the same time.\nTranslation process.\nWith NAT, all communications sent to external hosts actually contain the \"external\" IP address and port information of the NAT device instead of internal host IP addresses or port numbers. NAT only translates IP addresses and ports of its internal hosts, hiding the true endpoint of an internal host on a private network.\nWhen a computer on the private (internal) network sends an IP packet to the external network, the NAT device replaces the internal source IP address in the packet header with the external IP address of the NAT device. PAT may then assign the connection a port number from a pool of available ports, inserting this port number in the source port field. The packet is then forwarded to the external network. The NAT device then makes an entry in a translation table containing the internal IP address, original source port, and the translated source port. Subsequent packets from the same internal source IP address and port number are translated to the same external source IP address and port number. The computer receiving a packet that has undergone NAT establishes a connection to the port and IP address specified in the altered packet, oblivious to the fact that the supplied address is being translated.\nUpon receiving a packet from the external network, the NAT device searches the translation table based on the destination port in the packet header. If a match is found, the destination IP address and port number is replaced with the values found in the table and the packet is forwarded to the inside network. Otherwise, if the destination port number of the incoming packet is not found in the translation table, the packet is dropped or rejected because the PAT device doesn't know where to send it.\nRelated techniques.\nIEEE Reverse Address and Port Translation (RAPT or RAT) allows a host whose real IP address changes from time to time to remain reachable as a server via a fixed home IP address. Cisco's RAPT implementation is PAT or NAT overloading and maps multiple private IP addresses to a single public IP address. Multiple addresses can be mapped to a single address because each private address is tracked by a port number. PAT uses unique source port numbers on the inside global IP address to distinguish between translations. PAT attempts to preserve the original source port. If this source port is already used, PAT assigns the first available port number starting from the beginning of the appropriate port group 0\u2013511, 512\u20131023, or 1024\u201365535. When there are no more ports available and there is more than one external IP address configured, PAT moves to the next IP address to try to allocate the original source port again. This process continues until it runs out of available ports and external IP addresses.\nMapping of Address and Port is a Cisco proposal that combines Address plus Port translation with tunneling of the IPv4 packets over an ISP provider's internal IPv6 network. In effect, it is an (almost) stateless alternative to carrier-grade NAT and DS-Lite that pushes the IPv4 address/port translation function (and the maintenance of NAT state) entirely into the existing customer premises equipment NAT implementation. Thus avoiding the NAT444 and statefulness problems of carrier-grade NAT, and also provides a transition mechanism for the deployment of native IPv6 at the same time with very little added complexity.\nIssues and limitations.\nHosts behind NAT-enabled routers do not have end-to-end connectivity and cannot participate in some internet protocols. Services that require the initiation of TCP connections from the outside network, or that use stateless protocols such as those using UDP, can be disrupted. Unless the NAT router makes a specific effort to support such protocols, incoming packets cannot reach their destination. Some protocols can accommodate one instance of NAT between participating hosts (\"passive mode\" FTP, for example), sometimes with the assistance of an application-level gateway (see ), but fail when both systems are separated from the internet by NAT. The use of NAT also complicates tunneling protocols such as IPsec because NAT modifies values in the headers which interfere with the integrity checks done by IPsec and other tunneling protocols.\nEnd-to-end connectivity has been a core principle of the Internet, supported, for example, by the Internet Architecture Board. Current Internet architectural documents observe that NAT is a violation of the end-to-end principle, but that NAT does have a valid role in careful design. There is considerably more concern with the use of IPv6 NAT, and many IPv6 architects believe IPv6 was intended to remove the need for NAT.\nAn implementation that only tracks ports can be quickly depleted by internal applications that use multiple simultaneous connections such as an HTTP request for a web page with many embedded objects. This problem can be mitigated by tracking the destination IP address in addition to the port thus sharing a single local port with many remote hosts. This additional tracking increases implementation complexity and computing resources at the translation device.\nBecause the internal addresses are all disguised behind one publicly accessible address, it is impossible for external hosts to directly initiate a connection to a particular internal host. Applications such as VOIP, videoconferencing, and other peer-to-peer applications must use NAT traversal techniques to function.\nFragmentation and checksums.\nPure NAT, operating on IP alone, may or may not correctly parse protocols with payloads containing information about IP, such as ICMP. This depends on whether the payload is interpreted by a host on the \"inside\" or \"outside\" of the translation. Basic protocols such as TCP and UDP cannot function properly unless NAT takes action beyond the network layer.\nIP packets have a checksum in each packet header, which provides error detection only for the header. IP datagrams may become fragmented and it is necessary for a NAT to reassemble these fragments to allow correct recalculation of higher-level checksums and correct tracking of which packets belong to which connection.\nTCP and UDP have a checksum that covers all the data they carry, as well as the TCP or UDP header, plus a \"pseudo-header\" that contains the source and destination IP addresses of the packet carrying the TCP or UDP header. For an originating NAT to pass TCP or UDP successfully, it must recompute the TCP or UDP header checksum based on the translated IP addresses, not the original ones, and put that checksum into the TCP or UDP header of the first packet of the fragmented set of packets.\nAlternatively, the originating host may perform path MTU Discovery to determine the packet size that can be transmitted without fragmentation and then set the \"don't fragment\" (DF) bit in the appropriate packet header field. This is only a one-way solution, because the responding host can send packets of any size, which may be fragmented before reaching the NAT.\nVariant terms.\nDNAT.\nDestination network address translation (DNAT) is a technique for transparently changing the destination IP address of a routed packet and performing the inverse function for any replies. Any router situated between two endpoints can perform this transformation of the packet.\nDNAT is commonly used to publish a service located in a private network on a publicly accessible IP address. This use of DNAT is also called port forwarding, or DMZ when used on an entire server, which becomes exposed to the WAN, becoming analogous to an undefended military demilitarized zone (DMZ).\nSNAT.\nThe meaning of the term \"SNAT\" varies by vendor:\nSecure network address translation (SNAT) is part of Microsoft's Internet Security and Acceleration Server and is an extension to the NAT driver built into Microsoft Windows Server. It provides connection tracking and filtering for the additional network connections needed for the FTP, ICMP, H.323, and PPTP protocols as well as the ability to configure a transparent HTTP proxy server.\nDynamic network address translation.\nDynamic NAT, just like static NAT, is not common in smaller networks but is found within larger corporations with complex networks. Where static NAT provides a one-to-one internal to public static IP address mapping, dynamic NAT uses a \"group\" of public IP addresses.\nNAT hairpinning.\nNAT hairpinning, also known as NAT loopback or NAT reflection, is a feature in many consumer routers where a machine on the LAN is able to access another machine on the LAN via the external IP address of the LAN/router (with port forwarding set up on the router to direct requests to the appropriate machine on the LAN). This notion is officially described in 2008, .\nThe following describes an example network:\nIf a packet is sent to by a computer at , the packet would normally be routed to the default gateway (the router). A router with the NAT loopback feature detects that is the address of its WAN interface, and treats the packet as if coming from that interface. It determines the destination for that packet, based on DNAT (port forwarding) rules for the destination. If the data were sent to port 80 and a DNAT rule exists for port 80 directed to , then the host at that address receives the packet.\nIf no applicable DNAT rule is available, the router drops the packet. An ICMP Destination Unreachable reply may be sent. If any DNAT rules were present, address translation is still in effect; the router still rewrites the source IP address in the packet. The local computer () sends the packet as coming from , but the server () receives it as coming from . When the server replies, the process is identical to an external sender. Thus, two-way communication is possible between hosts inside the LAN network via the public IP address.\nNAT in IPv6.\nNetwork address translation is not commonly used in IPv6 because one of the design goals of IPv6 is to restore end-to-end network connectivity. The large addressing space of IPv6 obviates the need to conserve addresses and every device can be given a unique globally routable address. Use of unique local addresses in combination with network prefix translation can achieve results similar to NAT.\nThe large addressing space of IPv6 can still be defeated depending on the actual prefix length given by the carrier. It is not uncommon to be handed a /64 prefix \u2013 the smallest recommended subnet \u2013 for an entire home network, requiring a variety of techniques to be used to manually subdivide the range for all devices to remain reachable. Even actual IPv6-to-IPv6 NAT, NAT66, can turn out useful at times: the APNIC blog outlines a case where the author was only provided a single address (/128).\nApplications affected by NAT.\nSome application layer protocols, such as File Transfer Protocol (FTP) and Session Initiation Protocol (SIP), send explicit network addresses within their application data. File Transfer Protocol in active mode, for example, uses separate connections for control traffic (commands) and for data traffic (file contents). When requesting a file transfer, the host making the request identifies the corresponding data connection by its network layer and transport layer addresses. If the host making the request lies behind a simple NAT firewall, the translation of the IP address or TCP port number makes the information received by the server invalid. SIP commonly controls voice over IP calls, and suffer the same problem. SIP and its accompanying Session Description Protocol may use multiple ports to set up a connection and transmit voice stream via Real-time Transport Protocol. IP addresses and port numbers are encoded in the payload data and must be known before the traversal of NATs. Without special techniques, such as STUN, NAT behavior is unpredictable and communications may fail. Application Layer Gateway (ALG) software or hardware may correct these problems. An ALG software module running on a NAT firewall device updates any payload data made invalid by address translation. ALGs need to understand the higher-layer protocol that they need to fix, and so each protocol with this problem requires a separate ALG. For example, on many Linux systems, there are kernel modules called \"connection trackers\" that serve to implement ALGs. However, ALG cannot work if the protocol data is encrypted.\nAnother possible solution to this problem is to use NAT traversal techniques using protocols such as STUN or Interactive Connectivity Establishment (ICE), or proprietary approaches in a session border controller. NAT traversal is possible in both TCP- and UDP-based applications, but the UDP-based technique is simpler, more widely understood, and more compatible with legacy NATs. In either case, the high-level protocol must be designed with NAT traversal in mind, and it does not work reliably across symmetric NATs or other poorly behaved legacy NATs.\nOther possibilities are Port Control Protocol (PCP), NAT Port Mapping Protocol (NAT-PMP), or Internet Gateway Device Protocol but these require the NAT device to implement that protocol.\nMost client\u2013server protocols (FTP being the main exception), however, do not send layer 3 contact information and do not require any special treatment by NATs. In fact, avoiding NAT complications is practically a requirement when designing new higher-layer protocols today.\nNATs can also cause problems where IPsec encryption is applied and in cases where multiple devices such as SIP phones are located behind a NAT. Phones that encrypt their signaling with IPsec encapsulate the port information within an encrypted packet, meaning that NAT devices cannot access and translate the port. In these cases, the NAT devices revert to simple NAT operations. This means that all traffic returning to the NAT is mapped onto one client, causing service to more than one client behind the NAT to fail. There are a couple of solutions to this problem: one is to use TLS, which operates at layer 4 and does not mask the port number; another is to encapsulate the IPsec within UDP \u2013 the latter being the solution chosen by TISPAN to achieve secure NAT traversal, or a NAT with \"IPsec Passthru\" support; another is to use a session border controller to help traverse the NAT.\nInteractive Connectivity Establishment (ICE) is a NAT traversal technique that does not rely on ALG support.\nThe DNS protocol vulnerability announced by Dan Kaminsky on July 8, 2008, is indirectly affected by NAT port mapping. To avoid DNS cache poisoning, it is highly desirable not to translate UDP source port numbers of outgoing DNS requests from a DNS server behind a firewall that implements NAT. The recommended workaround for the DNS vulnerability is to make all caching DNS servers use randomized UDP source ports. If the NAT function de-randomizes the UDP source ports, the DNS server becomes vulnerable.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53039", "revid": "15454761", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53039", "title": "Key (cryptography)", "text": "Used for encoding or decoding ciphertext\nA key in cryptography is a piece of information, usually a string of numbers or letters that are stored in a file, which, when processed through a cryptographic algorithm, can encode or decode cryptographic data. Based on the used method, the key can be different sizes and varieties, but in all cases, the strength of the encryption relies on the security of the key being maintained. A key's security strength is dependent on its algorithm, the size of the key, the generation of the key, and the process of key exchange.\nScope.\nThe key is what is used to encrypt data from plaintext to ciphertext. There are different methods for utilizing keys and encryption.\nSymmetric cryptography.\nSymmetric cryptography refers to the practice of the same key being used for both encryption and decryption.\nAsymmetric cryptography.\nAsymmetric cryptography has separate keys for encrypting and decrypting. These keys are known as the public and private keys, respectively.\nPurpose.\nSince the key protects the confidentiality and integrity of the system, it is important to be kept secret from unauthorized parties. With public key cryptography, only the private key must be kept secret, but with symmetric cryptography, it is important to maintain the confidentiality of the key. Kerckhoff's principle states that the entire security of the cryptographic system relies on the secrecy of the key.\nKey sizes.\nKey size is the number of bits in the key defined by the algorithm. This size defines the upper bound of the cryptographic algorithm's security. The larger the key size, the longer it will take before the key is compromised by a brute force attack. Since perfect secrecy is not feasible for key algorithms, researches are now more focused on computational security.\nIn the past, keys were required to be a minimum of 40 bits in length, however, as technology advanced, these keys were being broken quicker and quicker. As a response, restrictions on symmetric keys were enhanced to be greater in size.\nCurrently, 2048 bit RSA is commonly used, which is sufficient for current systems. However, current RSA key sizes would all be cracked quickly with a powerful quantum computer.\n\"The keys used in public key cryptography have some mathematical structure. For example, public keys used in the RSA system are the product of two prime numbers. Thus public key systems require longer key lengths than symmetric systems for an equivalent level of security. 3072 bits is the suggested key length for systems based on factoring and integer discrete logarithms which aim to have security equivalent to a 128 bit symmetric cipher.\"\nKey generation.\nTo prevent a key from being guessed, keys need to be generated randomly and contain sufficient entropy. The problem of how to safely generate random keys is difficult and has been addressed in many ways by various cryptographic systems. A key can directly be generated by using the output of a Random Bit Generator (RBG), a system that generates a sequence of unpredictable and unbiased bits. A RBG can be used to directly produce either a symmetric key or the random output for an asymmetric key pair generation. Alternatively, a key can also be indirectly created during a key-agreement transaction, from another key or from a password.\nSome operating systems include tools for \"collecting\" entropy from the timing of unpredictable operations such as disk drive head movements. For the production of small amounts of keying material, ordinary dice provide a good source of high-quality randomness.\nEstablishment scheme.\nThe security of a key is dependent on how a key is exchanged between parties. Establishing a secured communication channel is necessary so that outsiders cannot obtain the key. A key establishment scheme (or key exchange) is used to transfer an encryption key among entities. Key agreement and key transport are the two types of a key exchange scheme that are used to be\u00a0 remotely exchanged between entities . In a key agreement scheme, a secret key, which is used between the sender and the receiver to encrypt and decrypt information, is set up to be sent indirectly. All parties exchange information (the shared secret) that permits each party to derive the secret key material. In a key transport scheme, encrypted keying material that is chosen by the sender is transported to the receiver. Either symmetric key or asymmetric key techniques can be used in both schemes.\nThe Diffie\u2013Hellman key exchange and Rivest-Shamir-Adleman (RSA) are the most two widely used key exchange algorithms. In 1976, Whitfield Diffie and Martin Hellman constructed the Diffie\u2013Hellman algorithm, which was the first public key algorithm. The Diffie\u2013Hellman key exchange protocol allows key exchange over an insecure channel by electronically generating a shared key between two parties. On the other hand, RSA is a form of the asymmetric key system which consists of three steps: key generation, encryption, and decryption.\nKey confirmation delivers an assurance between the key confirmation recipient and provider that the shared keying materials are correct and established. The National Institute of Standards and Technology recommends key confirmation to be integrated into a key establishment scheme to validate its implementations.\nManagement.\nKey management concerns the generation, establishment, storage, usage and replacement of cryptographic keys. A key management system (KMS) typically includes three steps of establishing, storing and using keys. The base of security for the generation, storage, distribution, use and destruction of keys depends on successful key management protocols.\nKey vs password.\nA password is a memorized series of characters including letters, digits, and other special symbols that are used to verify identity. It is often produced by a human user or a password management software to protect personal and sensitive information or generate cryptographic keys. Passwords are often created to be memorized by users and may contain non-random information such as dictionary words. On the other hand, a key can help strengthen password protection by implementing a cryptographic algorithm which is difficult to guess or replace the password altogether. A key is generated based on random or pseudo-random data and can often be unreadable to humans.\nA password is less safe than a cryptographic key due to its low entropy, randomness, and human-readable properties. However, the password may be the only secret data that is accessible to the cryptographic algorithm for information security in some applications such as securing information in storage devices. Thus, a deterministic algorithm called a key derivation function (KDF) uses a password to generate the secure cryptographic keying material to compensate for the password's weakness. Various methods such as adding a salt or key stretching may be used in the generation.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "53041", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53041", "title": "Asymmetric key algorithm", "text": ""}
{"id": "53042", "revid": "50153734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53042", "title": "Symmetric-key algorithm", "text": "Algorithm\nSymmetric-key algorithms are algorithms for cryptography that use the same cryptographic keys for both the encryption of plaintext and the decryption of ciphertext. The keys may be identical, or there may be a simple transformation to go between the two keys. The keys, in practice, represent a shared secret between two or more parties that can be used to maintain a private information link. The requirement that both parties have access to the secret key is one of the main drawbacks of symmetric-key encryption, in comparison to asymmetric-key encryption (also known as public-key encryption). However, symmetric-key encryption algorithms are usually better for bulk encryption. With exception of the one-time pad they have a smaller key size, which means less storage space and faster transmission. Due to this, asymmetric-key encryption is often used to exchange the secret key for symmetric-key encryption.\nTypes.\nSymmetric-key encryption can use either stream ciphers or block ciphers. \nStream ciphers encrypt the digits (typically bytes), or letters (in substitution ciphers) of a message one at a time. An example is ChaCha20. Substitution ciphers are well-known ciphers, but can be easily decrypted using a frequency table.\nBlock ciphers take a number of bits and encrypt them in a single unit, padding the plaintext to achieve a multiple of the block size. The Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) algorithm, approved by NIST in December 2001, uses 128-bit blocks.\nImplementations.\nExamples of popular symmetric-key algorithms include Twofish, Serpent, AES (Rijndael), Camellia, Salsa20, ChaCha20, Blowfish, CAST5, Kuznyechik, RC4, DES, 3DES, Skipjack, Safer, and IDEA.\nUse as a cryptographic primitive.\nSymmetric ciphers are commonly used to achieve other cryptographic primitives than just encryption.\nEncrypting a message does not guarantee that it will remain unchanged while encrypted. Hence, often a message authentication code is added to a ciphertext to ensure that changes to the ciphertext will be noted by the receiver. Message authentication codes can be constructed from an AEAD cipher (e.g. AES-GCM).\nHowever, symmetric ciphers cannot be used for non-repudiation purposes except by involving additional parties. See the http://.\nAnother application is to build hash functions from block ciphers. See one-way compression function for descriptions of several such methods.\nConstruction of symmetric ciphers.\nMany modern block ciphers are based on a construction proposed by Horst Feistel. Feistel's construction makes it possible to build invertible functions from other functions that are themselves not invertible.\nSecurity of symmetric ciphers.\nSymmetric ciphers have historically been susceptible to known-plaintext attacks, chosen-plaintext attacks, differential cryptanalysis and linear cryptanalysis. Careful construction of the functions for each round can greatly reduce the chances of a successful attack. It is also possible to increase the key length or the rounds in the encryption process to better protect against attack. This, however, tends to increase the processing power and decrease the speed at which the process runs due to the amount of operations the system needs to do.\nMost modern symmetric-key algorithms appear to be resistant to the threat of post-quantum cryptography. Quantum computers would exponentially increase the speed at which these ciphers can be decoded; notably, Grover's algorithm would take the square-root of the time traditionally required for a brute-force attack, although these vulnerabilities can be compensated for by doubling key length. For example, a 128 bit AES cipher would not be secure against such an attack as it would reduce the time required to test all possible iterations from over 10 quintillion years to about six months. By contrast, it would still take a quantum computer the same amount of time to decode a 256 bit AES cipher as it would a conventional computer to decode a 128 bit AES cipher. For this reason, AES-256 is believed to be \"quantum resistant\".\nKey establishment.\nSymmetric-key algorithms require both the sender and the recipient of a message to have the same secret key. All early cryptographic systems required either the sender or the recipient to somehow receive a copy of that secret key over a physically secure channel.\nNearly all modern cryptographic systems still use symmetric-key algorithms internally to encrypt the bulk of the messages, but they eliminate the need for a physically secure channel by using Diffie\u2013Hellman key exchange or some other public-key protocol to securely come to agreement on a fresh new secret key for each session/conversation (forward secrecy).\nKey generation.\nWhen used with asymmetric ciphers for key transfer, pseudorandom key generators are nearly always used to generate the symmetric cipher session keys. However, lack of randomness in those generators or in their initialization vectors is disastrous and has led to cryptanalytic breaks in the past. Therefore, it is essential that an implementation use a source of high entropy for its initialization.\nReciprocal cipher.\nA reciprocal cipher is a cipher where, just as one enters the plaintext into the cryptography system to get the ciphertext, one could enter the ciphertext into the same place in the system to get the plaintext. A reciprocal cipher is also sometimes referred as self-reciprocal cipher.\nPractically all mechanical cipher machines implement a reciprocal cipher, a mathematical involution on each typed-in letter.\nInstead of designing two kinds of machines, one for encrypting and one for decrypting, all the machines can be identical and can be set up (keyed) the same way.\nExamples of reciprocal ciphers include:\nThe majority of all modern ciphers can be classified as either a stream cipher, most of which use a reciprocal XOR cipher combiner, or a block cipher, most of which use a Feistel cipher or Lai\u2013Massey scheme with a reciprocal transformation in each round.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53043", "revid": "46907571", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53043", "title": "Lenin Peak", "text": "Mountain on the Kyrgyzstan\u2013Tajikistan border\nLenin Peak or Ibn Sina (Avicenna) Peak is a mountain in the Trans-Alay Range of the Pamir Mountains, in the Gorno-Badakhshan and Osh regions on the Kyrgyzstan\u2013Tajikistan border. At , it is the second-highest point of both countries (after Ismoil Somoni Peak in Tajikistan and Jengish Chokusu in Kyrgyzstan) and the tallest mountain of the Trans-Alay Range. It is considered one of the least technical 7,000 m peaks in the world to climb and has the most ascents of any peak over 7,000 metres, with hundreds of climbers attempting it annually.\nLenin Peak was thought to be the highest point in the Pamirs in Tajikistan until 1933, when Ismoil Somoni Peak (known as \"Stalin Peak\" at the time) was climbed and found to be more than 300 metres higher. Two mountains in the Pamirs in China, Kongur Tagh (7,649 m) and Muztagh Ata (7,546 m), are higher than the Tajik summits.\nNames.\nLenin Peak was originally named Mount Kaufmann after Konstantin Kaufman, the first Governor-General of Russian Turkestan. In 1928, the mountain was renamed Lenin Peak after the Russian revolutionary and first leader of the Soviet Union, Vladimir Lenin. In Tajikistan, the peak was renamed again in July 2006, and today it is officially called in Tajik \"Qullai Abuali ibni Sino\" (\"\u049b\u0443\u043b\u043b\u0430\u0438 \u0410\u0431\u04ef\u0430\u043b\u04e3 \u0438\u0431\u043d\u0438 \u0421\u0438\u043d\u043e\", Ibn Sina Peak or, alternatively, Avicenna Peak) after Abu Ali ibn Sina (Avicenna).\nIn Kyrgyzstan, the peak is still officially called \"Lenin Chokusu\" (\"\u041b\u0435\u043d\u0438\u043d \u0427\u043e\u043a\u0443\u0441\u0443\", Lenin Peak). However, in October 2017, Kyrgyz president Almazbek Atambayev called for renaming the peak \"Manas Peak\", after the hero of the Epic of Manas. A peak named \"Manas Peak\" already exists in Kyrgyzstan; it is a mountain of in the Talas Alatau range in Talas Region.\nLocal Kyrgyz names include Jel-Aidar (\"Wind's God\") and Achyk-Tash (\"Open Rock\"). \"Achik-Tash\", is also the name of a plateau and a base camp at an elevation of 3,600 m on a popular northern climbing route to Lenin Peak, which starts in the southern Kyrgyz city of Osh, a day's drive north of the border. Another suggested local name, Pik Kaman (\"wild pig\", \"boar\") probably belongs to an officially unnamed peak west of Lenin Peak.\nClimbing history and routes.\nInitial exploration of this part of Central Asia occurred in the period 1774\u201382. Arguably the first recorded travel through the region is the involuntary journey of the slave Filipp Efremov (an ethnic Russian), who escaped from slavery in Bukhara. He crossed the Fergana valley, then via Osh, the Chigirik Pass and Terekdavan Pass he reached the Kashgar and finally came over the Karakorum. He was the first European who crossed the Alai Mountains.\nScientific expeditions to the Alai Mountains began in 1871, when Alexei Pavlovich Fedchenko discovered the Trans-Alai (Zaalayskiy) Range and its main peak. The first geographical expedition which came nearest to the base of the future Lenin Peak in the early 20th century was arguably the expedition of Nikolai Leopol'dovich Korzhenevskiy.\nIn September 1928, three mountaineers\u2014the Germans Eugen Allwein and Karl Wien, and the Austrian Erwin Schneider\u2014from the Soviet-German scientific expedition made the first attempt to reach the highest point of the Trans-Alai Range, which at that time had the name Kaufman Peak. They started climbing upstream of the Saukdara river along the South slope of Trans-Alai Range also Trans-Alay Range. From the river head they continued climbing along the Greater Saukdara Glacier towards a saddle at an elevation of 5820 m (this saddle is also known as the Krilenko Pass). On September 25, 1928, they started climbing from the saddle along the NE Ridge and at 15.30 they reached the summit. At the time, Kaufman Peak was the highest summit reached in the world. Schneider himself broke that record two years later when he made the first ascent of Jongsong Peak. \nThe title Lenin Peak was first applied to the highest point of the Trans-Alai Range in the same year (1928). When it was renamed after Lenin it was believed to be the highest point in the USSR.\nOn September 8, 1934, at 16:20 Kasian Chernuha, Vitaly Abalakov and Ivan Lukin, three members of a Soviet expedition, reached the summit at an elevation of . Their attempt lasted for four days with three camps (5,700 m, 6,500 m and 7,000 m). The expedition started climbing from the Achik-Tash canyon in the Alai valley. The summit attempt itself was started along the Western ice slope of the Lenin glacier. They continued climbing along the North Face, passing the rocks that were later given the name Lipkin's Rocks. At the end of the second day they reached the crest of the NE ridge at an elevation of about 6500 m. During the following day and a half they climbed along the NE Ridge and, utterly exhausted, reached the summit.\nThe third ascent was three years later, in 1937, when eight Soviet climbers under the direction of Lev Barkhash reached the summit by the same route. This was at the beginning of mass political repressions in the Soviet Union and many of the most prominent Soviet climbers, including Lev Barkhash, were brought to trial.\nSubsequent attempts to climb Lenin Peak could not begin until 1950, when the USSR began to recover from the Second World War. On August 14, 1950, twelve climbers (V. Aksenov, K, Zaporojchenko, Y. Izrael, V. Kovalev, A. Kormshikov, Y. Maslov, E. Nagel, V. Narishkin, V. Nikonov, V. Nozdryuhin, I. Rojkov) under the direction of Vladimir Racek reached the summit for the fourth time.\nAll three Soviet expeditions including Racec's expedition of 1950 were by almost the same route via the NE Ridge.\nThe route which now is known as the classic route, via the Razdelnaya Peak and NW Ridge, was first climbed in 1954 by a team of Soviet climbers under the direction of V. Kovalev (P. Karpov, E. Nagel, V. Narishkin, V. Nozdryuhin).\nIn 1958 the first female ascent of the peak was achieved by Soviet Alpinist Ekaterina Mamleeva.\nIn 1960, a group of eight Soviet climbers made a successful direct climb along the North Face (15.08.1960).\nThere are 16 established routes, nine on the southern side and seven on the northern slopes. The peak is quite popular with climbers due to its easy access and some uncomplicated routes. However, the peak is not without its share of disasters.\nIn August 1974, an entire team of eight Russian women climbers died high on the mountain in a storm. Elwira Szatajewa maintained radio contact with base camp as her team-mates perished around her. In her final words she said, 'I'm alone now, with just a few minutes left to live. See you in eternity.'\nThe first high-speed ascent of Lenin Peak was completed in 1987. The team, led by Valery Khrichtchatyi, included G. Lunyakov, Z. Khalitov, Anatoli Boukreev, V. Suviga, Y. Moiseev and A. Tselischev. The climb beginning from ABC base camp (4400 m) to the summit and return to ABC base camp took 12 hours.\nUnder the leadership of Leonid Troshchinenko the team, composed of 19 mountaineers from Leningrad and three from Kazakhstan, made the first winter ascent of Lenin Peak in 1988. With temperatures hovering at -45\u00a0\u00b0C, only six men reached the summit: including Valery Khrichtchatyi, Balyberdin, S. Arsentiev, U. Moiseev, I. Tulaiev and V. Dedi.\nIn 1987 the first solo ascent was achieved by the great high altitude mountaineer Anatoli Boukreev. An avalanche triggered by an earthquake killed 43 climbers in 1990.\nAs it is now, considering the existing infrastructure and BC/ABC locations, there are three most attractive routes from the North (approximately indicated on the Scheme): Lipkin's rocks route and NE Ridge; the classic North Face route; the route via Razdelnaya Peak and the NW Ridge.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53044", "revid": "5230548", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53044", "title": "Public key algorithm", "text": ""}
{"id": "53045", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53045", "title": "File Allocation Table", "text": "File system used by MS-DOS and Windows 9x\nFile Allocation Table (FAT) is a file system developed for personal computers and was the default file system for the DOS and Windows 9x operating systems. Originally developed in 1977 for use on floppy disks, it was adapted for use on hard disks and other devices. The increase in disk drive capacity over time drove modifications to the design that resulted in versions: FAT12, FAT16, FAT32, and exFAT. \nFAT was replaced with NTFS as the default file system on Microsoft operating systems starting with Windows XP. Nevertheless, FAT continues to be commonly used on relatively small capacity solid-state storage technologies such as USB flash drives, SD cards, MultiMediaCards (MMC) and eMMC because of its compatibility across operating systems and embedded systems, and ease of implementation.\nUses.\nHistorical.\nFAT was used on hard disks throughout the DOS and Windows 9x eras. Microsoft introduced NTFS with the Windows NT platform in 1993, but FAT remained the standard for the home user until the introduction of Windows XP in 2001. Windows Me was the final version of Windows to use FAT as its default file system.\nFor floppy disks, FAT has been standardized as ECMA-107 and ISO/IEC\u00a09293:1994 (superseding ISO\u00a09293:1987). These standards cover FAT12 and FAT16 with only short 8.3 filename support; long filenames with VFAT were partially patented. While FAT12 is used on floppy disks, FAT16 and FAT32 are typically found on the larger media.\nModern.\nFAT is used internally for the EFI system partition in the boot stage of EFI-compliant computers.\nFAT is still used in drives expected to be used by multiple operating systems, such as in shared Windows and Linux environments. Microsoft Windows additionally comes with a pre-installed tool to convert a FAT file system into NTFS directly without the need to rewrite all files, though this cannot be reversed easily. \nThe FAT file system is used in removable media such as floppy disks, super-floppies, memory and flash memory cards or USB flash drives. FAT is supported by portable devices such as PDAs, digital cameras, camcorders, media players, mobile phones, game consoles, as well as embedded systems such as boomboxes and DVD players and vehicle audio systems with built-in USB ports and SD card readers.\nThe DCF file system adopted by almost all digital cameras since 1998 defines a logical file system with 8.3 filenames and makes the use of either FAT12, FAT16, FAT32 or exFAT mandatory for its physical layer for compatibility.\nTechnical details.\nThe file system uses an index table stored on the device to identify chains of data storage areas associated with a file, the \"File Allocation Table\" (\"FAT\"). The FAT is statically allocated at the time of formatting. The table is a linked list of entries for each \"cluster\", a contiguous area of disk storage. Each entry contains either the number of the next cluster in the file, or else a marker indicating the end of the file, unused disk space, or special reserved areas of the disk. The \"root directory\" of the disk contains the number of the first cluster of each file in that directory. The operating system can then traverse the FAT, looking up the cluster number of each successive part of the disk file as a \"cluster chain\" until the end of the file is reached. \"Sub-directories\" are implemented as special files containing the \"directory entries\" of their respective files.\nEach entry in the FAT linked list is a fixed number of bits: 12, 16 or 32. The maximum size of a file or a disk drive that can be accessed is the product of the largest number that can be stored in the entries (less a few values reserved to indicate unallocated space or the end of a list) and the size of the disk cluster. Even if only one byte of storage is needed to extend a file, an entire cluster must be allocated to it. As a result, large numbers of small files can result in clusters being allocated that may contain mostly \"empty\" data to meet the minimum cluster size.\nOriginally designed as an 8-bit file system, the maximum number of clusters must increase as disk drive capacity increases, and so the number of bits used to identify each cluster has grown. The successive major variants of the FAT format are named after the number of table element bits: 12 (FAT12), 16 (FAT16), and 32 (FAT32).\nVariants.\nThere are several variants of the FAT file system (e.g. FAT12, FAT16 and FAT32). FAT16 refers to both the original group of FAT file systems with 16-bit wide cluster entries and also to later variants. \"VFAT\" is an optional extension for long file names, which can work on top of any FAT file system. Volumes using VFAT long-filenames can be read also by operating systems not supporting the VFAT extension.\nOriginal 8-bit FAT.\nThe original FAT file system (or \"FAT structure\", as it was called initially) was designed and implemented by Marc McDonald, based on a series of discussions between McDonald and Bill Gates.\nIt was introduced with 8-bit table elements (and valid data cluster numbers up to codice_1) in a precursor to Microsoft's \"Standalone Disk BASIC-80\" for an 8080-based successor of the NCR 7200 model VI data-entry terminal, equipped with 8-inch (200\u00a0mm) floppy disks, in 1977 or 1978.\nIn 1978, \"Standalone Disk BASIC-80\" was ported to the 8086 using an emulator on a DEC PDP-10, since no real 8086 systems were available at this time.\nThe FAT file system was also used in Microsoft's MDOS/MIDAS, an operating system for 8080/Z80 platforms written by McDonald since 1979.\nThe \"Standalone Disk BASIC\" version supported three FATs, whereas this was a parameter for MIDAS. Reportedly, MIDAS was also prepared to support 10-bit, 12-bit and 16-bit FAT variants. While the size of directory entries was 16 bytes in \"Standalone Disk BASIC\", MIDAS instead occupied 32\u00a0bytes per entry.\nTim Paterson of Seattle Computer Products (SCP) was first introduced to Microsoft's FAT structure when he helped Bob O'Rear adapting the \"Standalone Disk BASIC-86\" emulator port onto SCP's S-100 bus 8086 CPU board prototype during a guest week at Microsoft in May 1979. The final product was shown at Lifeboat Associates' booth stand at the National Computer Conference in New York on June 4\u20137, 1979, where Paterson learned about the more sophisticated FAT implementation in MDOS/MIDAS and McDonald talked to him about the design of the file system.\nFAT12.\nBetween April and August 1980, while borrowing the FAT concept for SCP's own 8086 operating system QDOS 0.10, Tim Paterson extended the table elements to 12 bits, reduced the number of FATs to two, redefined the semantics of some of the reserved cluster values, and modified the disk layout, so that the root directory was now located between the FAT and the data area for his implementation of FAT12. Paterson also increased the nine-character (6.3) filename length limit to eleven characters to support CP/M-style 8.3 filenames and File Control Blocks. The format used in Microsoft \"Standalone Disk BASIC's\" 8-bit file system precursor was not supported by QDOS. By August 1980, QDOS had been renamed to 86-DOS. Starting with 86-DOS 0.42, the size and layout of directory entries was changed from 16\u00a0bytes to 32\u00a0bytes in order to add a file date stamp and increase the theoretical file size limit beyond the previous limit of 16\u00a0MB.\n86-DOS 1.00 became available in early 1981. Later in 1981, 86-DOS evolved into Microsoft's MS-DOS and IBM PC DOS.\nThe capability to read previously formatted volumes with 16-byte directory entries was dropped with MS-DOS 1.20.\nFAT12 used 12-bit entries for the cluster addresses; some values were reserved to mark the end of a chain of clusters, to mark unusable areas of the disk, or for other purposes, so the maximum number of clusters was limited to 4078. To conserve disk space, two 12-bit FAT entries used three consecutive 8-bit bytes on disk, requiring manipulation to unpack the 12-bit values. This was sufficient for the original floppy disk drives, and small hard disks up to 32 megabytes. The FAT16B version available with DOS\u00a03.31 supported 32-bit sector numbers, and so increased the volume size limit.\nAll the control structures fit inside the first track, to avoid head movement during read and write operations. Any bad sector in the control structures area would make the disk unusable. The DOS formatting tool rejected such disks completely. Bad sectors were allowed only in the file data area. Clusters containing bad sectors were marked unusable with the reserved value codice_2 in the FAT.\nWhile 86-DOS supported three disk formats (250.25\u00a0KB, 616\u00a0KB and 1232\u00a0KB, with FAT IDs codice_3 and codice_4) on 8-inch (200\u00a0mm) floppy drives, IBM PC\u00a0DOS 1.0, released with the original IBM Personal Computer in 1981, supported only an 8-sector floppy format with a formatted capacity of 160\u00a0KB (FAT ID codice_4) for single-sided 5.25-inch floppy drives, and PC\u00a0DOS 1.1 added support for a double-sided format with 320\u00a0KB (FAT ID codice_3). PC DOS 2.0 introduced support for 9-sector floppy formats with 180\u00a0KB (FAT ID codice_7) and 360\u00a0KB (FAT ID codice_8).\n86-DOS\u00a01.00 and PC\u00a0DOS 1.0 directory entries included only one date, the last modified date. PC\u00a0DOS 1.1 added the last modified time. PC\u00a0DOS 1.x file attributes included a hidden bit and system bit, with the remaining six bits undefined. At this time, DOS did not support sub-directories, but typically there were only a few dozen files on a diskette.\nThe PC XT was the first PC with an IBM-supplied hard drive, and PC\u00a0DOS 2.0 supported that hard drive with FAT12 (FAT ID codice_9). The fixed assumption of 8\u00a0sectors per clusters on hard disks practically limited the maximum partition size to 16\u00a0MB for 512\u00a0byte sectors and 4\u00a0KB clusters.\nThe \"BIOS Parameter Block\" (\"BPB\") was introduced with PC\u00a0DOS\u00a02.0 as well, and this version also added read-only, archive, volume label, and directory attribute bits for hierarchical sub-directories.\nMS-DOS 3.0 introduced support for high-density 1.2\u00a0MB 5.25-inch diskettes (media descriptor codice_10), which notably had 15\u00a0sectors per track, hence more space for the FATs.\nFAT12 remains in use on all common floppy disks, including 1.44\u00a0MB and later 2.88\u00a0MB disks (media descriptor byte codice_11).\nInitial FAT16.\nIn 1984, IBM released the PC AT, which required PC\u00a0DOS\u00a03.0 to access its 20\u00a0MB hard disk. Microsoft introduced MS-DOS\u00a03.0 in parallel. Cluster addresses were increased to 16-bit, allowing for up to 65,526\u00a0clusters per volume. However, the maximum possible number of sectors and the maximum partition size of 32\u00a0MB did not change. Although cluster addresses were 16\u00a0bits, this format was not what today is commonly understood as FAT16.\nA partition type codice_12 indicates this form of FAT16 with less than 65,536\u00a0sectors (less than 32\u00a0MB for sector size 512). The benefit of FAT16 was the use of smaller clusters, making disk usage more efficient, particularly for large numbers of files only a few hundred bytes in size.\nAs MS-DOS\u00a03.0 formatted all 16\u00a0MB-32\u00a0MB partitions in the FAT16 format, a 20\u00a0MB hard disk formatted under MS-DOS\u00a03.0 was not accessible by MS-DOS\u00a02.0. MS-DOS\u00a03.0 to MS-DOS\u00a03.30 could still access FAT12 partitions under 15\u00a0MB, but required all 16\u00a0MB-32\u00a0MB partitions to be FAT16, and so could not access MS-DOS\u00a02.0 partitions in this size range. MS-DOS\u00a03.31 and higher could access 16\u00a0MB-32\u00a0MB FAT12 partitions again.\nLogical sectored FAT.\nMS-DOS and PC\u00a0DOS implementations of FAT12 and FAT16 could not access disk partitions larger than 32 megabytes. Several manufacturers developed their own FAT variants within their OEM versions of MS-DOS.\nSome vendors (AST and NEC) supported eight, instead of the standard four, primary partition entries in their custom extended \"Master Boot Record\" (\"MBR\"), and they adapted MS-DOS to use more than a single primary partition.\nOther vendors worked around the volume size limits imposed by the 16-bit sector entries by increasing the apparent \"size\" of the sectors the file system operated on. These \"logical sectors\" were larger (up to 8192\u00a0bytes) than the \"physical sector\" size (still 512\u00a0bytes) on the disk. The DOS-BIOS or System BIOS would then combine multiple physical sectors into logical sectors for the file system to work with.\nThese changes were transparent to the file system implementation in the DOS kernel. The underlying DOS-BIOS translated these logical sectors into physical sectors according to partitioning information and the drive's physical geometry.\nThe drawback of this approach was increased memory used for sector buffering and deblocking. Since older DOS versions could not use large logical sectors, the OEMs introduced new partition IDs for their FAT variants in order to hide them from off-the-shelf issues of MS-DOS and PC DOS. Known partition IDs for logical sectored FATs include: codice_13 (Commodore MS-DOS 3.x), codice_14 (Leading Edge MS-DOS 3.x), codice_15 (AST MS-DOS 3.x), codice_16 (NEC MS-DOS 3.30), codice_17 (AT&amp;T MS-DOS 3.x), codice_18 (Tandy MS-DOS), codice_19 (Sperry IT MS-DOS 3.x, Unisys MS-DOS 3.3 \u2013 also used by Digital Research DOS Plus 2.1). OEM versions like Toshiba\u00a0MS-DOS, Wyse\u00a0MS-DOS\u00a03.2 and 3.3, as well as Zenith\u00a0MS-DOS are also known to have utilized logical sectoring.\nWhile non-standard and sub-optimal, these FAT variants are perfectly valid according to the specifications of the file system itself. Therefore, even if default issues of MS-DOS and PC\u00a0DOS were not able to cope with them, most of these vendor-specific FAT12 and FAT16 variants can be mounted by more flexible file system implementations in operating systems such as DR-DOS, simply by changing the partition ID to one of the recognized types. Also, if they no longer need to be recognized by their original operating systems, existing partitions can be \"converted\" into FAT12 and FAT16 volumes more compliant with versions of MS-DOS/PC\u00a0DOS\u00a04.0\u20136.3, which do not support sector sizes different from 512\u00a0bytes, by switching to a BPB with 32-bit entry for the number of sectors, as introduced since DOS\u00a03.31 (see FAT16B below), keeping the cluster size and reducing the logical sector size in the BPB down to 512\u00a0bytes, while at the same time increasing the counts of logical sectors per cluster, reserved logical sectors, total logical sectors, and logical sectors per FAT by the same factor.\nA parallel development in MS-DOS / PC\u00a0DOS which allowed an increase in the maximum possible disk size was the extension of the number of FAT partitions on a hard disk beyond the earlier 4, and the replacement of \"installable block devices\" with native DOS FAT partitions. To allow the use of more FAT partitions in a compatible way, a new partition type was introduced in PC\u00a0DOS\u00a03.2 (1986), the \"extended partition\" (EBR), which is a container for an additional partition called \"logical drive\". Since PC\u00a0DOS\u00a03.3 (April 1987), there is another, optional extended partition containing the next \"logical drive\", and so on. The MBR of a hard disk can either define up to four primary partitions, or an extended partition in addition to up to three primary partitions.\nFinal FAT16.\nIn November 1987, Compaq Personal Computer DOS 3.31 (a modified OEM version of MS-DOS\u00a03.3 released by Compaq with their machines) introduced what today is simply known as \"the FAT16\" format, with the expansion of the 16-bit disk sector count to 32\u00a0bits in the BPB.\nAlthough the on-disk changes were minor, the entire DOS disk driver had to be converted to use 32-bit sector numbers, a task complicated by the fact that it was written in 16-bit assembly language.\nThe result was initially called the \"DOS 3.31 Large File System\". Microsoft's codice_20 tool refers to type codice_21 as \"BigFAT\", whereas some older versions of codice_22 described it as \"BIGDOS\". Technically, it is known as FAT16B.\nSince older versions of DOS were not designed to cope with more than 65,535\u00a0sectors, it was necessary to introduce a new partition type for this format in order to hide it from pre-3.31 issues of DOS. The original form of FAT16 (with less than 65,536 sectors) had a partition type codice_12. To deal with disks larger than this, type codice_21 was introduced to indicate 65,536 or more sectors. In addition to this, the disk driver was expanded to cope with more than 65,535\u00a0sectors as well. The only other difference between the original FAT16 and the newer FAT16B format is the usage of a newer BPB format with 32-bit sector entry. Therefore, newer operating systems supporting the FAT16B format can cope also with the original FAT16 format without any necessary changes.\nIf partitions to be used by pre-DOS\u00a03.31 issues of DOS need to be created by modern tools, the only criteria theoretically necessary to meet are a sector count of less than 65536, and the usage of the old partition ID (codice_12). In practice however, type codice_26 and codice_12 primary partitions should not be physically located outside the first 32\u00a0MB of the disk, due to other restrictions in MS-DOS\u00a02.x, which could not cope with them otherwise.\nIn 1988, the FAT16B improvement became more generally available through DR\u00a0DOS\u00a03.31, PC\u00a0DOS\u00a04.0, OS/2\u00a01.1, and MS-DOS\u00a04.0. The limit on partition size was dictated by the 8-bit signed count of sectors per cluster, which originally had a maximum power-of-two value of 64. With the standard hard disk sector size of 512\u00a0bytes, this gives a maximum of 32\u00a0KB cluster size, thereby fixing the \"definitive\" limit for the FAT16 partition size at 2\u00a0GB for sector size 512. On magneto-optical media, which can have 1 or 2\u00a0KB sectors instead of 0.5\u00a0KB, this size limit is proportionally larger.\nMuch later, Windows\u00a0NT increased the maximum cluster size to 64\u00a0KB, by considering the sectors-per-cluster count as unsigned. However, the resulting format was not compatible with any other FAT implementation of the time, and it generated greater internal fragmentation. Windows 98, SE and ME also supported reading and writing this variant, but its disk utilities did not work with it and some FCB services are not available for such volumes. This contributes to a confusing compatibility situation.\nPrior to 1995, versions of DOS accessed the disk via CHS addressing only. When Windows\u00a095 (MS-DOS 7.0) introduced LBA disk access, partitions could start being physically located outside the first c. 8\u00a0GB of this disk and thereby out of the reach of the traditional CHS addressing scheme. Partitions partially or fully located beyond the CHS barrier therefore had to be hidden from non-LBA-enabled operating systems by using the new partition type codice_28 in the partition table instead. FAT16 partitions using this partition type are also named FAT16X. The only difference, compared to previous FAT16 partitions, is the fact that some CHS-related geometry entries in the BPB record, namely the number of sectors per track and the number of heads, may contain no or misleading values and should not be used.\nThe number of root directory entries available for FAT12 and FAT16 is determined when the volume is formatted, and is stored in a 16-bit field. For a given number codice_29 and sector size codice_30, the number codice_31 of root directory sectors is codice_32, and codice_29 is normally chosen to fill these sectors, i.e., codice_34. FAT12 and FAT16 media typically use 512 root directory entries on non-floppy media. Some third-party tools, like mkdosfs, allow the user to set this parameter.\nFAT32.\nIn order to overcome the volume size limit of FAT16, while at the same time allowing DOS real-mode code to handle the format, Microsoft designed a new version of the file system, FAT32, which supported an increased number of possible clusters, but could reuse most of the existing code, so that the conventional memory footprint was increased by less than 5\u00a0KB under DOS. Cluster values are represented by 32-bit numbers, of which 28 bits are used to hold the cluster number.\nMaximal sizes.\nThe FAT32 boot sector uses a 32-bit field for the sector count, limiting the maximal FAT32 volume size to 2\u00a0terabytes with a sector size of 512\u00a0bytes. The maximum FAT32 volume size is 16\u00a0TB with a sector size of 4,096\u00a0bytes. The built-in Windows shell disk format tool on Windows NT arbitrarily only supports volume sizes up to 32\u00a0GB, but Windows supports reading and writing to preexisting larger FAT32 volumes, and these can be created with the command prompt, PowerShell or third-party tools, or by formatting the volume on a non-Windows system or on a Windows 9x system with FAT32 support and then transferring it to the Windows NT system. In August 2024, Microsoft released an update to Windows 11 preview builds that allows for the creation of FAT32 partitions up to 2TB in size. \nThe maximal possible size for a file on a FAT32 volume is 4\u00a0GB minus 1 byte, or 4,294,967,295 (232\u00a0\u2212\u00a01) bytes. This limit is a consequence of the 4-byte file length entry in the directory table and would also affect relatively huge FAT16 partitions enabled by a sufficient sector size.\nLike FAT12 and FAT16, FAT32 does not include direct built-in support for long filenames, but FAT32 volumes can optionally hold VFAT long filenames in addition to short filenames in exactly the same way as VFAT long filenames have been optionally implemented for FAT12 and FAT16 volumes.\nDevelopment.\nFAT32 was introduced with Windows 95 OSR2 (MS-DOS 7.1) in 1996, although reformatting was needed to use it, and DriveSpace 3 (the version that came with Windows 95 OSR2 and Windows 98) never supported it. Windows 98 introduced a utility to convert existing hard disks from FAT16 to FAT32 without loss of data.\nIn the Windows NT line, native support for FAT32 arrived in Windows 2000. A free FAT32 driver for Windows NT 4.0 was available from Winternals, a company later acquired by Microsoft. The acquisition of the driver from official sources is no longer possible. Since 1998, Caldera's dynamically loadable DRFAT32 driver could be used to enable FAT32 support in DR-DOS. The first version of DR-DOS to natively support FAT32 and LBA access was OEM DR-DOS 7.04 in 1999. That same year IMS introduced native FAT32 support with REAL/32 7.90, and IBM 4690 OS added FAT32 support with version 2. Ahead Software provided another dynamically loadable FAT32.EXE driver for DR-DOS 7.03 with Nero Burning ROM in 2004. IBM introduced native FAT32 support with OEM PC DOS 7.1 in 1999.\nTwo partition types have been reserved for FAT32 partitions, codice_35 and codice_36. The latter type is also named FAT32X in order to indicate usage of LBA disk access instead of CHS. On such partitions, CHS-related geometry entries, namely the CHS sector addresses in the MBR as well as the number of sectors per track and the number of heads in the EBPB record, may contain no or misleading values and should not be used.\nExtensions.\nExtended attributes.\nOS/2 heavily depends on extended attributes (EAs) and stores them in a hidden file called \"codice_37\" in the root directory of the FAT12 or FAT16 volume. This file is indexed by two previously reserved bytes in the file's (or directory's) directory entry at offset codice_15. In the FAT32 format, these bytes hold the upper 16\u00a0bits of the starting cluster number of the file or directory, hence making it impossible to store OS/2 EAs on FAT32 using this method.\nHowever, the third-party FAT32 installable file system (IFS) driver FAT32.IFS version 0.70 and higher by Henk Kelder &amp; Netlabs for OS/2, eComStation and ArcaOS stores extended attributes in extra files with filenames having the string \"codice_39\" appended to the regular filename of the file to which they belong. The driver also utilizes the byte at offset codice_36 in directory entries to store a special mark byte indicating the presence of extended attributes to help speed up things. (This extension is critically incompatible with the FAT32+ method to store files larger than 4\u00a0GB minus 1 on FAT32 volumes.)\nExtended attributes are accessible via the Workplace Shell desktop, through REXX scripts, and many system GUI and command-line utilities (such as 4OS2).\nTo accommodate its OS/2 subsystem, Windows NT supports the handling of extended attributes in HPFS, NTFS, FAT12 and FAT16. It stores EAs on FAT12, FAT16 and HPFS using exactly the same scheme as OS/2, but does not support any other kind of ADS as held on NTFS volumes. Trying to copy a file with any ADS other than EAs from an NTFS volume to a FAT or HPFS volume gives a warning message with the names of the ADSs that will be lost. It does not support the FAT32.IFS method to store EAs on FAT32 volumes.\nWindows 2000 onward acts exactly as Windows NT, except that it ignores EAs when copying to FAT32 without any warning (but shows the warning for other ADSs, like \"Macintosh Finder Info\" and \"Macintosh Resource Fork\").\nCygwin uses \"codice_37\" files as well.\nLong file names.\nOne of the user experience goals for the designers of Windows 95 was the ability to use long filenames (LFNs\u2014up to 255 UCS-2 code units long), in addition to classic 8.3 filenames (SFNs). For backward and forward compatibility, LFNs were implemented as an optional extension on top of the existing FAT file system structures using a workaround in the way directory entries are laid out.\nThis transparent method to store long file names in the existing FAT file systems without altering their data structures is usually known as VFAT (for \"Virtual FAT\") after the Windows 95 virtual device driver.\nNon VFAT-enabled operating systems can still access the files under their short file name alias without restrictions; however, the associated long file names may be lost when files with long filenames are copied under non VFAT-aware operating systems.\nIn Windows\u00a0NT, support for VFAT long filenames began with version 3.5.\nLinux provides a VFAT filesystem driver to work with FAT volumes with VFAT long filenames. For some time, a UVFAT driver was available to provide combined support for UMSDOS-style permissions with VFAT long filenames.\nOS/2 added long filename support to FAT using extended attributes (EA) before the introduction of VFAT. Thus, VFAT long filenames are invisible to OS/2, and EA long filenames are invisible to Windows; therefore, experienced users of both operating systems would have to manually rename the files.\nHuman68K supported up to 18.3 filenames and (Shift JIS) Kanji characters in a proprietary FAT file system variant.\nIn order to support Java applications, the FlexOS-based IBM 4690 OS version 2 introduced its own virtual file system (VFS) architecture to store long filenames in the FAT file system in a backwards-compatible fashion. If enabled, the virtual filenames (VFN) are available under separate logical drive letters, whereas the real filenames (RFN) remain available under the original drive letters.\nForks and alternate data streams.\nThe FAT file system itself is not designed for supporting alternate data streams (ADS), but some operating systems that heavily depend on them have devised various methods for handling them on FAT volumes. Such methods either store the additional information in extra files and directories (classic Mac OS and macOS), or give new semantics to previously unused fields of the FAT on-disk data structures (OS/2 and Windows NT).\nMac\u00a0OS using PC Exchange stores its various dates, file attributes and long filenames in a hidden file called \"codice_42\", and resource forks (a common Mac\u00a0OS ADS) in a subdirectory called \"codice_43\", in every directory where they are used. From PC\u00a0Exchange\u00a02.1 onwards, they store the Mac\u00a0OS long filenames as standard FAT long filenames and convert FAT filenames longer than 31 characters to unique 31-character filenames, which can then be made visible to Macintosh applications.\nmacOS stores resource forks and metadata (file attributes, other ADS) using AppleDouble format in a hidden file with a name constructed from the owner filename prefixed with \"codice_44\", and Finder stores some folder and file metadata in a hidden file called \"codice_45\" (but note that Finder uses codice_45 even on macOS' native filesystem, HFS+).\nUMSDOS permissions and filenames.\nEarly Linux distributions also supported a format known as UMSDOS, a FAT variant with Unix file attributes (such as long file name and access permissions) stored in a separate file called \"codice_47\". UMSDOS fell into disuse after VFAT was released and it is not enabled by default in Linux from version 2.5.7 onwards. For some time, Linux also provided combined support for UMSDOS-style permissions and VFAT long filenames through UVFAT.\nFAT+.\nIn 2007 the open FAT+ draft proposed how to store larger files up to 256\u00a0GB minus 1\u00a0byte, or 274,877,906,943 (238\u00a0\u2212\u00a01) bytes, on slightly modified and otherwise backward-compatible FAT32 volumes, but imposes a risk that disk tools or FAT32 implementations not aware of this extension may truncate or delete files exceeding the normal FAT32 file size limit. Support for FAT32+ and FAT16+ is limited to some versions of DR-DOS and not available in mainstream operating systems. (This extension is critically incompatible with the codice_48 option of the FAT32.IFS method to store OS/2 extended attributes on FAT32 volumes.)\nDerivatives.\nTurbo FAT.\nIn its NetWare File System (NWFS) Novell implemented a heavily modified variant of a FAT file system for the NetWare operating system. For larger files it utilized a performance feature named Turbo FAT.\nFATX.\nFATX is a family of file systems designed for Microsoft's Xbox video game console hard disk drives and memory cards, introduced in 2001.\nWhile resembling the same basic design ideas as FAT16 and FAT32, the FATX16 and FATX32 on-disk structures are simplified, but fundamentally incompatible with normal FAT16 and FAT32 file systems, making it impossible for normal FAT file system drivers to mount such volumes.\nThe non-bootable superblock sector is 4\u00a0KB in size and holds an 18\u00a0byte large BPB-like structure completely different from normal BPBs. Clusters are typically 16\u00a0KB in size and there is only one copy of the FAT on the Xbox. Directory entries are 64\u00a0bytes in size instead of the normal 32\u00a0bytes. Files can have filenames up to 42 characters long using the OEM character set and be up to 4\u00a0GB minus 1\u00a0byte in size. The on-disk timestamps hold creation, modification and access dates and times but differ from FAT: in FAT, the epoch is 1980; in FATX, the epoch is 2000. On the Xbox 360, the epoch is 1980.\nexFAT.\nexFAT is a file system introduced with Windows Embedded CE 6.0 in November 2006 and brought to the Windows\u00a0NT family with Vista Service Pack 1 and Windows XP Service Pack 3 (or separate installation of Windows\u00a0XP Update KB955704). It is loosely based on the File Allocation Table architecture, but incompatible, proprietary and protected by patents.\nexFAT is intended for use on flash drives and memory cards such as SDXC and Memory Stick XC, where FAT32 is otherwise used. Vendors usually pre-format SDXC cards with it. Its main benefit is its exceeding of the 4\u00a0GB file size limit, as file size references are stored with eight instead of four bytes, increasing the limit to 264\u00a0\u2212\u00a01 bytes.\nMicrosoft's GUI and command-line format utilities offer it as an alternative to NTFS (and, for smaller partitions, to FAT16B and FAT32). The MBR partition type is codice_49 (the same as used for IFS, HPFS, and NTFS). Logical geometry information located in the VBR is stored in a format not resembling any kind of BPB.\nIn early 2010, the file system was reverse-engineered by the SANS Institute. On August 28, 2019, Microsoft published the technical specification for exFAT so that it can be used in the Linux kernel and other operating systems.\nPatents.\nMicrosoft applied for, and was granted, a series of patents for key parts of the FAT file system in the mid-1990s. All four pertain to long-filename extensions to FAT first seen in Windows 95: U.S. patent 5,579,517, U.S. patent 5,745,902, U.S. patent 5,758,352, U.S. patent 6,286,013 (all expired since 2013).\nOn December 3, 2003, Microsoft announced that it would be offering licenses for use of its FAT specification and \"associated intellectual property\", at the cost of a US$ royalty per unit sold, with a US$ maximum royalty per license agreement. To this end, Microsoft cited four patents on the FAT file system as the basis of its intellectual property claims.\nIn the EFI FAT32 specification, Microsoft specifically grants a number of rights, which many readers have interpreted as permitting operating system vendors to implement FAT. Non-Microsoft patents affecting FAT include: U.S. patent 5,367,671, specific to the OS/2 extended object attributes (expired in 2011).\nChallenges and lawsuits.\nThe Public Patent Foundation (PUBPAT) submitted evidence to the US Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) in 2004 disputing the validity of U.S. patent 5,579,517, including prior art references from Xerox and IBM. The USPTO opened an investigation and concluded by rejecting all claims in the patent. The next year, the USPTO further announced that following the re-examination process, it affirmed the rejection of '517 and additionally found U.S. patent 5,758,352 invalid on the grounds that the patent had incorrect assignees.\nHowever, in 2006, the USPTO ruled that features of Microsoft's implementation of the FAT system were \"novel and non-obvious\", reversing both earlier decisions and leaving the patents valid.\nIn February 2009, Microsoft filed a patent infringement lawsuit against TomTom alleging that the device maker's products infringe on patents related to VFAT long filenames. As some TomTom products are based on Linux, this marked the first time that Microsoft tried to enforce its patents against the Linux platform. The lawsuit was settled out of court the following month with an agreement that Microsoft be given access to four of TomTom's patents, that TomTom will drop support for the VFAT long filenames from its products, and that in return Microsoft not seek legal action against TomTom for the five-year duration of the settlement agreement.\nIn October 2010, Microsoft filed a patent infringement lawsuit against Motorola alleging several patents (including two of the VFAT patents) were not licensed for use in the Android operating system. They also submitted a complaint to the ITC.\nDevelopers of open source software have designed methods intended to circumvent Microsoft's patents.\nIn 2013, patent EP0618540 \"common name space for long and short filenames\" (expired since 2014) was invalidated in Germany. After the appeal was withdrawn, this judgment became final on 28 October 2015."}
{"id": "53047", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53047", "title": "Joan Collins", "text": "English actress and writer (born 1933)\nDame Joan Henrietta Collins (born 23 May 1933) is an English actress, author and columnist. She is the recipient of several accolades, including a Golden Globe Award, a People's Choice Award, two Soap Opera Digest Awards and a Primetime Emmy Award nomination. In 1983, Collins was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. She has been recognised for her philanthropy, particularly her advocacy towards causes relating to children, which has earned her many honours. In 2015, she was made a Dame by Queen Elizabeth II for her charitable services, presented to her by the Prince of Wales.\nCollins trained as an actress at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art. She signed to The Rank Organisation at the age of 17 and had small roles in the British films \"Lady Godiva Rides Again\" (1951) and \"The Woman's Angle\" (1952) before taking on a supporting role in \"Judgment Deferred\" (1952). She went under contract to 20th Century Fox in 1955, and in that same year she starred as Evelyn Nesbit in \"The Girl in the Red Velvet Swing\", Elizabeth Raleigh in \"The Virgin Queen\" and Princess Nellifer in \"Land of the Pharaohs\", the latter garnering a cult following. Collins continued to take on film roles throughout the late 1950s, appearing in \"The Opposite Sex\" (1956), \"Sea Wife\" (1957), and \"The Wayward Bus\" (1957). After starring in the epic film \"Esther and the King\" (1960), she was, upon request, released from her contract with 20th Century Fox.\nCollins appeared only in a few film roles in the 1960s, notably starring in \"Seven Thieves\" (1960), \"The Road to Hong Kong\" (1962), and \"Warning Shot\" (1967). She also appeared in an episode of \"Star Trek\" (1967) and in \"Subterfuge\" (1968). She began to take on local roles again back in Britain in the 1970s, appearing in the films \"Revenge\", \"Quest for Love\" (both 1971), \"Tales from the Crypt\", \"Fear in the Night\" (both 1972), \"Dark Places\" and \"Tales That Witness Madness\" (both 1973), as well as \"Empire of the Ants\" (1977), which earned her a Saturn Award nomination, \"The Stud\", \"Zero to Sixty\" (both 1978), \"Game for Vultures\", and \"The Bitch\" (both 1979).\nFrom 1981 to 1989, Collins starred as Alexis Colby in the soap opera \"Dynasty\", which made her an international superstar. It brought her critical acclaim, winning her the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Television Series \u2013 Drama in 1982, and earning her a nomination for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series in 1984.\nIn the 1990s and 2000s, Collins worked sporadically in acting. She took fewer film roles, most notably appearing in \"The Flintstones in Viva Rock Vegas\" (2000) and the TV movie \"These Old Broads\" (2001) alongside Elizabeth Taylor, Debbie Reynolds and Shirley MacLaine. She made her comeback to mainstream television in the 2010s, taking on recurring roles in the series \"Happily Divorced\" (2011\u20132013), \"The Royals\" (2014\u20132018), \"Benidorm\" (2014\u20132017) and \"\" (2018). Her first starring film role since the 1980s was \"The Time of Their Lives\" (2017), and she has also appeared in various independent films, which includes the critically acclaimed \"Gerry\" (2018).\nEarly life.\nCollins was born in Paddington, London on 23 May 1933, and brought up in Maida Vale, the daughter of Elsa Collins (n\u00e9e Bessant), a dance teacher, and Joseph William Collins, a talent agent (whose clients would later include Shirley Bassey, the Beatles and Tom Jones). Her father, a native of South Africa, was Jewish, and her British mother was Anglican. She had two younger siblings, Jackie, a novelist, and Bill, a property agent. She was educated at the Francis Holland School, an independent day school for girls in London. Collins made her stage debut in the Henrik Ibsen play \"A Doll's House\" at the age of nine, and at the age of 16 trained as an actress at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (RADA) in London. At the age of 17, Collins was signed to the Rank Organisation, a British film studio.\nActing career.\n1950s.\nAfter signing with Rank, Collins appeared in many British films. Her feature debut as a film extra playing a beauty contestant in \"Lady Godiva Rides Again\" (1951) which featured Diana Dors. Collins followed up with \"The Woman's Angle\" (1952) a minor role as a Greek maid. Next was a more significant role as a gangster's moll in \"Judgment Deferred\" (1952).\nCollins's big break came with a major, highly publicised role as a juvenile delinquent in \"I Believe in You\" (1952). Her success in the part led to her initial stardom and the press nickname \"Britain's Bad Girl\". Her subsequent films whilst under contract to Rank included \"Decameron Nights\" (1953) with Joan Fontaine; England's first X certificate drama, \"Cosh Boy\" (1953), directed by Lewis Gilbert; \"Turn the Key Softly\" (1953), a drama about three women released from prison on the same day; and the boxing saga \"The Square Ring\" (1953).\nCollins was top-billed in the desert island comedy \"Our Girl Friday\" (1953), co starring Kenneth More. She was directed again by Lewis Gilbert in \"The Good Die Young\" (1954) with Laurence Harvey and Gloria Grahame. Between films, she appeared in several plays in London including \"The Seventh Veil\" (1952), \"Jassy\" (1952), \"Claudia and David\" (1954), and \"The Skin of Our Teeth\" (1954), as well as a UK tour of \"The Praying Mantis\" (1953).\nIn 1954, Collins was chosen by American director Howard Hawks to star as the scheming Princess Nellifer in her first international production, \"Land of the Pharaohs\". The lavish Warner Brothers historical epic was unsuccessful upon release but has been lauded by Martin Scorsese and French critics supporting the auteur theory for numerous elements of its physical production. Danny Peary in his book \"Cult Movies\" (1981), selected it as a cult classic. Collins's sultry performance so impressed 20th Century Fox chief Darryl Zanuck that he signed the young star to a seven-year contract with the Hollywood studio.\nCollins made her Hollywood film debut in the lavish historical drama \"The Virgin Queen\" (1955). The British newcomer was given equal billing with established stars Bette Davis and Richard Todd. The same year, Collins was cast in the starring role of Evelyn Nesbit in \"The Girl in the Red Velvet Swing\" with Ray Milland and Farley Granger. The part had originally been intended for Marilyn Monroe, however problems between Monroe and Fox led to Collins gaining the role.\nMGM borrowed Collins for \"The Opposite Sex\" (1956), a musical remake of \"The Women\" (1939) in which she was cast as the gold digging Crystal, the role played by Joan Crawford in the original. She then starred as a young nun in \"Sea Wife\" (1956), top-billed over co-star Richard Burton, followed by the all-star \"Island in the Sun\" (1957), which was a major box-office success. The film earned $5,550,000 worldwide, and finished as the sixth-highest-grossing film of 1957. In 1957, she was top-billed over Jayne Mansfield in the film version of John Steinbeck's \"The Wayward Bus\", which despite disappointing reviews was nominated for the Golden Berlin Bear Award at the 7th Berlin International Film Festival. She then starred opposite Robert Wagner in the espionage thriller \"Stopover Tokyo\" (1957), and was Gregory Peck's leading lady in the Western drama \"The Bravados\" (1958). The Leo McCarey comedy \"Rally Round the Flag, Boys\" (1958) cast Collins as a temptress out to seduce Paul Newman away from Joanne Woodward. Next came the tense crime caper \"Seven Thieves\" (1960) opposite Edward G. Robinson and Rod Steiger.\n1960s.\nIn 1960, Collins became increasingly disillusioned with 20th Century Fox when, having been the original choice to play the title role in \"Cleopatra\", the part went instead to Elizabeth Taylor. Collins withdrew from the studio's production of \"Sons and Lovers\", and requested a release from her contract, but agreed to star in one last film for Fox, top-billed again in the biblical epic \"Esther and the King\" (1960).\nIn 1961, she returned to London to star opposite Bing Crosby and Bob Hope in the last of that film duo's \"road\" pictures, \"The Road to Hong Kong\" (1962). Former \"road\" leading lady Dorothy Lamour was relegated to a guest appearance in the film. In Italy, Collins starred in \"Hard Time for Princes\" (1965); back in the US she played David Janssen's wife in the detective thriller \"Warning Shot\" (1967); in the UK she was the leading lady in the spy caper \"Subterfuge\" (1968); and made a cameo appearance in the comedy \"If It's Tuesday, This Must Be Belgium\" (1969).\nIn the US, Collins starred opposite then-husband Anthony Newley in his autobiographical musical \"Can Heironymus Merkin Ever Forget Mercy Humppe and Find True Happiness?\" (1969), a decision she later regretted. Then came the female lead in the Italian drama \"L'amore brave\" (1969), \"The Executioner\" (1970), a thriller with George Peppard, and \"Up in the Cellar\" (1970), a quasisequel to \"Three in the Attic\". Although she had made several appearances on interview and game shows in the late 1950s and early 1960s, Collins began her television dramatic career with a guest role in \"The Human Jungle\" in 1963. Her notable appearances on American television during the 1960s included playing the villainous Siren in \"Batman\", \"Run For Your Life\", \"The Virginian\", ', \"The Man From U.N.C.L.E.\", and in ', she played Edith Keeler in the episode, \"The City on the Edge of Forever\" (1967), an episode noted by many critics and fans as the best Star Trek episode of the whole franchise \n1970s.\nIn the 1970s, Collins remained busy on television. She starred in the TV movies \"The Man Who Came to Dinner\" (1972) with Orson Welles and Lee Remick, and \"Drive Hard, Drive Fast\" (1973) opposite Brian Kelly. Her many guest appearances during the decade included \"The Persuaders!\" alongside Roger Moore and Tony Curtis, \"Fallen Angels\" with Susannah York, \"Space 1999\", \"Orson Welles Great Mysteries\", \"Police Woman\", \"The Moneychangers\" with Kirk Douglas and Christopher Plummer, \"Starsky and Hutch\", \"Tattletales\", \"Switch\", \"Future Cop\", \"Ellery Queen\", \"The Fantastic Journey\", \"Baretta\" and three separate episodes of \"Tales of the Unexpected\". She rounded off the decade playing Cleopatra in an episode of Aaron Spelling's \"Fantasy Island\".\nIn 1970, Collins returned to Britain and starred in several films, mostly thrillers and horror films: \"Revenge\" (1971), as the vengeance-seeking mother of a murdered child; \"Quest for Love\" (1971), a romantic science-fiction piece; \"Tales from the Crypt\" (1972), a highly successful horror anthology; \"Fear in the Night\" (1972), a psychological horror from Jimmy Sangster; \"Dark Places\" (1973), a thriller with Christopher Lee; and \"Tales That Witness Madness\" (1973), another horror anthology. She went to Italy for the football-themed comedy \"L'arbitro\" (1974), to Spain for \"The Great Adventure\" opposite Jack Palance and returned to England for yet another horror, playing the mother of a murderous infant in \"I Don't Want to Be Born\" (1975).\nAfter two comedies, \"Alfie Darling\" (1975) and \"The Bawdy Adventures of Tom Jones\" (1976), Collins returned to the US to make what she now refers to as the nadir of her film career, the giant insect science-fiction piece \"Empire of the Ants\" (1977). In Italy she was the leading lady in the thriller \"Fearless\" (1978); in the US made the lighthearted \"Zero to Sixty\" (1978); and back in the UK appeared with Robert Mitchum in \"The Big Sleep\".\nIn 1978, Collins was catapulted back to major stardom in the UK when she starred in the film version of her sister Jackie Collins's racy novel \"The Stud\". It was made for $600,000 and went on to gross over $20,000,000 internationally. At the same time she published her autobiography, \"Past Imperfect\", which went to number 1 in the bestseller charts. \"The Stud\" was so successful that a sequel, \"The Bitch\" (1979) was hastily arranged and was also a hit. After shooting \"Game for Vultures\" (1979) opposite Richard Harris and \"Sunburn\" (1979) with Farrah Fawcett, Collins returned to the stage for the first time in many years to play the title role in \"The Last of Mrs. Cheyney\" (1980) in London's West End.\n1980s.\nThe success of \"The Stud\" and \"The Bitch\" helped Collins to be cast in the second season of the then-struggling soap opera \"Dynasty\" (1981\u201389), as Alexis Colby, the beautiful and vengeful ex-wife of oil tycoon Blake Carrington (John Forsythe). \"Dynasty\" became an enormous worldwide phenomenon, and by 1985 the program was the number-one show in the United States, beating out CBS rival \"Dallas\", which ranked number two. For her portrayal of Alexis, Collins was nominated six times for a Golden Globe Award (every year from 1982 to 1987), winning in 1983, the same year she was nominated for an Emmy as Best Actress in a Drama Series. In accepting the award, Collins thanked Sophia Loren for turning down the part of Alexis.\nHer performance is generally credited as the chief factor in the fledgling show's subsequent rise in the Nielsen ratings to a hit rivalling \"Dallas\". Co-star Al Corley noted that Collins \"just flew\" in the role that was \"tailor made... just spot on.\" In \"Dynasty\" producer Aaron Spelling's final press interview, he said of Collins: \"We didn't write Joan Collins. She played Joan Collins. Am I right? We wrote a character, but the character could have been played by 50 people and 49 of them would have failed. She made it work.\" In recognition of her new status, in 1983 Collins was honoured with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for career achievement.\nWhilst filming \"Dynasty\", Collins starred in the feature film \"Nutcracker\" (1982) (an attempt to repeat the success of \"The Stud\" and \"The Bitch\") and the TV movies \"Paper Dolls\" (1982), \"The Wild Women of Chastity Gulch\" (1982), \"Making of a Male Model\" (1983) with Jon-Erik Hexum, \"Her Life as a Man\" (1984), and \"The Cartier Affair\" (1984) with David Hasselhoff. She made guest star appearances in \"The Love Boat\" and \"Faerie Tale Theatre\", and co-hosted an ABC-TV special created for her, \"Blondes vs. Brunettes\". At the age of 50, Collins appeared in a 12-page photo layout for \"Playboy\" magazine shot by George Hurrell. With \"Dynasty\" at the height of its success, Collins both produced and starred in the smash hit 1986 CBS miniseries \"Sins\", and also in the same year, \"Monte Carlo\".\n1990s.\nWhen \"Dynasty\" ended in 1989, Collins began rehearsals for her Broadway stage debut, as Amanda in a successful revival of No\u00ebl Coward's \"Private Lives\" (1990). She subsequently toured the US in the same play and also starred as Amanda in a production in London's West End. In 1991, she also starred for BBC Television in a series of eight individual No\u00ebl Coward plays under the title \"Tonight at 8.30\". In 1991, Collins rejoined her co-stars for \"\", a miniseries that concluded the cliffhanger ending left after the show's abrupt 1989 cancellation. In the 1990s, Collins continued to star in films including \"Decadence\" (1994) and \"In The Bleak Midwinter\" (1995).\nOn American television she made the TV movies \"Hart to Hart \u2013 Two Harts in 3/4 Time\" (1995), \"\" (1995) and \"Sweet Deception\" (1998). She also made guest-star appearances on series such as \"Roseanne\" (1993), \"The Nanny\" (1996) and \"Will &amp; Grace\" (2000), and played a recurring role in seven episodes of \"Pacific Palisades\" (1997). She was selected as the cover star for the relaunch of the popular celebrity magazine \"OK!\" when it changed from a monthly to a weekly. In 1999, Collins was cast in the film version of the musical theatre show \"Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat, \" with Donny Osmond. She then starred opposite Nigel Hawthorne in the film \"The Clandestine Marriage\" (1999), which she also co-produced.\n2000s.\nIn 2000, Collins replaced Elizabeth Taylor as Pearl Slaghoople, Wilma Flintstone's mother, in \"The Flintstones in Viva Rock Vegas\", a prequel to the Universal Studios live-action film \"The Flintstones\" (1994, Taylor had originated the role in the first film). The following year, Collins co-starred with Taylor, Shirley MacLaine and Debbie Reynolds in the television film \"These Old Broads\", written by Reynolds' daughter Carrie Fisher. In 2002, Collins returned to soap operas in a limited guest run on the American daytime soap \"Guiding Light\". In 2005, actress Alice Krige impersonated Collins in \"\", a fictionalised television film based on the creation and behind-the-scenes production of \"Dynasty\".\nIn 2006, Collins toured the United Kingdom in \"An Evening with Joan Collins\" (US title \"One Night With Joan\"), a one-woman show in which she related the highs and lows of her career and life. The show was directed by her husband Percy Gibson, whom she married in 2002. She has continued to tour the world with the show and its sequel \"Joan Collins Unscripted\" ever since, including appearances in New York, Las Vegas, Dubai, Sydney, and twice at the London Palladium. In 2006\u20132007 she also toured North America for 30 weeks in the play \"Legends!\" with former \"Dynasty\" co-star Linda Evans.\nIn the mid-2000s, Collins's television work included the hit British television series \"Footballer's Wives\" as Eva de Wolffe (2005), the BBC series \"Hotel Babylon\" (2006) and \"Dynasty Reunion: Catfights and Caviar\", a 2006 special featuring several of her \"Dynasty\" co-stars reminiscing about the original series. Collins guest-starred in \"They Do It with Mirrors\", a two-hour episode of the murder-mystery drama \"Marple\" in 2009, as Ruth Van Rydock, a friend of detective Miss Jane Marple. In 2009, Collins presented her own reality television series entitled \"Joan Collins Does Glamour\".\n2010s.\nIn 2010 she joined the cast of the German soap opera \"Verbotene Liebe\" (\"Forbidden Love\") for a short run, playing an aristocratic British woman, Lady Joan, who takes a young German prince in tow. Famed for her double act with Leonard Rossiter in the Cinzano advertisements, in 2012 she starred in a Europe-wide commercial for Snickers chocolate bars, alongside Stephanie Beacham. Within a short time the advert was re-edited and Beacham's appearance cut.\nShe made her first (and, to date, only) venture into pantomime as Queen Rat in \"Dick Whittington\" at the Birmingham Hippodrome during the 2010 Christmas season, starring alongside Nigel Havers and Julian Clary. In 2012\u20132013, she appeared as herself in the US sitcom \"Happily Divorced\". She also lent her voice to the animated feature film \"Saving Santa\" (2013).\nFrom 2013 to 2017, Collins had a recurring guest role in the British sitcom \"Benidorm\" as Crystal Hennessy-Vass, the fierce CEO of the fictional Solana Hotel Group. From 2014 to 2018, she played the Grand Duchess of Oxford, mother of fictional British Queen Helena (Elizabeth Hurley) in the E! drama series \"The Royals\". In 2015, Collins backed the children's fairytales app GivingTales in aid of UNICEF, together with others such as Roger Moore, Ewan McGregor, Stephen Fry, Joanna Lumley, and Michael Caine. The same year she starred in the fantasy film \"Molly Moon and the Incredible Book of Hypnotism\".\nIn 2016, Collins made a cameo appearance as herself in \"\". The following year she returned to the big screen with the starring role in the British comedy-drama \"The Time of Their Lives\", playing a faded Hollywood star. In 2018 she appeared in a critically acclaimed short film, \"Gerry\", for which she won the Best Actress award at the LA Shorts International Film Festival.\nIn 2018, Collins joined the cast of Ryan Murphy's series \"American Horror Story\" for its eighth season \"\". She first portrayed Evie Gallant, the glamorous and rich grandmother of Evan Peters' character, and later portrayed witch actress Bubbles McGee. In 2019 she guest-starred in an episode of the new \"Hawaii Five-O\" TV-series.\n2020s.\nShe had a co-starring role in the 2020 film \"The Loss Adjuster\" opposite Luke Goss and Martin Kemp. In 2021, Collins appeared in a short comedy spoof for Comic Relief entitled \"2020: The Movie\", in which she played Maggie Keenan, the first person to receive a COVID-19 vaccination. Collins starred as Adelaide of Maurienne in the historical drama miniseries \"Glow and Darkness\" (2021), alongside Jane Seymour and Denise Richards. She is the subject of the feature-length TCM documentary \"This Is Joan Collins\" (2022), in which she narrates her own story. Collins had a role in the 2022 musical \"Tomorrow Morning\", based on the acclaimed musical play of the same name. She is set to portray Wallis Simpson in a movie under a working title \"The Bitter End\". Filming on the movie began in May 2025, taking place in London and Paris.\nOther ventures.\nPhilanthropy.\nCollins has publicly supported several charities for several decades. In 1982, Collins spoke before the U.S. Congress about increasing funding for neurological research. In 1983, she was named a patron of the International Foundation for Children with Learning Disabilities, earning the foundation's highest honour in 1988 for her continuing support. Additionally, 1988 also saw the opening of the Joan Collins Wing of the Children's Hospital of Michigan in Detroit. In 1990, she was made an honorary founding member of the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children.\nIn 1994, Collins was awarded the lifetime achievement award from the Association of Breast Cancer Studies in Great Britain for her contribution to breast cancer awareness in the UK. Collins is patron of Fight for Sight; in 2003, she became a patron of the Shooting Star Chase Children's Hospice in Great Britain, while continuing to support several foster children in India, something she has done for the past 35 years. Collins serves her former school, the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, as the Honorary President of the RADA Associates.\nWriting.\nSince the late 1990s, Collins has been a regular guest diarist for \"The Spectator\". In 2008, she had a weekly opinions column in \"The Sunday Telegraph\". She continues to write occasionally for the \"Daily Mail\", \"The Times\", \"The Daily Telegraph\" and \"The Lady\" in the United Kingdom, and \"Harper's Bazaar\" in the United States.\nCollins has established herself as a successful author, although doing so annoyed her sister Jackie, whose books had helped Joan's career. In addition to her bestselling novels, including \"Prime Time\" and \"Love &amp; Desire &amp; Hate\", she has also written six lifestyle books, including \"The Joan Collins Beauty Book\", as well as memoirs, including \"Past Imperfect\". To date, she has sold over 50 million copies of her books, which have been translated into 30 languages.\nPersonal life.\nMarriages and family.\nCollins has been married five times, with her current marriage lasting almost as long as the previous four combined. Her first husband was Irish actor Maxwell Reed, whom she wed on 24 May 1952 after he date raped her. She was 19 and he was 33. Collins divorced Reed on 29 May 1956, following a two-year separation. From 1955 to 1957, she was in a relationship with producer Arthur Loew Jr. In 1959, Collins began a romance with the then-unknown actor Warren Beatty. They became engaged in 1960, but his infidelity led to their split the same year.\nIn 1961, she began dating singer-songwriter Anthony Newley; they married on 27 May 1963 when Collins was five months pregnant. They had two children, Tara (born 12 October 1963) and Alexander (born 8 September 1965). The couple divorced on 13 August 1971. Collins wed her third husband, American businessman Ron Kass, on 11 March 1972 when she was six months pregnant with their daughter Katyana (born 20 June 1972). Collins and Kass divorced on 6 May 1983. She married former singer Peter Holm on 6 November 1985. Collins sought an annulment in December 1986, but was instead granted a divorce 24 August 1987.\nBetween marriages, Collins dated Mercedes-Benz heir Friedrich Christian Flick, realtor Bill Wiggins, director George Englund, art dealer Robin Hurlstone, producer Robert Evans and actors Gardner McKay, Harry Belafonte, Dennis Hopper, Sydney Chaplin and Ryan O'Neal.\nCollins has been married to her fifth husband Percy Gibson, who is 32 years her junior, since 17 February 2002.&lt;ref name=\"evoke.ie/collins-gibson\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"broadwayworld/Percy-Gibson\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The couple met in 2000 when Collins and her ex-boyfriend George Hamilton performed the play \"Love Letters\" at the Marines' Memorial Theatre in San Francisco and Gibson was the producer.&lt;ref name=\"people/who-is-percy\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The wedding took place at Claridge's Hotel in London. Collins has four grandchildren.\nCollins maintains residences in Belgravia, Beverly Hills, and Saint-Tropez, describing her life in 2010 as being \"that of a gypsy\". In 2019, Collins and Gibson escaped a \"terrifying\" fire at her London flat in Eaton Place. Gibson was able to contain the blaze using a fire extinguisher before the emergency services arrived. Collins was treated for smoke inhalation but was otherwise unharmed and thanked the emergency response crews on social media. In 2021, she sold her condo in New York City for $2 million.\nPolitical views.\nCollins was a supporter of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, and was invited to attend her funeral on 17 April 2013. She also said: \"I'm a big monarchist and I love the Queen.\" In 2004, it was announced she had become a Patron of the UK Independence Party, though she later said this did not necessarily mean she would vote for the party. In 2013, she supported British withdrawal from the European Union.\nHonours.\nCollins was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 1997 New Year Honours for services to drama and advanced to Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE) in the 2015 New Year Honours for services to charity.\nShe was given a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 1983.\nBibliography.\nMemoir\nNonfiction\nFiction\nBy other authors\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53049", "revid": "50612021", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53049", "title": "University of Vienna", "text": "Public university in Vienna, Austria\nclass=skin-invert\nThe University of Vienna (, ) is a public research university in Vienna, Austria. Founded by Duke Rudolph IV in 1365, it is the oldest university in the German-speaking world and among the largest institutions of higher learning in Europe.\nThe University of Vienna is associated with 17 Nobel Prize laureates and has been home to numerous scholars of historical and academic significance, including Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger, Karl Popper, Stefan Zweig, Friedrich Hayek, Gustav Mahler, Sigmund Freud, Gregor Mendel, Ludwig von Mises, among others.\nHistory.\nMiddle Ages to the Enlightenment.\nThe university was founded on March 12, 1365, by Rudolf IV, Duke of Austria, hence the name \"Alma Mater Rudolphina\". After the Charles University in Prague (1347) and Jagiellonian University in Krak\u00f3w (1364), the University of Vienna is the third oldest university in Central Europe and the oldest university in the contemporary German-speaking world; it remains a question of definition as the Charles University in Prague was German-speaking when founded, too. However, Pope Urban V did not ratify the deed of foundation that had been sanctioned by Rudolf IV, specifically in relation to the department of theology. This was presumably due to pressure exerted by Charles IV, Holy Roman Emperor, who wished to avoid competition for the Charles University in Prague.\nThe pope later granted an endowment to the university in 1365, while papal assent was finally received in 1384. This led to the University of Vienna and its Faculty of Catholic Theology being granted the status of a full university. The first university building opened in 1385. It grew into the biggest university of the Holy Roman Empire, and during the advent of Humanism in the mid-15th century was home to more than 6,000 students.\nIn its early years, the university had a partly hierarchical, partly cooperative structure, in which the Rector was at the top, while the students had little say and were settled at the bottom. The Magister and Doctors constituted the four faculties and elected the academic officials from amidst their ranks. The students, but also all other Supposita (university members), were divided into four Academic Nations. Their elected board members, mostly graduates themselves, had the right to elect the Rector. He presided over the Consistory which included procurators of each of the nations and the faculty deans, as well as over the University Assembly, in which all university teachers participated. Complaints or appeals against decisions of the faculty by the students had to be brought forward by a Magister or Doctor.Being considered a Papal Institution, the university suffered a setback during the Reformation. In addition, epidemics, economic stagnation, and the first Siege of Vienna by Ottoman forces had devastating effects on the city, leading to a sharp decline in enrollment. For Emperor Ferdinand I, this meant that the university should be tied to the church to an even stronger degree, and in 1551 he installed the Jesuit Order there. As time went on, conflicts between the Jesuit school and the university arose. This led Emperor Ferdinand II, in 1623, to pass a law that incorporated the Jesuit College into the university. It was only in the mid-18th century that the Jesuits lost influence over the university and when Empress Maria Theresa ensured that the university went under the control of the monarchy. The university would later focus on the education of physicians and civil servants. Her successor Joseph II continued her reforms and further liberalized the university, abolishing official attire and allowing both Protestants and Jews to enroll by 1782, as well as introducing German as the compulsory language of instruction the year later.\nModern history.\nSignificant changes were instituted in the wake of the Revolution in 1848, with the Philosophical Faculty being upgraded into equal status as Theology, Law and Medicine. Led by the reforms of Leopold, Count von Thun und Hohenstein, the university was able to achieve a larger degree of academic freedom. The current main building on the was built between 1877 and 1884 by Heinrich von Ferstel. The previous main building was located close to the \"Stuben\" Gate (Stubentor) on Iganz Seipel Square, the current home of the old University Church (\"Universit\u00e4tskirche\") and the Austrian Academy of Sciences (\"\u00d6sterreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften\"). Women were admitted as full students in 1897, although their studies were limited to Philosophy. The remaining departments gradually followed suit, although with considerable delay: Medicine in 1900, Law in 1919, Protestant Theology in 1923, and finally Roman Catholic Theology in 1946. Ten years after the admission of the first female students, Elise Richter became the first woman to receive \"habilitation\", becoming professor of Romance languages in 1907; she was also the first female distinguished professor.\nIn the late 1920s, the university was in steady turmoil because of anti-democratic and anti-Semitic activity by parts of the student body. Professor Moritz Schlick was killed by a former student while ascending the steps of the university for a class. His murderer was later released by the Nazi regime. Following the Anschluss, the annexation of Austria into Greater Germany by the Nazi regime, in 1938 the University of Vienna was reformed under political aspects, and a huge number of teachers and students were dismissed for political and \"racial\" reasons. In April 1945, the then 22-year-old Kurt Schubert, later acknowledged doyen of Judaic Studies at the University of Vienna, was permitted by the Soviet occupation forces to open the university again for teaching, which is why he is regarded as the unofficial first rector in the post-war period. On 25 April 1945, however, the constitutional lawyer Ludwig Adamovich senior was elected as the official rector of the University of Vienna. \nA large degree of participation by students and university staff was realized in 1975, however, the University Reforms of 1993 and 2002 largely re-established the professors as the main decision-makers. However, also as part of the 2002 reform, the university, after more than 250 years of being largely under governmental control, finally regained its full legal capacity. The number of faculties and centers was increased to 18, and the whole of the medical faculty was separated into the new Medical University of Vienna.\nCampus.\nThe University of Vienna does not have one single campus. Historically, the university started functioning from the First District near the Jesuit Church. Now, the academic facilities occupy more than sixty locations throughout the city of Vienna. The historical main building on the Ringstra\u00dfe constitutes the university's center and is commonly referred to as \"die Uni\". Most other larger university facilities and lecture halls are located nearby in the area of Vienna's First and Ninth District: the so-called new Lecture Hall Complex (Neues Institutgeb\u00e4ude, NIG), the lecture hall complex Althanstra\u00dfe (UZA), the campus on the premises of the Historical General Hospital of Vienna, the Faculty of Law (Juridicum) and others. The Botanical Garden of the University of Vienna is housed in the Third District, as are the Department of Biochemistry and related research centers.\nAlso worth mentioning is the Vienna Observatory, which belongs to the university, and the Institute for University Sports (USI), which offers training and recreational possibilities to all students of the university. In addition, the University of Vienna maintains facilities outside of Vienna in the Austrian provinces of Lower Austria, Upper Austria, and Carinthia. These are mainly research and experimental departments for Biology, Astrophysics and Sports.\nLibrary.\nThe University Library of the University of Vienna comprises the Main Library and the 50 departmental libraries at various university locations throughout Vienna. The library's primary responsibility is to the members of the university; however, the library's 350 staff members also provide access to the public. Use of the books in the reading halls is open to all persons without the need for identification, which is only required for checking out books. The library's website provides direct access to information such as electronic journals, online indices, and databases.\nHistory.\nRudolf IV had already provided for a \"publica libraria\" in the Foundation Deed of 12 March 1365, where the valuable books bequeathed by deceased members of the university should be collected. Through many legacies, this collection was subsequently greatly increased and became the basis of the old \"Libreye\" that was accommodated in the same building as the student infirmary. In addition, there were libraries in the separate Faculties and in the Duke's College.\nFrom the 17th century onwards, interest in the old library, with its manuscripts and incunabulae, went into decline and the modern library in the Jesuit College came to the fore. In 1756, the oldest university library was finally closed down and its books, 2,787 volumes, were incorporated into the Court Library, of which Gerard van Swieten was then director. After the dissolution of the Jesuit order (1773), the new \"Academic Library\" was created out of the book collections of the five Lower Austrian Colleges and many duplicates from the Court Library. This was opened on 13 May 1777, the birthday of Maria Theresa of Austria, in the building of the Academic College. Initially, the stock consisted of some 45,000 books, and during Emperor Joseph II's dissolution of the monasteries, this was soon considerably extended. In contrast to its antecedents, the new library was open to the general public. Between 1827 and 1829, it acquired the classicist extension (Postgasse 9) to the Academic College, in which it was to be accommodated until 1884. In this year, the main library, with some 300,000 books, moved to Heinrich von Ferstel's new Main Building on the Ring, where stacks for some 500,000 volumes had already been prepared. With an annual growth of up to 30,000 volumes, the surplus space was soon filled. Book storage space had to be extended continuously. One hundred years later, the complete library, including departmental and subject libraries, comprised more than 4.3 million volumes. Today, Vienna's University Library is the largest collection of books in Austria, still facing problems of space. In addition to the Main Library, which alone has to cope with an annual growth of 40,000 volumes, it includes about 40 Subject Libraries.\nOrganization.\nThe University of Vienna, like all universities and academies in Austria, once featured a system of democratic representation. Power in the university was divided equally among three groups: students (the largest group), junior faculty, and full professors. All groups had the right to send representatives to boards, who then voted on almost every issue. From 2002 on, the government of Austria, headed by chancellor Wolfgang Sch\u00fcssel, reformed the university system, transforming the institutions into legal entities, but also concentrating power in the hands of the full professors. The reform also introduced a board of governors and tuition fees. In 2013, those amounted to about \u20ac381 per semester for students from Austria, the European Union as well as some non-EU countries, while students from developed non-EU countries usually pay double that amount. The reforms also separated the medical departments into separate medical schools, such as the Medical University of Vienna.\nProgrammes.\nStudents at the university can select from 181 degree programs: 55 bachelor programs, 110 master programs, 3 diploma programs, and 13 doctoral programmes. In the academic year 2013/14, the university awarded 7,745 first degrees (Bachelors and Diplomas), 1,424 Master's degrees, and 568 Doctoral degrees. The university offers a number of Master's programs in English, including quantitative economics, management and finance, science-technology-society, environmental sciences, Middle European interdisciplinary master programme in cognitive science, European master in health and physical activity, English language and linguistics, Anglophone literature and culture, East Asian economy and society, economics, botany, ecology and ecosystems, molecular biology, microbial ecology and immunobiology, European master in urban studies, masters in European and international business law, mathematics, etc.\nSome 6,900 scholars undertake research and teaching activities at the university. Of these, approximately 1,000 engage actively in projects financed by third parties. The main fields of research at the university cover a wide spectrum of subjects: Catholic and Protestant theology, law, economic sciences and computer science, philological-cultural studies and historical-cultural studies, social sciences and psychology, life sciences and natural sciences, mathematics, sports sciences, and teacher education.\nFaculties and centres.\nThe University of Vienna consists of 15 faculties and 5 centers:\nAcademic reputation.\nThe University of Vienna has the highest ranking in Mathematics and in Arts and Humanities. In Mathematics it is placed 31st in the world according to the Shanghai-Ranking. In Arts and Humanities it is placed 35th and 54th in the world according to the THE and QS ranking respectively. Outstanding subjects include Geography (ranked 28th globally in 2013), Linguistics and Philosophy (both 46th globally) and Law (ranked 73rd globally). It is rated high in academic reputation and number of international students, but low in terms of faculty-to-student ratio and citations per faculty. In the THE ranking for 2026, the University of Vienna came in at number 95, making it the first Austrian university to break into the top 100.\nAn overview of the QS World University Rankings by subjects:\nThe Times Higher Education World University Rankings by subjects:\nThe Shanghai-Ranking in Mathematics:\nNotable people.\nFaculty and scholars.\nNobel Prize Laureates who taught at the University of Vienna include Robert B\u00e1r\u00e1ny, Julius Wagner-Jauregg, Hans Fischer, Karl Landsteiner, Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger, Victor Franz Hess, Otto Loewi, Konrad Lorenz and Friedrich Hayek.\nThe University of Vienna was the cradle of the Austrian School of economics. The founders of this school who studied and later instructed at the University of Vienna included Carl Menger, Eugen von B\u00f6hm-Bawerk, Friedrich von Wieser, Joseph Schumpeter, Ludwig von Mises and Friedrich Hayek. \nOther famous scholars who have taught at the University of Vienna are: Theodor W. Adorno, Alexander Van der Bellen, Manfred Bietak, Theodor Billroth, Ludwig Boltzmann, Ulrich Brand, Franz Brentano, Anton Bruckner, Rudolf Carnap, Conrad Celtes, Adrian Constantin, Viktor Frankl, Sigmund Freud, Karl Samuel Gr\u00fcnhut, Eduard Hanslick, Edmund Hauler, Jalile Jalil, Leon Kellner, Hans Kelsen, Adam Franti\u0161ek Koll\u00e1r, Johann Josef Loschmidt, Franz Miklosich, Oskar Morgenstern, Otto Neurath, Johann Palisa, Pope Pius II, Karl Popper, Elise Richter, Baron Carl von Rokitansky, Rudolf von Scherer, Peter Schuster, August Schleicher, Moritz Schlick, Ludwig Karl Schmarda, Joseph von Sonnenfels, Josef Stefan, Olga Taussky-Todd, Hans Thirring, Walter Thirring, Walter G. Url, Leopold Vietoris, Carl Auer von Welsbach, and Wilhelm Winkler.\nNobel laureates.\nThere are total 17 Nobel Prize Laureates affiliated to the university as follows:\nAlumni.\nSome of the university's better-known students include: Kurt Adler, Franz Alt, Wilhelm Altar, Maria Anwander, Napoleon Baniewicz, Bruno Bettelheim, Rudolf Bing, Lucian Blaga, Hedda Bolgar, Michael Brainin, Josef Breuer, F. F. Bruce, Elias Canetti, Ivan Cankar, Otto Maria Carpeaux, Friedrich Cerha, Felix Ehrenhaft, Olga Ehrenhaft-Steindler, Mihai Eminescu, Stephen Ferguson, Paul Feyerabend, Heinz Fischer, O. W. Fischer, Ivan Franko, Sigmund Freud, Adolf Albrecht Friedl\u00e4nder, Alcide De Gasperi, Nathan Michael Gelber, Hilda Geiringer, Kurt G\u00f6del, Ernst Gombrich, Franz Grillparzer, Karina Gr\u00f6mer, Werner Gruber, Karl Samuel Gr\u00fcnhut, Pamela Gutman, Hans Hahn, J\u00f6rg Haider, Michael Haneke, Friedrich Hayek, Leo-Ferdinand Henckel von Donnersmarck, Theodor Herzl, Anneliese Hitzenberger, Hugo von Hofmannsthal, Edmund Husserl, Marie Jahoda, Max Jammer, Elfriede Jelinek, Percy Julian, Karl Kautsky, Elisabeth Kehrer, Leon Kellner, Hans Kelsen, Hryhoriy Khomyshyn, Jan Kickert, Rudolf Kirchschl\u00e4ger, Arthur Koestler, Jernej Kopitar, Karl Kordesch, Arnold Krammer, Karl Kraus, Bruno Kreisky, Richard Kuhn, Hermann F. Kvergi\u0107, Paul Lazarsfeld, Ignacy \u0141ukasiewicz, Gustav Mahler, Tom\u00e1\u0161 Garrigue Masaryk, Lise Meitner, Gregor Mendel, Karl Menger, Franz Mesmer, Egon Orowan, Franz Miklosich, Alois Mock, Wolf-Dieter Montag, Matija Murko, Paul Niel, Joachim Oppenheim, Eduard Pernkopf, Anton Pi\u00ebch, Ioan Nicolidi of Pindus, Pope Pius III, Hans Popper, Karl Popper, Otto Preminger, Wilhelm Reich, Peter Safar, Monika Salzer, Mordecai Sandberg, Mordkhe Schaechter, Karl Schenkl, Max Schloessinger, Marianne Schmidl, Andreas Schnider, Arthur Schnitzler, Albin Schram, Joseph Schumpeter, Wolfgang Sch\u00fcssel, Peter Schuster, John J. Shea, Jr., Mihalj \u0160ilobod Bol\u0161i\u0107, Maria Simon, Felix Somary, Marian Smoluchowski, Adalbert Stifter, Countess Stoeffel, Yemima Tchernovitz-Avidar, Eric Voegelin, Maria W\u00e4hnl, Kurt Waldheim, Calvin Edouard Ward, Otto Weininger, Slavko Wolf, Eduard Zirm, Stefan Zweig, and Huldrych Zwingli.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53050", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53050", "title": "Pope Paul IV", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1555 to 1559\nPope Paul IV (; ; 28 June 1476\u00a0\u2013 18 August 1559), born Gian Pietro Carafa, was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 23 May 1555 to his death, in August 1559. While serving as papal nuncio in Spain, he developed an anti-Spanish outlook that later coloured his papacy. In response to an invasion of part of the Papal States by Spain during his papacy, he called for a French military intervention. After a defeat of the French and with Spanish troops at the edge of Rome, the Papacy and Spain reached a compromise: French and Spanish forces left the Papal States and the Pope thereafter adopted a neutral stance between France and Spain.\nCarafa was appointed bishop of Chieti, but resigned in 1524 in order to found with Saint Cajetan the Congregation of Clerics Regular (Theatines). Recalled to Rome, and made Archbishop of Naples, he worked to re-organise the Inquisitorial system in response to the emerging Protestant movement in Europe, any dialogue with which he opposed (the inquisition itself had been first instituted by Pope Innocent III who first regulated inquisitional procedure in the 13th century). Carafa was elected pope in 1555 through the influence of Cardinal Alessandro Farnese in the face of opposition from Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor. His papacy was characterised by strong nationalism in reaction to the influence of Philip II of Spain and the Habsburgs. The appointment of Carlo Carafa as Cardinal Nephew damaged the papacy further, and scandals forced Paul to remove him from office. He curbed some clerical abuses in Rome, but his methods were seen as harsh. He would introduce the first modern \"Index Librorum Prohibitorum\" or \"Index of Prohibited Books\" banning works he saw as in error. In spite of his advanced age, he was a tireless worker and issued new decrees and regulations daily, unrelenting in his determination to keep Protestants and recently immigrated Marranos from gaining influence in the Papal States. Paul IV issued the Papal bull \"Cum nimis absurdum\", which confined Jews in Rome to the neighbourhood \"claustro degli Ebrei\" (\"enclosure of the Hebrews\"), later known as the Roman Ghetto. He died highly unpopular, to the point that his family rushed his burial to make sure his body would not be desecrated by a popular uprising.\nEarly life.\nGian Pietro Carafa was born in Capriglia Irpina, near Avellino, into the prominent Carafa family of Naples. His father Giovanni Antonio of the Counts Carafa della Stadera died in West Flanders in 1516 and his mother Vittoria Camponeschi was the daughter of , 5th Count of Montorio, a Neapolitan nobleman, and Maria de Noronha, a Portuguese noblewoman of the House of Pereira.\nChurch career.\nBishop.\nHe was mentored by Cardinal Oliviero Carafa, his relative, who resigned the see of Chieti (Latin \"Theate\") in his favour. Under the direction of Pope Leo X, he was ambassador to England and then papal nuncio in Spain, where he conceived a violent detestation of Spanish rule that affected the policies of his later papacy.\nIn 1524, Pope Clement VII allowed Carafa to resign his benefices and join the ascetic and newly founded Congregation of Clerks Regular, popularly called the Theatines, after Carafa's see of \"Theate.\" Following the sack of Rome in 1527, the order moved to Venice. There, he wrote in a memorandum in 1533 that reform of the Church and vigorous struggle against any deviations were interlinked. Carafa was recalled to Rome by the reform-minded Pope Paul III (1534\u201349), to sit on a committee of reform of the papal court, an appointment that forecasted an end to a humanist papacy and a revival of scholasticism, as Carafa was a disciple of Thomas Aquinas.\nCardinal.\nIn December 1536 he was made Cardinal-Priest of \"S. Pancrazio\" and then Archbishop of Naples.\nThe Regensburg Colloquy in 1541 failed to achieve any measure of reconciliation between Catholics and Protestants in Europe, but instead saw a number of prominent Italians defect to the Protestant camp. In response, Carafa was able to persuade Pope Paul III to set up a Roman Inquisition, modelled on the Spanish Inquisition with himself as one of the Inquisitors-General. The Papal Bull was promulgated in 1542. Carafa demanded the surveillance of education, ordered the confiscation of many authors, such as Erasmus, and inspired the warning of the Inquisition against printed books containing perceived threats against the Christianity. In this regard, he headed the commission that investigated the Bragadin-Giustiniani dispute and that recommended the burning of the Talmud in 1553.\nElection as pope.\nHe was a surprise choice as pope to succeed Pope Marcellus II (1555); his severe and unbending character combined with his advanced age and Italian patriotism meant under normal circumstances he would have declined the honor. He accepted apparently because Emperor Charles V was opposed to his accession.\nCarafa, elected on 23 May 1555, took the name of \"Paul IV\" in honor of Pope Paul III who named him as a cardinal. He was crowned as pope on 26 May 1555 by the protodeacon. He formally took possession of the Basilica of Saint John Lateran on 28 October 1555.\nPapacy.\nInterior Policy.\nAs pope, Paul IV's nationalism was a driving force; he used the office to preserve some liberties in the face of fourfold foreign occupation. Like Pope Paul III, he was an enemy of the Colonna family. His treatment of Giovanna d'Aragona, who had married into that family, drew further negative comment from Venice because she had long been a patron of artists and writers.\nPaul IV was violently opposed to the liberal Cardinal Giovanni Morone, whom he strongly suspected of being a hidden Protestant, so much that he had him imprisoned. In order to prevent Morone from succeeding him and imposing what he believed to be his Protestant beliefs on the Church, Pope Paul IV codified the Catholic Law excluding heretics and non-Catholics from receiving or legitimately becoming pope, in the bull \"Cum ex apostolatus officio\".\nPaul IV was rigidly orthodox, austere in life, and authoritarian in manner. He affirmed the Catholic doctrine of \"extra ecclesiam nulla salus\" ('outside the Church there is no salvation'), and used the Holy Office to suppress the Spirituali, a Catholic group deemed heretical. The strengthening of the Inquisition continued under Paul IV, and few could consider themselves safe by virtue of position in his drive to reform the Church; even cardinals he disliked could be imprisoned. He appointed inquisitor Michele Ghislieri, the future Pope Pius V, to the position of Supreme Inquisitor despite the fact as Inquisitor of Como, Ghislieri's persecutions had inspired a citywide rebellion, forcing him to flee in fear for his life. Paul IV also established a special committee to work on the \"Index Librorum Prohibitorum\", a first draft of which was finished in 1557, that later served as basis for the first version promulgated by the Inquisition after his death in 1559.\nPaul IV also begun a more radical and severe policy towards the Jews compared to the lenient papal legislation of the first half of the sixteenth century. As such, in the Papal States, especially in the seaport of Ancona, Marranos had thrived under benevolent popes Clement VII (1523\u201334), Paul III (1534\u201349), and Julius III (1550\u201355). These had even received a guarantee that if accused of apostasy they would be subject only to papal authority. Convinced that the papal policy of kindness had been abused by the Jews and not resulted in enough conversions, he enacted harsh restrictions and ended all dispensations to the Jews in the papal state, with the aim of encourage the Jews to convert.\nThe policy was formalised in his bull \"Cum nimis absurdum\", which was issued on 17 July 1555 and where Paul IV explicitly declared that the Church had to adopt a policy that led Jews to converting. In the bull, Paul IV restricted the commercial activities and professions Jews could engage with, forbade them employing Christian servants and future ownership of real property while limiting their options to sell their own property. It further ordered that Jews had to wear distinctive yellow hats, especially outside the ghetto, and that Jews were forbidden to have more than one synagogue per city, resulting in Rome alone to the destruction of seven \"excess\" places of worship. Finally, the bull also ordered the creation of a Jewish ghetto in Rome. The Pope set its borders near the Rione Sant'Angelo, an area where large numbers of Jews already resided, and ordered it walled off from the rest of the city. A single gate, locked every day at sundown, was the only means of reaching the rest of the city. The Jews themselves were forced to pay all design and construction costs related to the project, which came to a total of roughly 300 \"scudi\". In another reversal of previous papal policies, some hundred of the Marranos of Ancona were thrown into prison, 50 sentenced by the tribunal of the Inquisition and 25 Conversos who had reverted Judaism were burned at the stake in the spring of 1556. Finally, the Inquisition prohibited in 1557 under his influence the Jews to possess any other religious work in Hebrew except for the Bible. Paul IV's policy was somewhat successful as the later sixteenth century saw a substantial increase in conversions from Jews to Christianity. By the end of his five-year reign, the number of Roman Jews had dropped by half. Yet his anti-Jewish legacy endured for over 300 years: the ghetto he established ceased to exist only with the dissolution of the Papal States in 1870. Its walls were torn down in 1888.\nAccording to Leopold von Ranke, a rigid austerity and an earnest zeal for the restoration of primitive habits became the dominant tendency of his papacy. Monks who had left their monasteries were expelled from the city and from the Papal States. He would no longer tolerate the practice by which one man had been allowed to enjoy the revenues of an office while delegating its duties to another.\nAll begging was forbidden. Even the collection of alms for Masses, which had previously been made by the clergy, was discontinued. A medal was struck representing Christ driving the money changers from the Temple. Paul IV put in place a reform of the papal administration designed to stamp out trafficking of principal positions in the Curia. All secular offices, from the highest to the lowest, were assigned to others based on merit. Important economies were made, and taxes were proportionately remitted. Paul IV established a chest, of which only he held the key, for the purpose of receiving all complaints that anyone desired to make.\nDuring his papacy, censorship reached new heights. Among his first acts as pope was to cut off Michelangelo's pension, and he ordered the nudes of \"The Last Judgment\" in the Sistine Chapel be painted more modestly (a request that Michelangelo ignored) (the beginning of the Vatican's Fig leaf campaign). Paul IV also introduced the Index Librorum Prohibitorum or \"Index of Prohibited Books\" to Venice, then an independent and prosperous trading state, in order to crack down on the growing threat of Protestantism. Under his authority, all books written by Protestants were banned, together with Italian and German translations of the Latin Bible.\nExterior Policy.\nPaul IV was displeased at the French signing a five-year truce with Spain in February 1556 (in the midst of the Italian War of 1551\u20131559) and urged King Henry II of France to join the Papal States in an invasion of Spanish Naples. On 1 September 1556, King Philip II responded by preemptively invading the Papal States with 12,000 men under the Duke of Alba. French forces approaching from the north were defeated and forced to withdraw at Civitella del Tronto in August 1557. The Papal armies were left exposed and were defeated, with Spanish troops arriving at the edge of Rome. Out of fear of another sack of Rome, Paul IV agreed to the Duke of Alba's demand for the Papal States to declare neutrality by signing the Peace of Cave-Palestrina on 12 September 1557. Emperor Charles V criticised the peace agreement as being overly generous to the Pope.\nAs cardinal-nephew, Carlo Carafa became his uncle's chief political adviser. Having accepted a pension from the French, Cardinal Carafa worked to secure a French alliance. Carlo's older brother Giovanni was made commander of the Papal forces and Duke of Paliano after the pro-Spanish Colonna were deprived of that town in 1556. Another nephew, Antonio, was given command of the Papal guard and made Marquis of Montebello. Their conduct became notorious in Rome. However, at the conclusion of the disastrous war with Philip II of Spain in the Italian War, and after many scandals, Paul IV publicly disgraced his nephews and banished them from Rome in 1559.\nWith the Protestant Reformation, the papacy required all Roman Catholic rulers to consider Protestant rulers as heretics, thus making their realms illegitimate. At the time of Paul's election, Queen Mary I of England was two years into her reign, and was rolling back the English Reformation that had occurred under her half-brother Edward VI. Paul IV issued a papal bull in 1555, \"\", removing all Church measures against the English government, and further recognising Mary and her husband Philip as King and Queen of Ireland, rather than merely being \"lord\". Despite the bull, his relations with England were not positive. Paul IV had known Cardinal Reginald Pole while Pole was living in Italy and the two had been members of the spirituali together. Pole was the leader of Mary's efforts, but Paul IV seems to have hated Pole and become convinced he was a crypto-Protestant. Combined with hostility towards Spain and thus Mary's husband, Paul IV refused to allow any English bishops to be appointed, and began inquisitorial discipline proceedings against Pole, leading to the \"farcical\" situation that by 1558, the most serious opponent of English Catholicism was the Pope himself. He also angered people in England by insisting on the restitution of property confiscated during the dissolution of the monasteries. After Mary's death, he rejected the succession of Elizabeth I of England to the throne.\nConsistories.\nThroughout his pontificate, Paul IV named 46 cardinals in four consistories, including Michele Ghislieri (the future Pope Pius V). According to Robert Maryks, the pope decided to nominate the Jesuit priest Diego Laynez to the cardinalate. However, Father Alfonso Salmer\u00f3n warned Saint Ignatius of Loyola of this, as did Cardinal Otto Truchsess von Waldburg. In response, Father Pedro de Ribadeneira repeated what the saint had said to him: \"If our Lord does not lay down his hand, we will have Master La\u00ednez a cardinal, but I certify to you, if it were, that it be with so much noise that the world would understand how the Society accepts these things\".\nDeath.\nPaul IV's health began to break down in May 1559. He rallied in July, holding public audiences and attending meetings of the Inquisition. But he engaged in fasting, and the heat of the summer wore him down again. He was bedridden, and on 17 August it became clear he would not live. Cardinals and other officials gathered at his bedside on 18 August, where Paul IV asked them to elect a \"righteous and holy\" successor and to retain the Inquisition as \"the very basis\" of the Catholic Church's power. By 2 or 3 pm, he was close to death, and died at 5 pm.\nThe people of Rome did not forget what they had suffered because of the war he had brought on the State. Crowds of people gathered at the Piazza del Campidoglio and began rioting even before Paul IV died. His statue, erected before the Campidoglio just months before, had a yellow hat placed on it (similar to the yellow hat Paul IV had forced Jews to wear in public). After a mock trial, the statue was decapitated. It was then thrown into the Tiber.\nThe crowd broke into the three city jails and freed more than 400 prisoners, then broke into the offices of the Inquisition at the Palazzo dell' Inquisizone near to the Church of San Rocco. They murdered the Inquisitor, Tommaso Scotti, and freed 72 prisoners. One of those released was Dominican John Craig, who later was a colleague of John Knox. The people ransacked the palace, and then set it afire (destroying the Inquisition's records). That same day, or the next day (records are unclear), the crowd attacked the Church of Santa Maria sopra Minerva. The intercession of some local nobility dissuaded them from burning it and killing all those within. On the third day of rioting, the crowd removed the Carafa family coat of arms from all churches, monuments, and other buildings in the city.\nThe crowd dedicated to him the following pasquinata:\n\"Carafa hated by the devil and the sky\"\n\"is buried here with his rotting corpse,\"\n\"Erebus has taken the spirit;\"\n\"he hated peace on earth, our faith he contested.\"\n\"he ruined the church and the people, men and sky offended;\"\n\"treacherous friend, suppliant with the army which was fatal to him.\"\n\"You want to know more? Pope was him and that is enough.\"\nSuch hostile views have not mellowed much with time; modern historians tend to view his papacy as an especially poor one. His policies stemmed from personal prejudices\u2014against Spain, for example, or the Jews\u2014rather than any overarching political or religious goals. In a time of precarious balance between Catholic and Protestant, his adversarial nature did little to slow the latter's spread across northern Europe. His anti-Spanish feelings alienated the Habsburgs, arguably the most powerful Catholic rulers in Europe, and his ascetic personal beliefs left him out of touch with the artistic and intellectual movements of his era (he often spoke of whitewashing the Sistine Chapel ceiling). Such a reactionary attitude alienated clergy and laity alike: historian John Julius Norwich calls him \"the worst pope of the 16th century.\"\nFour or five hours after his death, Paul IV's body was taken to the Cappella Paolina in the Apostolic Palace. It lay in repose, and a choir sang the Office of the Dead on the morning of 19 August. Cardinals and many others then paid homage to Paul IV (\"kissed the feet of the pope\"). The canons of St. Peter's Basilica refused to take his body into the basilica unless they were paid the customary money and gifts. Instead, the canons sang the usual office in the Cappella del Santissimo Sacramento (Chapel of the Blessed Sacrament). Paul IV's body was taken to the Sistine Chapel in the Apostolic Palace at 6 pm.\nPaul IV's nephew, Cardinal-nephew Carlo Carafa, arrived in Rome late on 19 August. Worried that the rioters might break in and desecrate the pope's corpse, at 10 pm Cardinal Carafa had Pope Paul IV buried without ceremony next to the Cappella del Volto Santo (Chapel of the Holy Face) in St. Peter's. His remains stayed there until October 1566, when his successor as pope, Pius V, had them transferred to Santa Maria sopra Minerva. In the chapel founded by Paul IV's uncle and mentor, Cardinal Oliviero Carafa, a tomb was created by Pirro Ligorio and Paul IV's remains were placed therein.\nIn fiction.\nPaul IV's title in the Prophecy of St. Malachy is \"Of the Faith of Peter\".\nAs Paul IV, appears as a character in John Webster's Jacobean revenge drama \"The White Devil\" (1612).\nIn the novel \"Q\" by Luther Blissett, while not appearing himself, Gian Pietro Carafa is mentioned repeatedly as the cardinal whose spy and \"agent provocateur\", Qoelet, causes many of the disasters to befall Protestants during the Reformation and the Roman Church's response in the 16th century.\nAlison MacLeod's 1968 historical novel \"The Hireling\" depicts Cardinal Carafa befriending the English Cardinal Reginald Pole during Pole's long exile in Italy, their later falling out, and Pole's feelings of betrayal after Carafa, once elevated to the Papacy, charges him with heresy at the very time when Pole was striving to return England to the Catholic fold.\nPope Paul IV is a major villain in Sholem Asch's 1921 historical novel \"The Witch of Castile\" (Yiddish: \"Di Kishufmakherin fun Kastilien\", Hebrew: \"Ha'Machshepha Mi'Castilia\" \u05d4\u05de\u05db\u05e9\u05e4\u05d4 \u05de\u05e7\u05e9\u05d9\u05d8\u05dc\u05d9\u05d4). The book's depiction of a young Sephardi Jewish woman in Rome being falsely accused of witchcraft and being burned at the stake, dying as a Jewish martyr, is placed in the context of Paul IV's actual persecution of the Jews.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53052", "revid": "968351069", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53052", "title": "Sony Playstation", "text": ""}
{"id": "53053", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53053", "title": "GPU", "text": ""}
{"id": "53054", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53054", "title": "Sony PlayStation", "text": ""}
{"id": "53056", "revid": "46906180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53056", "title": "Ministry of Internal Affairs (Russia)", "text": "Government ministry of Russia\nThe Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Russian Federation (, MVD) is the interior ministry of Russia.\nThe MVD is responsible for law enforcement in Russia through its agencies the Police of Russia, Migration Affairs, Drugs Control, Traffic Safety, the Centre for Combating Extremism, and the Investigative Department. The MVD is headquartered in Zhitnaya Street 16 in Yakimanka, Moscow. Vladimir Kolokoltsev has been the Minister of Internal Affairs since 2012.\nHistory.\nRussian Empire (1802\u20131917).\nThe first interior ministry (MVD) in Russia was created by Tsar Alexander I on 28 March 1802. The MVD was one of the most powerful governmental bodies of the Empire, responsible for the police forces and Internal Guards, and the supervision of gubernial administrations. Its initial responsibilities also included prisons, firefighting, state enterprises, the state postal system, state property, construction, roads, medicine, clergy, natural resources, and nobility; most of them were transferred to other ministries and government bodies by the mid-19th century.\nPolice.\nAs the central government began to further partition the countryside, the \"ispravniks\" (chiefs of police) were distributed among the sections. Serving under them in their principal localities were commissaries (). and alike were armed with broad and obscurely defined powers which, combined with the fact that they were for the most part illiterate and wholly ignorant of the law, formed crushing forces of oppression. Towards the end of the reign of Alexander II, the government, in order to preserve order in the country districts, also created a special class of mounted rural policemen (, from , order), who, in a time without \"habeas corpus\", were armed with power to arrest all suspects on the spot. These rapidly became the terror of the countryside. Finally, in the towns of the rural countryside, every house was provided with a \"guard dog\" of sorts, in the form of a porter (), who was charged with the duty of reporting the presence of any suspicious characters or anything of interest to the police.\nSecret Police.\nIn addition there was also the secret police, in direct subordination to the ministry of the interior, of which the principal function was the discovery, prevention, and extirpation of political sedition. Its most famous development was the so-called Third Section (of the imperial chancery) instituted by Emperor Nicholas I in 1826. This was entirely independent of the ordinary police, but was associated with the previously existing Special Corps of Gendarmes, whose chief was placed at its head. Its object had originally been to keep the emperor in close touch with all the branches of the administration and to bring to his notice any abuses and irregularities, and for this purpose its chief was in constant personal contact with the sovereign.\nFollowing the growth of the revolutionary movement and the assassination of Emperor Alexander II, the Department of State Police inherited the secret police functions of the dismissed Third Section and transferred the most capable Gendarmes to the Okhrana. In 1896 the powers of the minister were extended at the expense of those of the under-secretary, who remained only at the head of the corps of gendarmes; but by a law of 24 September 1904 this was reversed, and the under-secretary was again placed at the head of all the police with the title of under-secretary for the administration of the police.\nBy World War I, the department had spawned a counter-intelligence section. After the February Revolution of 1917, the Gendarmes and the Okhrana were disbanded as anti-revolutionary.\nSoviet era (1917\u201389).\nHaving won the October Revolution, the Bolsheviks disbanded the \"tsarist\" police forces and formed an all-proletarian \"Workers' and Peasants' Militsiya\" under the NKVD of the Russian SFSR. After the establishment of the USSR, there was no Soviet (federal) NKVD until 1934. In March 1946, all of the People's Commissariats (NK) were redesignated as Ministries (M). The NKVD was renamed the MVD of the USSR, along with its former subordinate, the NKGB which became the MGB of the USSR. The NKVDs of Union Republics also became Ministries of Internal Affairs subordinate to MVD of the USSR.\nSecret police became a part of MVD after Lavrenty Beria merged the MGB into the MVD in March 1953. Within a year Beria's downfall caused the MVD to be split up again; after that, the MVD retained its \"internal security\" (police) functions, while the new KGB took on \"state security\" (secret police) functions.\nIn his efforts to fight bureaucracy and maintain 'Leninist principles', Nikita Khrushchev, as the Premier of the Soviet Union, called for the dismissal of the All-Union MVD. The Ministry ceased to exist in January 1960, and its functions were transferred to the respective Republican Ministries. The MVD of the Russian SFSR was renamed the Ministry for Securing the Public Order in 1962. Leonid Brezhnev again recreated the All-Union Ministry for Securing the Public Order in July 1966, and later assigned Nikolai Shchelokov as Minister; the RSFSR Ministry was disbanded for the second time, the first being at the creation of the NKVD of the Soviet Union. The MVD regained its original title in 1968. Another role of the reformed MVD was to combat \"economic crimes\", that is, to suppress private business which was largely prohibited by socialist law. This fight was never successful, due to the pervasive nature of the black market.\nBy the mid-1980s, the image of the \"people's militsiya\" was largely compromised by the corruption and disorderly behaviour of both enlisted and officer staff (the most shocking case was the robbery and murder of a KGB operative by a group of militsiya officers stationed in the Moscow Metro in 1980).\nRussian Federation (1990\u2013present).\nOrganizational changes.\nThe Russian MVD re-formed as the MVD of the Russian SFSR in 1990, following the restoration of the republican Russian Council of Ministers and the Supreme Soviet of Russia. It continued in its functions when Russia gained independence from the Soviet Union in 1991. As of 2017[ [update]] the Ministry controlled: the Politsiya (formerly Militsiya), the General Administration for Traffic Safety, and the Federal Drug Control Service.\nSince the disbanding of the Russian Tax Police Service in 2003, the MVD also investigates economic crimes. Two long-time units of the Imperial MVD and NKVD, the Russian Firefighting Service and the Federal Prisons Service, transferred to the Russian Ministry of Emergency Situations in 2001 and to the Russian Ministry of Justice in 2006, respectively. The last reorganization abolished Main Directorates inherited from the NKVD in favour of Departments. In 2012, career police officer Vladimir Kolokoltsev became the Minister of Internal Affairs in Russia.\nOn 5 April 2016, Russian President Vladimir Putin ordered the Russian Internal Troops, OMON (the Special Purpose Mobility Unit), and SOBR (SWAT) forces to form the basis of the newly created National Guard of Russia, and these close to 200,000 public order, special police, and internal troop forces previously under the command of the MVD were reassigned to the Security Council of Russia. In turn and on the same day, the Federal Drug Control Service and the Federal Migration Service merged into the MVD, and are now known as the Main Directorate for Drugs Control and the Main Directorate for Migration Affairs, respectively.\n2005\u201319.\nIn 2006, investigative journalist Anna Politkovskaya was murdered. Six years later, the former head of surveillance at Moscow\u2019s main Internal Affairs Directorate was found guilty of organizing her murder by tracking her movements and giving a gun to the killer.\nIn December 2019, Distributed Denial of Secrets listed a leak from Russia's Ministry of the Interior, portions of which detailed the deployment of Russian troops to Ukraine, at a time when the Kremlin was denying a military presence there. Some material from that leak was published in 2014, about half of it was not, and WikiLeaks reportedly rejected a request to host the files two years later, at a time when Julian Assange was focused on exposing Democratic Party documents passed to WikiLeaks by Kremlin hackers.\n2020\u2013present.\nThe founder and editor of the independent news site Koza.Press, known professionally as Irina Slavina, was harassed by law enforcement for years. On October 2, 2020, she committed suicide by self-immolation outside a regional Ministry of Internal Affairs building, writing on Facebook, \u201cFor my death, please blame the Russian Federation.\u201d\nIn September 2023, Russia's Ministry of Internal Affairs decided to have an appeal by imprisoned opposition leader Alexei Navalny challenging his 19-year prison sentence on extremism charges held by a court behind closed doors, and the appeal was dismissed. Supporters of Navalny said he was being silenced for criticizing President Vladimir Putin's government. In 2020 Navalny was poisoned in Russia with the Soviet-era nerve agent Novichok.\nTelecommunications service providers are required to grant the Ministry of Internal Affairs 24-hour remote access to their client databases, including telephone and electronic communication and records, enabling the Ministry to track private communications and internet activity without the users' knowledge. The law permits authorities to monitor telephone calls in real time.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53057", "revid": "4842600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53057", "title": "Pareto distribution", "text": "Probability distribution\n&lt;/math&gt;\n | cdf =formula_1\n | quantile = formula_2\n | mean =formula_3\n | median =formula_4\n | mode =formula_5\n | variance =formula_6\n | skewness =formula_7\n | kurtosis =formula_8\n | entropy =formula_9\n | mgf =does not exist\n | char =formula_10\n | fisher =formula_11\n | ES =formula_12\n | bPOE =formula_13\nThe Pareto distribution, named after the Italian civil engineer, economist, and sociologist Vilfredo Pareto, is a power-law probability distribution that is used in description of social, quality control, scientific, geophysical, actuarial, and many other types of observable phenomena; the principle originally applied to describing the distribution of wealth in a society, fitting the trend that a large portion of wealth is held by a small fraction of the population.\nThe \"Pareto principle\" or \"80:20 rule\" stating that 80% of outcomes are due to 20% of causes was named in honour of Pareto, but the concepts are distinct, and only Pareto distributions with shape value (\"\u03b1\") precisely reflect it. Empirical observation has shown that this 80:20 distribution fits a wide range of cases, including natural phenomena and human activities.\nDefinitions.\nIf \"X\" is a random variable with a Pareto (Type I) distribution, then the probability that \"X\" is greater than some number \"x\", i.e., the survival function (also called tail function), is given by\nformula_14\nwhere \"x\"m is the (necessarily positive) minimum possible value of \"X\", and \"\u03b1\" is a positive parameter. The type I Pareto distribution is characterized by a scale parameter \"x\"m and a shape parameter \"\u03b1\", which is known as the \"tail index\". If this distribution is used to model the distribution of wealth, then the parameter \"\u03b1\" is called the Pareto index.\nCumulative distribution function.\nFrom the definition, the cumulative distribution function of a Pareto random variable with parameters \"\u03b1\" and \"x\"m is\nformula_15\nProbability density function.\nIt follows (by differentiation) that the probability density function is\nformula_16\nWhen plotted on linear axes, the distribution assumes the familiar J-shaped curve which approaches each of the orthogonal axes asymptotically. All segments of the curve are self-similar (subject to appropriate scaling factors). When plotted in a log\u2013log plot, the distribution is represented by a straight line.\nProperties.\nMoments and characteristic function.\nThe parameters may be solved for using the method of moments.\nConditional distributions.\nThe conditional probability distribution of a Pareto-distributed random variable, given the event that it is greater than or equal to a particular number\u00a0formula_24 exceeding formula_25, is a Pareto distribution with the same Pareto index\u00a0formula_26 but with minimum\u00a0formula_24 instead of formula_25:\nformula_29\nThis implies that the conditional expected value (if it is finite, i.e. formula_30) is proportional to formula_24:\nformula_32\nIn case of random variables that describe the lifetime of an object, this means that life expectancy is proportional to age, and is called the Lindy effect or Lindy's Law.\nA characterization theorem.\nSuppose formula_33 are independent identically distributed random variables whose probability distribution is supported on the interval formula_34 for some formula_35. Suppose that for all formula_36, the two random variables formula_37 and formula_38 are independent. Then the common distribution is a Pareto distribution.\nGeometric mean.\nThe geometric mean (\"G\") is\nformula_39\nHarmonic mean.\nThe harmonic mean (\"H\") is\nformula_40\nGraphical representation.\nThe characteristic curved 'long tail' distribution, when plotted on a linear scale, masks the underlying simplicity of the function when plotted on a log-log graph, which then takes the form of a straight line with negative gradient: It follows from the formula for the probability density function that for \"x\" \u2265 \"x\"m,\nformula_41\nSince \"\u03b1\" is positive, the gradient \u2212(\"\u03b1\"\u00a0+\u00a01) is negative.\nRelated distributions.\nGeneralized Pareto distributions.\nThere is a hierarchy of Pareto distributions known as Pareto Type I, II, III, IV, and Feller\u2013Pareto distributions. Pareto Type IV contains Pareto Type I\u2013III as special cases. The Feller\u2013Pareto distribution generalizes Pareto Type IV.\nPareto types I\u2013IV.\nThe Pareto distribution hierarchy is summarized in the next table comparing the survival functions (complementary CDF).\nWhen \"\u03bc\" = 0, the Pareto distribution Type II is also known as the Lomax distribution.\nIn this section, the symbol \"x\"m, used before to indicate the minimum value of \"x\", is replaced by\u00a0\"\u03c3\".\nThe shape parameter \"\u03b1\" is the tail index, \"\u03bc\" is location, \"\u03c3\" is scale, \"\u03b3\" is an inequality parameter. Some special cases of Pareto Type (IV) are\nformula_42\nformula_43\nformula_44\nThe finiteness of the mean, and the existence and the finiteness of the variance depend on the tail index \"\u03b1\" (inequality index \"\u03b3\"). In particular, fractional \"\u03b4\"-moments are finite for some \"\u03b4\" &gt; 0, as shown in the table below, where \"\u03b4\" is not necessarily an integer.\nFeller\u2013Pareto distribution.\nFeller defines a Pareto variable by transformation \"U\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"Y\"\u22121\u00a0\u2212\u00a01 of a beta random variable ,\"Y\", whose probability density function is\nformula_45\nwhere B(\u00a0) is the beta function. If\nformula_46\nthen \"W\" has a Feller\u2013Pareto distribution FP(\"\u03bc\", \"\u03c3\", \"\u03b3\", \"\u03b3\"1, \"\u03b3\"2).\nIf formula_47 and formula_48 are independent Gamma variables, another construction of a Feller\u2013Pareto (FP) variable is\nformula_49\nand we write \"W\" ~ FP(\"\u03bc\", \"\u03c3\", \"\u03b3\", \"\u03b4\"1, \"\u03b4\"2). Special cases of the Feller\u2013Pareto distribution are\nformula_50\nformula_51\nformula_52\nformula_53\nInverse-Pareto Distribution / Power Distribution.\nWhen a random variable formula_54 follows a pareto distribution, then its inverse formula_55 follows a Power distribution. \nInverse Pareto distribution is equivalent to a Power distribution\nformula_56\nRelation to the exponential distribution.\nThe Pareto distribution is related to the exponential distribution as follows. If \"X\" is Pareto-distributed with minimum \"x\"m and index\u00a0\"\u03b1\", then\nformula_57\nis exponentially distributed with rate parameter\u00a0\"\u03b1\". Equivalently, if \"Y\" is exponentially distributed with rate\u00a0\"\u03b1\", then\nformula_58\nis Pareto-distributed with minimum \"x\"m and index\u00a0\"\u03b1\".\nThis can be shown using the standard change-of-variable techniques:\nformula_59\nThe last expression is the cumulative distribution function of an exponential distribution with rate\u00a0\"\u03b1\".\nPareto distribution can be constructed by hierarchical exponential distributions. Let formula_60 and formula_61. Then we have formula_62 and, as a result, formula_63.\nMore in general, if formula_64 (shape-rate parametrization) and formula_65, then formula_66.\nEquivalently, if formula_67 and formula_68, then formula_69.\nRelation to the log-normal distribution.\nThe Pareto distribution and log-normal distribution are alternative distributions for describing the same types of quantities. One of the connections between the two is that they are both the distributions of the exponential of random variables distributed according to other common distributions, respectively the exponential distribution and normal distribution. (See the previous section.)\nRelation to the generalized Pareto distribution.\nThe Pareto distribution is a special case of the generalized Pareto distribution, which is a family of distributions of similar form, but containing an extra parameter in such a way that the support of the distribution is either bounded below (at a variable point), or bounded both above and below (where both are variable), with the Lomax distribution as a special case. This family also contains both the unshifted and shifted exponential distributions.\nThe Pareto distribution with scale formula_70 and shape formula_26 is equivalent to the generalized Pareto distribution with location formula_72, scale formula_73 and shape formula_74 and, conversely, one can get the Pareto distribution from the GPD by taking formula_75 and formula_76 if formula_77.\nBounded Pareto distribution.\n | cdf =formula_78\n | mean =\nformula_79\n | median = formula_80\n | mode =\n | variance =\nformula_81\n | kurtosis =\n | entropy =\n | mgf =\n | char =\nThe bounded (or truncated) Pareto distribution has three parameters: \"\u03b1\", \"L\" and \"H\". As in the standard Pareto distribution \"\u03b1\" determines the shape. \"L\" denotes the minimal value, and \"H\" denotes the maximal value.\nThe probability density function is\nformula_82\nwhere \"L\"\u00a0\u2264\u00a0\"x\"\u00a0\u2264\u00a0\"H\", and \"\u03b1\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a00.\nGenerating bounded Pareto random variables.\nIf \"U\" is uniformly distributed on (0,\u00a01), then applying inverse-transform method \nformula_83\nformula_84\nis a bounded Pareto-distributed.\nSymmetric Pareto distribution.\nThe purpose of the Symmetric and Zero Symmetric Pareto distributions is to capture some special statistical distribution with a sharp probability peak and symmetric long probability tails. These two distributions are derived from the Pareto distribution. Long probability tails normally means that probability decays slowly, and can be used to fit a variety of datasets. But if the distribution has symmetric structure with two slow decaying tails, Pareto could not do it. Then Symmetric Pareto or Zero Symmetric Pareto distribution is applied instead.\nThe Cumulative distribution function (CDF) of Symmetric Pareto distribution is defined as following:\nformula_85\nThis distribution has two parameters: a and b. It is symmetric about b. Then the mathematic expectation is b. When, it has variance as following:\nformula_86\nThe CDF of Zero Symmetric Pareto (ZSP) distribution is defined as following:\nformula_87\nThe corresponding PDF is:\nformula_88\nThis distribution is symmetric about zero. Parameter a is related to the decay rate of probability and (a/2b) represents peak magnitude of probability.\nMultivariate Pareto distribution.\nThe univariate Pareto distribution has been extended to a multivariate Pareto distribution.\nStatistical inference.\nEstimation of parameters.\nThe likelihood function for the Pareto distribution parameters \"\u03b1\" and \"x\"m, given an independent sample \"x\" =\u00a0(\"x\"1,\u00a0\"x\"2,\u00a0...,\u00a0\"xn\"), is\nformula_89\nTherefore, the logarithmic likelihood function is\nformula_90\nIt can be seen that formula_91 is monotonically increasing with \"x\"m, that is, the greater the value of \"x\"m, the greater the value of the likelihood function. Hence, since \"x\" \u2265 \"x\"m, we conclude that\nformula_92\nTo find the estimator for \"\u03b1\", we compute the corresponding partial derivative and determine where it is zero:\nformula_93\nThus the maximum likelihood estimator for \"\u03b1\" is:\nformula_94\nThe expected statistical error is:\nformula_95\nMalik (1970) gives the exact joint distribution of formula_96. In particular, formula_97 and formula_98 are independent and formula_97 is Pareto with scale parameter \"x\"m and shape parameter \"n\u03b1\", whereas formula_98 has an inverse-gamma distribution with shape and scale parameters \"n\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01 and \"n\u03b1\", respectively.\nOccurrence and applications.\nGeneral.\nVilfredo Pareto originally used this distribution to describe the allocation of wealth among individuals since it seemed to show rather well the way that a larger portion of the wealth of any society is owned by a smaller percentage of the people in that society. He also used it to describe distribution of income. This idea is sometimes expressed more simply as the Pareto principle or the \"80-20 rule\" which says that 20% of the population controls 80% of the wealth. As Michael Hudson points out in \"The Collapse of Antiquity\", \"a mathematical corollary [is] that 10% would have 65% of the wealth, and 5% would have half the national wealth.\" However, the 80-20 rule corresponds to a particular value of \"\u03b1\", and in fact, Pareto's data on British income taxes in his \"Cours d'\u00e9conomie politique\" indicates that about 30% of the population had about 70% of the income. The probability density function (PDF) graph at the beginning of this article shows that the \"probability\" or fraction of the population that owns a small amount of wealth per person is rather high, and then decreases steadily as wealth increases. (The Pareto distribution is not realistic for wealth for the lower end, however. In fact, net worth may even be negative.) This distribution is not limited to describing wealth or income, but to many situations in which an equilibrium is found in the distribution of size or magnitude. The following examples are sometimes seen as approximately Pareto-distributed:\nRelation to Zipf's law.\nThe Pareto distribution is a continuous probability distribution. Zipf's law, also sometimes called the zeta distribution, is a discrete distribution, separating the values into a simple ranking. Both are a simple power law with a negative exponent, scaled so that their cumulative distributions equal 1. Zipf's can be derived from the Pareto distribution if the formula_101 values (incomes) are binned into formula_102 ranks so that the number of people in each bin follows a 1/rank pattern. The distribution is normalized by defining formula_70 so that formula_104 where formula_105 is the generalized harmonic number. This makes Zipf's probability density function derivable from Pareto's.\nformula_106\nwhere formula_107 and formula_101 is an integer representing rank from 1 to N where N is the highest income bracket. So a randomly selected person (or word, website link, or city) from a population (or language, internet, or country) has formula_109 probability of ranking formula_101.\nRelation to the \"Pareto principle\".\nThe \"80/20 law\", according to which 20% of all people receive 80% of all income, and 20% of the most affluent 20% receive 80% of that 80%, and so on, holds precisely when the Pareto index is formula_111. This result can be derived from the Lorenz curve formula given below. Moreover, the following have been shown to be mathematically equivalent:\nThis does not apply only to income, but also to wealth, or to anything else that can be modeled by this distribution.\nThis excludes Pareto distributions in which\u00a00\u00a0&lt;\u00a0\"\u03b1\"\u00a0\u2264\u00a01, which, as noted above, have an infinite expected value, and so cannot reasonably model income distribution.\nRelation to Price's law.\nPrice's law is sometimes offered as a property of or as similar to the Pareto distribution. However, the law only holds in the case that formula_113. Note that in this case, the total and expected amount of wealth are not defined, and the rule only applies asymptotically to random samples. The extended Pareto Principle mentioned above is a far more general rule.\nLorenz curve and Gini coefficient.\nThe Lorenz curve is often used to characterize income and wealth distributions. For any distribution, the Lorenz curve \"L\"(\"F\") is written in terms of the PDF \"f\" or the CDF \"F\" as\nformula_114\nwhere \"x\"(\"F\") is the inverse of the CDF. For the Pareto distribution,\nformula_115\nand the Lorenz curve is calculated to be\nformula_116\nFor formula_117 the denominator is infinite, yielding \"L\"=0. Examples of the Lorenz curve for a number of Pareto distributions are shown in the graph on the right.\nAccording to Oxfam (2016) the richest 62 people have as much wealth as the poorest half of the world's population. We can estimate the Pareto index that would apply to this situation. Letting \u03b5 equal formula_118 we have:\nformula_119\nor\nformula_120\nThe solution is that \"\u03b1\" equals about 1.15, and about 9% of the wealth is owned by each of the two groups. But actually the poorest 69% of the world adult population owns only about 3% of the wealth.\nThe Gini coefficient is a measure of the deviation of the Lorenz curve from the equidistribution line which is a line connecting [0,\u00a00] and [1,\u00a01], which is shown in black (\"\u03b1\"\u00a0=\u00a0\u221e) in the Lorenz plot on the right. Specifically, the Gini coefficient is twice the area between the Lorenz curve and the equidistribution line. The Gini coefficient for the Pareto distribution is then calculated (for formula_121) to be\nformula_122\n(see Aaberge 2005).\nRandom variate generation.\nRandom samples can be generated using inverse transform sampling. Given a random variate \"U\" drawn from the uniform distribution on the unit interval [0,\u00a01], the variate \"T\" given by\nformula_123\nis Pareto-distributed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53058", "revid": "14135516", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53058", "title": "Regular space", "text": "Property of topological space\nIn topology and related fields of mathematics, a topological space \"X\" is called a regular space if every closed subset \"C\" of \"X\" and a point \"p\" not contained in \"C\" have non-overlapping open neighborhoods. Thus \"p\" and \"C\" can be separated by neighborhoods. This condition is known as Axiom T3. The term \"T3 space\" usually means \"a regular Hausdorff space\". These conditions are examples of separation axioms.\nDefinitions.\nA topological space \"X\" is a regular space if, given any closed set \"F\" and any point \"x\" that does not belong to \"F\", there exists a neighbourhood \"U\" of \"x\" and a neighbourhood \"V\" of \"F\" that are disjoint. Concisely put, it must be possible to separate \"x\" and \"F\" with disjoint neighborhoods.\nA &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;T3 space or &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;regular Hausdorff space is a topological space that is both regular and a Hausdorff space. (A Hausdorff space or T2 space is a topological space in which any two distinct points are separated by neighbourhoods.) It turns out that a space is T3 if and only if it is both regular and T0. (A T0 or Kolmogorov space is a topological space in which any two distinct points are topologically distinguishable, i.e., for every pair of distinct points, at least one of them has an open neighborhood not containing the other.) Indeed, if a space is Hausdorff then it is T0, and each T0 regular space is Hausdorff: given two distinct points, at least one of them misses the closure of the other one, so (by regularity) there exist disjoint neighborhoods separating one point from (the closure of) the other.\nAlthough the definitions presented here for \"regular\" and \"T3\" are not uncommon, there is significant variation in the literature: some authors switch the definitions of \"regular\" and \"T3\" as they are used here, or use both terms interchangeably. This article uses the term \"regular\" freely, but will usually say \"regular Hausdorff\", which is unambiguous, instead of the less precise \"T3\". For more on this issue, see History of the separation axioms.\nA is a topological space where every point has an open neighbourhood that is regular. Every regular space is locally regular, but the converse is not true. A classical example of a locally regular space that is not regular is the bug-eyed line.\nRelationships to other separation axioms.\nA regular space is necessarily also preregular, i.e., any two topologically distinguishable points can be separated by neighbourhoods.\nSince a Hausdorff space is the same as a preregular T0 space, a regular space which is also T0 must be Hausdorff (and thus T3).\nIn fact, a regular Hausdorff space satisfies the slightly stronger condition T2\u00bd.\nThus, the definition of T3 may cite T0, T1, or T2\u00bd instead of T2 (Hausdorffness); all are equivalent in the context of regular spaces.\nSpeaking more theoretically, the conditions of regularity and T3-ness are related by Kolmogorov quotients.\nA space is regular if and only if its Kolmogorov quotient is T3; and, as mentioned, a space is T3 if and only if it's both regular and T0.\nThus a regular space encountered in practice can usually be assumed to be T3, by replacing the space with its Kolmogorov quotient.\nThere are many results for topological spaces that hold for both regular and Hausdorff spaces.\nMost of the time, these results hold for all preregular spaces; they were listed for regular and Hausdorff spaces separately because the idea of preregular spaces came later.\nOn the other hand, those results that are truly about regularity generally don't also apply to nonregular Hausdorff spaces.\nThere are many situations where another condition of topological spaces (such as normality, pseudonormality, paracompactness, or local compactness) will imply regularity if some weaker separation axiom, such as preregularity, is satisfied.\nSuch conditions often come in two versions: a regular version and a Hausdorff version.\nAlthough Hausdorff spaces aren't generally regular, a Hausdorff space that is also (say) locally compact will be regular, because any Hausdorff space is preregular.\nThus from a certain point of view, regularity is not really the issue here, and we could impose a weaker condition instead to get the same result.\nHowever, definitions are usually still phrased in terms of regularity, since this condition is more well known than any weaker one.\nMost topological spaces studied in mathematical analysis are regular; in fact, they are usually completely regular, which is a stronger condition.\nRegular spaces should also be contrasted with normal spaces.\nExamples and nonexamples.\nA zero-dimensional space with respect to the small inductive dimension has a base consisting of clopen sets.\nEvery such space is regular.\nAs described above, any completely regular space is regular, and any T0 space that is not Hausdorff (and hence not preregular) cannot be regular.\nMost examples of regular and nonregular spaces studied in mathematics may be found in those two articles.\nOn the other hand, spaces that are regular but not completely regular, or preregular but not regular, are usually constructed only to provide counterexamples to conjectures, showing the boundaries of possible theorems.\nOf course, one can easily find regular spaces that are not T0, and thus not Hausdorff, such as an indiscrete space, but these examples provide more insight on the T0 axiom than on regularity. An example of a regular space that is not completely regular is the Tychonoff corkscrew.\nMost interesting spaces in mathematics that are regular also satisfy some stronger condition.\nThus, regular spaces are usually studied to find properties and theorems, such as the ones below, that are actually applied to completely regular spaces, typically in analysis.\nThere exist Hausdorff spaces that are not regular. An example is the K-topology on the set formula_1 of real numbers. More generally, if formula_2 is a fixed nonclosed subset of formula_1 with empty interior with respect to the usual Euclidean topology, one can construct a finer topology on formula_1 by taking as a base the collection of all sets formula_5 and formula_6 for formula_5 open in the usual topology. That topology will be Hausdorff, but not regular.\nElementary properties.\nSuppose that \"X\" is a regular space.\nThen, given any point \"x\" and neighbourhood \"G\" of \"x\", there is a closed neighbourhood \"E\" of \"x\" that is a subset of \"G\".\nIn fancier terms, the closed neighbourhoods of \"x\" form a local base at \"x\".\nIn fact, this property characterises regular spaces; if the closed neighbourhoods of each point in a topological space form a local base at that point, then the space must be regular.\nTaking the interiors of these closed neighbourhoods, we see that the regular open sets form a base for the open sets of the regular space \"X\".\nThis property is actually weaker than regularity; a topological space whose regular open sets form a base is \"semiregular\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53059", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53059", "title": "Separated space", "text": ""}
{"id": "53060", "revid": "41354242", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53060", "title": "Scalar", "text": "Scalar may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "53062", "revid": "39700576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53062", "title": "66 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 66 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Lepidus and Tullus (or, less frequently, year 688 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 66 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nJudea.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53063", "revid": "47175317", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53063", "title": "67 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 67 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Piso and Glabrio (or, less frequently, year 687 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 67 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53064", "revid": "50519108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53064", "title": "Kerckhoffs's principle", "text": "Cryptographic principle that states everything except the key can be public knowledge\nKerckhoffs's principle (also called Kerckhoffs's desideratum, assumption, axiom, doctrine or law) of cryptography was stated by the Dutch cryptographer Auguste Kerckhoffs in the 19th century. The principle holds that a cryptosystem should be secure, even if everything about the system, except the key, is public knowledge. This concept is widely embraced by cryptographers, in contrast to security through obscurity, which is not.\nKerckhoffs's principle was phrased by the American mathematician Claude Shannon as \"the enemy knows the system\", i.e., \"one ought to design systems under the assumption that the enemy will immediately gain full familiarity with them\". In that form, it is called Shannon's maxim.\nAnother formulation by American researcher and professor Steven M. Bellovin is:\nIn other words\u2014design your system assuming that your opponents know it in detail. (A former official at NSA's National Computer Security Center told me that the standard assumption there was that serial number 1 of any new device was delivered to the Kremlin.)\nOrigins.\nThe invention of telegraphy radically changed military communications and increased the number of messages that needed to be protected from the enemy dramatically, leading to the development of field ciphers which had to be easy to use without large confidential codebooks prone to capture on the battlefield. It was this environment which led to the development of Kerckhoffs's requirements.\nAuguste Kerckhoffs was a professor of German language at Ecole des Hautes Etudes Commerciales (HEC) in Paris. In early 1883, Kerckhoffs's article, \"La Cryptographie Militaire\", was published in two parts in the \"Journal of Military Science\", in which he stated six design rules for military ciphers.\u200a Translated from French, they are:\nSome are no longer relevant given the ability of computers to perform complex encryption. The second rule, now known as Kerckhoffs's principle, is still critically important.\nExplanation of the principle.\nKerckhoffs viewed cryptography as a rival to, and a better alternative than, steganographic encoding, which was common in the nineteenth century for hiding the meaning of military messages. One problem with encoding schemes is that they rely on humanly-held secrets such as \"dictionaries\" which disclose for example, the secret meaning of words. Steganographic-like dictionaries, once revealed, permanently compromise a corresponding encoding system. Another problem is that the risk of exposure increases as the number of users holding the secrets increases.\nNineteenth century cryptography, in contrast, used simple tables which provided for the transposition of alphanumeric characters, generally given row-column intersections which could be modified by keys which were generally short, numeric, and could be committed to human memory. The system was considered \"indecipherable\" because tables and keys do not convey meaning by themselves. Secret messages can be compromised only if a matching set of table, key, and message falls into enemy hands in a relevant time frame. Kerckhoffs viewed tactical messages as only having a few hours of relevance. Systems are not necessarily compromised, because their components (i.e. alphanumeric character tables and keys) can be easily changed.\nAdvantage of secret keys.\nUsing secure cryptography is supposed to replace the difficult problem of keeping messages secure with a much more manageable one, keeping relatively small keys secure. A system that requires long-term secrecy for something as large and complex as the whole design of a cryptographic system obviously cannot achieve that goal. It only replaces one hard problem with another. However, if a system is secure even when the enemy knows everything except the key, then all that is needed is to manage keeping the keys secret.\nThere are a large number of ways the internal details of a widely used system could be discovered. The most obvious is that someone could bribe, blackmail, or otherwise threaten staff or customers into explaining the system. In war, for example, one side will probably capture some equipment and people from the other side. Each side will also use spies to gather information.\nIf a method involves software, someone could do memory dumps or run the software under the control of a debugger in order to understand the method. If hardware is being used, someone could buy or steal some of the hardware and build whatever programs or gadgets needed to test it. Hardware can also be dismantled so that the chip details can be examined under the microscope.\nMaintaining security.\nA generalization some make from Kerckhoffs's principle is: \"The fewer and simpler the secrets that one must keep to ensure system security, the easier it is to maintain system security.\" Bruce Schneier ties it in with a belief that all security systems must be designed to fail as gracefully as possible:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Kerckhoffs's principle applies beyond codes and ciphers to security systems in general: every secret creates a potential failure point. Secrecy, in other words, is a prime cause of brittleness\u2014and therefore something likely to make a system prone to catastrophic collapse. Conversely, openness provides ductility.\nAny security system depends crucially on keeping some things secret. However, Kerckhoffs's principle points out that the things kept secret ought to be those least costly to change if inadvertently disclosed.\nFor example, a cryptographic algorithm may be implemented by hardware and software that is widely distributed among users. If security depends on keeping that secret, then disclosure leads to major logistic difficulties in developing, testing, and distributing implementations of a new algorithm \u2013 it is \"brittle\". On the other hand, if keeping the algorithm secret is not important, but only the \"keys\" used with the algorithm must be secret, then disclosure of the keys simply requires the simpler, less costly process of generating and distributing new keys.\nApplications.\nIn accordance with Kerckhoffs's principle, the majority of civilian cryptography makes use of publicly known algorithms. By contrast, ciphers used to protect classified government or military information are often kept secret (see Type 1 encryption). However, it should not be assumed that government/military ciphers must be kept secret to maintain security. It is possible that they are intended to be as cryptographically sound as public algorithms, and the decision to keep them secret is in keeping with a layered security posture.\nSecurity through obscurity.\nIt is moderately common for companies to keep the inner workings of a system secret. Some argue this \"security by obscurity\" makes the product safer and less vulnerable to attack. A counter-argument is that keeping the innards secret may improve security in the short term, but in the long run, only systems that have been published and analyzed should be trusted.\nSteven Bellovin and Randy Bush commented:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Security Through Obscurity Considered Dangerous\nHiding security vulnerabilities in algorithms, software, and/or hardware decreases the likelihood they will be repaired and increases the likelihood that they can and will be exploited. Discouraging or outlawing discussion of weaknesses and vulnerabilities is extremely dangerous and deleterious to the security of computer systems, the network, and its citizens.\nOpen Discussion Encourages Better Security\nThe long history of cryptography and cryptoanalysis has shown time and time again that open discussion and analysis of algorithms exposes weaknesses not thought of by the original authors, and thereby leads to better and more secure algorithms. As Kerckhoffs noted about cipher systems in 1883 [Kerc83], \"Il faut qu'il n'exige pas le secret, et qu'il puisse sans inconv\u00e9nient tomber entre les mains de l'ennemi.\" (Roughly, \"the system must not require secrecy and must be able to be stolen by the enemy without causing trouble.\")\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"This article incorporates material from the Citizendium article \"\", which is licensed under the but not under the .\""}
{"id": "53066", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53066", "title": "68 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 68 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Metellus/Vatia and Rex (or, less frequently, year 686 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 68 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nOsroene.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53067", "revid": "6941696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53067", "title": "69 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 69 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Hortensius and Metellus (or, less frequently, year 685 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 69 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nGreece.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53068", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53068", "title": "Stefan\u2013Boltzmann constant", "text": ""}
{"id": "53071", "revid": "16893326", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53071", "title": "The Magician's Nephew", "text": "1955 children's novel by C. S. Lewis\nThe Magician's Nephew is a portal fantasy novel by British author C. S. Lewis, published in 1955 by The Bodley Head. It is the sixth published of seven novels in \"The Chronicles of Narnia\" (1950\u20131956). In recent editions, which sequence the books according in chronological order, it is placed as the first volume of the series. Like the others, it was illustrated by Pauline Baynes whose work has been retained in many later editions. The Bodley Head was a new publisher for \"The Chronicles\", a change from Geoffrey Bles who had published the previous five novels.\n\"The Magician's Nephew\" is a prequel to the series. The middle third of the novel features the creation of the Narnia world by Aslan the lion, centred on a section of a lamp-post brought by accidental observers from London in 1900. The visitors then participate in the beginning of Narnia's history, 1000 years before \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\" (which inaugurated the series in 1950).\nThe frame story, set in England, features two children ensnared in experimental travel via \"the wood between the worlds\". Thus, the novel shows Narnia and our middle-aged world to be only two of many in a multiverse, which changes as some worlds begin and others end. It also explains the origin of foreign elements in Narnia, not only the lamp-post but also the White Witch and a human king and queen.\nLewis began \"The Magician's Nephew\" soon after completing \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\", spurred by a friend's question about the lamp-post in the middle of nowhere, but he needed more than five years to complete it. The story includes several autobiographical elements and explores a number of themes with general moral and Christian implications, including atonement, original sin, temptation, and the order of nature.\nPlot summary.\nThe story begins in London during the summer of 1900. Two children, Digory and Polly, meet while playing in the adjacent gardens of a row of terraced houses. They decide to explore the abandoned attic beyond Digory's house, but do not walk far enough, and find themselves in Uncle Andrew's study. Uncle Andrew tricks Polly into touching a yellow magic ring, causing her to vanish. Then he explains to Digory that he has been dabbling in magic, and that the rings allow travel between one world and another. He blackmails Digory into taking another yellow ring to follow wherever Polly has gone, and two green rings so that they both can return.\nDigory finds himself transported to a sleepy woodland with an almost narcotic effect; he finds Polly nearby. The woodland is filled with pools. Digory and Polly surmise that the wood is not really a proper world at all but a \"Wood between the Worlds\", similar to the attic that links their houses back in England, and that each pool leads to a separate universe. They decide to explore a different world before returning to England, and jump into one of the nearby pools. They then find themselves in a desolate abandoned city of the ancient world of Charn. Inside the ruined palace, they discover statues of Charn's former kings and queens, which degenerate from the fair and wise to the unhappy and cruel. They find a bell with a hammer and an inscription inviting the finder to strike the bell.\nDespite protests from Polly, Digory rings the bell. This awakens the last of the statues, a witch queen named Jadis, who\u00a0\u2013\u00a0to avoid defeat in battle\u00a0\u2013\u00a0had deliberately killed every living thing in Charn by speaking the \"Deplorable Word\". As the only survivor left in her world, she placed herself in an enchanted sleep that would only be broken by someone ringing the bell.\nThe children recognise Jadis as evil and attempt to flee, but she follows them back to England by clinging to them as they clutch their rings. In England, she discovers that her magical powers do not work, although she retains her superhuman strength. Dismissing Uncle Andrew as a poor magician, she enslaves him and orders him to fetch her a \"chariot\"\u00a0\u2013\u00a0a hansom cab\u00a0\u2013\u00a0so she can set about conquering Earth. They leave, and she attracts attention by robbing a jeweller's shop in London. The police chase after her cab, until she crashes at the foot of the Kirke house. Jadis breaks off and tears an iron rod from a nearby lamp-post, using it to fight off police and onlookers when they mock her.\nWhen Jadis threatens the crowd, Polly and Digory grab her and put on their rings to take her out of their world\u00a0\u2013\u00a0along with Uncle Andrew, Frank the cab-driver, and Frank's horse, Strawberry, who were all touching each other when the children grabbed their rings. In the Wood between the Worlds, Strawberry, when attempting to drink from one of the ponds, accidentally brings everyone into another world: a dark, empty void. At first, Digory believes it to be Charn, but Jadis recognises it as a world not yet created. They then all witness the creation of a new world by the lion Aslan, who brings stars, plants, and animals into existence as he sings. Jadis, as terrified by his singing as the others are attracted to it, tries to kill Aslan with the iron rod; but it rebounds harmlessly off him, and in the creative soil of the new world it sprouts into a growing lamp-post. Jadis flees in terror.\nAslan gives some animals the power of speech, commanding them to use it for justice and merriment or else risk becoming regular animals once again. Frank the cabby and his wife Helen are then crowned King and Queen of Narnia. Aslan confronts Digory with his responsibility for bringing Jadis into his young world, and tells Digory he must atone by helping to protect the new land of Narnia from her evil. Aslan transforms Strawberry, Frank's horse, into a winged horse called Fledge, and Digory and Polly fly on him to a distant garden high in the mountains. Digory's task is to take an apple from a tree in this garden and plant it in Narnia. At the garden Digory finds a sign warning not to steal from the garden.\nDigory picks one of the apples for his mission, but their overpowering smell tempts him. Jadis appears, having herself eaten an apple to become immortal, leaving her with pale white skin. She tempts Digory either to eat an apple himself and join her in immortality, or steal one to take back to Earth to heal his dying mother. Digory resists, knowing his mother would never condone theft, but hesitates. He sees through the Witch's ploy when she suggests he leave Polly behind\u00a0\u2013\u00a0not knowing Polly can get away by her own ring. Foiled, the Witch departs for the North, and taunts Digory for his refusal to eat the apple and gain immortality. Digory returns to Narnia and plants the apple, which grows into a mature tree behind them while the coronation proceeds. Aslan tells Digory how the tree works\u00a0\u2013\u00a0anyone who steals the apples gets their heart's desire, but in a form that renders it extremely disagreeable. In the Witch's case, she has achieved immortality, but it only means eternal misery because of her evil heart. Moreover, the magic apples are now a horror to her, so much so that the apple tree will repel her for centuries to come, but not forever. With Aslan's permission, Digory takes an apple from the new tree to heal his mother. Aslan returns Digory, Polly, and Uncle Andrew to England. Frank and his wife Helen (transported from England by Aslan) stay to rule Narnia as its first King and Queen. The Narnian creatures live in peace and joy, and neither the Witch nor any other enemy will come to trouble Narnia for many hundreds of years.\nDigory's apple restores his mother's health as his father returns for good after being away on business in India, and he and Polly remain lifelong friends. Uncle Andrew reforms and gives up magic, but still enjoys bragging about his adventures with the Witch. Digory plants the apple's core with Uncle Andrew's rings in the back yard of his aunt's home in London, and it grows into a large tree. Soon afterwards, Digory's family inherits a mansion in the country, and many years later the apple tree blows down in a storm. Digory, now a middle-aged professor, has its wood made into a wardrobe, setting up the events in \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\".\nWriting.\nLewis had originally intended only to write the one Narnia novel, \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\". However, when Roger Lancelyn Green asked him how a lamp-post came to be standing in the midst of Narnian woodland, Lewis was intrigued enough by the question to attempt to find an answer by writing \"The Magician's Nephew\", which features a younger version of Professor Kirke from the first novel.\n\"The Magician's Nephew\" seems to have been the most challenging Narnia novel for Lewis to write. While the other six \"Chronicles of Narnia\" books were written between 1948 and 1953, \"The Magician's Nephew\" was written over a five-year period between 1949 and 1954. He started in the summer of 1949 after finishing \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\", but came to a halt after producing 26\u00a0pages of manuscript and did not resume work until two years later. This may be as a result of the autobiographical aspects of the novel, as it reflects a number of incidents and parallels very close to his own experiences.\nHe returned to \"The Magician's Nephew\" late in 1950, after completing \"The Silver Chair\". He managed to finish close to three-quarters of the novel, and then stopped work once again after Roger Green, to whom Lewis showed all his writing at the time, suggested there was a structural problem in the story. Finally he returned to the novel in 1953, after finishing \"The Last Battle\" in the spring of that year and completed early in 1954.\nLewis originally titled the novel \"Polly and Digory\"; his publisher changed it to \"The Magician's Nephew\". This book is dedicated to \"the Kilmer family\".\nThe Lefay Fragment.\nThe original opening of the novel differs greatly from the published version, and was abandoned by Lewis. It is now known as 'The Lefay Fragment', and is named after Mrs\u00a0Lefay, Digory's fairy godmother, who is mentioned in the final version as Uncle Andrew's godmother, a less benevolent user of magic, who bequeathed him the box of dust used to create the magic rings.\nIn the Lefay Fragment, Digory is born with the ability to speak to (and understand) trees and animals; the distinction between Talking and non-Talking Beasts which was to become such a characteristic feature of the Narnian world is absent. Digory lives with an Aunt Gertrude, a former school mistress with an officious, bullying nature, who has ended up as a Government minister after a lifetime of belligerent brow-beating of others. Whenever his aunt is absent, Digory finds solace with the animals and trees, including a squirrel named Pattertwig. Polly enters the story as a girl next door who is unable to understand the speech of non-human creatures. She wants to build a raft to explore a stream which leads to an underground world. Digory helps construct the raft, but saws a branch from a tree necessary to complete it, in order not to lose face with Polly. This causes him to lose his supernatural powers of understanding the speech of trees and animals. The following day he is visited by his godmother Mrs\u00a0Lefay who knows that Digory has lost his abilities and gives him a card with the address of a furniture shop which she instructs him to visit. At this point the fragment ends.\nPattertwig and Aunt Gertrude do not appear in the final version of the novel. Pattertwig does, however, appear as a Narnian creature in \"Prince Caspian\", and Aunt Gertrude's career path is retraced by the Head of Experiment House in \"The Silver Chair\".\nAuthenticity.\nSome doubt has been cast on the authenticity of the Lefay Fragment, as the handwriting in the manuscript differs in some ways from Lewis's usual style, and the writing is not of a similar calibre to his other work. Also in August 1963 Lewis had given instructions to Douglas Gresham to destroy all his unfinished or incomplete fragments of manuscript when his rooms at Magdalene College, Cambridge were being cleaned out, following his resignation from the college early in the month.\nAutobiographical elements.\nA number of aspects of \"The Magician's Nephew\" are parallels with Lewis's own life. Both Digory and Lewis were children in the early 1900s, both wanted a pony, and both were faced with the death of their mothers in childhood. Digory is separated from his father, who is in India, and misses him. Lewis was educated in England after his mother's death, while his father remained in Ireland. He also had a brother in India. Both Lewis and Digory were voracious readers as children, and both are better with books than with numbers. Digory (and Polly) struggle with sums when trying to work out how far they must travel along the attic space to explore an abandoned house, Lewis failed the maths entrance exam for Oxford University. Lewis remembered rainy summer days from his youth and Digory is faced with the same woe in the novel. Additionally Digory becomes a professor when he grows up, who takes in evacuated children during World War II.\nThe character of Andrew Ketterley also closely resembles Robert Capron, a schoolmaster at Wynyard School, which Lewis attended with his brother, whom Lewis suggested during his teens would make a good model for a villain in a future story. Ketterley resembles Capron in his age, appearance, and behaviour.\nStyle.\n\"The Magician's Nephew\" is written in a lighter tone than other \"Chronicles of Narnia\" books, in particular \"The Last Battle\", which was published after. It frequently makes use of humour; this perhaps reflects the sense of looking back at an earlier part of the century with affection, and Lewis as a middle-aged man recalling his childhood during those years. There are a number of humorous references to life in the old days, in particular school life. Humorous exchanges also take place between Narnian animals. Jadis's attempt to conquer London is portrayed as more comical than threatening, and further humour derives from the contrast between the evil empress and Edwardian London and its social mores, and her humiliation of bumbling Andrew Ketterley after discovering he is not as powerful a sorcerer as she is (or was). This recalls the style of Edith Nesbit's children's books. Lewis was fond of these books, which he read in childhood, a number were set in the same period and \"The Magician's Nephew\" has some apparent references or homages to them.\nReading order.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"I think I agree with your [chronological] order for reading the books more than with your mother's. The series was not planned beforehand as she thinks. When I wrote The Lion I did not know I was going to write any more. Then I wrote P. Caspian as a sequel and still didn't think there would be any more, and when I had done The Voyage I felt quite sure it would be the last, but I found I was wrong. So perhaps it does not matter very much in which order anyone read them. I\u2019m not even sure that all the others were written in the same order in which they were published.\"\n\u2014C. S. Lewis's reply to a letter from Laurence Krieg, an American fan who was having an argument with his mother about the reading order.\n\"The Magician's Nephew\" was originally published as the sixth book in the \"Narnia Chronicles\". Most reprintings of the novels until the 1980s also reflected the order of original publication. In 1980 HarperCollins published the series ordered by the chronology of the events in the novels. This meant \"The Magician's Nephew\" was numbered as the first in the series. HarperCollins, which had previously published editions of the novels outside the United States, also acquired the rights to publish the novels in that country in 1994 and used this sequence in the uniform worldwide edition published in that year.\nLaurence Krieg, a young fan, wrote to Lewis, asking him to adjudicate between his views of the correct sequence of reading the novels \u2013 according to the sequence of events, with \"The Magician's Nephew\" being placed first \u2013 and that of his mother, who thought the order of publication was more appropriate. Lewis wrote back, appearing to support the younger Krieg's views, although he did point out that perhaps it would not matter what order they were read in.\nLewis scholars Peter Schakel and Paul Ford support the publishing order. Schakel points out that the narrative of \"The Magician's Nephew\" assumes that the reader has already read \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\" (which was written and published first) and is now being shown its beginnings. Ford writes, \"most scholars disagree with this decision and find it the least faithful to Lewis's deepest intentions\". From a literary standpoint, Lucy Pevensie's discovery of the wardrobe that opens onto a forest and a mysterious lamp-post creates a sense of suspense about an unknown land she is discovering for the first time. This would be anticlimactic if the reader has already been introduced to Narnia in \"The Magician's Nephew\" and already knows the origins of Narnia, the wardrobe, and the lamp-post.\nThemes and interpretations.\nParallels with the Book of Genesis.\nLewis suggested that he did not directly intend to write his Narnia stories as Christian tales, but that these aspects appeared subconsciously as he wrote, although the books did become Christian as they progressed. He thought that the tales were not direct representations or allegory, but that they might evoke or remind readers of Biblical stories. In \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\", Aslan is a Christ-like figure who suffers a death of atonement and returns to life in a similar way to Christ's crucifixion and resurrection. \"The Magician's Nephew\" has similar biblical allusions, reflecting aspects of the Book of Genesis such as the creation, original sin and temptation.\nParallels with events in the Book of Genesis include the forbidden fruit represented by an Apple of Life. Jadis tempts Digory to eat one of the forbidden apples in the garden, as the serpent tempts Eve into eating a forbidden fruit in the Garden of Eden; unlike Eve however, Digory rejects the offer. (Lewis's \"Perelandra\" also features a re-enactment of the same Biblical story, which in that book also ends with the tempter foiled and the fall avoided.)\nWhile the creation of Narnia closely echoes the creation of the Earth in the Book of Genesis, there are a number of important differences. Human beings are not created in Narnia by Aslan, they are brought into Narnia from our own world. Unlike Genesis, where souls are given only to human beings, animals and half-human half-animal creatures such as Fauns and Satyrs and even trees and watercourses are given souls and the power of rational thought and speech. This appears to suggest Lewis combined his Christian outlook with his fondness for nature, myths and fairy tales.\nParallels may also be found in Lewis's other writings. Jadis's references to \"reasons of State\", and her claim to own the people of Charn and to be beyond morality, represent the eclipse of the medieval Christian belief in natural law by the political concept of sovereignty, as embodied first in royal absolutism and then in modern dictatorships. Uncle Andrew represents the Faustian element in the origins of modern science.\nThe Holy Spirit and the breath of life.\nOn a number of occasions in the \"Chronicles of Narnia\", Aslan uses his breath to give strength to characters, demonstrating his benevolent power of bringing life. He specifically does so in \"The Magician's Nephew\" when a \"long warm breath\" gives life to Narnia. Lewis used the symbol of breath to represent the Holy Spirit, also known as the Holy Ghost. Both \"spirit\" and \"ghost\" are translations of the word for \"breath\" in Hebrew and Greek. The flash from the stars when the Narnian animals are given the ability to talk also most probably represents the Holy Spirit or \"breath of life\" of \"Genesis\" chapter\u00a02, as well as (possibly) the scholastic concept of the divine active intellect that inspires human beings with rationality.\nNature and a natural order.\n\"The Magician's Nephew\" suggests two opposing approaches to nature, a good approach associated with Aslan as creator and an evil approach associated with human deviation from divine intentions and the harmony of a natural order. On the one hand there is the beauty of Aslan's creation of Narnia, which is suggested as having a natural order by the use of musical harmony to bring landscapes and living things into being. There is also a distinct order to the process of creation, from earth to plants to animal, which evokes the concept of The Great Chain of Being. Lewis himself was a strong believer in the intrinsic value of nature for itself, rather than as a resource to be exploited. This is perhaps reflected in how Aslan also gives speech to spiritual aspects of nature, such as naiads in the water and dryads in the trees. Andrew Ketterley and Jadis represent an opposite, evil approach of bending the forces of nature to human will for their own gain. They see nature solely as a resource to use for their plans and thus disturb and destroy the natural order.\nInfluences.\nJohn Milton's \"Paradise Lost\".\nThe sacred Garden in the west of the Narnian world is surrounded by a \"high wall of green turf\" with branches of trees overhanging it, and \"high gates of gold, fast shut, facing due east\", which must be the only entrance because the travellers \"walked nearly all the way round it\" before they found them. In all these points Lewis echoes John Milton's description of Eden in \"Paradise Lost\":\nThe verdurous wall of Paradise up sprung...\nAnd higher than that Wall a circling row\nOf goodliest trees loaden with fairest fruit,\nBlossoms and fruits at once of golden hue,\nAppeerd, with gay enameld colours mixt...\nOne gate there only was, and that look'd east\nOn th' other side...\nJadis takes on echoes of Satan from the same work: she climbs over the wall of the Garden in contempt of the command to enter only by the gate, and proceeds to tempt Digory as Satan tempted Eve, with lies and half-truths.\nSome details of the creation of Narnia, such as the emergence of animals from the ground, and the way they shake earth from their bodies are also similar to passages in \"Paradise Lost\", and may also have been inspired by descriptions of the processes of nature in the seventh book of Edmund Spenser's \"The Faerie Queene\".\nThe Garden of the Hesperides.\nFour years before the publication of the first Narnia book, Lewis had written as follows on the experience of reading really good poetry for the first time:\n...I did not in the least feel that I was getting in more quantity or better quality a pleasure I had already known. It was more as if a cupboard which one had hitherto valued as a place for hanging coats proved one day, when you opened the door, to lead to the garden of the Hesperides...\nThe element of the cupboard leading to a new world Lewis proceeded to use in \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\", but the snowy Narnia of that book is quite unlike the balmy Garden of the Hesperides, most of whose major mythological features appear as attributes of the sacred Garden in \"The Magician's Nephew\" where it differs from the Biblical or Miltonian Eden. It is set in the far West of the world; it has a watchful guardian; a hero (Digory) is sent, like , to fetch an apple from it; a female villain (Jadis) steals another of the apples, like Eris. Since the eponymous Hesperides were daughters of Hesperus, the god of the planet Venus in the evening, advocates of the planetary theory adduce this as evidence for a special association between \"The Magician's Nephew\" and Venus.\nEdith Nesbit.\nLewis read Edith Nesbit's children's books as a child and was extremely fond of them. \"The Magician's Nephew\" refers to these books in the opening of the novel as though their events were true, mentioning the setting of the piece as being when \"Mr. Sherlock Holmes was still living in Baker Street and the Bastables were looking for treasure in the Lewisham Road\". The Bastables were children who appeared in a number of Edith Nesbit's stories. In addition to being set in the same period and location as several of Nesbit's stories, \"The Magician's Nephew\" also has some similarities with Nesbit's \"The Story of the Amulet\" (1906). This novel focuses on four children living in London who discover a magic amulet. Their father is away and their mother is ill, as is the case with Digory. They also manage to transport the queen of ancient Babylon to London and she is the cause of a riot; a very similar event takes place in \"The Magician's Nephew\" when Polly and Digory transport Queen Jadis to London and she also causes a similar disturbance.\nJ. R. R. Tolkien.\nThe creation of Narnia may also have been influenced by his close friend J. R. R. Tolkien's \"The Silmarillion\", which also contains a creation scene driven by the effect of music.\nMorgan Le Fay and Pandora's Box.\nLewis greatly enjoyed stories of Arthurian legend and wrote poetry about this world. Mrs\u00a0Lefay visits Digory in The Lefay Fragment, and becomes Andrew Ketterley's nefarious godmother in the finished novel. She gives Ketterley a box from Atlantis containing the dust from which he constructs the rings Digory and Polly use to travel between worlds. Both Lefays are allusions to Morgan Le Fay, a powerful sorceress in a number of versions of King Arthur's tales, who is often portrayed as evil. The box itself is also evocative of Pandora's box from Greek myth, which also contained dangerous secrets.\nThe Atlantis legend.\nThe box of dust enabling travel between worlds originated in Atlantis. Both Lewis and Tolkien were fascinated by the Atlantis legend. The degeneration of Charn's rulers, Jadis's ancestors, from the early kind and wise to the later cruel and arrogant is reminiscent of the similar degeneration in Tolkien's N\u00famenor, the fabled island kingdom that finally sank under the waves due to the sinfulness of its latter inhabitants. The world of Charn was destroyed when Jadis spoke The Deplorable Word, a form of knowledge ancient Charnian scholars feared for its destructive potential. A number of commentators believed Lewis was referring to the use of the atomic bomb, used less than a decade earlier. It is perhaps more likely that Lewis was echoing the mythical destruction of Atlantis by the forces of evil and arrogance. As noted by Alice Ward, the comparison with nuclear arms is made explicit in Aslan's last warning: \"You [Earth] are growing more like it [Charn]. It is not certain that some wicked one of your race will not find out a secret as evil as The Deplorable Word and use it to destroy all living things\".\nAdaptations.\nTheatrical.\nAurand Harris was a well-known American playwright for children, whose works are among the most performed in that medium. He wrote 36\u00a0plays for children including an adaption of \"The Magician's Nephew\". The play was first performed on 26 May 1984 by the Department of Drama, University of Texas, Austin and staged at the B. Iden Payne Theatre. A musical score by William Penn was written for use with productions of the play.\nErina Caradus wrote a playscript for \"The Magician's Nephew\" that was performed in Dunedin, New Zealand in 2005.\nFilm.\nAn agreement among representatives of 20th Century Fox, Walden, and the C. S. Lewis estate determined that \"The Magician's Nephew\" would be the basis for the next film following the release of the 2010 film \"The Voyage of the Dawn Treader\". However, in October 2011, Douglas Gresham confirmed that Walden Media's contract with the C. S. Lewis estate had expired.\nOn 1 October 2013, the C.S. Lewis Company announced that they had entered into an agreement with producer Mark Gordon to jointly develop and produce \"The Chronicles of Narnia: The Silver Chair\", ultimately deciding to continue releasing the films to mirror the novel series' publication order.\nIn October 2018, Netflix announced an agreement with the C.S. Lewis Company. Netflix will develop and produce new series and movies based on \"The Chronicles of Narnia\". Mark Gordon of Entertainment One, Douglas Gresham and Vincent Sieber will serve as producers for films and executive producers for series. Filming started in London on the adaptation of \"The Magician\u2019s Nephew\" directed by Greta Gerwig in August 2025.\nTV.\nIn 2003, the BBC produced a 10-part version read by Jane Lapotaire and signed by Jean St Clair wearing different Narnia-like clothes in British Sign Language, for the TV series \"Hands Up!\" which was first broadcast on the 16 January 2003. Jean signed in front of various high quality illustrations representing parts of the novel. It was later repeated on CBBC on the 3 December 2007, and BBC Two on the 16 September 2008.\nRadio.\nA BBC Radio 4 adaptation exists. Focus on the Family also made an adaptation of this book with a full cast, sound editing, and music. Both productions adapted all seven books.\nManga.\nA HarperCollins Japan manga adaptation, , began publication in 2018, before concluding in 2020 after two volumes.\nCritical reception.\nT.M. Wagner of SF Reviews said \"\"The Magician's Nephew\" may not be the best of the Narnia novels, but it's a brisk and funny tale certain to delight its intended young audience\", saying that it may not satisfy readers in their teenage years and older.\nJandy's Reading Room reviewed the book, saying that although they feel it is the weakest of the series, they would still recommend it. They say it \"gives a wonderful picture of the beginning of a new world, in the manner of the Creation.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53074", "revid": "5850103", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53074", "title": "Biocompatible material", "text": ""}
{"id": "53075", "revid": "14965160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53075", "title": "Jehuda Cresques", "text": "Cartographer from Palma, Majorca\nJehud\u00e0 Cresques (, 1360-1410), also known as Jafud\u00e0 Cresques, Jaume Riba, and Cresques lo Juheu (\"Cresques the Jew\"), was a \"converso\" cartographer from \"Majorca\" in the early 15th century.\nBiography.\nThe son of Cresques Abraham, a famous Jewish cartographer, he was born in Majorca, in the Majorcan-Catalan speaking part of Crown of Aragon, in present-day Spain. Together he and his father were the probable authors of the famous Catalan Atlas of 1375.\nCresques' work was highly sought after. In 1390 John I of Aragon paid 60 livres and 8 sous for one of his maps. After the Aragonese persecutions of 1391 he was forcibly converted to Christianity, at which time he took the name Jaume Riba, Jacobus Ribus, in Latin. He appears to have remained in Majorca for a considerable time and to have become known to the people there as \"\"lo jueu buscoler\", the map Jew, or \"el jueu de les bruixoles\"\", the compass Jew.\n'Mestre Jacome'.\nIt has long been believed that Jehuda Cresques is the same person as 'Mestre Jacome', a Majorcan cartographer induced by the Portuguese prince Henry the Navigator to move to Portugal in the 1420s to train Portuguese map-makers in Majorcan-style cartography. 'Jacome of Majorca' was described as the head of Henry's legendary observatory and \"school\" at Sagres by Samuel Purchas.\nThe identification of \"Mestre Jacome\" with Jehuda Cresques\" is principally due to the Catalan historian Gonzalo de Reparaz (1930).\nMore recent research argues that Jehuda Cresques was dead by 1410, and \"Mestre Jacome\" must have been someone else, identity still indeterminate - Majorca had many skilled Jewish cartographers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53076", "revid": "14835592", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53076", "title": "Darwin (operating system)", "text": "Computer operating system\nDarwin is the core Unix-like operating system of macOS, iOS, watchOS, tvOS, iPadOS, audioOS, visionOS, and bridgeOS. It previously existed as an independent open-source operating system, first released by Apple in 2000. It is composed of code derived from NeXTSTEP, FreeBSD and other BSD operating systems, Mach, and other free software projects' code, as well as code developed by Apple. Darwin's unofficial mascot is Hexley the Platypus.\nDarwin is mostly POSIX-compatible, but has never, by itself, been certified as compatible with any version of POSIX. Starting with Leopard, macOS has been certified as compatible with the Single UNIX Specification version 3 (SUSv3).\nHistory.\nThe heritage of Darwin began with Unix derivatives supplemented by aspects of NeXT's NeXTSTEP operating system (later, since version 4.0, known as OPENSTEP), first released in 1989. After Apple bought NeXT in 1996, it announced it would base its next operating system on OPENSTEP. This was developed into Rhapsody in 1997, Mac OS X Server 1.0 in 1999, Mac OS X Public Beta in 2000, and Mac OS X 10.0 in 2001.\nIn 1999, Apple announced it would release the source code for the Mach 2.5 microkernel, BSD Unix 4.4 OS, and the Apache Web server components of Mac OS X Server. At the time, interim CEO Steve Jobs alluded to British naturalist Charles Darwin by announcing \"because it's about evolution\". In 2000, the core operating system components of Mac OS X were released as open-source software under the Apple Public Source License (APSL) as Darwin; the higher-level components, such as the Cocoa and Carbon frameworks, remained closed-source.\nUp to Darwin 8.0.1, released in April 2005, Apple released a binary installer (as an ISO image) after each major Mac OS X release that allowed one to install Darwin on PowerPC and Intel x86 systems as a standalone operating system. Minor updates were released as packages that were installed separately. Darwin is now only available as source code. As of January 2023, Apple no longer mentions Darwin by name on its https:// and only publishes https://.\nDesign.\nKernel.\nThe kernel of Darwin is XNU, a hybrid kernel which uses Open Software Foundation Mach Kernel (OSFMK) 7.3 from the OSF, various elements of FreeBSD (including the process model, network stack, and virtual file system), and an object-oriented device driver API called I/O Kit. The hybrid kernel design provides the flexibility of a microkernel and the performance of a monolithic kernel.\nHardware and software support.\nThe last bootable full release of Darwin supported 32-bit and 64-bit Apple PowerPC systems and 32-bit Intel PCs.\nDarwin currently includes support for the 64-bit x86-64 variant of the Intel x86 processors used in Intel-based Macs and the 64-bit ARM processors used in the iPhone 5S and later, the 6th generation iPod Touch, the 5th generation iPad and later, the iPad Air family, the iPad Mini 2 and later, the iPad Pro family, the fourth generation and later Apple TVs, the HomePod family, and Macs with Apple silicon such as the 2020 Apple M1 Macs, as well as the Raspberry Pi 3B. An open-source port of the XNU kernel exists that supports Darwin on Intel and AMD x86 platforms not officially supported by Apple, though it does not appear to have been updated since 2009. An open-source port of the XNU kernel also exists for ARM platforms, though it has not been updated since 2016. Older versions supported some or all of 32-bit PowerPC, 64-bit PowerPC, 32-bit x86, and 32-bit ARM.\nIt supports the POSIX API by way of its BSD lineage (largely FreeBSD userland), so a large number of programs written for various other UNIX-like systems can be compiled on Darwin with no changes to the source code.\nDarwin does not include many of the defining elements of macOS, such as the Carbon and Cocoa APIs or the Quartz Compositor and Aqua user interface, and thus cannot run Mac applications. It does, however, support a number of lesser-known features of macOS, such as mDNSResponder, which is the multicast DNS responder and a core component of the Bonjour networking technology, and launchd, an advanced service management framework.\nLicense.\nIn July 2003, Apple released Darwin under version 2.0 of the Apple Public Source License (APSL), which the Free Software Foundation (FSF) qualifies as a free software license. The APSL is similar to AGPL, including in being incompatible with the GNU General Public License.\nPrevious versions of the APSL license did not meet the FSF definition of free software, although they did meet the requirements of the Open Source Definition.\nRelease history.\nThe following is a table of major Darwin releases with their dates of release and their derivative operating system releases. Note that the corresponding releases may have been released on a different date.\nDarwin 0\u20138 and corresponding Mac OS X releases.\nThe jump in version numbers from Darwin 1.4.1 to 5.1 with the release of Mac OS X v10.1.1 was designed to tie Darwin to the Mac OS X version and build numbering system, which in turn is inherited from NeXTSTEP. In the build numbering system of macOS, every version has a unique beginning build number, which identifies what whole version of macOS it is part of. Mac OS X v10.0 had build numbers starting with 4, 10.1 had build numbers starting with 5, and so forth (earlier build numbers represented developer releases).\nDarwin 20 onwards.\n\"Note: the tables above contain the release dates of the corresponding OS releases. Build dates for Darwin versions are not publicly available; the commands below only give the build date for the XNU kernel.\"\nThe command uname -r in Terminal will show the Darwin version number (\"20.3.0\"), and the command uname -v will show the XNU build version string, which includes the Darwin version number.\nThe command sw_vers will show the corresponding ProductName (\"macOS\"), the ProductVersion number (\"11.2.3\") and the BuildVersion string (\"20D91\").\nDerived projects.\nDue to the free software nature of Darwin, there have been projects that aim to modify the operating system or take Darwin\u2019s parts for their own purpose.\nAmong these, DarwinBSD, OpenDarwin, and PureDarwin can be termed \"alternative Darwin distributions\" in a sense analogous to Linux distributions.\nOpenDarwin.\nOpenDarwin was a community-led operating system based on the Darwin system. It was founded in April 2002 by Apple and Internet Systems Consortium. Its goal was to increase collaboration between Apple developers and the free software community. Apple benefited from the project because improvements to OpenDarwin would be incorporated into Darwin releases; and the free/open-source community benefited from being given complete control over its own operating system, which could then be used in free software distributions such as GNU-Darwin.\nOn July 25, 2006, the OpenDarwin team announced that the project was shutting down, as they felt OpenDarwin had \"become a mere hosting facility for Mac OS X related projects\", and that the efforts to create a standalone Darwin operating system had failed. They also state: \"Availability of sources, interaction with Apple representatives, difficulty building and tracking sources, and a lack of interest from the community have all contributed to this.\" The last stable release was version 7.2.1, released on July 16, 2004.\nPureDarwin.\nPureDarwin is a project to create a bootable operating system image from Apple's released source code for Darwin. Since the halt of OpenDarwin and the release of bootable images since Darwin 8.x, it has been increasingly difficult to create a full operating system as many components became closed source. In 2015 the project created a preview release based on Darwin 9 with an X11 GUI, followed by a command-line only 17.4 Beta based on Darwin 17 in 2019.\nOther derived projects.\n\"Darwin distributions\" (see also the other package managers below):\nOther types of derivatives:\nRelated open-source projects.\nProjects intended to work with Darwin.\nThe following are not Darwin derivatives, at least not beyond the extent that any program written for an operating system is partly derived from its application programming interface and other constraints.\nNeither substantially based on Darwin nor mainly intended to work on it.\nThe following projects re-implements parts of macOS API that are above the level of Darwin.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53081", "revid": "30380342", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53081", "title": "History of El Salvador", "text": "The history of El Salvador begins with several distinct groups of Mesoamerican people, especially the Pipil, the Lenca and the Maya. In the early 16th century, the Spanish Empire conquered the territory, incorporating it into the Viceroyalty of New Spain ruled from Mexico City. In 1821, El Salvador achieved independence from Spain as part of the First Mexican Empire, only to further secede as part of the Federal Republic of Central America two years later. Upon the republic's independence in 1841, El Salvador became a sovereign state until forming a short-lived union with Honduras and Nicaragua called the Greater Republic of Central America, which lasted from 1895 to 1898.\nIn the 20th century, El Salvador endured chronic political and economic instability characterized by coups, revolts, and a succession of authoritarian rulers caused by the intervention of the United States. Persistent socioeconomic inequality and civil unrest culminated in the devastating Salvadoran Civil War in the 1980s, which was fought between the military-led government and a coalition of left-wing guerrilla groups. The conflict ended in 1992 with a negotiated settlement that established a multiparty constitutional republic, which remains in place to this day.\nEl Salvador's economy was historically dominated by agriculture, beginning with the indigo plant (\"a\u00f1il\" in Spanish), the most important crop during the colonial period, and followed thereafter by coffee, which by the early 20th century accounted for 90 percent of export earnings.\nPre-Columbian history.\nBefore the Spanish conquest, the area that is known as El Salvador was composed of three indigenous states and several principalities. In central El Salvador were the indigenous inhabitants, the Pipils, or the Pipiles, a tribe of nomadic Nahua people that were settled there for a long time. The Pipil strongly resisted Spanish efforts to extend their dominion southward.\nThe eastern region was populated and governed by the Lenca people, while the northern zone of the Lempa River was populated and governed by the Ch\u02bcorti\u02bc, a Mayan people. Their culture was similar to that of their Aztecs and Maya neighbors.\nSeveral archaeological sites dating to 1400 years ago have been discovered preserved beneath 6\u00a0m (20\u00a0ft) of volcanic ash.\nSpanish conquest (1524\u20131525).\nThe first Spanish attempt to control El Se\u00f1or\u00edo of Cuzcatl\u00e1n failed in 1524, when Pedro de Alvarado was forced to retreat by Pipil warriors led by King Atl\u00e1catl and Prince Atonal in the Battle of Acajutla. In 1525, he returned and succeeded in bringing the district under control of the Audiencia of Mexico. Land- Environmental Impact was dry and cold around this time\nSpanish colonial period (1525\u20131821).\nAfter the Spanish conquest, the region became part of the Captaincy General of Guatemala. Pedro de Alvarado was the first governor, a position he held until his death in 1541. The area was briefly (from 1538 to 1543) under the authority of a short-lived Real Audiencia of Panama, after which most of Central America was placed under a new Real Audiencia of Guatemala. During this period, the region was divided into the province of San Salvador, the province of San Miguel, and the province of Izalcos.\nIn 1579 the province of San Salvador became an alcald\u00eda mayor (great mayor's office). In 1786 it became an intendancy and in 1821 it became a province with a provincial council. In 1824, San Salvador and Sonsonate were united into the State of Salvador (within the Federal Republic of Central America).\nStruggle for independence (1821-1841).\nIn the early 19th century, Napoleon's occupation of Spain led to the outbreak of revolts across Spanish America. All of the fighting by those seeking independence was done in the center of New Spain from 1810 to 1821, in what is currently central Mexico. After the viceroy was defeated in Mexico City in 1821, news of the independence was sent to all the territories of New Spain including the intendancies of the former Captaincy General of Guatemala.\nThe public proclamation was done through the 1821 Act of Independence of Central America. After the declaration of independence, the parliament of New Spain intended to establish a commonwealth whereby the King of Spain, Ferdinand VII, would also be Emperor of New Spain, but in which both countries would be governed by separate laws and with their own legislative offices. Should the king refuse the position, the law provided for another member of the House of Bourbon to accede to the throne of New Spain. Ferdinand VII, however, did not recognize the independence of New Spain and said that Spain would not allow any other European prince to take the throne of New Spain.\nParliament proclaimed Agust\u00edn de Iturbide emperor of New Spain on 19 May 1822 and renamed New Spain as the Mexican Empire. The territory of the Mexican Empire included the continental intendancies and provinces of New Spain proper, including those of the former Captaincy General of Guatemala.\nEl Salvador, fearing incorporation into Mexico, petitioned the United States government for statehood. But in 1823, a revolution in Mexico ousted Emperor Agust\u00edn de Iturbide and a new Mexican congress voted to allow the Central American intendancies to decide their own fate. That year, the Federal Republic of Central America (FRCA) was formed of the five Central American intendancies under General Manuel Jos\u00e9 Arce. The intendancies became states under the FRCA.\nIn 1832, Anastasio Aquino led an indigenous revolt against criollos and mestizos in Santiago Nonualco, a small town in the province of La Paz. The source of the discontent of the indigenous people was the constant abuse and the lack of land to cultivate. The problem of land distribution has been the source of many political conflicts in Salvadoran history.\nThe FRCA was dissolved in February 1841, and El Salvador gained recognition as an independent republic on 18 February 1841.\nRise of the oligarchy.\nIn the early 19th century, El Salvador's economy depended on the production of a single export crop, indigo. This led wealthy landowners to be attracted to certain lands while leaving other lands, especially those around former volcanic eruptions, to the poor and indigenous communities for subsistence farming. In the late 19th century, natural indigo was replaced by synthetic chemical dyes. The landed elite replaced this crop with a newly demanded product, coffee.\nThe lands that had been left by the wealthy landowners to the poor and indigenous communities were suddenly quite valuable. The elite-controlled legislature and president passed vagrancy laws that removed people from their land and the great majority of Salvadorans became landless, as their former lands were absorbed into the new coffee plantations (\"fincas\"). Historian H\u00e9ctor Lindo-Fuentes asserts that \"the parallel process of state-building and expansion of the coffee industry resulted in the formation of an oligarchy that was to rule El Salvador during the twentieth century.\"\nThe coffee industry gave birth to an oligarchy in the late 19th century, which has controlled most of the land and wealth of El Salvador since that time. The Fourteen Families (\"las catorce familias\")\u2014with names including de Sola, Llach, Hill, Meza-Ayau, Duenas, Dalton, Regalado, Qui\u00f1onez, Flores, and Salaverria\u2014is a reference to this oligarchy. For much of this time, this oligarchy acted in a manner similar to the overlords of the feudal system that existed in Europe during the Middle Ages. Although the constitution was amended repeatedly in favor of the oligarchs (in 1855, 1864, 1871, 1872, 1880, 1883, and 1886), several elements remained constant throughout. The wealthy landowners were granted super-majority power in the national legislature and economy. For example, the 1824 constitution provided for a unicameral legislature of 70 deputies, in which 42 seats were set aside for the landowners. The president was selected from the landed elite. Each of El Salvador's 14 regional departments had a governor appointed by the president. The frequent changes in the constitution were mainly due to the attempts of various presidents to hold onto power. For example, President Gerardo Barrios created a new constitution to extend his term limit.\nFrom 1931 until the early 1980s, El Salvador was governed by various dictatorships, but these governments were subservient to the oligarchy, with some officials deriving \u201cmodest wealth from bureaucratic corruption\u201d. At that time, the oligarchy consisted of some 20 families which controlled more than 70 percent of El Salvador's coffee production and exports, sugar mills, banks, television and newspapers. Since the end of that war in 1992, the oligarchic families of El Salvador have shifted their focus from agricultural exports to capital investment. Today, the majority of El Salvador's capital is distributed among eight powerful business conglomerates. These companies (Grupo Cuscatl\u00e1n, Banagr\u00edcola, Banco Davivienda El Salvador, Banco de Comercio, Grupo Agrisal, Grupo Poma, Grupo de Sola, and Grupo Hill) dominate the economy of El Salvador and they are largely owned by the descendants of the original 14 families of the coffee oligarchy.\nMilitary dictatorships (1931\u20131979).\nBetween 1931, the year of General Maximiliano Hern\u00e1ndez Mart\u00ednez's coup, and 1944, when he was deposed, there was brutal suppression of rural resistance. The most notable event was the 1932 Salvadoran peasant uprising headed by Farabundo Mart\u00ed, Chief Feliciano Ama from the Izalco tribe and Chief Francisco \"Chico\" Sanchez from Juay\u00faa, Izalco subdivision. The government retaliation, commonly referred to as \"La Matanza\" (\u201cthe slaughter\u201d), which followed days of protest. In this 'Matanza', between 10,000 and 40,000 indigenous people and political opponents were murdered, imprisoned or exiled. Federal Research Division historian Richard Haggerty described the coup as a \"watershed\" event in Salvadoran history, while historian Michael Krennerich described both the coup and the subsequent (a January 1932 military-instigated massacre that killed up to 40,000 peasants) as \"landmarks in the history of the country\".\nFrom 1931 until 1982, was ruled by either a military dictator or a joint civilian-military dictatorship and its economy was based primarily on the cultivation and exportation of coffee. These authoritarian governments employed political repression to maintain power, despite the appearance of democracy.\nThroughout the 1970s, there was great political instability in El Salvador. In the 1972 presidential election, opponents of military rule united under Jos\u00e9 Napole\u00f3n Duarte, leader of the Christian Democratic Party (PDC). Amid widespread fraud, Duarte's broad-based reform movement was defeated. Subsequent protests and an attempted coup were crushed and Duarte was exiled. These events eroded hope of reform through democratic means and persuaded those opposed to the government that armed insurrection was the only way to achieve change.\nSalvadoran Civil War (1979\u20131992).\nIn 1979, the reformist Revolutionary Government Junta took power. Both the far right and the far left political wings disagreed with the new government and increased political violence rapidly developed into a civil war. The initially poorly trained Armed Forces of El Salvador (ESAF) engaged in repression and indiscriminate killings, the most notorious of which was the El Mozote massacre in December 1981. The United States supported the government, while Cuba and other Communist states supported the insurgents\u2014now organized as the Farabundo Mart\u00ed National Liberation Front (FMLN). The Chapultepec Peace Accords marked the end of the war in 1992, and the FMLN became one of the major political parties.\nIn accordance with the peace agreements, the constitution was amended to prohibit the military from playing an internal security role except under extraordinary circumstances. Demobilization of Salvadoran military forces generally proceeded on schedule throughout the peace process. The Treasury Police, National Guard, and National Police were abolished, and military intelligence functions were transferred to civilian control. By 1993\u2014nine months ahead of schedule\u2014the military had cut personnel from a war-time high of 63,000 to the level of 32,000 required by the peace accords.\nBy 1999, ESAF strength stood at less than 15,000, including uniformed and non-uniformed personnel. A purge of military officers accused of human rights abuses and corruption was completed in 1993 in compliance with the Ad Hoc Commission's recommendations. The new doctrine, professionalism, and complete withdrawal from political and economic affairs leave the ESAF as one of the most respected institutions in El Salvador.\nMore than 35,000 eligible beneficiaries from among the former guerrillas and soldiers who fought in the war received land under the peace accord-mandated land transfer program, which ended in January 1997. The majority of these also received agricultural credits.\nThe democratic process in El Salvador is delicately balanced, since the Legislative Assembly decreed an amnesty after the Chapultepec Peace Accords. As a result of this amnesty, no one responsible for crimes carried out before, during and after the war has been convicted.\nPost-war period (1992\u20132019).\nThe FMLN participated in the 1994 presidential election as a political party. Armando Calder\u00f3n Sol, the ARENA candidate, won the election. During his rule, Calder\u00f3n Sol implemented neoliberal policies, including the privatization of several large state enterprises. The FMLN emerged strengthened from the legislative and municipal elections of 1997, where they won the mayoralty of San Salvador. However, internal divisions in the process of electing a presidential candidate damaged the party's image. ARENA again won the presidency in the election of March 7, 1999, with its candidate Francisco Flores P\u00e9rez.\nIn the presidential elections of March 21, 2004, ARENA was victorious again, this time with the candidate Antonio Saca, securing the party's third consecutive term. In the same election, economist Ana Vilma de Escobar became El Salvador's first female vice president. The election result also marked the end of the minor parties (PCN, PDC, and CD), which failed get the 3% required by electoral law to maintain their registration as parties.\nIn the postwar period, El Salvador experienced problems with organized crime in the form of \u201cmaras\u201d or gangs, mainly due to the deportation of Salvadorans from the United States. Two law enforcement programs created to combat this problem\u2013La Mano Dura and Mano Superdura\u2013have failed.\nCurrently, El Salvador's largest source of foreign currency is remittances sent by Salvadorans from abroad; these have been estimated at over $2 billion US dollars. There are over 2 million Salvadorans living abroad in countries including the United States, Canada, Mexico, Guatemala, Costa Rica, Australia, and Sweden.\nIn the 2009 presidential elections, FMLN candidate Mauricio Funes, a former journalist, won the presidency. This was the first victory of a leftist political party in El Salvador's history. Funes took over as president on June 1, 2009, together with Salvador S\u00e1nchez Cer\u00e9n as vice president.\nIn 2014, Cer\u00e9n took office as president, after winning the election as the candidate of the left-wing FMLN. Cer\u00e9n had been a guerrilla leader in the Civil War and is the first ex-rebel to serve as president. Under his leadership, El Salvador became the first country in the world to ban the mining of metal on its territory, for environmental and public health reasons.\nCorrupt presidents.\nFormer President Mauricio Funes fled to Nicaragua in 2014 after being charged with illicit enrichment and money laundering. In 2017, an El Salvador court ruled that Funes and one of his sons had illegally enriched themselves. Funes was still living in Nicaragua as of 2019. Funes was also sentenced in 2023 to 14 years in prison in absentia because of negotiations related to the gang truces he made while serving as president. He was sentenced to an additional six years for tax evasion, and he was also placed under sanctions by the U.S. State Department.\nIn 2018, former President Antonio Saca was sentenced to 10 years in prison after he pleaded guilty to diverting more than US$300 million in state funds to his own businesses and third parties.\nIn 2023, former President Salvador S\u00e1nchez Cer\u00e9n was sanctioned by the U.S. State Department for \"significant corruption by laundering money\" during his tenure as vice president.\nBukele presidency (2019\u2013).\nIn February 2019, Nayib Bukele, a Millennial who was not aligned with either of the major parties that had dominated the country since the Civil War, was elected president of El Salvador.\nAccording to a report by the International Crisis Group (ICG) 2020, the homicide rate in El Salvador declined by as much as 60 percent since Bukele became president in June 2019. This phenomenon could be related to the informal \u201cnon-aggression agreement\u201d between the government and certain of the maras.\nPresident Nayib Bukele remains very popular among the citizens, with approval ratings typically hovering around 90 percent, almost unheard of in presidential politics. El Salvador's legislative elections was an important breakthrough in February 2021. Nuevas Ideas (New Ideas)\u2014the new party founded by Bukele\u2014won around two-thirds of votes with its allies (GANA-New Ideas). Nuevas Ideas won a supermajority of 56 seats in the 84-seat parliament. This supermajority enabled President Bukele to appoint judges and pass laws (for example, to remove presidential term limits). In September 2021, El Salvador's Supreme Court decided to allow Bukele to run for a second term in 2024, despite the constitution prohibits the president to serve two consecutive terms in office. The decision was organized by judges appointed to the court by President Bukele.\nIn 2021, El Salvador adopted the Bitcoin as its legal tender under the direction of Bukele. Its value at the time was equivalent to US$52,000. In January 2022, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) urged El Salvador to reverse its decision to make cryptocurrency Bitcoin legal tender. Bitcoin had rapidly lost about half of its value, meaning economic difficulties for El Salvador. President Bukele had announced his plans to build a Bitcoin city at the base of a volcano in El Salvador.\nIn March 2024, BitCoin's value rebounded, exceeding its previous high value to over US$64,700.\nIn 2022, Salvadoran government initiated a massive fight against criminal gangs and gang-related violence. State of emergency was declared on 27 March. It was extended on 20 July. More than 53,000 suspected gang members were arrested. This has resulted in significant declines in homicide, extortion, and other gang-related crimes.\nIn January 2024, it was announced that the homicide rate dropped nearly 70% year over year, with 495 homicides in 2022 compared to 154 in 2023.\nOn 4 February 2024, President Nayib Bukele, won re-election with 84% of the vote in the presidential election. His party Nuevas Ideas (New Ideas) won 58 of the El Salvador parliament's 60 seats. On 1 June 2024, President Nayib Bukele was sworn in for the second five-year term.\nAs of February 2025, El Salvador had the highest prisoner rate worldwide, with over 1,600 prisoners per 100,000 of the national population. El Salvador\u2019s Cecot mega-prison, officially called the Center for Terrorism Confinement, is considered the largest prison in the Americas with a capacity of 40,000 inmates. The incarcerations have been part of president Bukele\u2019s efforts to reduce high crime rates and gang violence. In March 2025, the United States transferred more than 200 immigrants, alleged members of a Venezuelan gang, to be imprisoned in El Salvador. In 2024, the amount of homicides in El Salvador was record low. The 1.9 homicides per 100,000 in population put it below any other Latin American country.\nSee also.\nGeneral:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "53084", "revid": "921446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53084", "title": "Wizard (fantasy)", "text": ""}
{"id": "53085", "revid": "21623104", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53085", "title": "Toy Story", "text": "1995 Pixar film\n \nToy Story is a 1995 American animated adventure comedy film produced by Pixar Animation Studios for Walt Disney Pictures. It is the first installment in the \"Toy Story\" franchise and the first entirely computer-animated feature film, as well as the first feature film from Pixar. The film was directed by John Lasseter, written by Joss Whedon, Andrew Stanton, Joel Cohen, and Alec Sokolow based on a story by Lasseter, Stanton, Pete Docter, and Joe Ranft, produced by Bonnie Arnold and Ralph Guggenheim, and features the voices of Tom Hanks, Tim Allen, Annie Potts, John Ratzenberger, Don Rickles, Wallace Shawn, and Jim Varney. Taking place in a world where toys come to life when humans are not present, \"Toy Story\" follows an old-fashioned pullstring cowboy doll named Woody and a modern space cadet action figure, Buzz Lightyear, as Woody develops jealousy towards Buzz when he becomes their owner Andy's favorite toy.\nFollowing the success of the 1988 short film \"Tin Toy\", Pixar was approached by Disney to produce a computer-animated feature film that was told from a small toy's perspective. Lasseter, Stanton, and Docter wrote early story treatments, which were rejected by Disney, who wanted the film's tone to be \"edgier\". After several disastrous story reels, production was halted and the script was rewritten to better reflect the tone and theme Pixar desired: \"toys deeply want children to play with them, and ... this desire drives their hopes, fears, and actions\". The studio, then consisting of a relatively small number of employees, produced \"Toy Story\" under minor financial constraints.\n\"Toy Story\" premiered at the El Capitan Theatre in Los Angeles on November 19, 1995, and was released in theaters in North America three days later on November 22. It was the highest-grossing film during its opening weekend, eventually grossing over $363 million worldwide, making it the second highest-grossing film of 1995. The film received critical acclaim, with praise directed towards the technical innovation of the animation, script, Randy Newman's score, appeal to all age groups, and voice performances (particularly Hanks and Allen), and holds a approval rating on film aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes. The film is frequently lauded as one of the best animated films ever made and, due to its status as the first computer-animated film, one of the most important films in the medium's history and film at large. The film received three Academy Award nominations\u2014Best Original Screenplay (the first animated film to be nominated for the award), Best Original Song for \"You've Got a Friend in Me\", and Best Original Score\u2014in addition to being honored with a non-competitive Special Achievement Academy Award.\nIn 2005, \"Toy Story\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\", one of nine films designated in its first year of eligibility. The success of \"Toy Story\" launched a multimedia franchise, spawning four sequels beginning with \"Toy Story 2\" (1999); a spin-off film \"Lightyear\" (2022); and numerous short films. The film has had several theatrical re-releases, including a 3D re-release in 2009 as part of a double feature with the second film and a 30th anniversary re-release in 2025.\nPlot.\nA group of sentient toys, who pretend to be lifeless when humans are around, are preparing to move into a new house with their young owner Andy Davis, his infant sister Molly, and their single mother Mrs. Davis. Learning that Andy's sixth birthday party has been unexpectedly moved to an earlier date, several toys \u2014 including Mr. Potato Head, Slinky Dog, Rex the tyrannosaur, Hamm the piggy bank, and Bo Peep the porcelain doll \u2014 become concerned that Andy might receive something that will replace them. To calm them, Sheriff Woody, Andy's favorite toy and their \"de facto\" leader, sends Sarge and his green army men to spy on Andy's birthday party with a baby monitor. Andy receives a Buzz Lightyear action figure, who believes he is an actual Space Ranger and does not know he is really a toy. Buzz impresses the others with his electronic features and becomes Andy's new favorite toy, provoking Woody's jealousy.\nTwo days before the move, Andy's family plans for a dinner at a pizza restaurant called Pizza Planet. To ensure Andy brings him along and not Buzz, Woody tries knocking Buzz behind the desk with RC, Andy's radio-controlled car. However, Buzz is accidentally knocked out of the window instead, and most of the other toys believe Woody has deliberately killed Buzz. Andy takes Woody with him, but Buzz furiously confronts him in the car. The two fight, fall out of the car, and are left behind; after a further argument, they hitch a ride to the restaurant on a Pizza Planet delivery truck.\nAt Pizza Planet, Buzz mistakes a claw crane full of rubber toy aliens for a rocket, and climbs in, pursued by Woody. Sid Phillips, Andy's sadistic next-door neighbor, takes the two from the crane to his house, where they encounter his Bull Terrier Scud and his \"mutant\" toys, made from parts of other toys Sid has destroyed.\nBuzz witnesses a television commercial promoting him and suffers an existential crisis, finally realizing he is a toy after all. He attempts to fly but falls and breaks his arm. After Sid's toys repair Buzz, Sid tapes Buzz to a firework rocket, planning to destroy him the following day. Overnight, Woody helps Buzz realize that his purpose is to make Andy happy, restoring Buzz's resolve. Sid takes Buzz out to blow him up, but Woody rallies the mutant toys to come to life in front of Sid and frighten him into never harming toys again.\nNow freed, Woody and Buzz pursue the Davis' moving truck, but Scud attacks Woody. Buzz stays behind to fight off the dog; Woody climbs into the truck, and pushes RC out to rescue Buzz. Thinking Woody has killed another toy, the others also throw him off the truck. Upon witnessing Woody and Buzz pursue the truck on RC, the toys realize their mistake. RC's batteries run out, forcing Woody to ignite the rocket strapped to Buzz. As the two are propelled into the air, Buzz opens his wings to sever the tape just before the rocket explodes; he and Woody glide through the sunroof of Mrs. Davis' car, landing safely inside.\nAs the toys listen in on the Christmas gift opening in the new house, Mr. Potato Head is delighted when Molly gets a Mrs. Potato Head. Woody and Buzz jokingly ponder what gift could be \"worse\" than Buzz, only to nervously smile at each other when Andy gets a dachshund puppy.\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nJohn Lasseter's first experience with computer animation was during his work as an animator at Walt Disney Feature Animation, when two of his friends showed him the light-cycle scene from \"Tron\". It was an eye-opening experience that awakened Lasseter to the possibilities offered by the new medium of computer-generated animation. Lasseter tried to pitch \"The Brave Little Toaster\" as a fully computer-animated film to Disney, but the idea was rejected and Lasseter was fired. He then went on to work at Lucasfilm and in 1986, he became a founding member of Pixar. In 1986, Pixar was purchased by entrepreneur and Apple Inc. co-founder Steve Jobs. At Pixar, Lasseter created short, computer-animated films to show off the Pixar Image Computer's capabilities. In 1988, Lasseter produced the short film \"Tin Toy\", which was told from the perspective of a toy, referencing Lasseter's love of classic toys. \"Tin Toy\" won the 1989 Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film, the first computer-generated film to do so.\n\"Tin Toy\" gained Disney's attention, and the new team at The Walt Disney Company, CEO Michael Eisner and chairman Jeffrey Katzenberg in the film division, sought to get Lasseter to come back. Lasseter, grateful for Jobs' faith in him, felt compelled to stay with Pixar, telling co-founder Ed Catmull, \"I can go to Disney and be a director, or I can stay here and make history.\" Katzenberg realized he could not lure Lasseter back to Disney and therefore set plans into motion to ink a production deal with Pixar to produce a film. Disney had always made all their movies in-house and refused to change this. But when Tim Burton, who used to work at Disney, wanted to buy back the rights to \"The Nightmare Before Christmas\", Disney struck a deal allowing him to make it as a Disney film outside the studio. This allowed Pixar to make their movies outside Disney.\nBoth sides were willing. Catmull and fellow Pixar co-founder Alvy Ray Smith had long wanted to produce a computer-animated feature, but only by the early 1990s were the computers cheap and powerful enough to make this possible. In addition, Disney had licensed Pixar's Computer Animation Production System (CAPS), and that made it the largest customer for Pixar's computers. Jobs made it apparent to Katzenberg that although Disney was happy with Pixar, it was not the other way around: \"We want to do a film with you,\" said Jobs. \"That would make us happy.\"\nCatmull, Smith, and head of animation Ralph Guggenheim met with Walt Disney Feature Animation president Peter Schneider in the summer of 1990 to discuss making a feature film, but they found the atmosphere to be puzzling and contentious. They later learned that while Katzenberg was pushing the idea of working with Pixar, Schneider did not want to bring in a non-Disney animation studio. Katzenberg arranged to meet directly with the Pixar contingent, this time including Lasseter and Jobs. The Pixar team proposed three separate ideas for their first major project, including an original idea entitled \"Bob the Dinosaur\", an adaptation of \"James and the Giant Peach\", and a Christmas television special entitled, \"A Tin Toy Christmas\". Disney greenlit the third idea, but Katzenberg countered that as long as they were gearing up to transition from 30-second commercials to a half-hour special, they might as well go all the way and make a feature-length film.\nKatzenberg also made it clear that he was only working with Pixar to get access to Lasseter's talents, and that the Pixar team would be signing up to work with a self-described \"tyrant\" and micro-manager. However, he invited them to talk with Disney's animators and get their opinions on working under him and Lasseter was impressed with what he heard. The two companies began negotiations, although they disagreed on key points including whether Disney would get the rights to Pixar's animation technology or whether Pixar would retain partial ownership of the films, characters, and home video and sequel rights. As Pixar was nearing bankruptcy and desperate for funds, they settled on a deal that would allow Disney to have complete ownership and control of the films and characters, including the rights to make sequels without Pixar's involvement, while Pixar would get approximately 12.5% of ticket sales. These early negotiations became a point of contention between Jobs and Eisner for many years.\nAn agreement to produce a feature film based on \"Tin Toy\" with a working title of \"Toy Story\" was finalized, and production began soon thereafter.\nWriting.\nOriginally, \"Toy Story\" was going to feature \"Tinny\", the wind-up one-man band toy from the \"Tin Toy\" short film, along with \"the dummy\", a ventriloquist's dummy. While the film's premise was still about toys' desire to be played with by children, the rest of the film's script, which involved Tinny being left behind at a gas station, meeting up with the dummy, and having a series of adventures before finding their way into a kindergarten classroom where they can be played with every day, was quite different. Katzenberg was unhappy with the treatment drafted by Lasseter, Andrew Stanton, and Pete Docter, as the two character's motivations were too similar. Instead, he encouraged them to write it as a buddy film, giving the two main characters contrasting personalities, and having them only become friends after being forced to work together. Lasseter, Stanton, and Docter delivered a revised treatment in September 1991 that more closely resembles the final version of the film: Tinny replaces the ventriloquist dummy as a child's favorite toy, their bickering causes them to be left behind at a gas station, they almost catch up to the family at a pizza restaurant, they have to escape a kid that mutilates toys, and the movie ends with a chase scene as the two toys try to catch up to the family's moving van.\nThe script went through many changes before the final version of it. Lasseter decided Tinny was \"too antiquated\"; the character was first changed to a military action figure in the likes of \"G.I. Joe\" and was then given a space theme. Tinny's name changed to Lunar Larry, then Tempus from Morph, and eventually Buzz Lightyear (after astronaut Buzz Aldrin). Lightyear's design was modeled on the suits worn by Apollo astronauts as well as the aforementioned \"G.I. Joe\" action figures. Also, the green and purple color scheme on Lightyear's suit was inspired by Lasseter and his wife, Nancy, whose favorite colors are green and purple, respectively. Woody was inspired by a Casper the Friendly Ghost doll that Lasseter had when he was a child; he was a ventriloquist's dummy with a pull-string (hence the name \"Woody\"). This was until character designer Bud Luckey suggested that Woody could be changed to a cowboy ventriloquist dummy. Lasseter liked the contrast between the Western and the science fiction genres and the character immediately changed. Eventually, all of the ventriloquist dummy aspects of the character were deleted as the dummy looked \"sneaky and mean\". However they kept the name \"Woody\" to pay homage to the Western actor Woody Strode. The story department drew inspiration from films such as \"Midnight Run\" and \"The Odd Couple\", and Lasseter screened Hayao Miyazaki's \"Castle in the Sky\" for further influence.\nSince \"Toy Story\"'s script writers had little experience with feature films, they attended a seminar given by screenwriter Robert McKee. They were inspired by his guidance, based on Aristotle's \"Poetics\", that the main character in a story should be defined by how they react to the obstacles they face, and that it is those obstacles that make characters interesting. Disney also appointed the duo Joel Cohen and Alec Sokolow and, later, Joss Whedon to help develop the script. Whedon thought that while the script did not work, it had \"a great structure\". He added the character of Rex and sought a pivotal role for a Barbie doll; the latter transformed into Bo Peep as Mattel would not license the character. Whedon also re-visioned Buzz Lightyear from being a dim-witted but cheerful and self-aware character to an action figure who isn't aware that he's a toy\u2014an epiphany that transformed the film. A brainstorming session with members of Disney Animation's creative team resulted in the addition of the three-eyed squeaky toy aliens.\n\"Toy Story\" was the first animated film for which scratch vocals were recorded first for all reels, to be later replaced by production sound. Before that point, animation studios were more disorganized as to when scratch vocals or production sound were recorded for any particular reel. For example, during the 1980s, Disney Animation experimented with recording production sound for all reels (without recording scratch vocals first) before starting animation.\nCasting.\nKatzenberg approved the script on January 19, 1993, at which point voice casting began. Paul Newman, who subsequently accepted the role of Doc Hudson in the 2006 Pixar film \"Cars\", was considered for the role of Woody. Robin Williams and Clint Eastwood were also considered for Woody, but Lasseter always wanted Tom Hanks to play the role. Lasseter claimed that Hanks \"has the ability to take emotions and make them appealing. Even if the character, like the one in \"A League of Their Own\", is down-and-out and despicable.\" To gauge how an actor's voice might fit with a character, Lasseter borrowed a common Disney technique: animate a vocal monologue from a well-established actor to meld the actor's voice with the appearance or actions of the animated character. This early test footage, using Hanks' voice from \"Turner &amp; Hooch\", convinced Hanks to sign on to the film.\nBilly Crystal was approached to play Buzz, and was given his own monologue, utilizing dialogue from \"When Harry Met Sally\". However, he turned down the role, believing the film would be unsuccessful due to its animation. Crystal regretted this upon seeing the film; he subsequently accepted the role of Mike Wazowski in the 2001 Pixar film \"Monsters, Inc.\". In addition to Crystal, Bill Murray, Chevy Chase and Jim Carrey, along with a number of other actors, including Jason Alexander, Dan Aykroyd, Matthew Broderick, Kevin Costner, Michael J. Fox, Richard Gere, David Hasselhoff, Michael Keaton, Wayne Knight, Bill Paxton, Dennis Quaid, Kurt Russell, Adam Sandler and John Travolta, were also considered for the role of Buzz. Lasseter took the role to Tim Allen, who was appearing in Disney's \"Home Improvement\", and he accepted. Crystal later stated in an interview that he would not have been right as Buzz, and that Allen was \"fantastic\" in the role. Before Wallace Shawn and Jim Varney were cast as Rex and Slinky Dog, Rick Moranis and John Cleese were originally considered for the roles.\nTo cast Andy, Pixar held an open call for young male actors to bring a toy with them. John Morris (who voices Andy in the film) brought multiple toys, specifically 45 \"X-Men\" figures, contrary to the instructions of bringing just one, and Pixar reacted to his dumping of the toys with laughter.\n\"Toy Story\" was both Hanks' and Allen's first animated film.\nProduction shutdown.\nEvery couple of weeks, Lasseter and his team showed Disney their latest storyboards or footage. Disney was impressed by Pixar's technical innovation, but less so of the plot. Katzenberg discarded most of Pixar's script ideas, giving his own extensive notes. Katzenberg primarily wanted to add \"more edginess\" to the two main characters, as Disney wanted \"Toy Story\" to appeal to both children and adults, and they asked for adult references to be added to the film. The characters ended up being stripped of their charm, with Hanks, while recording Woody's dialogue for the story reels, pointed out that the Woody character had been made into a \"real jerk\". Pixar screened the first half of the film for Disney executives on November 19, 1993\u2014an event they later dubbed the \"Black Friday Incident\". The results were disastrous, and Disney's head of feature animation, Peter Schneider, halted production. Katzenberg asked colleague Thomas Schumacher why the reels were bad, to which Schumacher answered, \"Because it's not their movie anymore; it's completely not the movie that John set out to make.\"\nLasseter was embarrassed by the current state of the film, later recalling, \"It was a story filled with the most unhappy, mean characters that I've ever seen.\" Katzenberg allowed him to take the script back to Pixar for rewrites, and the production crew shifted to television commercials while the head writers worked out a new script, being funded personally by Jobs until Disney resumed production. Although Lasseter attempted to keep morale high by remaining outwardly buoyant, the production shutdown was \"a very scary time\" according to story department manager BZ Petroff. Schneider appealed directly to Eisner to cancel the project altogether. Stanton and the other story artists worked to quickly produce new script pages, with help from consultants such as Whedon, and the first revisions were completed in two weeks as promised.\nPixar's script rewrites took three months, and saw Woody transformed from a tyrant to a wise leader. It also included a more adult-oriented staff meeting amongst the toys rather than the juvenile group discussion that had existed in earlier drafts. Buzz Lightyear's character was also changed \"to make it more clear to the audience that he genuinely doesn't know he's a toy\". Katzenberg and Schneider resumed production with the new script by February 1994, and the voice actors returned one month later to record their new lines. The crew grew from 24 people to 110, and now included 27 animators and 22 technical directors. In comparison, \"The Lion King\", released in 1994, required a staff of 800. In the early budgeting process, Jobs was eager to produce the film as efficiently as possible, impressing Katzenberg with his focus on cost-cutting. However, the $17\u00a0million production budget was no longer going to be sufficient, and Jobs requested more funds from Disney to compensate them for the time lost in rewrites based on Katzenberg's notes. Catmull was able to reach a compromise on a new budget, but the incident led Jobs to rethink their deal with Disney.\nAnimation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWe couldn't have made this movie in traditional animation. This is a story that can only really be told with three-dimensional toy characters. ... Some of the shots in this film are so beautiful.\n\u2014Tom Schumacher, Vice President of Walt Disney Feature Animation\nRecruiting animators for \"Toy Story\" was brisk; the magnet for talent was not the pay, which was mediocre, but the allure of taking part in the first computer-animated feature. Lasseter said of the challenges of computer animation, \"We had to make things look more organic. Every leaf and blade of grass had to be created. We had to give the world a sense of history. So the doors are banged up, the floors have scuffs.\" The film began with animated storyboards to guide the animators in developing the characters. 27 animators worked on the film, using 400 computer models to animate the characters. Each character was first either created out of clay or modeled from a computer-drawn diagram before reaching the computer-animated design.\nOnce the animators had a model, its articulation and motion controls were coded; this allowed each character to move in a variety of ways, such as talking, walking, or jumping. Out of all of the characters, Woody was the most complex, as he required 723 motion controls, including 212 for his face and 58 for his mouth. The first piece of animation, a 30-second test, was delivered to Disney in June 1992, when the company requested a sample of what the film would look like. Lasseter wanted to impress Disney with several things in the test that could not be done in traditional, hand-drawn animation, such as Woody's yellow plaid shirt with red stripes, the reflections in Buzz's helmet and the decals on his spacesuit, or Venetian blind shadows falling across Andy's room.\nThere were eight teams that were responsible for different aspects of all of the shots. The art department was responsible for determining the overall color and lighting scheme. The layout department was responsible for determining the position of all elements of the shot, as well as programming the virtual camera's position and movements. The animation department created the movements of the characters, generally with one animator being assigned to animate an entire shot, but occasionally with each character having its own animator. The shading team used Pixar's RenderMan software to assign surface textures and reflectivity properties to objects. The lighting team placed global, spot, and flood lighting within the scenes. The \"Render Farm\" used Sun Microsystems computers, running around the clock, to produce the final frames of the film. The camera team recorded the finished frames, which had been rendered at a resolution of 1536 by 922, onto film stock. Finally, Skywalker Sound mixed sound effects, the musical score, and the dialogue to create the audio for the film.\nIn order to make the film feel as realistic as possible, the layout department, led by Craig Good, avoided the sweeping camera shots popular in computer animation at the time, and instead focused on emulating what would have been possible had the film been shot in live-action with real film cameras. The animation department, led by Rich Quade and Ash Brannon, used Pixar's Menv software to hand pose the characters at key frames based on videotape of the actors recording their lines, and let the software do the inbetweening. To sync the characters' mouths and facial expressions to the actors' recorded voices, animators spent a week per eight seconds of animation, as Lasseter felt that automatic lip syncing would not properly convey a character's emotions. The shading team, led by Tom Porter, used scans of real objects, as well as textures drawn by artists and created with procedural generation algorithms, to \"dress\" the objects in the film.\nThe film required 800,000 machine hours and 114,240 frames of animation in total, divided between 1,561 shots that totaled over 77 minutes. Pixar was able to render less than 30 seconds of the film per day.\nMusic.\nLasseter did not want to make \"Toy Story\" into a musical, as he felt that it would make the film feel less genuine. Whedon later agreed, saying \"It would have been a really bad musical because it's a buddy movie. It's about people who won't admit what they want, much less sing about it. ... Buddy movies are about sublimating, punching an arm, 'I hate you.' It's not about open emotion.\" However, Disney preferred to make it a musical, as they had had much success with incorporating Broadway-style musical numbers into their animated films, and encouraged Pixar to do the same. As a compromise, although the characters would not sing, the movie would feature non-diegetic songs as background music. Despite this not happening, the first musical number is seen at the end of \"Toy Story 2\" (1999), and \"\" (2012) is the first version of the original to actually feature the cast of characters singing.\nRandy Newman was hired, and composed three original songs for the film. It marks as Newman's first film soundtrack for an animated film. The film's signature song \"You've Got a Friend in Me\", was written in one day. The song \"Hakuna Matata\" from \"The Lion King\" is heard briefly during the climax when Woody and Buzz are trying to get into the truck while riding RC.\nOn Newman, Lasseter said, \"His songs are touching, witty, and satirical, and he would deliver the emotional underpinning for every scene.\" The soundtrack for \"Toy Story\" was produced by Walt Disney Records and was released on November 22, 1995, the week of the film's release.\nEditing and pre-release.\nThe film's editors, including Lee Unkrich, worked on \"Toy Story\" up until the September 1995 deadline to deliver a final cut for scoring and sound design. According to Unkrich, a scene removed from the original final edit featured Sid torturing Buzz and Woody violently at his house before the scene where Sid interrogates Woody with a magnifying glass. The torture scene was removed because the crew felt that the audience would be so invested in Buzz and Woody's characters by that point that they would be uncomfortable watching them being subjected to such violence. Another scene, in which Woody tries to get Buzz's attention when he was stuck in the box crate while insincerely apologizing for accidentally getting him knocked out of the window, was shortened because the creators felt it would lose the energy of the film. A test screening in July 1995 received encouraging responses from the audience, but the film was not rated as highly as had been hoped, leading to another last-minute round of edits. Eisner, who attended the screening, suggested that the final shot of the film should be of both Woody and Buzz, leading to the film's final shot of the two worried about the arrival of Andy's new puppy.\nThe crew had difficulty analysing the film's quality due to footage being in scattered pieces. Some animators felt the film would be a significant disappointment commercially but felt animators and animation fans would find it interesting. Schneider had grown optimistic about the film as it neared completion, and he announced a United States release date of November, coinciding with Thanksgiving weekend and the start of the winter holiday season.\nSources indicate that Jobs lacked confidence in the film during its production, and had been exploring the possibility of selling Pixar to companies such as Hallmark Cards and Microsoft. However, as the film progressed, Jobs, like Schneider, became increasingly passionate about the film and the transformative nature of what Pixar might be able to accomplish. Eager for Pixar to have the funds necessary to negotiate with Disney as an equal partner, and optimistic about the impact the finished film would have, Jobs decided that he would schedule an initial public offering (IPO) of Pixar just a week after the film's November release.\nRelease.\nBoth Disney and Pixar held separate premieres for \"Toy Story\", with Disney holding theirs at their flagship El Capitan Theatre in Los Angeles on November 19, 1995, and Pixar holding theirs the following night at the Regency Center in San Francisco. According to David Price's 2008 book \"The Pixar Touch\", the film deeply resonated with audiences, with even the adults being noticeably moved by the film.\nIn some international territories, the theatrical release of the film was preceded by a re-release of the \"Roger Rabbit\" short \"Roller Coaster Rabbit\".\nIn addition to showing at the El Capitan, where tickets included admission to the \"Totally Toy Story\" funhouse that Disney had built in the Hollywood Masonic Temple next door, the film opened on 2,281 screens on the 22nd and later expanded to 2,574.\nThe film was also shown at the Berlin International Film Festival out of competition from February 15 to 26, 1996. Elsewhere, the film opened in March 1996.\nMarketing.\nMarketing for \"Toy Story\" included $20\u00a0million spent by Disney for advertising as well as advertisers such as Burger King, PepsiCo, Coca-Cola, and Payless ShoeSource paying $125\u00a0million in promotions for the film. Marketing consultant Al Ries reflected on the promotion: \"This will be a killer deal. How can a kid, sitting through a one-and-a-half-hour movie with an army of recognizable toy characters, not want to own one?\" Despite this, Disney Consumer Products was slow to see the potential of \"Toy Story\". When the Thanksgiving release date was announced in January 1995, many toy companies were accustomed to having eighteen months to two years of lead time and passed on the project. Disney shopped the film at the Toy Fair trade show in February 1995, where only the small Canadian company Thinkway Toys, was interested in licensing the toy rights for the \"Toy Story\" characters. Disney promoted the film by inserting its trailer into the home-video re-release of \"Cinderella\", showing a behind-the-scenes documentary on the Disney Channel, and incorporating the characters into a parade at the Disney-MGM Studios theme park in Florida.\nIt was screenwriter Joss Whedon's idea to incorporate Barbie as a character who could rescue Woody and Buzz in \"Toy Story\"'s final act. The idea was dropped after Mattel objected and refused to license the toy. Producer Ralph Guggenheim claimed that Mattel did not allow the use of the toy as \"They [Mattel] philosophically felt girls who play with Barbie dolls are projecting their personalities onto the doll. If you give the doll a voice and animate it, you're creating a persona for it that might not be every little girl's dream and desire.\" Hasbro likewise refused to license (mainly because Sid was going to blow one up, prompting the filmmakers to instead use a fictional toy, Combat Carl), but they did license Mr. Potato Head. The only real-life toy in the film that was not in production was Slinky Dog, which had been discontinued since the 1970s. When designs for Slinky were sent to Betty James (Slinky inventor Richard James's wife) she said that Pixar had improved the toy and that it was \"cuter\" than the original.\nRe-releases.\n3-D conversion.\nOn October 2, 2009, \"Toy Story\" was re-released in Disney Digital 3-D. The film was also released with \"Toy Story 2\" as a double feature for a two-week run which was extended due to its success. In addition, the film's second sequel, \"Toy Story 3\", was also released in the 3-D format. Lasseter commented on the new 3-D re-release:\nThe \"Toy Story\" films and characters will always hold a very special place in our hearts and we're so excited to be bringing this landmark film back for audiences to enjoy in a whole new way thanks to the latest in 3-D technology. With \"Toy Story 3\" shaping up to be another great adventure for Buzz, Woody, and the gang from Andy's room, we thought it would be great to let audiences experience the first two films all over again and in a brand new way.\nTranslating the film into 3-D involved revisiting the original computer data and virtually placing a second camera into each scene, creating left eye and right eye views needed to achieve the perception of depth. Unique to computer animation, Lasseter referred to this process as \"digital archaeology\". The process took four months, as well as an additional six months for the two films to add the 3-D. The lead stereographer Bob Whitehill oversaw this process and sought to achieve an effect that affected the emotional storytelling of the film:\nWhen I would look at the films as a whole, I would search for story reasons to use 3-D in different ways. In \"Toy Story\", for instance, when the toys were alone in their world, I wanted it to feel consistent with a safer world. And when they went out to the human world, that's when I really blew out the 3-D to make it feel dangerous and deep and overwhelming.\nUnlike other countries, the United Kingdom received the films in 3-D as separate releases. \"Toy Story\" was released on October 2, 2009. \"Toy Story 2\" was instead released January 22, 2010. The re-release performed well at the box office, opening with $12,500,000 in its opening weekend, placing at the third position after \"Zombieland\" and \"Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs\". The double feature grossed $30.7\u00a0million in its five-week release.\nDisney100.\nAs part of Disney's 100th anniversary, \"Toy Story\" was re-released in selected CINEMARK theaters from July 21 to August 3, 2023. It was also re-released in the United Kingdom from September 29 to October 5, and in Latin American theaters from October 12 to 18 alongside \"Cinderella\" (1950).\n30th anniversary.\n\"Toy Story\" was re-released in the United States on September 12, 2025 to coincide with the film's 30th anniversary and kickstart the promotional rollout for \"Toy Story 5\" (2026). During its opening weekend, the film earned $3.4 million, ranking fifth at the domestic box office.\nHome media.\n\"Toy Story\" was released by Walt Disney Home Video on VHS and LaserDisc in the United States and Canada on October 29, 1996, with no bonus material. Within the first few weeks of this release, VHS rentals and sales totaled $5.1\u00a0million, ranking \"Toy Story\" as the No. 1 video, beating out \"Twister\". Over 21.5\u00a0million VHS copies were sold during the first year. A deluxe edition widescreen LaserDisc 4-disc box set was released on December 18, 1996. This THX-certified LaserDisc release features bonus material, including the history and development of characters, storyboards and story reels, abandoned concepts and characters, audio commentary, outtakes, deleted animation and trailers. On January 11, 2000, the film was re-released on VHS, but this time as the first video to be part of the Walt Disney Gold Classic Collection with the bonus short film \"Tin Toy\". This release sold two million copies.\n\"Toy Story\" was released for the first time on DVD on October 17, 2000, in a two-pack with its first sequel \"Toy Story 2\". The same day, a 3-disc \"Ultimate Toy Box\" set was released, featuring \"Toy Story\", \"Toy Story 2\", and the third disc of bonus materials. Both DVD versions have the \"Tin Toy\" short, as well as the THX certification. The twin-pack release was later released individually on March 20, 2001. The DVD two-pack, the Ultimate Toy Box set, the Gold Classic Collection VHS and DVD, and the original DVD were all put in the Disney Vault on May 1, 2003. On September 6, 2005, a 2-disc \"10th Anniversary Edition\" was released featuring much of the bonus material from the \"Ultimate Toy Box\", including a retrospective special with John Lasseter and a brand new DTS sound mix. This DVD went back in the Disney Vault on January 31, 2009, along with \"Toy Story 2\". The 10th Anniversary release was the last version of \"Toy Story\" to be released before being taken out of the Disney Vault lineup along with \"Toy Story 2\". A UMD of \"Toy Story\" was released for the Sony PlayStation Portable on September 6, 2005.\n\"Toy Story\" was available for the first time on Blu-ray in a Special Edition Combo Pack that included two discs, the Blu-ray, and the DVD versions of the film. This combo-edition was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on March 23, 2010, along with its sequel. There was a DVD-only re-release on May 11, 2010. Another \"Ultimate Toy Box\", packaging the Combo Pack with those of both sequels, became available on November 2, 2010. On November 1, 2011, the first three \"Toy Story\" films were re-released all together, each as a DVD/Blu-ray/Blu-ray 3D/Digital Copy combo pack (four discs each for the first two films, and five for the third film). They were also released on Blu-ray 3D in a complete trilogy box set. The film had a re-release on 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray on June 4, 2019.\nReception.\nBox office.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nYes, we worry about what the critics say. Yes, we worry about what the opening box office is going to be. Yes, we worry about what the final box office is going to be. But really, the whole point of why we do what we do is to entertain our audiences. The greatest joy I get as a filmmaker is to slip into an audience for one of our movies anonymously and watch people watch our film. Because people are 100 percent honest when they're watching a movie. And to see the joy on people's faces, to see people really get into our films... to me is the greatest reward I could get.\n\u2014John Lasseter, reflecting on the impact of the film\nBefore the film's release, executive producer and Apple Inc. co-founder Steve Jobs stated \"If \"Toy Story\" is a modest hit\u2014say $75\u00a0million at the box office, we'll [Pixar and Disney] both break even. If it gets $100\u00a0million, we'll both make money. But if it's a real blockbuster and earns $200\u00a0million or so at the box office, we'll make good money, and Disney will make a lot of money.\" Upon its release on November 22, 1995, \"Toy Story\" managed to gross more than $350\u00a0million worldwide. Disney chairman Michael Eisner stated \"I don't think either side thought \"Toy Story\" would turn out as well as it has. The technology is brilliant, the casting is inspired, and I think the story will touch a nerve. Believe me, when we first agreed to work together, we never thought their first movie would be our 1995 holiday feature, or that they could go public on the strength of it.\"\n\"Toy Story\" earned $39.1\u00a0million in its first five days of domestic release, leading the most successful long weekend in box office history until Fourth of July 1996. The film placed first in the weekend's box office with $29.1\u00a0million and maintained the number-one position at the domestic box office for the next two weekends. It was displaced by \"Jumanji\" in its fourth weekend, but still managed to outgross \"Heat\" and \"Sabrina\" with $10.9 million. \"Toy Story\" went on to become the highest-grossing domestic film of 1995, beating \"Batman Forever\", \"Apollo 13\" (also starring Tom Hanks), \"Pocahontas\", \"Casper\", \"Waterworld\", \"GoldenEye\", and other films. At the time of its release, it was the third-highest-grossing animated film of all time, after \"The Lion King\" (1994) and \"Aladdin\" (1992). \"Toy Story\" became the second-highest-grossing film of 1995, just $3 million behind \"Die Hard with a Vengeance\". When not considering inflation, \"Toy Story\" is number 96 on the list of the highest-grossing domestic films of all time. \nAs of \u00a021, 2025[ [update]], \"Toy Story\" has grossed $198.4\u00a0million in the U.S. and Canada and $176.2\u00a0million in international markets from its original 1995 release and subsequent re-releases for a total of $374.6\u00a0million worldwide. At the time of its release, the film ranked as the 17th-highest-grossing film (unadjusted) domestically and the 21st-highest-grossing film worldwide.\nCritical response.\n\"Toy Story\" received unanimous acclaim upon release. The film earned a rare approval rating of based on professional reviews on the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, with an average rating of . Its critical consensus reads, \"Entertaining as it is innovative, \"Toy Story\" reinvigorated animation while heralding the arrival of Pixar as a family-friendly force to be reckoned with.\" Metacritic (which uses a weighted average) assigned \"Toy Story\" a score of 96 out of 100 based on 26 critics, indicating \"universal acclaim\". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of \"A\" on an A+ to F scale.\nParticular praise was offered for the film's 3D animation. Leonard Klady of \"Variety\" commended its \"razzle-dazzle technique and unusual look\" and said that \"the camera loops and zooms in a dizzying fashion that fairly takes one's breath away.\" Roger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" compared the animation to Disney's \"Who Framed Roger Rabbit\", saying that \"both movies take apart the universe of cinematic visuals and put it back together again, allowing us to see in a new way.\" Due to the film's creative animation, Richard Corliss of \"TIME\" claimed that it was \"the year's most inventive comedy\".\nThe voice cast was also praised by various critics. Susan Wloszczyna of \"USA Today\" approved of the selection of Tom Hanks and Tim Allen for the lead roles. Kenneth Turan of the \"Los Angeles Times\" stated that \"Starting with Tom Hanks, who brings an invaluable heft and believability to Woody, \"Toy Story\" is one of the best voiced animated features in memory, with all the actors ... making their presences strongly felt.\"\nSeveral critics also recognized the film's ability to appeal to various age groups. Owen Gleiberman of \"Entertainment Weekly\" wrote \"It has the purity, the ecstatic freedom of imagination, that's the hallmark of the greatest children's films. It also has the kind of spring-loaded allusive prankishness that, at times, will tickle adults even more than it does kids.\"\nIn 1995, \"Toy Story\" was ranked eighth in \"TIME\"'s list of the \"Best 10 films of 1995\". In 2011, \"TIME\" named it one of the \"25 All-TIME Best Animated Films\".\nIt also ranks at number 99 in \"Empire\" magazine's list of the \"500 Greatest Films of All Time\" and as the \"highest-ranked animated movie\".\nIn 2003, the Online Film Critics Society ranked the film as the greatest animated film of all time. In 2007, the Visual Effects Society named the film 22nd in its list of the \"Top 50 Most Influential Visual Effects Films of All Time\". The film is ranked 99th on the AFI's list of the \"100 greatest American Films of All-Time\". It was one of the only two animated films on that list, the other being \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" (1937). It was also the sixth best in the animation genre on AFI's 10 Top 10.\nIn more recent years, director Terry Gilliam has praised the film as \"a work of genius. It got people to understand what toys are about. They're true to their own character. And that's just brilliant. It's got a shot that's always stuck with me when Buzz Lightyear discovers he's a toy. He's sitting on this landing at the top of the staircase and the camera pulls back and he's this tiny little figure. He was this guy with a massive ego two seconds before... and it's stunning. I'd put that as one of my top ten films, period.\"\nAccolades.\nThe film won and was nominated for various other awards including a Kids' Choice Award, MTV Movie Award, and a British Academy Film Award, among others. John Lasseter received a Special Achievement Academy Award in 1996 \"for the development and inspired application of techniques that have made possible the first feature-length computer-animated film\". Additionally, the film was nominated for three Academy Awards, two to Randy Newman for Best Music\u2014Original Song, for \"You've Got a Friend in Me\", and Best Music\u2014Original Musical or Comedy Score. It was also nominated for Best Original Screenplay for the work by Joel Cohen, Pete Docter, John Lasseter, Joe Ranft, Alec Sokolow, Andrew Stanton and Joss Whedon, making it the first animated film to be nominated for an Academy Award writing category.\n\"Toy Story\" won eight Annie Awards, including Best Animated Feature. Animator Pete Docter, director John Lasseter, musician Randy Newman, producers Bonnie Arnold and Ralph Guggenheim, production designer Ralph Eggleston, and writers Joel Cohen, Alec Sokolow, Andrew Stanton, and Joss Whedon all won awards for Best Individual Achievement in their respective fields for their work on the film. The film also won Best Individual Achievement in technical achievement.\n\"Toy Story\" was nominated for two Golden Globe Awards, one for Best Motion Picture\u2014Comedy or Musical, and one for Best Original Song\u2014Motion Picture for Newman's \"You've Got a Friend in Me\". At both the Los Angeles Film Critics Association Awards and the Kansas City Film Critics Circle Awards, the film won \"Best Animated Film\". \"Toy Story\" is also among the top ten in the BFI list of the 50 films you should see by the age of 14, and the highest-placed (at No. 99) animated film in \"Empire\" magazine's list of \"500 Greatest Movies of All Time\". In 2005, \"Toy Story\", along with \"Toy Story 2\" was voted the fourth greatest cartoon in Channel 4's 100 Greatest Cartoons poll, behind \"The Simpsons\", \"Tom and Jerry\", and \"South Park\".\nInfluence and legacy.\n\"Toy Story\" had a large effect on the film industry with its innovative computer animation. After the film's debut, various industries were interested in the technology used for the film. Graphics chip makers desired to compute imagery similar to the film's animation for personal computers, game developers wanted to learn how to replicate the animation for video games, and robotics researchers were interested in building artificial intelligence into their machines that compared to the film's lifelike characters. Various authors have also compared the film to an interpretation of \"Don Quixote\" as well as humanism. In addition, \"Toy Story\" left an impact with its catchphrase \"To Infinity and Beyond\", sequels, and software, among others. In 2005, \"Toy Story\" was selected by the United States Library of Congress to be preserved in the National Film Registry for being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\n\"To Infinity... and Beyond!\".\nBuzz Lightyear's line \"To Infinity and Beyond!\" has been used not only on themed merchandise, but among philosophers and mathematical theorists as well. In 2008, during STS-124, astronauts took an action figure of Buzz Lightyear into space on Space Shuttle \"Discovery\" as part of an educational experience for students while stressing the catchphrase. The action figure was used for experiments in zero-g. It was reported in 2008 that a father and son had continually repeated the phrase to help them keep track of each other while treading water for 15 hours in the Atlantic Ocean. The phrase occurs in the lyrics of Beyonc\u00e9's 2008 song \"Single Ladies (Put a Ring on It)\", during the bridge. In 2012, the late Capital STEEZ released a song titled \"Infinity and Beyond\" in reference to the phrase as part of his \"AmeriKKKan Korruption\" mixtape.\nDisney has also recycled the phrase in homage to \"Toy Story\" at least twice. In the \"blooper reel\" shown during the credits of \"A Bug's Life\", Dave Foley says the line while in character as Flik, and Tim Allen himself repeated his famous line in \"The Shaggy Dog\", in a scene when the titular character jumps off a bridge onto a moving vehicle.\nOther influences.\n\"Toy Story\"'s cast of characters forms the basis for the naming of the releases of the Debian computer operating system, from Debian 1.1 \"Buzz\", the first release with a codename, in 1996, to Debian 14 \"Forky\", the most-recently announced future release.\nIn 2013, Pixar designed a \"Gromit Lightyear\" sculpture based on the Aardman Animations character Gromit for Gromit Unleashed, which sold for \u00a365,000.\nSequels and spin-off.\n\"Toy Story 2\".\nThe first sequel, titled \"Toy Story 2\", was released on November 24, 1999. In the film, Woody is stolen by a toy collector, leading Buzz and his friends to launch a rescue mission. Initially, \"Toy Story 2\" was going to be a direct-to-video release, with development beginning in 1996. However, after the cast from \"Toy Story\" returned and the story was considered to be better than that of a direct-to-video release, it was announced in 1998 that the sequel would see a theatrical release.\n\"Toy Story 3\".\n\"Toy Story 3\" was released on June 18, 2010. In the film, Andy's toys are accidentally donated to a day-care center as he prepares to leave for college.\n\"Toy Story 4\".\n\"Toy Story 4\" was released on June 21, 2019, with most of the main cast returning for the film. In the film, Woody, Buzz, and the rest of the gang get used to living with Bonnie, who creates a new toy named Forky, from recycled materials from school. As they go on a road trip with Bonnie, Woody is also reunited with Bo Peep, and must decide where his loyalties lie.\n\"Lightyear\".\nA spin-off film, \"Lightyear\", was released on June 17, 2022, with Chris Evans portraying the original Buzz Lightyear, upon whom the toy given to Andy in the first film was based.\n\"Toy Story 5\".\nOn February 8, 2023, Disney announced that a fifth \"Toy Story\" film is in development. It is scheduled to be released on June 19, 2026.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53086", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53086", "title": "Satanic Verses", "text": "Retracted false revelation in Islamic tradition\nThe Satanic Verses are words of \"satanic suggestion\" which the Islamic prophet Muhammad is alleged to have mistaken for divine revelation. The first use of the expression in English is attributed to Sir William Muir in 1858.\nAccording to early prophetic biographies of Muhammad by al-W\u0101qid\u012b, Ibn Sa'd and the of al-Tabar\u012b, Muhammad was manipulated by Satan to praise the three chief pagan Meccan goddesses\u2014al-L\u0101t, al-'Uzz\u00e1, and Man\u0101t\u2014while preaching Islam to an audience in Mecca. Religious authorities recorded the story for the first two centuries of the Islamic era. The words of praise for the pagan deities allegedly elicited by Satanic temptation are known as the Satanic Verses. A version of this episode, in which Muhammad does not issue the purported Satanic Verses, takes place in surah 53 of the Qur\u02bean.\nStrong objections to the historicity of the Satanic Verses incident were raised as early as the tenth century. By the 13th century, most Islamic scholars (Ulama) started to reject it as inconsistent with the theological principle of (impeccability of the prophets) and the methodological principle of isnad-criticism. According to some Islamic traditions, God sent Satan as a tempter to test the audience. Others categorically deny that this incident ever happened.\nSome modern scholars of Islam accept the incident as historical, citing the implausibility of early Muslim biographers fabricating a story so unflattering to their prophet. Alford T. Welch considers this argument insufficient, but does not dismiss the possibility that the story has some historical basis. He proposes that the story may reflect a longer period of Muhammad's acceptance of the Meccan goddesses, known by his contemporaries and later condensed into a story that limits his acceptance of the Meccan goddesses\u2019 intercession to a single incident and assigns blame for this departure from strict monotheism to Satan. Carl W. Ernst writes that the existence of later insertions in early Meccan surahs indicates that the Qur\u02bean was revised in dialogue with its first audience, who recited these surahs frequently in worship services and asked questions about difficult passages. A reading of surah 53 with this in mind leads Ernst to conclude that the Satanic Verses likely never existed as part of the Qur\u02bean. He argues that the surah is heavily focused on rejection of polytheism, which makes the inclusion of the Satanic Verses quote unrealistic. Its absence from the canonical hadith collections supports his claim. Others have suggested that the story may have been fabricated for theological reasons.\nBasic narrative.\nThere are some accounts of the incident, which differ in the construction and detail of the narrative, but they may be broadly collated to produce a basic account. The different versions of the story are recorded in early tafsirs (Quranic commentaries) and biographies of the Prophet, such as Ibn Ishaq's. In its essential form, the story reports that Muhammad longed to convert his kinsmen and neighbors of Mecca to Islam. It then reports that as he was reciting these verses of S\u016brat an-Najm, considered a revelation from the angel Gabriel:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Have you thought of al-L\u0101t and al-'Uzz\u00e1? And about the third one, Man\u0101t?\"\nSatan tempted him to utter the following line which does not appear in the Quran:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"These are the exalted , whose intercession is hoped for.\"\nAl-L\u0101t, al-'Uzz\u0101, and Man\u0101t were three pre-Islamic Arabian goddesses worshipped by the Meccans. Discerning the precise meaning of the word has proven difficult, as it has multiple appropriate meanings. Commentators have written that it means \"the cranes\". In other contexts, Arabic word does mean a \"crane\" \u2013 appearing in the singular as and , and the word has cousin forms in other words for birds, including \"raven, crow\" and \"eagle\". Taken as a segment, \"exalted \" has been translated by Orientalist William Muir to mean \"exalted women\", while contemporary academic Muhammad Manazir Ahsan has translated the same segment as \"high-soaring ones (deities)\". Thus, whether the phrase had intended to attribute a divine nature to the three \"idols\" is a matter of dispute. In either case, scholars generally agree on the meaning of the second half of the verse, \"whose intercession is hoped for\".\nTabar\u012b's account.\nAn extensive account of the incident is found in al-Tabar\u012b's history, the (Vol. VI) (c.\u2009915 CE):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The prophet was eager for the welfare of his people, desiring to win them to him by any means he could. It has been reported that he longed for a way to win them, and part of what he did to that end is what Ibn Humayd told me, from Salama, from Muhammad ibn Ishaq, from Yaz\u012bd ibn Ziy\u0101d al-Madan\u012b, from Muhammad ibn Ka'b al-Quraz\u012b:\nWhen the prophet saw his people turning away from him, and was tormented by their distancing themselves from what he had brought to them from God, he longed in himself for something to come to him from God which would draw him close to them. With his love for his people and his eagerness for them, it would gladden him if some of the hard things he had found in dealing with them could be alleviated. He pondered this in himself, longed for it, and desired it.\nThen God sent down the revelation. 'By the star when it sets! Your companion has not erred or gone astray, and does not speak from mere fancy\u2026' [Q.53:1] When he reached God's words, \"Have you seen al-L\u0101t and al-'Uzz\u0101 and Man\u0101t, the third, the other?' [Q.53:19\u201320] Satan cast upon his tongue, because of what he had pondered in himself and longed to bring to his people, 'These are the high-flying cranes and their intercession is to be hoped for.'\nWhen Quraysh heard that, they rejoiced. What he had said about their gods pleased and delighted them, and they gave ear to him. The Believers trusted in their prophet with respect to what he brought them from their Lord: they did not suspect any slip, delusion or error. When he came to the prostration and finished the chapter, he prostrated and the Muslims followed their prophet in it, having faith in what he brought them and obeying his command. Those of Quraysh and others who were in the mosque also prostrated on account of what they had heard him say about their gods. In the whole mosque there was no believer or who did not prostrate. Only al-Wal\u012bd bin al-Mugh\u012bra, who was an aged shaykh and could not make prostration, scooped up in his hand some of the soil from the valley of Mecca [and pressed it to his forehead]. Then everybody dispersed from the mosque.\nQuraysh went out and were delighted by what they had heard of the way in which he spoke of their gods. They were saying, 'Muhammad has referred to our gods most favourably. In what he has recited he said that they are \"high-flying cranes whose intercession is to be hoped for\".'\nThose followers of the Prophet who had emigrated to the land of Abyssinia heard about the affair of the prostration, and it was reported to them that Quraysh had accepted Islam. Some men among them decided to return while others remained behind.\nGabriel came to the Prophet and said, 'O Muhammad, what have you done! You have recited to the people something which I have not brought you from God, and you have spoken what He did not say to you.'\nAt that the Prophet was mightily saddened and greatly feared God. But God, of His mercy, sent him a revelation, comforting him and diminishing the magnitude of what had happened. God told him that there had never been a previous prophet or apostle who had longed just as Muhammad had longed, and desired just as Muhammad had desired, but that Satan had cast into his longing just as he had cast onto the tongue of Muhammad. But God abrogates what Satan has cast, and puts His verses in proper order. That is, 'you are just like other prophets and apostles.'\nAnd God revealed: 'We never sent any apostle or prophet before you but that, when he longed, Satan cast into his longing. But God abrogates what Satan casts in, and then God puts His verses in proper order, for God is all-knowing and wise.' [Q.22:52]\nSo God drove out the sadness from His prophet and gave him security against what he feared. He abrogated what Satan had cast upon his tongue in referring to their gods: 'They are the high-flying cranes whose intercession is accepted [\"sic\"]'. [Replacing those words with] the words of God when Al-l\u0101t, al-'Uzz\u0101 and Man\u0101t the third, the other are mentioned: 'Should you have males and He females [as offspring]! That, indeed, would be an unfair division. They are only names which you and your fathers have given them'\u2026 as far as 'As many as are the angels in heaven, their intercession shall be of no avail unless after God has permitted it to whom He pleases and accepts' [Q.53:21\u201326] meaning, how can the intercession of their gods be of any avail with Him?\nWhen there had come from God the words which abrogated what Satan had cast on to the tongue of His prophet, Quraysh said, 'Muhammad has gone back on what he said about the status of our gods relative to God, changed it and brought something else', for the two phrases which Satan had cast on to the tongue of the Prophet had found a place in the mouth of every polytheist. They, therefore, increased in their evil and in their oppression of everyone among them who had accepted Islam and followed the Prophet.\nThe band of the Prophet's followers who had left the land of Abyssinia on account of the report that the people of Mecca had accepted Islam when they prostrated together with the Prophet drew near. But when they approached Mecca they heard that the talk about the acceptance of Islam by the people of Mecca was wrong. Therefore, they only entered Mecca in secret or after having obtained a promise of protection.\nAmong those of them who came to Mecca at that time and remained there until emigrating to Medina and taking part in the battle of Badr alongside Muhammad there was, from the family of 'Abd Shams b. Abd Man\u0101f b. Qussayy, 'Uthm\u0101n b. 'Aff\u0101n together with his wife Ruqayya the daughter of the Prophet. Ab\u016b Hudhayfa b. 'Utba with his wife Shal bint Suhayl, and another group with them, numbering together 33 men.\nReception in Muslim exegesis.\nEarly Islam.\nShahab Ahmed, author of a book on the satanic verses in early Islam, observed that in the era of early tafsirs and s\u012brah/maghazi literature, the satanic verses incident was near universally accepted by the early Muslim community and illustrative of a concept of prophethood involving an ongoing struggle. Later, it was rejected when the logic of the era of hadith collections and subsequent orthodoxy was based on two epistemological principles: the theological principle of \u2018i\u1e63mat al-anbiy\u0101\u2019 (impeccability of the prophets) and the \u1e24ad\u012bth methodology principle of assaying reports by their isn\u0101ds.\nIbn Hazm considered the story to be fabricated, saying: \"The hadith which includes the phrase, 'Indeed, they are the lofty Gharaniq, and their intercession is hoped for,' is an absolute lie. It is neither valid in terms of transmission nor worthy of being engaged with, as fabricating lies is within anyone's capacity.\"\nAccording to Ibn Taymiyyah, there are two opinions in regard to this. It was transmitted that the early Islamic Scholars (Salaf) believed the story, while the later coming scholars (Khalaf), say that the transmission of the account is not established as reliable.\nIbn Kathir rejected the narration, saying: \"The core of the story is from the authentic narration, but the Gharaniq story is disconnected and its chain of transmission is not authentic.\" This was a reference to the narration recorded by Scholars such as Al-Bukhari and Al-Muslim who mentioned the recitation of the current verses of Chapter 53 and the prostration of the Muslims and the disbelievers upon their recitation, but not the intervention of Satan. \nThe earliest biography of Muhammad, Ibn Ishaq (761\u2013767) is lost but his collection of traditions survives mainly in two sources: Ibn Hisham (833) and al-Tabari (915). The story appears in al-Tabari, who includes Ibn Ishaq in the chain of transmission, but not in Ibn Hisham, where much that previous generations had recorded of the Prophet, he commented sternly, was either bogus, or irrelevant, or sacrilegious. Ibn Sa'd and Al-Waqidi, two other early biographers of Muhammad relate the story.\nThe doctrine of \u201cIsma\" (Perfection of Prophets) has been most forcefully and consistently upheld by the Shi'a, for whom it is a central tenet. It therefore appears that no Shi\u2019i of any school has ever accepted the Satanic Verses incident. Those Sunni scholars who did accept the incident had a slightly, but very significantly, different understanding of \u201cisma\u201d.\nPaul Arno Eichler (1928) describes Muslims as believing that Satan's interference in divine revelation as a test sent by God. He explains this interpretation of Muslims by the fact that in Islamic thought, Satan (\"Ibl\u012bs\") himself is not the tempter, but merely the instrument through which God tests his subjects.\nLater medieval period.\nDue to its controversial nature, the tradition of the Satanic Verses never made it into any of the canonical hadith compilations (though possible truncated versions of the incident did). The reference and exegesis about the Verses appear in early histories. In addition to appearing in Tabar\u012b's , it is used in the of Muq\u0101til, \u02bdAbd al-Razzaq al-San\u02bdani and Ibn Kathir as well as the of Abu Ja'far an-Nahh\u0101s, the collection of W\u0101hid\u012b and even the late-medieval as-Suy\u016bt\u012b's compilation .\nObjections to the incident were raised as early as the fourth Islamic century, such as in the work of an-Nahh\u0101s and continued to be raised throughout later generations by scholars such as Abu Bakr ibn al-\u2018Arabi (d. 1157), Fakhr ad-Din Razi (1220) as well as al-Qurtubi (1285). The most comprehensive argument presented against the factuality of the incident came in Qadi Iyad's . The incident was discounted on two main bases. The first was that the incident contradicted the doctrine of , divine protection of Muhammad from mistakes. The second was that the descriptions of the chain of transmission extant since that period are not complete and sound/authentic ().\nImam Fakhr al-Din al-Razi commenting on in his Tafsir al-Kabir stated that the \"people of verification\" declared the story as an outright fabrication, citing supporting arguments from the Qur'an, Sunnah and reason. He then reported that the preeminent Muhaddith Ibn Khuzaymah said: \"it is an invention of the heretics\" when once asked about it. Al-Razi also recorded that al-Bayhaqi stated that the narration of the story was unreliable because its narrators were of questionable integrity.\nAl-Shawkani stated that the story is not authentic, saying: \"And nothing from this (Gharaniq story) is sahih, nor is it proven [except for] its lack of authenticity and falsehood as the scholars of verification have said for it contradicts the Book of Allah the Exalted\". He then cites other scholars who also deemed it to be inauthentic, such Al-Bazzar, Al-Bayhaqi, and Ibn Khuzaymah.\nThose scholars who acknowledged the historicity of the incident apparently had a different method for the assessment of reports than that which has become standard Islamic methodology. For example, Ibn Taymiyyah took the position that since and reports were commonly transmitted by incomplete , these reports should not be assessed according to the completeness of the chains but rather on the basis of recurrent transmission of common meaning between reports.\nAl-Qurtubi () dismisses all these variants in favor of the explanation that once S\u016bra al-Najm was safely revealed the basic events of the incident (or rumors of them) \"were now permitted to occur to identify those of his followers who would accept Muhammad's explanation of the blasphemous imposture\" (\"JSS\" 15, pp.\u00a0254\u2013255).\nIbn Hajar al-Asqalani wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;All the chains of this narration are weak, except of Said Ibn Jubayr. And when one incident is reported from many different chains, then it means there is something real in this incident. Moreover, this incident has also been narrated through 2 Mursal (where chain goes up to Successor, i.e., Tabari) traditions, whose chains of narration are authentic according to the standards of Imam Bukhari and Imam Muslim. First one is what Tabari recorded from Younus bin Yazid, he from Ibn Shahab that Abu Bakr Ibn Abdul Rehman narrated me. While second one which Tabari recorded from Mutabar bin Sulayman and Hammad bin Salama, and they from Dawud bin Abi Hind, and he from Abu Aliya [...] Ibn Arabi and Qadhi Ayyad say there is no proof of this incident, but contrary to their claim when one incident comes through different chain of narrations, then it means that this incident is real. While there are not only multiple chain of narrations about this incident, but also 3 of them are authentic while 2 of them are Mursal narrations.\nModern Islamic scholarship.\nWhile the authors of the texts during the first two centuries of the Islamic era do not seem to have regarded the tradition as in any way inauspicious or unflattering to Muhammad, it seems to have been universally rejected by at least the 13th century, and most modern Muslims likewise see the tradition as problematic, in the sense that it is viewed as \"profoundly heretical because, by allowing for the intercession of the three pagan female deities, they eroded the authority and omnipotence of Allah. But they also hold... damaging implications in regard to the revelation as a whole, for Muhammad's revelation appears to have been based on his desire to soften the threat to the deities of the people.\" Different responses have developed concerning the account.\nMany modern Muslim scholars have rejected the story. Arguments for rejection are found in Muhammad Abduh's article \"Mas\u02bealat al-ghar\u0101n\u012bq wa-tafs\u012br al-\u0101y\u0101t\", Muhammad Husayn Haykal's \"Hayat Muhammad\" (1933), Sayyid Qutb's \"Fi Zilal al-Quran\" (1965), Abul Ala Maududi's \"Tafhim-ul-Quran\" (1972) and Muhammad Nasiruddin al-Albani's \"Nasb al-maj\u0101n\u012bq li-nasf al-ghar\u0101n\u012bq\".\nHaykal points out the many forms and versions of the story and their inconsistencies and argues that \"the contextual flow of Surah 'al Najm' does not allow at all the inclusion of such verses as the story claims\". Haykal quotes Muhammad Abduh who pointed out that the \"Arabs have nowhere described their gods in such terms as 'al gharaniq'. Neither in their poetry nor in their speeches or traditions do we find their gods or goddesses described in such terms. Rather, the word 'al ghurnuq' or 'al gharniq' was the name of a black or white water bird, sometimes given figuratively to the handsome blond youth.\" Lastly, Haykal argues that the story is inconsistent with Muhammad's personal life and is completely against the spirit of the Islamic message.\nAqa Mahdi Puya has said that these fake verses were shouted out by the Meccans to make it appear that it was Muhammad who had spoken them; he writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Some pagans and hypocrites planned secretly to recite words praising idolatry alongside the recitation of the Holy Prophet, while he was praying, in such a way that the people would think as if they were recited by him. Once when the Holy Prophet was reciting verses 19 and 20 of Najm one of the pagans recited: \"Tilkal gharani-ul ula wa inna shafa-atahuma laturja\"-(These are the lofty (idols), verily their intercession is sought after.) As soon as this was recited the conspirators shouted in delight to make the people believe that it was the Holy Prophet who said these words. Here, the Quran is stating the general pattern the enemies of the messengers of Allah followed when they were positively convinced that the people were paying attention to the teachings of the messengers of Allah and sincerely believing in them. They would mix their false doctrines with the original teachings so as to make the divine message a bundle of contradictions. This kind of satanic insertions are referred to in thus verse, and it is supported by Ha Mim: 26. It is sheer blasphemy to say that satanic forces can influence the messengers of Allah.\nHistoricity debate.\nSince William Muir, the historicity of this episode had been accepted by secular academics. Some orientalists, however, argued against the historic authenticity of these verses on various grounds. Sean Anthony observes a trend of more recent scholarship towards rejecting the historicity of the story after a period in which scholars were more divided.\nWilliam Montgomery Watt and Alfred Guillaume claim that stories of the event were true based upon the implausibility of Muslims fabricating a story so unflattering to their prophet: \"Muhammad must have publicly recited the satanic verses as part of the Qur'\u0101n; it is unthinkable that the story could have been invented by Muslims, or foisted upon them by non-Muslims.\"\nScholars such as Uri Rubin and Shahab Ahmed and Guillaume hold that the report was in Ibn Ishaq, while Alford T. Welch holds the report has not been presumably present in the Ibn Ishaq.\nShahab Ahmed states that \"Reports of the Satanic verses incident were recorded by virtually every compiler of a major biography of Muhammad in the first two centuries of Islam: 'Urwah b. al-Zubayr (23\u201394), Ibn Shihab al-Zuhri (51\u2013124), Musa b. 'Uqbah (85\u2013141), Ibn Ishaq (85\u2013151), Abu Ma'shar (d. 170), Yunus b. Bukayr (d. 199), and al-Waqidi (130\u2013207).\" Alford T. Welch, however, argues that this rationale alone is insufficient but does not rule out the possibility of some historical foundation to the story. He proposes that the story may be yet another instance of historical telescoping, i.e., a circumstance that Muhammad's contemporaries knew to have lasted for a long period of time later became condensed into a story that limits his acceptance of the Meccan goddesses\u2019 intercession to a brief period of time and assigns blame for this departure from strict monotheism to Satan.\nJohn Burton argued for its fictitiousness based upon a demonstration of its actual utility to certain elements of the Muslim community \u2013 namely, those legal exegetes seeking an \"occasion of revelation\" for eradicative modes of abrogation. Burton supports his theory by the fact that Tabari does not discuss the story in his exegesis of the verse 53:20, but rather in 22:52. Disagreeing with Burton, G.R. Hawting writes that the satanic verses incident would not serve to justify or exemplify a theory that God reveals something and later replaces it himself with another true revelation. Burton, in his rejection of the authenticity of the story, sided with Leone Caetani, who wrote that the story was to be rejected not only on the basis of , but because \"had these hadiths even a degree of historical basis, Muhammad's reported conduct on this occasion would have given the lie to the whole of his previous prophetic activity.\"\nMaxime Rodinson finds that it may reasonably be accepted as true \"because the makers of Muslim tradition would never have invented a story with such damaging implications for the revelation as a whole.\" He writes the following on the genesis of the verses: \"Obviously Muhammad's unconscious had suggested to him a formula which provided a practical road to unanimity.\" Rodinson writes that this concession, however, diminished the threat of the Last Judgment by enabling the three goddesses to intercede for sinners and save them from eternal damnation. Further, it diminished Muhammad's own authority by giving the priests of Uzza, Manat, and Allat the ability to pronounce oracles contradicting his message. Disparagement from Christians and Jews, who pointed out that he was reverting to his pagan beginnings, combined with opposition and indignation from his own followers influenced him to recant his revelation. However, in doing so he denounced the gods of Mecca as lesser spirits or mere names, cast off everything related to the traditional religion as the work of pagans and unbelievers, and consigned the Meccan's pious ancestors and relatives to Hell. This was the final break with the Quraysh.\nFred Halliday states that rather than having damaging implications, the story is a cautionary tale, the point of which is \"not to malign God but to point up the frailty of human beings,\" and that even a prophet may be misled by shaytan \u2013 though ultimately shaytan is unsuccessful.\nSince John Wansbrough's contributions to the field in the early 1970s, though, scholars have become much more attentive to the emergent nature of early Islam, and less willing to accept back-projected claims of continuity:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To those who see the tradition as constantly evolving and supplying answers to question that it itself has raised, the argument that there would be no reason to develop and transmit material which seems derogatory of the Prophet or of Islam is too simple. For one thing, ideas about what is derogatory may change over time. We know that the doctrine of the Prophet's infallibility and impeccability (the doctrine regarding his ) emerged only slowly. For another, material which we now find in the biography of the Prophet originated in various circumstances to meet various needs and one has to understand why material exists before one can make a judgment about its basis in fact...\nIn Rubin's recent contribution to the debate, questions of historicity are completely eschewed in favor of an examination of internal textual dynamics and what they reveal about early medieval Islam. Rubin claims to have located the genesis of many prophetic traditions and that they show an early Muslim desire to prove to other scriptuaries \"that Muhammad did indeed belong to the same exclusive predestined chain of prophets in whom the Jews and the Christians believed. He alleges that the Muslims had to establish the story of Muhammad's life on the same literary patterns as were used in the \"vitae\" of the other prophets\". The incident of the Satanic Verses, according to him, conforms to the common theme of persecution followed by isolation of the prophet-figure.\nAs the story was adapted to include Qur'\u0101nic material (Q.22:52, Q.53, Q.17:73\u201374), the idea of satanic temptation was claimed to have been added, heightening its inherent drama as well as incorporating additional Biblical motifs (cf. the Temptation of Christ). Rubin gives his attention to the narratological exigencies which may have shaped early material, as opposed to the more commonly considered ones of dogma, sect, and political/dynastic faction. Given the consensus that \"the most archaic layer of the biography, [is] that of the stories of the [i.e. popular story-tellers]\" (, \"EI\u00b2\"), this may prove a fruitful line of inquiry.\nRubin also claimed that the supposed temporary control taken by Satan over Muhammad made such traditions unacceptable to early hadith compilers, which he believed to be a unique case in which a group of traditions are rejected only after being subject to Qur'anic models, and as a direct result of this adjustment.\nBuilding on Rubin's views, Sean Anthony has proposed that an early tradition attributed to \u02bfUrwa b. al-Zubayr about the mass conversion and prostration of the Meccans but which does not mention the satanic verses was at a later stage connected with Q. 53:19-20, Q. 22:52 and Q. 17:73-74.\nSome scholars believe there is evidence in the Quranic text of surah 53 itself relevant to the question of historicity. Nicolai Sinai argues that the conciliatory satanic verses would make no sense in the context of the scathing criticism in the subsequent verses, whether they were uttered before Q.53:21-22 or (if those replaced the satanic verses) Q. 53:24-25. Patricia Crone makes a similar point but regarding the preceding verses, Q. 53:19-20. She argues that \"Have you seen al-Lat...?\" should be taken as a hostile question about literally seeing the three deities, particularly since the preceding half of the surah repeatedly claims that Allah's servant saw the heavenly being, and noting also other verses where a similar question is asked (Q. 35:40 and Q. 46:4).\nOn the other hand, Tommaso Tesei builds on the common observation (also mentioned by Crone) that verses 23 and 26-32 of Q. 53 appear to be an interpolation of long verses into a surah of otherwise short verses. Tesei argues that those verses display stylistic incoherence as well as a theological tension with the rest of Q. 53, a surah which is consistent with evidence external to the Islamic tradition regarding pre-Islamic deities and star worship. Of relevance to the possibility of historical elements in the satanic verses story, Tesei notes that the interpolation (as he sees it) coincides exactly with the traditional account that an explanatory comment was inserted to rectify the identification of the pagan deities as divine intercessors.\nShahab Ahmed noted that the Quran is at pains to deny that the source of Muhammad's inspiration is a shaytan (Q. 81:19\u201320, 25) because for his immediate audience, the sources for the two categories of inspired individuals in society, poets and soothsayers, were shaytans and jinn, respectively, whereas Muhammad was a prophet.\nRelated traditions.\nSeveral related traditions exist, some adapted to Qur'\u0101nic material, some not. One version, appearing in Tabar\u012b's and attributed to Urwah ibn Zubayr (d. 713), preserves the basic narrative but with no mention of satanic temptation. Muhammad is persecuted by the Meccans after attacking their idols, during which time a group of Muslims seeks refuge in Abyssinia. After the cessation of this first round of persecution () they return home, but soon a second round begins. No compelling reason is provided for the caesura of persecution, though, unlike in the incident of the Satanic Verses, where it is the (temporary) fruit of Muhammad's accommodation to Meccan polytheism. Another version attributed to 'Urwa has only one round of , which begins after Muhammad has converted the entire population of Mecca, so that the Muslims are too numerous to perform ritual prostration () all together. This somewhat parallels the Muslims and prostrating themselves together after Muhammad's first, allegedly satanically infected, recitation of , in which allegedly the efficacy of the three pagan goddesses is acknowledged.\nThe image of Muslims and pagans prostrating themselves together in prayer in turn links the story of the satanic verses to very abbreviated (i.e. prostration when reciting the Qur'\u0101n) traditions found in the authoritative collections, including the Sunni canonical ones of Bukh\u0101ri and Tirmidh\u012b. Rubin claims that apparently \"the allusion to the participation of the emphasises how overwhelming and intense the effect of this was on those attending\". The traditions actually state that all cognizant creatures took part in it, humans as well as jinns.\nRubin further argues that this is inherently illogical without the Satanic Verses in the recitation, given that in the accepted version of verses Q.53:19\u201323, the pagans' goddesses are attacked. The majority of traditions relating to prostration at the end of solve this by either removing all mention of the , or else transforming the attempt of an old Meccan to participate (who, instead of bowing to the ground, puts dirt to his forehead proclaiming \"This is sufficient for me\") into an act of mockery. Some traditions even describe his eventual comeuppance, saying he is later killed at the battle of Badr. Thus, according to Rubin, \"the story of the single polytheist who raised a handful of dirt to his forehead\u2026 [in]\u2026 attempt of an old disabled man to participate in Muhammad's \u2026 in\u2026 a sarcastic act of an enemy of Muhammad wishing to dishonor the Islamic prayer\". And \"traditions which originally related the dramatic story of temptation became a sterilized anecdote providing prophetic precedent for a ritual practice\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53087", "revid": "50618038", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53087", "title": "Jean Lafitte", "text": "French pirate and privateer\nJean Lafitte (c.\u20091780 \u2013 c.\u20091823) was a French pirate, privateer, and slave trader who operated in the Gulf of Mexico in the early 19th century. He and his older brother Pierre spelled their last name Laffite, but English language documents of the time used \"Lafitte\". This has become the common spelling in the United States, including places named after him.\nLafitte is believed to have been born either in Biarritz, in the French Basque Country, France, or the French colony of Saint-Domingue in the Caribbean.\nBy 1805, Lafitte was operating a warehouse in New Orleans to help distribute the goods smuggled by his brother Pierre Lafitte. The United States government passed the Embargo Act of 1807 as tensions built with the United Kingdom by prohibiting trade. The Lafittes moved their operations to an island in Barataria Bay, Louisiana. By 1810, their new port had become very successful: the Lafittes had a profitable smuggling operation and also started to engage in piracy.\nIn 1812, the United States and the United Kingdom went to war. Despite Lafitte warning the other Baratarians of a possible military attack on their base, a US naval force successfully invaded in September 1814 and captured most of his fleet. Later, in return for a legal pardon, Lafitte and his fleet helped General Andrew Jackson during the Battle of New Orleans to defend the city during the War of 1812. British forces sought access to the Mississippi River to gain control of the interior of the US. After securing victory, Jackson paid tribute in despatches to the Lafitte brothers' efforts, as well as those of their fellow privateers.\nThe Lafittes subsequently became spies for the Spanish during the Mexican War of Independence. In 1817, Jean founded a new colony on Galveston Island named \"Campeche\". At its height, the colonists and privateers earned millions of dollars annually from stolen or smuggled coin and goods. Very little is known about Lafitte, and speculation about his life and death continues among historians.\nA famous persistent rumor claimed that Lafitte rescued French Emperor Napoleon Bonaparte from exile, and both of them ended their days in Louisiana. No evidence supports it.\nOrigins.\nA number of details about Jean Lafitte's early life remain obscure, and often sources contradict each other. In the \"Journal de Jean Lafitte\", the authenticity of which is contested, Lafitte claims to have been born in Bordeaux, France, in 1780 to Sephardic Jewish parents. His maternal grandmother and mother, both Conversos, fled Spain for France in 1765. His maternal grandfather had been executed by the Inquisition for \"Judaizing\". Some sources say that his father was French and his mother's family had come from Spain.\nLafitte and his brother Pierre also claimed to have been born in Bayonne. Other documents of the period place his birthplace as St. Malo or Brest. Jack C. Ramsay, who published a 1996 biography of Lafitte, says, \"this was a convenient time to be a native of France, a claim that provided protection from the enforcement of American law\". He notes that still other contemporary accounts claim that Lafitte was born in Ordu\u00f1a, Spain, or in Westchester County, New York, north of Manhattan.\nSaint-Domingue.\nSome sources speculate that Lafitte was born in the French colony of Saint-Domingue (known as Haiti since it gained independence in 1804). In the late 18th century, adult children of the French planters in Saint-Domingue often resettled along the Mississippi River in \"La Louisiane\", especially in its largest city of New Orleans. Families with the surname Lafitte have been found in Louisiana documents from 1765. According to Ramsay, Lafitte's widowed mother migrated with her two sons, the elder Pierre and Jean, from Saint-Domingue to New Orleans in the 1780s. In approximately 1784, his mother married Pedro Aubry, a New Orleans merchant, keeping Jean with her. She placed Pierre to be raised by extended family elsewhere in Louisiana.\nAccording to Ramsay, as a young man, Lafitte likely spent much time exploring the wetlands and bayou country south of New Orleans. In later years, he was described as having \"a more accurate knowledge of every inlet from the Gulf than any other man\". His elder brother Pierre became a privateer; he may have operated from Saint-Domingue, where the colonial government frequently issued letters of marque to profit from the shipping traffic of other nations. \nLafitte likely helped his brother to sell or trade the captured merchandise. By 1805 he is believed to have been running a warehouse in New Orleans and possibly a store on Royal Street.\nFrance.\nBiographer William C. Davis suggests a different childhood for Lafitte. According to his 2005 book, Lafitte was born in or near Pauillac, France, the son of Pierre Lafitte and his second wife, Marguerite Desteil. The couple had six children, including at least three daughters. Jean Lafitte was likely born in 1782, although he was not baptized until 1786. Pierre Lafitte had an older son, his namesake Pierre, born from his first marriage to Marie LaGrange, who died in childbirth. The boys were given a basic Catholic education.\nAcknowledging that details of Lafitte's first twenty years are sparse, Davis speculates that Lafitte spent much time at sea as a child, probably aboard ships owned by his father, a known trader. Davis places Lafitte's brother Pierre in Saint-Domingue by the late 1790s and the early 19th century. Due to escalating violence from the Haitian Revolution, in early 1803 Pierre boarded a refugee ship for New Orleans. This was the last year that Napoleon Bonaparte failed to regain control of Saint-Domingue. He withdrew his battered troops and ended French involvement in North America, selling the US what became known as the Louisiana Purchase in 1803: French-claimed lands west of the Mississippi River. By 1806, several \"Captain Lafitte\"s operated in New Orleans; Jean Lafitte was likely one of them.\nCharacter and abilities.\nSources indicate that Lafitte was sharp and resourceful, but also handsome and friendly, enjoying drinking, gambling, and women. He was known to adopt more aristocratic mannerisms and dress than most of his fellow privateers.\nLafitte's native language was clearly French, though the specific dialect is a matter of some debate. He was evidently able to speak English reasonably well and most likely had a working knowledge of Spanish. He was educated with his brother at a military academy on Saint Kitts. No samples of his writing survive, except his signature; his surviving letters were always written by a secretary. His reading and writing abilities, therefore, remain unclear. During his life he acted as a soldier, sailor, diplomat, merchant, and much more, demonstrating natural gifts for leadership.\nBarataria.\nThe United States made the Louisiana Purchase in 1803. In January 1808, the government began to enforce the Embargo Act of 1807, which barred American ships from docking at any foreign port and imposed an embargo on goods imported into the US. It was specifically intended to prohibit trade with the United Kingdom, as tensions were increasing between the two countries over the North American border with Canada and other issues. That was problematic for New Orleans merchants, who had depended on trade with the Caribbean colonies of Great Britain and other nations. The Lafitte brothers began to look for another port from which they could smuggle goods to local merchants.\nThey created a base on the small and sparsely populated island of Barataria, in Barataria Bay. The bay was located beyond a narrow passage between the barrier islands of Grand Terre and Grande Isle. Barataria was far from the US naval base, and ships could easily smuggle in goods without being noticed by customs officials. Workers would reload goods into smaller batches onto \"pirogues\" or barges, for transport through the many bayous to New Orleans.\nBased in New Orleans, Pierre Lafitte served as a silent partner, looking after their interests in the city. Jean Lafitte spent most of his time in Barataria managing the daily hands-on business of outfitting privateers and arranging the smuggling of stolen goods. By 1810, the island had become a booming port. Seamen flocked to the island, working on the docks or at the warehouses until they were chosen as crew for one of the privateers.\nDissatisfied with their role as brokers, in October 1812 the Lafitte brothers purchased a schooner and hired Captain Trey Cook to sail it. As the schooner did not have an official commission from a national government, its captain was considered a pirate operating illegally. In January 1813, they took their first prize, a British hermaphrodite brig loaded with 77\u00a0slaves. Sale of the slaves and additional cargo generated $18,000 in profits.\nThe brothers adapted the captured ship for use in piracy and named it \"Dorada\". Within weeks, \"Dorada\" captured a schooner loaded with goods valued at more than $9,000. The captured schooner was not considered useful for piracy and so after they had unloaded its cargo, the Lafittes returned the ship to its former captain and crew. The Lafittes gained a reputation for treating captive crew members well and often returned captured ships to their original crew.\nThe brothers soon acquired a third ship, \"La Diligente\". They outfitted it with 12 fourteen-pounder cannons. \"Dorada\" captured a fourth ship, a schooner they renamed \"Petit Milan\". The brothers stripped down their original ship and used its guns to outfit the new one. \nThey sailed three ships, which Davis described as likely \"one of the largest privately owned corsair fleets operating on the coast, and the most versatile.\" For several months, the Lafittes would send the ships directly to New Orleans with legal cargo and would take on outgoing provisions in the city. The crew would create a manifest that listed not the provisions that had been purchased, but smuggled items stored at Barataria. Uninterested in exports from New Orleans, customs agents rarely checked the accuracy of the manifests. The ship would sail to the mouth of Bayou Lafourche, load the contraband goods, and sail \"legally\" back to New Orleans, with goods listed on a certified manifest.\nShifting attitudes.\nGovernor William C.C. Claiborne took a leave of absence in September 1810, leaving Thomas B. Robertson as acting governor. Robertson was incensed by Lafitte's operation, calling his men \"brigands who infest our coast and overrun our country\". The residents of New Orleans were grateful to the Lafittes for providing them with luxuries otherwise prevented from being imported by the embargo. When Claiborne returned to office, he was relatively quiet on the subject.\nOn June 18, 1812, the United States declared war on Great Britain. Britain maintained a powerful navy, but the United States had little naval power. The US built 13 warships in upstate New York to operate on the Great Lakes, but in other areas supplemented its navy by offering letters of marque to privately owned armed vessels. \nNew Orleans issued six such letters, primarily to smugglers who worked with Lafitte at Barataria. The smugglers often held letters of marque from multiple countries, authorizing them to capture booty from differing nations. They submitted booty from captured British ships to the American authorities at New Orleans, and booty from all other ships was often channeled for sale on the markets through Lafitte's operation.\nAs the smuggling operations reduced the amount of revenue collected by customs offices, American authorities were determined to halt business at Barataria. Because the US Navy did not have enough ships to act against the Baratarian smugglers, the government turned to the courts. On November 10, 1812, United States District Attorney John R. Grymes charged Lafitte with \"violation of the revenue law.\" Three days later, 40 soldiers were sent to ambush the Baratarians and captured Lafitte, his brother Pierre, and 25 unarmed smugglers on November 16. They confiscated several thousand dollars of contraband. Officials released the smugglers after they posted bail; the men quickly disappeared and refused to return for a trial.\nAlthough under indictment, in March 1813 Lafitte registered as captain of \"Le Brig Goelette la Diligente\" for a supposed journey to New York. Biographer Jack Ramsay speculates that the voyage was intended to \"establish ... [Lafitte] as a privateering captain\". Lafitte soon acquired a letter of marque from Cartagena, but never sent any booty there. He brought all captured goods to Barataria.\nLafitte's continued flouting of the laws angered Governor Claiborne, who, on March 15, issued a proclamation against the Baratarian \"banditti ... who act in contravention of the laws of the United States ... to the evident prejudice of the revenue of the federal government\". The proclamation was printed in the nationally read \"Niles' Weekly Register\".\nIn October, a revenue officer prepared an ambush of a band of Lafitte's smugglers. The smugglers wounded one of the officers and safely escaped with the contraband. The following month, the governor offered a $500 reward for Lafitte's capture. Within two days of his offer, handbills were posted all over New Orleans offering a similar award for the arrest of the governor. Although the handbills were made in Lafitte's name, Ramsay believes \"it is unlikely [the handbills] originated with him\". Following the reward offer, Lafitte wrote Claiborne a note denying the charges of piracy.\nGiven the success of his auctions at the Temple, in January 1814 Lafitte set up a similar auction at a site just outside New Orleans. Many of the city's merchants were unhappy with this auction, because it allowed their customers to buy goods directly from Lafitte at a lower price than the merchants could charge in the city. Officials tried to break up this auction by force. In the ensuing gunfight, one of the revenue officers was killed and two others were wounded.\nClaiborne appealed to the new state legislature, citing the lost revenues due to the smuggling. He requested approval to raise a militia company to \"disperse those desperate men on Lake Barataria whose piracies have rendered our shores a terror to neutral flags\". The legislature appointed a committee to study the matter but, as most of their constituents benefitted by the smuggling, they never authorized the militia. \nA grand jury indicted Pierre Lafitte after hearing testimony against him by one of the city's leading merchants. He was arrested, tried, convicted, and jailed on charges of \"having knowingly and wittingly aided and assisted, procured, commanded, counselled, and advised\" persons to commit acts of piracy\".\nWar of 1812.\nBritish offer.\nFollowing the charges of November 10, 1812, and subsequent arrest and jailing of his brother Pierre, Jean Lafitte operated the piracy and smuggling business. Over the next few months, the British Navy increased patrols in the Gulf of Mexico, and by August they had established a base at Pensacola. On September 3, 1814, the British ship HMS \"Sophie\" fired on a pirate ship returning to Barataria. Lafitte's ship grounded in shallow water where the larger British ship could not follow. The British raised a white flag and launched a small dinghy with several officers. Lafitte and several of his men rowed to meet them halfway.\nCaptain Nicholas Lockyer, the commander of the \"Sophie\", had been ordered to contact the \"Commandant at Barataria\". He was accompanied by a Royal Marine infantry captain, John McWilliam, who had been given a package to deliver to Lafitte. The Baratarians invited the British officers to row to their island. When they had disembarked and were surrounded by his men, Lafitte identified himself to them. Many of the smugglers wanted to lynch the British men, but Lafitte intervened and placed guards outside his home to ensure their protection.\nMcWilliam brought two letters in his packet for Lafitte: one, under the seal of King George III, offered Lafitte and his forces British citizenship and land grants in the British colonies in the Americas (by then, these consisted of islands in the Caribbean and territory in Upper and Lower Canada). In exchange, the king asked for Lafitte and his forces to promise to assist in the naval fight against the United States and to return any recent property that had been captured from Spanish ships. (Spain had become an ally of the British against the French.) If they refused the offer, the letters informed Lafitte that the British had orders to capture Barataria to put an end to their smuggling. The second item was a personal note to Lafitte from McWilliam's superior, Lieutenant Colonel Edward Nicolls, urging him to accept the offer.\nBelieving that the Americans would eventually prevail in the war against Britain, Lafitte thought he could more easily defeat the US revenue officers than he could the British Navy. He had also been told in August that American officials were planning an assault on Barataria with forces under the command of Commodore Daniel Patterson. They feared that Lafitte and his men might side with the British.\nLafitte tried to convince the Americans that they had nothing to fear from him. He sent a message to the Americans that few of his men favored helping the British but said he needed 15 days to review their offer. Lafitte had copies of the letters sent to Jean Blanque, a member of the Louisiana state legislature who had invested in the Barataria operation. In a personal note, Lafitte reminded Blanque that his brother Pierre was still in jail and deserved an early release.\nLafitte added a note to Governor Claiborne, saying,\nI am the stray sheep, wishing to return to the sheepfold... If you were thoroughly acquainted with the nature of my offenses, I should appear to you much less guilty, and still worthy to discharge the duties of a good citizen.\nLafitte committed himself and his men for any defensive measures needed by New Orleans. Within two days of Lafitte's notes, Pierre \"escaped\" from jail.\nAmerican invasion.\nThe US ordered an attack on Lafitte's colony. On September 13, 1814, Commodore Daniel Patterson set sail aboard the for Barataria. He was accompanied by six gunboats and a tender. The fleet anchored off Grande Terre and the gunboats attacked. By midmorning, 10 armed pirate ships formed a battle line in the bay. Within a short period, Lafitte's men abandoned their ships, set several on fire, and fled the area. When Patterson's men went ashore, they met no resistance. They took 80 people captive, but Lafitte escaped safely. The Americans took custody of six schooners, one felucca, and a brig, as well as 20\u00a0cannon and goods worth $500,000.\nOn September 23, Patterson and his fleet, including the eight captured ships, began the return trip to New Orleans. Widely publicized, the raid was hailed by the \"Niles' Weekly Register\" as \"a major conquest for the United States\".\nLafitte was described as\na man who, for about two years past, has been famous for crimes that the civilized world wars against. ... [He] is supposed to have captured one hundred vessels of all nations, and certainly murdered the crews of all that he took, for no one has ever escaped him.\nFollowing the custom of the times, Patterson filed a legal claim for the profits from the confiscated ships and merchandise. An attorney representing Lafitte argued that the captured ships had flown the flag of Cartagena, an area at peace with the United States. One of Lafitte's men testified that the Baratarians had never intended to fight the US but had prepared their vessels to flee. The judge ruled that Patterson should get the customary share of profits from the goods that had already been sold, but he did not settle the ownership of the ships. They were held in port under custody of the United States Marshal.\nLikely inspired by Lafitte's offer to help defend Louisiana, Governor Claiborne wrote the US Attorney General, Richard Rush requesting a pardon for the Baratarians, saying that for generations, smugglers were \"esteemed honest ... [and] sympathy for these offenders is certainly more or less felt by many of the Louisianans\". According to Ramsay, Claiborne next wrote to General Andrew Jackson, \"implying Patterson had destroyed a potential first line of defense for Louisiana\" by his capture of Lafitte and his ships. Jackson responded, \"I ask you, Louisianans, can we place any confidence in the honor of men who have courted an alliance with pirates and robbers?\"\nBattle of New Orleans.\nWhen General Andrew Jackson arrived in New Orleans on December 1, 1814, he discovered the city had not created any defenses. It had approximately 1,000 unseasoned troops and two ships for its use. Although the city kept control of the eight ships taken from Lafitte, it did not have enough sailors to man them for defense. Resentful of the raid on Barataria, Lafitte's men refused to serve on their former ships.\nIn mid-December, Jackson met with Lafitte, who offered to serve if the United States would pardon those of his men who agreed to defend the city. Jackson agreed to do so. On December 19, the state legislature passed a resolution recommending a full pardon for all of the former residents at Barataria. With Lafitte's encouragement, many of his men joined the New Orleans militia or as sailors to man the ships. Others formed three artillery companies.\nOn December 23, advance units of the British fleet reached the Mississippi River. Lafitte realized that the American line of defense was so short as to potentially allow the British to encircle the American troops. He suggested that the line be extended to a nearby swamp, and Jackson ordered it done. The British began advancing upon the American lines on December 28, but were repulsed by an artillery crew manned by two of Lafitte's former lieutenants, Renato Beluche and Dominique Youx.\nPatterson praised the Barataria men who served on one of the US Navy ships, and whose skill with artillery was greater than their British counterparts. On land and sea, the former pirate gunners earned praise as the battle continued. On January 21, Jackson issued a statement praising his troops, especially the cannoneers and \"Captains Dominique and Beluche, lately commanding privateers of Barataria, with part of their former crews and many brave citizens of New Orleans, were stationed at Nos. 3 and 4.\" Jackson praised Jean and Pierre Lafitte for having \"exhibited the same courage and fidelity\". He formally requested clemency for the Lafittes and the men who had served under them. The government granted them all a full pardon on February 6.\nGalveston.\n \nIn late 1815 and early 1816, the Lafitte brothers agreed to act as spies for Spain, which was embroiled in the Mexican War of Independence. Collectively they were known as \"Number thirteen\". Pierre was to inform about the situation in New Orleans. Jean was sent to Galveston Island, a part of Spanish Texas that served as the home base of Louis-Michel Aury, a French privateer who claimed to be a Mexican revolutionary. By early 1817, other revolutionaries had begun to congregate at Galveston, hoping to make it their base to wrest Mexico from Spanish control. Lafitte visited in March 1817. Two weeks into his stay, the two leaders of the revolutionaries left the island.\nThe following day, Lafitte took command of the island and appointed his own officers. On April 18, he sailed for New Orleans to report his activities. With Spanish permission, Lafitte returned to Galveston, promising to make weekly reports of his activities.\nLafitte essentially developed Galveston Island as another smuggling base. Like Barataria, Galveston was a seaward island that protected a large inland bay. As part of Mexico, it was outside the authority of the United States. It was largely uninhabited, except by the Karankawa, a Native American people. Texas was lightly populated at this time, and the base had no significant populations nearby. It was, at least initially, relatively free of scrutiny from any of the governments in the region.\nLafitte named his colony \"Campeche\", after a Mexican outpost further south along the Gulf Coast. His men tore down the existing houses and built 200 new, sturdier structures. Ships operating from Galveston flew the flag of Mexico, but they did not participate in the revolution. Lafitte wanted to avoid a Spanish invasion. Aury returned to Galveston several months later, but he left in July when he realized that the men were unwilling to revolt.\nIn less than a year, Lafitte's colony grew to 100\u2013200 men and several women. Lafitte interviewed all newcomers and required them to take an oath of loyalty to him. The headquarters consisted of a two-storey building facing the inland harbor, where landings were made. The building was surrounded by a moat and painted red; it became known as \"Maison Rouge.\" Lafitte conducted most of his business aboard his ship, \"The Pride\", where he also lived. Lafitte forged letters of marque from an imaginary nation to fraudulently authorize all the ships sailing from Galveston as privateers. The letters gave the ships permission to attack ships from all nations.\nAt its peak the colony had more than two thousand inhabitants and 120 separate structures. Annual income reached more than $2 million ($ in today's terms) in stolen currency and goods. Lafitte for a time lived lavishly, complete with servants and the finest housewares and other accoutrements.\nIn April 1818, the United States passed a law prohibiting the import of slaves into any port in the United States. The law left several loopholes, giving permission to any ship to capture a slave ship, regardless of the country of origin. Slaves captured in such actions who were turned over to the customs office would be sold within the United States, with half the profits going to the people who turned them in. Lafitte worked with several smugglers, including Jim Bowie, to profit from the poorly written law. Lafitte's men identified slave ships and captured them. Smugglers would purchase the slaves for a discounted price, march them to Louisiana, and turn them in to customs officials. A representative of the smuggler would purchase the slaves at the ensuing auction, and the smuggler would be given half of the purchase price. The smuggler became the lawful owner of the slaves and could resell them in New Orleans, or transport them for sale in other parts of the Deep South, which was the major slave market of the time. It was being developed for cotton culture, as invention of the \ncotton gin had made short-staple cotton profitable.\nIn 1818, the Campeche colony suffered hardships. After Lafitte's men abducted a Karankawa woman, warriors of her tribe attacked and killed five men of the colony. The corsairs aimed the artillery at the Karankawa, killing most of the men in the tribe. A hurricane in September resulted in flooding of most of the island, and several people died. It destroyed four ships and most buildings. Only six houses survived as habitable.\nMarriage and family.\nAccording to historian William C. Davis, in 1815 Lafitte began a public relationship with his mistress, Catherine (Catiche) Villard, a free woman of color. She was the sister of Marie Villard, the mistress of his brother, Pierre. Catiche became pregnant and gave birth to their son, Jean Pierre, on November 4, 1815. Catiche had given birth to a daughter named Marie on November 10, 1813. It's not known who her father was. Some speculate it was Jean. \nAfter Jean's reported death in the mid-1820s, the widowed Catiche took up with Feliciano Ramos. They had two children together. Jean Pierre, her son with Jean Lafitte, died at 17 during a cholera epidemic in New Orleans in October 1832. Catiche died July 2, 1858, around the age of 65.\nAnother account says Lafitte married Christina Levine at the age of seventeen. They had 3 children together: Jean Antoine Lafitte, Lucien Jean Lafitte, and Denise Jeanette Lafitte. Christina died after the birth of their daughter. After his three children were grown, Lafitte fell sick in his 50s. \nHe was nursed back to health by Emma Hortense Mortimer. They married and had two sons together, Jules Jean and Glenn Henri. Lafitte possibly took an assumed name, John Lafflin, and may have given that surname to his younger two sons.\nEnd of Campeche.\nIn 1821, the schooner was sent to Galveston to remove Lafitte from the Gulf. One of the pirate's captains had attacked an American merchant ship. Lafitte agreed to leave the island without a fight, and on May 7, 1821, departed on \"The Pride\". His men burned the Maison Rouge, fortress, and settlement. Lafitte reportedly took immense amounts of treasure with him, and was accompanied by his mulatta mistress and an infant son . Maison Rouge was long believed to have stood at 1417 Harborside Drive, near the Galveston wharf, but the foundations there have been dated to the 1870s.\nLater years.\nMost of his men had believed that Lafitte had a valid privateering commission although there was confusion as to which country had issued it. Two weeks after setting sail, they captured a Spanish ship, which they sent to Galveston, hoping the Longs would smuggle the goods to New Orleans. Lafitte's men buried some of the cargo on the island and ran the captured vessel aground, but an American patrol spotted the ship and, after investigating, discovered the buried cargo. Several of Lafitte's men were arrested and convicted of piracy.\nThe remainder of the crew rejoined Lafitte, who finally acknowledged that he did not have a valid commission. He said his ships would sail as pirates. Almost half of the combined crew refused to sail as pirates; Lafitte allowed them to leave aboard his largest ship, the brig \"General Victoria\". That night his remaining men reboarded the \"General Victoria\" and destroyed its masts and spars, crippling the ship, but they left the crew unharmed.\nLafitte and his men continued to take Spanish ships in the Gulf of Mexico and often returned to Galveston or the barrier islands near New Orleans to unload cargo or take on supplies arranged by Pierre. The congressional delegation in Louisiana began to demand that the federal government do something to halt the smuggling, and more US Navy ships were sent to the Gulf. Their patrols and interventions reduced the number of active pirates in the region. In October or November 1821, Lafitte's ship was ambushed as he attempted to ransom a recent prize. After first escaping with some crew, he and his men were captured and jailed. On February 13, 1822 he escaped, likely with outside help.\nOver the next few months, Lafitte established a base along the coast of Cuba, where he bribed local officials with a share of the profits. In late April 1822, Lafitte was captured again after taking his first American ship. The American warship that captured him turned Lafitte over to the local authorities, who promptly released him. When Lafitte and other pirates operating in the area began attacking merchant ships carrying legal goods to Cuba, they angered Cuban officials. By the end of 1822, Cuba had banned all forms of sea raiding.\nIn June 1822, Lafitte approached the officials in Great Colombia, whose government under General Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar had begun commissioning former privateers as officers in its new navy. Lafitte was granted a commission and given a new ship, a 43-ton schooner named \"General Santander\" in honor to Vice-president General Francisco de Paula Santander. For the first time, Lafitte was legally authorized to take Spanish ships.\nLafitte continued to patrol the shipping lanes around Cuba. In November 1822, he made news in the American press after escorting an American schooner through the pirate-infested area and providing them with extra cannonballs and food.\nIn February 1823, Lafitte was cruising off the town of Omoa, Honduras, on his schooner \"General Santander\". Omoa was the site of the largest Spanish fort in Central America, built to guard the Spanish silver shipments from the mines of Tegucigalpa to overseas destinations. Lafitte attempted to take what appeared to be two Spanish merchant vessels on the night of February 4. It was cloudy with low visibility. The Spanish ships appeared to be fleeing but at 10:00 pm turned back for a frontal counterattack against Lafitte's ship. The Spanish ships were heavily armed privateers or warships and returned heavy fire.\nWounded in the battle, Lafitte is believed to have died just after dawn on February 5, 1823. He was buried at sea in the Gulf of Honduras. \nThe \"Gaceta de Cartagena\" and the \"Gaceta de Colombia\" carried obituaries that noted, \"the loss of this brave naval officer is moving.\" No American newspaper published an obituary of him.\nTwo amateur historians from Lincolnton, North Carolina have written a book claiming that Lafitte actually faked his death in 1823 and eventually changed his name to Lorenzo Ferrer, moving first to Mississippi and then Lincolnton, where Ferrer died in 1875. This claim has not been endorsed by any mainstream historians.\nLegacy.\nDavis writes that Lafitte's death in 1823 prevented his becoming obsolete; by 1825 piracy had been essentially eradicated in the Gulf of Mexico, and \"the new world of the Gulf simply had no room for [his] kind.\" Given his legendary reputation, there was much speculation about whether, or how, Lafitte had died. Rumors abounded that he had changed his name after leaving Galveston and disappeared, that he was killed by his own men shortly after leaving Galveston, or that he had rescued Napoleon and that both had died in Louisiana. In 1843, Mirabeau B. Lamar investigated many of the Lafitte stories and concluded that, while there were no authentic records of death, Lafitte was likely dead.\nRamsay compares the numerous legends related to the life and death of Jean Lafitte to those about King Arthur and Robin Hood. Lafitte is rumored to have buried treasure at many locations, including Galveston and sites along coastal Louisiana, such as Contraband Bayou in Lake Charles. Ramsay believes that over time, almost \"every foot of Grande Isle has been spaded for pirate gold\". In 1909, a man was given a six-year prison sentence for fraud after swindling thousands of dollars from people, by claiming that he knew where the Lafitte treasure was buried and taking their money for the promise to find it.\nRepresentation in popular culture.\nNew Orleans tourism.\nLafitte's Blacksmith Shop is named after him. Located on Bourbon Street, it is associated with Lafitte, who may have spent time there in his earlier years. He was said to use it as a base for arranging the transfer of smuggled goods. His brother Pierre Lafitte was a blacksmith.\nConstructed in the 1720s, the structure stands today as possibly the oldest building in the United States housing a bar (Lafitte's Blacksmith Shop Bar).\nLiterature.\nNumerous novels and stories refer to Lafitte's exploits.\nTelevision.\nIn a fifth-season episode of the long-running Western series \"Bonanza\" (\"The Gentleman from New Orleans\") an elderly man (played by John Dehner) claiming to be Lafitte appears. (It is never established in the episode whether this claim is true or not.) Since the series is set in the early 1860s, this is clearly some 40 years or so after the historical Lafitte's reported death.\nLafitte's Journal.\nIn 1948, John Andrechyne Laflin approached the Missouri Historical Society with a French-language manuscript he claimed was a journal Lafitte kept from 1845 until 1850. When the historical society could not authenticate the claim, Laflin approached Louisiana author Stanley Arthur. He wrote \"Jean Laffitte: Gentleman Rover\", based on the journal. \nIn 1958, Laflin self-published an English translation of the journal. He refused to allow anyone else to see the original documents until 1969, when he sold them to a professional document dealer. The paper and ink were analyzed and confirmed to be of mid-19th-century origin. An archivist for Bexar County, Texas, declared the papers to be authentic.\nIn 1980, the manuscript was donated to the Sam Houston Regional Library and Research Center in Texas. For the first time, it was made available for research. Many researchers noticed a similarity between John Laflin's handwriting and the writing in the journal. Handwriting analysis experts affirmed that conclusion. Laflin had been previously accused of forging letters purportedly from Abraham Lincoln, Andrew Jackson, and Davy Crockett. Most historians now believe the Lafitte journal to be a forgery.\nDisneyland.\nDisneyland memorializes Lafitte with a ship anchor monument and accompanying plaque in New Orleans Square. The Pirates of the Caribbean ride has a boat dock labeled LaFitte's Landing.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53089", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53089", "title": "H-Bomb", "text": ""}
{"id": "53090", "revid": "36623386", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53090", "title": "Pueblo peoples", "text": "Native Americans in the Southwestern US\nThe Pueblo peoples or Puebloans are Native Americans in the Southwestern United States who share common agricultural, material, and religious practices. Among the currently inhabited pueblos, Taos, San Ildefonso, Acoma, Zuni, and Hopi are some of the most commonly known. Pueblo people speak languages from four different language families, and each pueblo is further divided culturally by kinship systems and agricultural practices, although all cultivate varieties of corn (maize).\nPueblo peoples have lived in the American Southwest for millennia and descend from the Ancestral Pueblo peoples. The term \"Anasazi\" is sometimes used to refer to Ancestral Puebloan. \"Anasazi\" is a Navajo adoption of a Ute term that translates to \"Ancient Enemy\" or \"Primitive Enemy\", but was used by them to mean something like \"barbarian\" or \"savage\", hence the modern Pueblo peoples' rejection of it (see exonym).\n\"Pueblo\" is a Spanish term for \"village\". When Spanish conquest of the Americas began in the 16th century with the founding of Nuevo M\u00e9xico, they came across complex, multistory villages built of adobe, stone and other local materials. New Mexico contains the largest number of federally recognized Pueblo communities, though some Pueblo communities also live in Arizona and Texas and along the Rio Grande and Colorado rivers and their tributaries.\nPueblo nations have maintained much of their traditional cultures, which center around agricultural practices, a tight-knit community revolving around family clans, and respect for tradition. Pueblo people have been remarkably adept at preserving their culture and core religious beliefs, including developing syncretic Pueblo Christianity. Exact numbers of Pueblo peoples are unknown but, in the 21st century, some 75,000 Pueblo people live predominantly in New Mexico and Arizona, but also in Texas and elsewhere.\nEtymology.\n\"Pueblo\", which means \"village\" and \"people\" in Spanish, was a term originating with the Spanish explorers who used it to refer to the people's particular style of dwelling. The term \"Puebloan\" was previously common in an archeological context during the twentieth century. In the twentieth century, Pueblo peoples and their archaeological culture were often referred to by the term \"Anasazi\" exonym, a term introduced by Alfred V. Kidder from the Navajo word \"anaas\u00e1z\u00ed\" meaning 'enemy ancestors' (\"anaa\u2013\" 'enemy', \"-s\u00e1z\u00ed\" 'their ancestors') although Kidder thought it meant 'old people'. Contemporary Pueblo object to the use of this term, viewing it as derogatory.\nSubdivisions.\nDespite various similarities in cultural and religious practices, scholars have proposed divisions of contemporary Pueblos into smaller groups based on linguistic and individual manifestations of the broader Pueblo culture.\nLinguistic affiliation.\nPueblo peoples speak languages from four distinct language families, which means these languages are completely different in vocabulary, grammar, and most other linguistic aspects. As a result, each Pueblo language is not easily understood by speakers of the other languages, with English now working as the lingua franca of the region.\nCultural practices.\nAnthropologists have studied Pueblo peoples extensively and published various classifications of their subdivisions. In 1950, Fred Russell Eggan contrasted the peoples of the Eastern and Western Pueblos, based largely on their subsistence farming techniques. The Western or Desert Pueblos of the Zuni and Hopi specialize in dry farming, compared to the irrigation farmers of the Eastern or River Pueblos. Both groups cultivate mostly corn (maize), but squash and beans have also been staple Pueblo foods all around the region.\nIn 1954, Paul Kirchhoff published a division of Pueblo peoples into two groups based on culture. The Hopi, Zuni, Keres and Jemez each have matrilineal kinship systems: children are considered born into their mother's clan and must marry a spouse outside it, an exogamous practice. They maintain multiple kivas for sacred ceremonies. Their creation story tells that humans emerged from the underground. They emphasize four or six cardinal directions as part of their sacred cosmology, beginning in the north. Four and seven are numbers considered significant in their rituals and symbolism. In contrast, the Tanoan-speaking Pueblos (other than Jemez) have a patrilineal kinship system, with children considered born into their father's clan. They practice endogamy, or marriage within the clan. They have two kivas or two groups of kivas in their pueblos. Their belief system is based in dualism. Their creation story recounts the emergence of people from underwater. They use five directions, beginning in the west. Their ritual numbers are based on multiples of three.\nHistory of the Pueblo peoples.\nOrigins.\nPueblo societies contain elements of three major cultures that dominated the Southwest United States region before European contact: the Mogollon culture, whose adherents occupied an area near Gila Wilderness; the Hohokam culture; and the Ancestral Puebloan culture who occupied the Chaco Canyon and Mesa Verde regions of the Four Corners area.\nArcheological evidence suggests that people partaking in the Mogollon culture were initially foragers who augmented their subsistence through the development of farming. Around the first millennium CE farming became the main means to obtain food. Water control features are common among Mimbres branch sites which date from the 10th through 12th centuries CE. The nature and density of Mogollon residential villages changed through time; the earliest Mogollon villages were small hamlets composed of several pithouses, houses excavated into the ground surface with a stick and thatch roofs supported by a network of posts and beams, and faced on the exterior with earth. Village sizes increased over time so that by the 11th century CE villages composed of ground level dwellings of rock and earth walls and wooden beam-supported roofs were the norm. Cliff-dwellings became common during the 13th and 14th centuries.\nHohokam is a term borrowed from the O'odham language, used to define an archaeological culture that relied on irrigation canals to water their crops since as early as the 9th century CE. Their irrigation system techniques allowed for its adherents to expand into the largest population in the Southwest by 1300. Archaeologists working at a major archaeological dig in the 1990s in the Tucson Basin, along the Santa Cruz River, identified a culture and people that were ancestors of the Hohokam who might have occupied southern Arizona as early as 2000 BCE. This prehistoric group from the Early Agricultural Period grew corn, lived year-round in sedentary villages, and developed sophisticated irrigation canals from the beginning of the common era to about the middle of the 15th century. Within a larger context, the Hohokam culture area inhabited a central trade position between the Patayan situated along with the Lower Colorado River and in southern California; the Trincheras of Sonora, Mexico; the Mogollon culture in eastern Arizona, southwest New Mexico, and northwest Chihuahua, Mexico; and the Ancestral Puebloans in northern Arizona, northern New Mexico, southwest Colorado, and southern Utah.\nThe Ancestral Puebloan culture is known for the stone and earth dwellings its people built along cliff walls, particularly during the Pueblo II and Pueblo III eras, from about 900 to 1350 CE in total. The best-preserved examples of the stone dwellings are now protected within United States' national parks, such as Navajo National Monument, Chaco Culture National Historical Park, Mesa Verde National Park, Canyons of the Ancients National Monument, Aztec Ruins National Monument, Bandelier National Monument, Hovenweep National Monument, and Canyon de Chelly National Monument. These villages were accessible only by rope or through rock climbing. However, the first Ancestral Puebloan homes and villages were based on the pit-house, a common feature in the Basketmaker periods. Villages consisted of apartment-like complexes and structures made from stone, adobe mud, and other local materials, or were carved into the sides of canyon walls. Design details from Ancestral Puebloan villages contain elements from cultures as far away as present-day Mexico. In their day, these ancient towns and cities were usually multistoried and multi-purposed buildings surrounding open plazas and viewsheds. They were occupied by hundreds to thousands of Ancestral Pueblo peoples. These population complexes hosted cultural and civic events and infrastructure that supported a vast outlying region hundreds of miles away linked by transportation roadways.\nDevelopment of architecture and city-states.\nBy about 700 to 900 CE, Pueblo people began to move away from ancient pit houses dug in cliffs and to construct connected rectangular rooms arranged in apartment-like structures made of adobe and adapted to sites. By 1050, they had developed planned villages composed of large terraced buildings, each with many rooms. These apartment-house villages were often constructed on defensive sites: on ledges of massive rock, on flat summits, or on steep-sided mesas, locations that would afford Pueblo people protection from raiding parties originating from the north, such as the Comanche and Navajo. The largest of these villages, Pueblo Bonito in Chaco Canyon, New Mexico, contained around 700 rooms in five stories; it may have housed as many as 1000 persons.\nSpanish contact and colonization.\nBefore 1598, Spanish exploration of the present-day Pueblo areas was limited to several transitory groups. A group of colonizers led by Juan de O\u00f1ate arrived at the end of the 16th century as part of an apostolic mission to convert the Natives. Despite initial peaceful contact, Spain's attempts to dispose of the Pueblo religion and replace it with Catholicism became increasingly more aggressive, and were met with great resistance by Pueblo peoples, whose governmental structure was based around the figure of the cacique, a theocratic leader for both material and spiritual matters. Over the years, Spaniards' methods grew harsher, leading to a series of revolts by Pueblo peoples.\nPueblo Revolt.\nThe Pueblo Revolt that started in 1680 was the first led by a Native American group to successfully expel colonists from North America for a considerable number of years. It followed the successful Tiguex War led by Tiwas against the Coronado Expedition in 1540\u201341, which temporarily halted Spanish advances in present-day New Mexico. The 17th century's revolt was a direct consequence of growing discontent among the Northern Pueblos against the abuses by the Spaniards, which finally brewed into a large organized uprising against European colonizers.\nThe events that led to the Pueblo Revolt go back at least a decade before the formal uprising began. In the 1670s, severe drought swept the region, which caused both a famine among the Pueblo and increased the frequency of raids by the Apache. Neither Spanish nor Pueblo soldiers were able to prevent the attacks by the Apache raiding parties.\nThe unrest among the Pueblos came to a head in 1675, when Governor Juan Francisco Trevi\u00f1o ordered the arrest of forty-seven Pueblo medicine men and accused them of practicing sorcery. Four of the medicine men were sentenced to death by hanging; three of those sentences were carried out, while the fourth prisoner committed suicide. The remaining men were publicly whipped and sentenced to prison. When the news of the killings and public humiliation reached Pueblo leaders, they moved in force to Santa Fe, where the prisoners were held. Because a large number of Spanish soldiers were away fighting the Apache, Governor Trevi\u00f1o was forced to release the prisoners. Among those released was an Ohkay Owingeh Tewa man named Pop\u00e9. After being released, Pop\u00e9 took up residence in Taos Pueblo far from the capital of Santa Fe and spent the next five years seeking support for a revolt among the 46 Pueblo villages. He was able to gain the support of the Northern Tiwa, Tewa, Towa, Tano, and Keres-speaking Pueblos of the Rio Grande Valley. The Pecos Pueblo, 50 miles east of the Rio Grande pledged its participation in the revolt as did the Zuni and Hopi, 120 and 200 miles respectively west of the Rio Grande. At the time, the Spanish population was of about 2,400 colonists, including mixed-blood mestizos, and Indian servants and retainers, who were scattered thinly throughout the region. Starting early on 10 August 1680, Pop\u00e9 and leaders of each of the Pueblos sent a knotted rope carried by a runner to the next Pueblo; the number of knots signified the number of days to wait before beginning the uprising. Finally, on 21 August, 2,500 Pueblo warriors took the colony's capital Santa Fe from Spanish control, killing many colonizers, the remainder of whom were successfully expelled.\n21st century.\nOn 22 September 2005, the statue of Po'pay, leader of the Pueblo Revolt, was unveiled in the Capitol Rotunda in Washington, D.C. The statue was the second commissioned by the state of New Mexico for the National Statuary Hall Collection; it was the 100th and last to be added to the collection. It was created by Cliff Fragua, Jemez Pueblo sculptor. It is the only statue in the collection to be created by a Native American.\nIn 2018, Deb Haaland became the first Pueblo woman elected to the United States House of Representatives, and later became the first Native American Secretary of the Interior from 2021-2025.\nCulture.\nIn 1844 Josiah Gregg described the historic Pueblo people in \"\" as follows:\" When these regions were first discovered it appears that the inhabitants lived in comfortable houses and cultivated the soil, as they have continued to do up to the present time. Indeed, they are now considered the best horticulturists in the country, furnishing most of the fruits and a large portion of the vegetable supplies that are to be found in the markets. They were until very lately the only people in New Mexico who cultivated the grape. They also maintain at the present time considerable herds of cattle, horses, etc. They are, in short, a remarkably sober and industrious race, conspicuous for morality and honesty, and very little given to quarreling or dissipation ... \"\nMaterial culture.\nPueblo people have woven cloth and used twined and embroidered textiles, natural fibers, and animal hide in their cloth-making. Since woven clothing is laborious and time-consuming, everyday clothing for working around the villages was sparer. The men often wore breechcloths.\nAgriculture.\nCorn is a primary staple food for Pueblo peoples. Although it is possible that different groups may have grown local plants such as gourds and chenopods at very early dates, the first evidence of maize cultivation in the Southwest dates from about 2100 BCE. Small, fairly undomesticated maize cobs have been found at five different sites in New Mexico and Arizona.\nMaize reached the present-day Southwest via an unknown route from Mesoamerica (i.e., present-day Mexico) and was rapidly adopted by peoples in the region. One theory states that maize cultivation was carried northward from central Mexico by migrating farmers, most likely speakers of a Uto-Aztecan language. Another theory, more accepted among scholars, is that between 4300 BCE and 2100 BCE maize was diffused northward from group to group rather than by migrants. There is evidence that maize was initially cultivated in the Southwest during a climatic period when precipitation was relatively high.\nPottery.\nThe various Pueblo communities have different traditions regarding the making and decoration of pottery artifacts. Present-day archaeologists date Pueblo pottery back the early centuries of the Common Era.\nReligion.\nIn many Southwest Native communities' belief systems, the archetypal deities appear as visionary beings who bring blessings and receive love. A vast collection of religious stories explore the relationships among people and nature, including plants and animals. Spider Grandmother and kachina spirits figure prominently in some myths. \nPueblo peoples in the 16th century believed in Katsina spirits. Katsinas are supernatural beings who are representatives of Pueblo ancestors. They live for half the year in the underworld with the gods and spend the rest of the year with their descendants on earth. Katsinas have the power to take the form of clouds and bring rain for agricultural fields. They heal disease and also cause disease. \nPueblo prayer included substances as well as words; one common prayer material was ground-up maize\u00a0\u2013 white cornmeal. A man might bless his son, or some land, or the town by sprinkling a handful of meal as he uttered a blessing. After the 1692 re-conquest, the Spanish were prevented from entering one town when they were met by a handful of men who uttered imprecations and cast a single pinch of a sacred substance.\nThe Pueblo peoples used ritual 'prayer sticks', which were colorfully decorated with beads, fur, and feathers. These prayer sticks (or 'talking sticks') were similar to those used by other Native American nations. By the 13th century, Pueblo people crafted turkey feather blankets for warmth.\nMost of the Pueblos hold annual sacred ceremonies, some of which are now open to the public.\nReligious ceremonies usually feature traditional dances that are held outdoors in the large common areas and courtyards, which are accompanied by singing and drumming. Unlike kiva ceremonies, traditional dances may be open to non-Pueblo people. Traditional dances are considered a form of prayer, and strict rules of conduct apply to those who wish to attend one (e.g. no clapping or walking across the dance area or between the dancers, singers, or drummers).\n\" Since time immemorial, Pueblo communities have celebrated seasonal cycles through prayer, song, and dance. These dances connect us to our ancestors, community, and traditions while honoring gifts from our Creator. They ensure that life continues and that connections to the past and future are reinforced.\"Traditionally, all outside visitors to a public dance would be offered a meal afterward in a Pueblo home. Because of the numerous outside tourists who have attended these dances in the pueblos since the late 20th century, such meals are now open to outsiders by personal invitation only. Private sacred ceremonies are conducted inside the kivas and only tribal members may participate according to specific rules pertaining to each Pueblo's religion.\nOne of the primary goals of Spanish colonists in the 17th century was to convert the Natives in New Spain to Christianity. Franciscan priests had prepared for a long process of conversion, building churches and missions all around Pueblo country. Some of the Pueblos' feast days are a product of that process. Feast days are held on the day sacred to its Roman Catholic patron saint, assigned by Spanish missionaries so that each Pueblo's feast day would coincide with one of the people's existing traditional ceremonies. About the imposition of Christianity, Alfonso Ortiz, an Ohkay Owingeh anthropologist and Pueblo specialist states:\"The Spanish government demanded labor and tribute from the Pueblos and vigorously attempted to suppress native religion. (...) In that year\" [1692] \"Diego de Vargas re-entered Pueblo territory, though it was not until 1696 that he gained control over the entire Rio Grande Pueblo area. The Spaniards had learned from the Pueblo Revolt and were gentler in their demands in the next century and a half. However, the Pueblos had learned as well and maintained their ceremonial life out of the view of the Spaniards, while adopting a veneer of Roman Catholicism.\"\nThe public observances may also include a Roman Catholic Mass and processions on the Pueblo's feast day. Some Pueblos also hold sacred ceremonies around Christmas and at other Christian holidays.\nList of federally recognized Pueblo tribes.\nEndonyms and exonyms.\nAlthough most present-day pueblos are known by their Spanish or anglicized Spanish name, each Pueblo has a unique name in each of the different languages spoken in the area. The names used by each Pueblo to refer to their village (\"endonyms\") usually differ from those given to them by outsiders (their \"exonyms\"), including by speakers of other Pueblo languages. Centuries of trade and intermarriages between the groups are reflected in the names given to the same Pueblo in each of the languages. The table below contains the names of the New Mexican pueblos and Hopi using the official or practical orthographies of the languages. Despite not being a Pueblo language, Navajo names are also included due to prolonged contact between them and the several Pueblos.\nWith the exception of Zuni, all Pueblo languages, as well as Navajo, are tonal. However, the tone is not usually shown in the spelling of these languages save for Navajo, Towa, and Tewa. In the table above, a low tone is left unmarked in the orthography. Vowel nasalisation is shown by an ogonek diacritic below the vowel; ejective consonants are transcribed with an apostrophe following the consonant. Vowel length is shown either by doubling of the character or, in Zuni, by adding a colon.\nPopulation history.\nPrecontact population size of the Pueblo peoples was possibly as high as up to 313,000 people spread across at least 110 pueblos, according to authors and sources such as Antonio de Espejo, Alonso de Benavides, Relacion del Suceso and Agust\u00edn de Vetancurt. By the year 1907 the Pueblo population had been decimated to just over 11,300 individuals, according to James Mooney. However, from the 20th century up to the present day, their population has been rebounding. As of 2020, they numbered 78,884 in the USA, 52,369 of whom lived in New Mexico.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53091", "revid": "38360413", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53091", "title": "Spanish colonization of the Americas", "text": "The Spanish colonization of the Americas began in 1493 on the Caribbean island of Hispaniola (now Haiti and the Dominican Republic) after the initial 1492 voyage of Genoese mariner Christopher Columbus under license from Queen Isabella I of Castile. These overseas territories of the Spanish Empire were under the jurisdiction of Crown of Castile until the last territory was lost in 1898. Spaniards saw the dense populations of Indigenous peoples as an important economic resource and the territory claimed as potentially producing great wealth for individual Spaniards and the crown. Religion played an important role in the Spanish conquest and incorporation of indigenous peoples, bringing them into the Catholic Church peacefully or by force. The crown created civil and religious structures to administer the vast territory. Spanish men and women settled in greatest numbers where there were dense indigenous populations and the existence of valuable resources for extraction.\nThe Spanish Empire claimed jurisdiction over the New World in the Caribbean and North and South America, with the exception of Brazil, ceded to Portugal by the Treaty of Tordesillas. Other European powers, including England, France, and the Dutch Republic, took possession of territories initially claimed by Spain. Although the overseas territories under the jurisdiction of the Spanish crown are now commonly called \"colonies\" the term was not used until the second half of 18th century. The process of Spanish settlement, now called \"colonization\" and the \"colonial era\" are terms contested by scholars of Latin America and more generally.\nIt is estimated that during the period 1492\u20131832, a total of 1.86\u00a0million Spaniards settled in the Americas, and a further 3.5\u00a0million immigrated during the post-independence era (1850\u20131950); the estimate is 250,000 in the 16th century and most during the 18th century, as immigration was encouraged by the new Bourbon dynasty. The indigenous population plummeted by an estimated 80% in the first century and a half following Columbus's voyages, primarily through the spread of infectious diseases. Practices of forced labor and slavery for resource extraction, and forced resettlement in new villages and later missions were implemented. Alarmed by the precipitous fall in indigenous populations and reports of settlers' exploitation of their labor, the crown put in place laws to protect their newly converted indigenous vassals. Europeans imported enslaved Africans to the early Caribbean settlements to replace indigenous labor and enslaved and free Africans were part of colonial-era populations. A mixed-race \"casta\" population came into being during the period of Spanish rule. \nIn the early 19th century, the Spanish American wars of independence resulted in the secession of most of Spanish America and the establishment of independent nations. Continuing under crown rule were Cuba and Puerto Rico, along with the Philippines, which were all lost to the United States in 1898, following the Spanish\u2013American War, ending its rule in the Americas.\nImperial expansion.\nThe expansion of Spain's territory took place under the Catholic Monarchs Isabella I of Castile and her husband Ferdinand II of Aragon, whose marriage marked the beginning of Spanish power beyond the Iberian Peninsula. They pursued a policy of joint rule of their kingdoms and created the initial stage of a single Spanish monarchy, completed under the eighteenth-century Bourbon monarchs. The first expansion of territory was the conquest of the Muslim Emirate of Granada on 1 January 1492, the culmination of the Christian Reconquest of the Iberian Peninsula, held by the Muslims since 711. On 31 March 1492, the Catholic Monarch ordered the expulsion of the Jews in Spain who refused to convert to Christianity. Having departed from the port of Palos de la Frontera on 3 August 1492, on 12 October 1492, Genoese mariner Christopher Columbus and his crew made landfall in the Western Hemisphere, and in 1493 permanent Spanish settlement of the Americas began.\nCastile and Aragon were ruled jointly by their respective monarchs, but they remained separate kingdoms. When the Catholic Monarchs gave official approval for the plans for Columbus's voyage to reach \"the Indies\" by sailing West, the funding came from the queen of Castile. The profits from Spanish expedition flowed to Castile. The Kingdom of Portugal authorized a series of voyages down the coast of Africa and when they rounded the southern tip, were able to sail to India and further east. Spain sought similar wealth, and authorized Columbus's voyage sailing west. Once the Spanish settlement in the Caribbean occurred, Spain and Portugal formalized a division of the world between them in the 1494 Treaty of Tordesillas. The deeply pious Isabella saw the expansion of Spain's sovereignty inextricably paired with the evangelization of non-Christian peoples, the so-called \"spiritual conquest\" with the military conquest. Pope Alexander VI in a 4 May 1493 papal decree, \"Inter caetera\", divided rights to lands in the Western Hemisphere between Spain and Portugal on the proviso that they spread Christianity. These formal arrangements between Spain and Portugal and the pope were ignored by other European powers, with the French, the English, and the Dutch seizing territory in the Caribbean and in North America claimed by Spain but not effectively settled. Portugal's claim to part of South America under the Treaty of Tordesillas resulted in the creation of Portuguese colony of Brazil. Although during the rule of Charles V, the Spanish Empire was the first to be called \"The empire on which the sun never sets\", under Philip II the permanent colonization of the Philippine Islands made it demonstrably true.\nGeneral principles of expansion.\nThe Spanish expansion has sometimes been succinctly summed up as being motivated by \"gold, glory, God\", that is, the search for material wealth, the enhancement of the conquerors' and the crown's position, and the expansion of Christianity to the exclusion of other religious traditions. In the extension of Spanish sovereignty to its overseas territories, authority for expeditions (\"entradas\") of discovery, conquest, and settlement resided in the monarchy. Expeditions required authorization by the crown, which laid out the terms of such expedition. Virtually all expeditions after the Columbus voyages, which were funded by the crown of Castile, were done at the expense of the leader of the expedition and its participants. Although often the participants, conquistadors, are now termed \"soldiers\", they were not paid soldiers in ranks of an army, but rather soldiers of fortune, who joined an expedition with the expectation of profiting from it. The leader of an expedition, the \"adelantado\" was a senior with material wealth and standing who could persuade the crown to issue him a license for an expedition. He also had to attract participants to the expedition who staked their own lives and meager fortunes on the expectation of the expedition's success. The leader of the expedition pledged the larger share of capital to the enterprise, which in many ways functioned as a commercial firm. Upon the success of the expedition, the spoils of war were divvied up in proportion to the amount a participant initially staked, with the leader receiving the largest share. Participants supplied their own armor and weapons, and those who had a horse received two shares, one for himself, the second recognizing the value of the horse as a machine of war. For the conquest era, the names of two Spaniards are popularly known because they led the conquests of two indigenous empires, Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s, leader of the expedition involved in the conquest of the Aztec Empire, and Francisco Pizarro, leader of the conquest of the Inca in Peru. Spanish conquerors took advantage of indigenous rivalries to forge alliances with groups seeing an advantage for their own goals. This is most clearly seen in the conquest of the Aztec Empire with the alliance of the Nahua city-state of Tlaxcala against the Aztec Empire resulting in lasting benefits to themselves and their descendants.\nCaribbean islands and the Spanish Main.\nPatterns of the first Spanish settlements in the Caribbean were to endure there and had a lasting impact on the Spanish Empire. Until his dying day, Columbus was convinced that he had reached Asia, the Indies. From that misperception the Spanish called the indigenous peoples of the Americas, \"Indians\" (\"indios\"), lumping a multiplicity of civilizations, groups, and individuals into a single category. The Spanish royal government called its overseas possessions \"The Indies\" until its empire dissolved in the nineteenth century.\nIn the Caribbean, because there was no integrated indigenous civilization such as found in Mexico and Peru, there was no large-scale Spanish conquest of indigenous peoples, but there was indigenous resistance to Spanish colonization. Columbus made four voyages to the West Indies as the monarchs granted Columbus vast powers of governance over this unknown part of the world. The crown of Castile financed more of his trans-Atlantic journeys, a pattern they would not repeat elsewhere. Effective Spanish settlement began in 1493, when Columbus brought livestock, seeds, agricultural equipment. The first settlement of La Navidad, a crude fort built on his first voyage in 1492, had been abandoned by the time he returned in 1493. He then founded the settlement of La Isabela on the island they named Hispaniola (now divided into Haiti and the Dominican Republic).\nSpanish explorations of other islands in the Caribbean and what turned out to be the mainland of South and Central America occupied them for over two decades. Columbus had promised the crown that the region he now controlled held a huge treasure in the form of gold and spices. Spanish settlers initially found relatively dense populations of indigenous peoples, who were agriculturalists living in villages ruled by leaders not part of a larger integrated political system. The Spanish saw these populations as a source of labor, there for their exploitation, to supply their own settlements with foodstuffs, but more importantly for the Spanish, to extract mineral wealth or produce another valuable commodity for Spanish enrichment. The labor of dense populations of Ta\u00ednos were allocated as grants to Spanish settlers in an institution known as the \"encomienda\", where particular indigenous settlements were awarded to individual Spaniards. There was surface gold found in early islands, and holders of encomiendas put the indigenous to work panning for it. For all practical purposes, this was slavery. \nQueen Isabel put an end to formal slavery, declaring the indigenous to be vassals of the crown, but Spaniards' exploitation of indigenous labor continued. The Ta\u00edno population on Hispaniola went from hundreds of thousands or millions \u2013 the estimates by scholars vary widely \u2013 but in the mid-1490s, they were practically wiped out. Disease and overwork, disruption of family life and the agricultural cycle (which caused severe food shortages to Spaniards dependent on them) rapidly decimated the indigenous population. From the Spanish viewpoint, their source of labor and viability of their own settlements was at risk. After the collapse of the Taino population of Hispaniola, Spaniards began raiding indigenous settlements on nearby islands, including Cuba, Puerto Rico, and Jamaica, to enslave those populations, replicating the demographic catastrophe there as well. The names of two indigenous leaders (\"caciques\") who rebelled against Spanish colonization, Enriquillo and Hatuey in the Dominican Republic (Hispaniola), have become important.\nDominican friar Antonio de Montesinos denounced Spanish cruelty and abuse in a sermon in 1511, which comes down to us in the writings of Dominican friar Bartolom\u00e9 de las Casas. In 1542, Las Casas wrote a damning account of this demographic catastrophe, \"A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies\". It was translated quickly to English and became the basis for the anti-Spanish writings, collectively known as the Black Legend. Las Casas spent his long life attempting to defend the indigenous populations and to enlist the Spanish crown in establishing protections for them, seen most prominently in the enactment of the New Laws of 1542, restricting Spaniards' inheritance of \"encomiendas\".\nThe first mainland explorations by Spaniards were followed by a phase of inland expeditions and conquest. In 1500 the city of Nueva C\u00e1diz was founded on the island of Cubagua, Venezuela, followed by the founding of Santa Cruz by Alonso de Ojeda in the present-day Guajira Peninsula. Cuman\u00e1 in Venezuela was the first permanent settlement founded by Europeans in the mainland Americas, in 1501 by Franciscan friars, but due to successful attacks by the indigenous people, it had to be refounded several times, until Diego Hern\u00e1ndez de Serpa's foundation in 1569. The Spanish founded San Sebasti\u00e1n de Uraba in 1509 but abandoned it within the year. There is indirect evidence that the first permanent Spanish mainland settlement established in the Americas was Santa Mar\u00eda la Antigua del Dari\u00e9n.\nSpaniards spent over 25 years in the Caribbean where their initial high hopes of dazzling wealth gave way to continuing exploitation of disappearing indigenous populations, exhaustion of local gold mines, initiation of cane sugar cultivation as an export product, and forced migration of enslaved Africans as a labor force. Spaniards continued to expand their presence in the circum-Caribbean region with expeditions. One was by Francisco Hern\u00e1ndez de C\u00f3rdoba in 1517, another by Juan de Grijalva in 1518, which brought promising news of possibilities there.\nEven by the mid-1510s, the western Caribbean was largely unexplored by Spaniards. A well-connected settler in Cuba, Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s received authorization in 1519 by the governor of Cuba to form an expedition of exploration-only to this far western region. That expedition was to make world history. The Caribbean islands became less central to Spain's overseas colonization, but remained important strategically and economically, especially the islands of Cuba and Hispaniola. Smaller islands claimed by Spain were lost to the English and the Dutch, with France taking half of Hispaniola and establishing the sugar-producing colony of St-Domingue, as well as also taking other islands.\nMexico.\nWith Spanish expansion into central Mexico under conqueror Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s and the conquest of the Aztec Empire (1519\u20131521), Spanish explorers were able to find wealth on the scale that they had long hoped for. Unlike Spanish contact with indigenous populations in the Caribbean, which involved limited armed combat and sometimes the participation of indigenous allies, the conquest of central Mexico was protracted and necessitated significant numbers of indigenous allies, who chose to participate in defeating the Aztec Empire for their own purposes. The conquest of the Aztec Empire involved the combined effort of armies from many indigenous allies, spearheaded by a small Spanish force of conquistadors. The Aztecs did not govern over an empire in the conventional sense but were the rulers of a confederation of dozens of city-states and other polities; the status of each varied from harshly subjugated to closely allied. The Spaniards persuaded the leaders of Aztec vassals and Tlaxcala (a city-state never conquered by the Aztecs), to ally with them against the Aztecs. Through such methods, the Spaniards came to accumulate a massive force of thousands, perhaps tens of thousands of indigenous warriors. Records of the conquest of central Mexico include accounts by the expedition leader Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s, Bernal D\u00edaz del Castillo and other Spanish conquistadors, indigenous allies from the city-states altepetl of Tlaxcala, Texcoco, and Huexotzinco. In addition, indigenous accounts were written by the defeated from the Aztec capital, Tenochtitlan, a case of history being written by those other than the victors.\nThe capture of the Aztec emperor Moctezuma II, by Cort\u00e9s was not a brilliant stroke of innovation, but came from the playbook that the Spanish developed during their period in the Caribbean. The composition of the expedition was the standard pattern, with a senior leader, and participating men investing in the enterprise with the full expectation of rewards if they did not lose their lives. Cort\u00e9s's seeking indigenous allies was a typical tactic of warfare: divide and conquer. But the indigenous allies had much to gain by throwing off Aztec rule. For the Spaniards' Tlaxcalan allies, their crucial support gained them enduring political legacy into the modern era, the Mexican state of Tlaxcala.\nThe conquest of central Mexico sparked further Spanish conquests, following the pattern of conquered and consolidated regions being the launching point for further expeditions. These were often led by secondary leaders, such as Pedro de Alvarado. Later conquests in Mexico were protracted campaigns with less immediate results than the conquest of the Aztec Empire. The Spanish conquest of Yucat\u00e1n, the Spanish conquest of Guatemala, the conquest of the Pur\u00e9pecha of Michoacan, the war of Mexico's west, and the Chichimeca War in northern Mexico expanded Spanish control over territory and indigenous populations stretching thousands of miles. Not until the conquest of the Incan Empire, which used similar tactics and began in 1532, was the conquest of the Aztecs matched in scale of either territory or treasure.\nPeru.\nIn 1532 at the Battle of Cajamarca a group of Spaniards under Francisco Pizarro and their indigenous Andean Indian auxiliaries native allies ambushed and captured the Emperor Atahualpa of the Inca Empire. It was the first step in a long campaign that took decades of fighting to subdue the mightiest empire in the Americas. In the following years, Spain extended its rule over the Empire of the Inca civilization.\nThe Spanish took advantage of a recent civil war between the factions of the two brothers Emperor Atahualpa and Hu\u00e1scar, and the enmity of indigenous nations the Incas had subjugated, such as the Huanca, Chachapoyas, and Ca\u00f1aris. In the following years the conquistadors and indigenous allies extended control over Greater Andes Region. The Viceroyalty of Per\u00fa was established in 1542. The last Inca stronghold was conquered by the Spanish in 1572.\nPeru was the last territory on the continent under Spanish rule, which ended on 9 December 1824 at the Battle of Ayacucho (Spanish rule continued until 1898 in Cuba and Puerto Rico).\nChile.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatright\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:right; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:33%; \"\nChile was explored by Spaniards based in Peru, where Spaniards found the fertile soil and mild climate attractive. The Mapuche people of Chile, whom the Spaniards called Araucanians, resisted fiercely. The Spanish did establish the settlement of Chile in 1541, founded by Pedro de Valdivia.\nSouthward colonization by the Spanish in Chile halted after the conquest of Chilo\u00e9 Archipelago in 1567. This is thought to have been the result of an increasingly harsh climate to the south, and the lack of a populous and sedentary indigenous population to settle among for the Spanish in the fjords and channels of Patagonia. South of the B\u00edo-B\u00edo River the Mapuche successfully reversed colonization with the Destruction of the Seven Cities in 1599\u20131604. This Mapuche victory laid the foundation for the establishment of a Spanish-Mapuche frontier called La Frontera. Within this frontier the city of Concepci\u00f3n assumed the role of \"military capital\" of Spanish-ruled Chile. With a hostile indigenous population, no obvious mineral or other exploitable resources, and little strategic value, Chile was a fringe area of colonial Spanish America, hemmed in geographically by the Andes to the east, Pacific Ocean to the west, and indigenous to the south.\nNew Granada.\nBetween 1537 and 1543, six Spanish expeditions entered highland Colombia, conquered the Muisca Confederation, and set up the New Kingdom of Granada (). Gonzalo Jim\u00e9nez de Quesada was the leading conquistador with his brother Hern\u00e1n second in command. It was governed by the president of the Audiencia of Bogot\u00e1, and comprised an area corresponding mainly to modern-day Colombia and parts of Venezuela. The conquistadors originally organized it as a captaincy general within the Viceroyalty of Peru. The crown established the \"audiencia\" in 1549. Ultimately, the kingdom became part of the Viceroyalty of New Granada first in 1717 and permanently in 1739. After several attempts to set up independent states in the 1810s, the kingdom and the viceroyalty ceased to exist altogether in 1819 with the establishment of Gran Colombia.\nVenezuela.\nVenezuela was first visited by Europeans during the 1490s, when Columbus was in control of the region, and the region as a source for indigenous slaves for Spaniards in Cuba and Hispaniola, since the Spanish destruction of the local indigenous population. There were few permanent settlements, but Spaniards settled the coastal islands of Cubagua and Margarita to exploit the pearl beds. Western Venezuela's history took an atypical direction in 1528, when Spain's first Hapsburg monarch, Charles I granted rights to colonize to the German banking family of the Welsers. Charles sought to be elected Holy Roman Emperor and was willing to pay whatever it took to achieve that. He became deeply indebted to the German Welser and Fugger banking families. To satisfy his debts to the Welsers, he granted them the right to colonize and exploit western Venezuela, with the proviso that they found two towns with 300 settlers each and construct fortifications. They established the colony of Klein-Venedig in 1528. They founded the towns of Coro and Maracaibo. They were aggressive in making their investment pay, alienating the indigenous populations and Spaniards alike. Charles revoked the grant in 1545, ending the episode of German colonization.\nR\u00edo de la Plata and Paraguay.\nArgentina was not conquered or later exploited in the grand fashion of central Mexico or Peru, since the indigenous population was sparse and there were no precious metals or other valuable resources. Although today Buenos Aires at the mouth of R\u00edo de la Plata is a major metropolis, it held no interest for Spaniards and the 1535\u201336 settlement failed and was abandoned by 1541. Pedro de Mendoza and Domingo Mart\u00ednez de Irala, who led the original expedition, went inland and founded Asunci\u00f3n, Paraguay, which became the Spaniards' base. A second (and permanent) settlement was established in 1580 by Juan de Garay, who arrived by sailing down the Paran\u00e1 River from Asunci\u00f3n, now the capital of Paraguay. Exploration from Peru resulted in the foundation of Tucum\u00e1n in what is now northwest Argentina.\nUnited States.\nMuch of what is now the Southern United States was claimed by Spain, some of it at least explored by the Spanish starting in the early 1500s, and some permanent settlements established. Spanish explorers claimed land for the crown in the modern-day states of Alabama, Arizona, the Carolinas, Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Mississippi, New Mexico, Texas, and California. Puerto Rico was also colonized by the Spanish during this era, occasioning the earliest contact between Africans and what would become the United States (via the free Black conquistador Juan Garrido). Free and enslaved Africans were a feature of New Spain throughout the colonial period.\nOne of the colonists who conquered Puerto Rico, Juan Ponce de Le\u00f3n, is commonly given credit for being the first European to sight Florida in 1513. For political reasons, Spain would sometimes claim that La Florida was all of the North American continent. However, the name was typically used to refer to the peninsula itself as well as the Gulf Coast, Georgia, Carolina, and southern Virginia. In 1521, Ponce de Leon was killed while trying to establish a settlement near what is now Charlotte Harbor, Florida. Another failed attempt was conducted by Lucas V\u00e1zquez de Ayll\u00f3n, who set out with approximately 500 colonists and established the settlement of San Miguel de Gualdape in modern-day South Carolina in 1526. In the fall of 1528, Spanish explorer \u00c1lvar N\u00fa\u00f1ez Cabeza de Vaca landed on present day Follet's Island, Texas.\nIn 1559, Trist\u00e1n de Luna y Arellano established the first multi-year European settlement in the United States in what is now Pensacola, Florida. This settlement predates the foundation of Mission Nombre de Dios in St. Augustine by six years, marking an important yet often overlooked moment in the history of Spanish colonization. Archaeological evidence from the University of West Florida has confirmed the presence of Luna's expedition, which included 1,500 people and lasted from 1559 to 1561. The artifacts discovered at the site provide a direct link to Spain's early efforts to colonize the northern Gulf Coast.\nThe 1565 establishment of the settlement in St. Augustine, Florida, lasted in one way or another until modern times, making the city arguably the oldest in the United States. Permanent Spanish settlements were founded in New Mexico, starting in 1598, with Santa Fe founded in 1610.\nEnd of era of exploration.\nThe spectacular conquests of central Mexico (1519\u20131521) and Peru (1532) sparked Spaniards' hopes of finding yet another high civilization. Expeditions continued into the 1540s and regional capitals founded by the 1550s. Among the most notable expeditions are Hernando de Soto into southeast North America, leaving from Cuba (1539\u20131542); Francisco V\u00e1zquez de Coronado to northern Mexico (1540\u20131542), and Gonzalo Pizarro to Amazonia, leaving from Quito, Ecuador (1541\u20131542). In 1561, Pedro de Urs\u00faa led an expedition of some 370 Spanish (including women and children) into Amazonia to search for El Dorado. Far more famous now is Lope de Aguirre, who led a mutiny against Urs\u00faa, who was murdered. Aguirre subsequently wrote a letter to Philip II bitterly complaining about the treatment of conquerors like himself in the wake of the assertion of crown control over Peru. An earlier expedition that left in 1527 was led by P\u00e1nfilo Narv\u00e1ez, who was killed early on. Survivors continued to travel among indigenous groups in the North American south and southwest until 1536. \u00c1lvar N\u00fa\u00f1ez Cabeza de Vaca was one of four survivors of that expedition, writing an account of it. The crown later sent him to Asunci\u00f3n, Paraguay to be adelantado there. Expeditions continued to explore territories in hopes of finding another Aztec or Inca empire, with no further success. Francisco de Ibarra led an expedition from Zacatecas in northern New Spain, and founded Durango. Juan de O\u00f1ate, is sometimes referred to as \"the Last Conquistador\", expanded Spanish sovereignty over what is now New Mexico. Like previous conquistadors, O\u00f1ate engaged in widespread abuses of the Indian population. Shortly after founding Santa Fe, O\u00f1ate was recalled to Mexico City by the Spanish authorities. He was subsequently tried and convicted of cruelty to both natives and colonists and banished from New Mexico for life.\nFactors affecting Spanish settlement.\nTwo major factors affected the density of Spanish settlement in the long term. One was the presence or absence of dense, hierarchically organized indigenous populations that could be made to work. The other was the presence or absence of an exploitable resource for the enrichment of settlers. Best was gold, but silver was found in abundance.\nThe two main areas of Spanish settlement after 1550 were Mexico and Peru, the sites of the Aztec and Inca indigenous civilizations, and rich deposits of the valuable metal silver. Spanish settlement in Mexico \"largely replicated the organization of the area in preconquest times\". However, in Peru the center of the Incas was too far south, too remote, and at too high an altitude for the Spanish capital, so the capital Lima was built near the Pacific coast. The capitals of both Mexico and Peru (Mexico City and Lima) came to have large concentrations of Spanish settlers and hubs of royal and ecclesiastical administration, large commercial enterprises with skilled artisans, and centers of culture. Although Spaniards had hoped to find vast quantities of gold, the discovery of large quantities of silver became the motor of the Spanish colonial economy, a major source of income for the Spanish crown, and transformed the international economy. Mining regions in Mexico were remote, outside the zone of indigenous settlement in central and southern Mexico Mesoamerica, but mines in Zacatecas (founded 1548) and Guanajuato (founded 1548) emerged as key hubs in the colonial economy. In Peru, silver was found in a single silver mountain, the Cerro Rico de Potos\u00ed, which is still producing silver in the 21st century. Potos\u00ed (founded 1545) was in the zone of dense indigenous settlement, so that labor could be mobilized on traditional patterns to extract the ore. An important element for productive mining was mercury for processing high-grade ore. Peru had a source in Huancavelica (founded 1572), while Mexico had to rely on mercury imported from Spain.\nEstablishment of early settlements.\nThe Spanish founded towns in the Caribbean, on Hispaniola and Cuba, on a pattern that became spatially similar throughout Spanish America. A central plaza had the most important buildings on the four sides, especially buildings for royal officials and the main church. A checkerboard pattern radiated outward. Residences of the officials and elites were closest to the main square. Once on the mainland, where there were dense indigenous populations in urban settlements, the Spanish could build a Spanish settlement on the same site, dating its foundation to when that occurred. Often they erected a church on the site of an indigenous temple. They replicated the existing indigenous network of settlements, but added a port city. The Spanish network needed a port city so that inland settlements could be connected by sea to Spain. In Mexico, Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s and the men of his expedition founded of the port town of Veracruz in 1519 and constituted themselves as the town councilors, as a means to throw off the authority of the governor of Cuba, who did not authorize an expedition of conquest. Once the Aztec Empire was toppled, they founded Mexico City on the ruins of the Aztec capital. Their central official and ceremonial area was built on top of Aztec palaces and temples. In Peru, Spaniards founded the city of Lima as their capital and its nearby port of Callao, rather than the high-altitude site of Cuzco, the center of Inca rule. Spaniards established a network of settlements in areas they conquered and controlled. Important ones include Santiago de Guatemala (1524); Puebla (1531); Quer\u00e9taro (ca. 1531); Guadalajara (1531\u201342); Valladolid (now Morelia), (1529\u201341); Antequera (now Oaxaca (1525\u201329)); Campeche (1541); and M\u00e9rida. In southern Central and South America, settlements were founded in Panama (1519); Le\u00f3n, Nicaragua (1524); Cartagena (1532); Piura (1532); Quito (1534); Trujillo (1535); Cali (1537) Bogot\u00e1 (1538); Quito (1534); Cuzco (1534); Lima (1535); Tunja, (1539); Huamanga (1539); Arequipa (1540); Santiago de Chile (1544) and Concepci\u00f3n, Chile (1550). Settled from the south were Buenos Aires (1536, 1580); Asunci\u00f3n (1537); Potos\u00ed (1545); La Paz, Bolivia (1548); and Tucum\u00e1n (1553).\nEcological conquests and demographic catastrophe.\nThe Columbian Exchange was as significant as the clash of civilizations. Arguably the most significant introduction was diseases brought to the Americas, which devastated indigenous populations in a series of epidemics. The loss of indigenous population had a direct impact on Spaniards as well, since increasingly they saw those populations as a source of their own wealth, disappearing before their eyes.\nIn the first settlements in the Caribbean, the Spaniards deliberately brought animals and plants that transformed the ecological landscape. Pigs, cattle, sheep, goats, and chickens allowed Spaniards to eat a diet with which they were familiar. But the importation of horses transformed warfare for both the Spaniards and the indigenous. Where the Spaniards had exclusive access to horses in warfare, they had an advantage over indigenous warriors on foot. They were initially a scarce commodity, but horse breeding became an active industry. Horses that escaped Spanish control were captured by indigenous; many indigenous also raided for horses. Mounted indigenous warriors were significant foes for Spaniards. The Chichimeca in northern Mexico, the Comanche in the northern Great Plains and the Mapuche in southern Chile and the pampas of Argentina resisted Spanish conquest. For Spaniards, the fierce Chichimecas barred them for exploiting mining resources in northern Mexico. Spaniards waged a fifty-year war (ca. 1550\u20131600) to subdue them, but peace was only achieved by Spaniards' making significant donations of food and other commodities the Chichimeca demanded. \"Peace by purchase\" ended the conflict. In southern Chile and the pampas, the Araucanians (Mapuche) prevented further Spanish expansion. The image of mounted Araucanians capturing and carrying off white women was the embodiment of Spanish ideas of civilization and barbarism.\nCattle multiplied quickly in areas where little else could turn a profit for Spaniards, including northern Mexico and the Argentine pampas. The introduction of sheep production was an ecological disaster in places where they were raised in great numbers, since they ate vegetation to the ground, preventing the regeneration of plants.\nThe Spanish brought new crops for cultivation. (See Mission Garden for specific foods.) They preferred wheat cultivation to indigenous sources of carbohydrates: casava, maize (corn), and potatoes, initially importing seeds from Europe and planting in areas where plow agriculture could be utilized, such as the Mexican Baj\u00edo. They also imported cane sugar, which was a high-value crop in early Spanish America. Spaniards also imported citrus trees, establishing orchards of oranges, lemons, limes, and grapefruit. Other imports were figs, apricots, cherries, pears, and peaches among others. The exchange did not go one way. Important indigenous crops that transformed Europe were the potato and maize, which produced abundant crops that led to the expansion of populations in Europe. Chocolate and vanilla were cultivated in Mexico and exported to Europe. Among the foodstuffs that became staples in European cuisine and could be grown there were tomatoes, squashes, bell peppers, cashews, pecans and peanuts.\nCivil governance.\nThe empire in the Indies was a newly established dependency of the kingdom of Castile alone, so crown power was not impeded by any existing cortes (i.e. parliament), administrative or ecclesiastical institution, or seigneurial group. The crown sought to establish and maintain control over its overseas possessions through a complex, hierarchical bureaucracy, which in many ways was decentralized. The crown asserted is authority and sovereignty of the territory and vassals it claimed, collected taxes, maintained public order, meted out justice, and established policies for governance of large indigenous populations. Many institutions established in Castile found expression in The Indies from the early colonial period. Spanish universities expanded to train lawyer-bureaucrats (\"letrados\") for administrative positions in Spain and its overseas empire.\nThe end of the Habsburg dynasty in 1700 saw major administrative reforms in the eighteenth century under the Bourbon monarchy, starting with the first Spanish Bourbon monarch, Philip V (r. 1700\u20131746) and reaching its apogee under Charles III (r. 1759\u20131788). The reorganization of administration has been called \"a revolution in government.\" Reforms sought to centralize government control through reorganization of administration, reinvigorate the economies of Spain and the Spanish empire through changes in mercantile and fiscal policies, defend Spanish colonies and territorial claims through the establishment of a standing military, undermine the power of the Catholic church, and rein in the power of the American-born elites.\nEarly institutions of governance.\nThe crown relied on ecclesiastics as important councilors and royal officials in the governance of their overseas territories. Archbishop Juan Rodr\u00edguez de Fonseca, Isabella's confessor, was tasked with reining in Columbus's independence. He strongly influenced the formulation of colonial policy under the Catholic Monarchs, and was instrumental in establishing the \"Casa de Contrataci\u00f3n\" (House of Trade) (1503), which enabled crown control over trade and immigration. Ovando fitted out Magellan's voyage of circumnavigation, and became the first President of the Council of the Indies in 1524. Ecclesiastics also functioned as administrators overseas in the early Caribbean period, particularly Frey Nicol\u00e1s de Ovando, who was sent to investigate the administration of Francisco de Bobadilla, the governor appointed to succeed Christopher Columbus. Later ecclesiastics served as interim viceroys, general inspectors (visitadores), and other high posts.\nHouse of Trade.\nThe crown established control over trade and emigration to the Indies with the 1503 establishment the \"Casa de Contrataci\u00f3n\" (House of Trade) in Seville. Ships and cargoes were registered, and emigrants vetted to prevent migration of anyone not of Old Christian heritage, (i.e., with no Jewish or Muslim ancestry), and facilitated the migration of families and women. In addition, the \"Casa de Contrataci\u00f3n\" took charge of the fiscal organization, and of the organization and judicial control of the trade with the Indies.\nAssertion of royal control in the early Caribbean.\nThe politics of asserting royal authority to oppose Columbus resulted in the suppression of his privileges and the creation of territorial governance under royal authority. These governorates, also called as provinces, were the basic of the territorial government of the Indies, and arose as the territories were conquered and colonized. To carry out the expedition (\"entrada\"), which entailed exploration, conquest, and initial settlement of the territory, the king, as sovereign, and the appointed leader of an expedition (\"adelantado\") agreed to an itemized contract (\"capitulaci\u00f3n\"), with the specifics of the conditions of the expedition in a particular territory. The individual leaders of expeditions assumed the expenses of the venture and in return received as reward the grant from the government of the conquered territories; and in addition, they received instructions about treating the indigenous peoples.\nAfter the end of the period of conquests, it was necessary to manage extensive and different territories with a strong bureaucracy. In the face of the impossibility of the Castilian institutions to take care of the New World affairs, other new institutions were created.\nAs the basic political entity it was the governorate, or province. The governors exercised judicial ordinary functions of first instance, and prerogatives of government legislating by ordinances. To these political functions of the governor, it could be joined the military ones, according to military requirements, with the rank of Captain general. The office of captain general involved to be the supreme military chief of the whole territory and he was responsible for recruiting and providing troops, the fortification of the territory, the supply and the shipbuilding.\nBeginning in 1522 in the newly conquered Mexico, government units in the Spanish empire had a royal treasury controlled by a set of \"oficiales reales\" (royal officials). There were also sub-treasuries at important ports and mining districts. The officials of the royal treasury at each level of government typically included two to four positions: a \"tesorero\" (treasurer), the senior official who guarded money on hand and made payments; a \"contador\" (accountant or comptroller), who recorded income and payments, maintained records, and interpreted royal instructions; a \"factor\", who guarded weapons and supplies belonging to the king, and disposed of tribute collected in the province; and a \"veedor\" (overseer), who was responsible for contacts with native inhabitants of the province, and collected the king's share of any war booty. The \"veedor\", or overseer, position quickly disappeared in most jurisdictions, subsumed into the position of \"factor\". Depending on the conditions in a jurisdiction, the position of \"factor/veedor\" was often eliminated, as well.\nThe treasury officials were appointed by the king, and were largely independent of the authority of the viceroy, audiencia president or governor. On the death, unauthorized absence, retirement or removal of a governor, the treasury officials would jointly govern the province until a new governor appointed by the king could take up his duties. Treasury officials were supposed to be paid out of the income from the province, and were normally prohibited from engaging in income-producing activities.\nSpanish law and indigenous peoples.\nThe protection of the indigenous populations from enslavement and exploitation by Spanish settlers were established in the Laws of Burgos, 1512\u20131513. The laws were the first codified set of laws governing the behavior of Spanish settlers in the Americas, particularly with regards to treatment of native Indians in the institution of the \"encomienda\". They forbade the maltreatment of natives, and endorsed the forced resettlement of indigenous populations with attempts of conversion to Catholicism. Upon their failure to effectively protect the indigenous and following the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire and the Spanish conquest of Peru, more stringent laws to control conquerors' and settlers' exercise of power, especially their maltreatment of the indigenous populations, were promulgated, known as the New Laws (1542). The crown aimed to prevent the formation of an aristocracy in the Indies not under crown control.\nQueen Isabel was the first monarch that laid the first stone for the protection of the indigenous peoples in her testament in which the Catholic monarch prohibited the enslavement of the indigenous peoples of the Americas. Then the first such in 1542; the legal thought behind them was the basis of modern International law.\nThe Valladolid debate (1550\u20131551) was the first moral debate in European history to discuss the rights and treatment of a colonized people by colonizers. Held in the Colegio de San Gregorio, in the Spanish city of Valladolid, it was a moral and theological debate about the colonization of the Americas, its justification for the conversion to Catholicism and more specifically about the relations between the European settlers and the natives of the New World. It consisted of a number of opposing views about the way natives were to be integrated into colonial life, their conversion to Christianity and their rights and obligations. According to the French historian Jean Dumont The \"Valladolid debate\" was a major turning point in world history \"In that moment in Spain appeared the dawn of the human rights\".\nThe indigenous populations in the Caribbean became the focus of the crown in its roles as sovereigns of the empire and patron of the Catholic Church. Spanish conquerors holding grants of indigenous labor in encomienda ruthlessly exploited them. A number of friars in the early period came to the vigorous defense of the indigenous populations, who were new converts to Christianity. Prominent Dominican friars in Santo Domingo, especially Antonio de Montesinos and Bartolom\u00e9 de las Casas denounced the maltreatment and pressed the crown to act to protect the indigenous populations. The crown enacted Laws of Burgos (1513) and the Requerimiento to curb the power of the Spanish conquerors and give indigenous populations the opportunity to peacefully embrace Spanish authority and Christianity. Neither was effective in its purpose. Las Casas was officially appointed Protector of the Indians and spent his life arguing forcefully on their behalf. The New Laws of 1542 were the result, limiting the power of encomenderos, the private holders of grants to indigenous labor previously held in perpetuity. The crown was open to limiting the inheritance of encomiendas in perpetuity as a way to extinguish the coalescence of a group of Spaniards impinging on royal power. In Peru, the attempt of the newly appointed viceroy, Blasco N\u00fa\u00f1ez Vela, to implement the New Laws so soon after the conquest sparked a revolt by conquerors against the viceroy and the viceroy was killed in 1546. In Mexico, Don Mart\u00edn Cort\u00e9s, the son and legal heir of conqueror Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s, and other heirs of encomiendas led a failed revolt against the crown. Don Mart\u00edn was sent into exile, while other conspirators were executed.\nIndigenous peoples and colonial rule.\nThe conquest of the Aztec and Inca empires ended their sovereignty over their respective territorial expanses, replaced by the Spanish Empire, and indigenous religious beliefs and practices were suppressed and populations converted to Christianity. The Spanish Empire could not have ruled these vast territories and dense indigenous populations without utilizing the existing indigenous political and economic structures at the local level. A key to this was the cooperation between most indigenous elites with the new ruling structure. The Spanish recognized indigenous elites as nobles and gave them continuing standing in their communities. Indigenous elites could use the noble titles \"don\" and \"do\u00f1a\", were exempt from the head-tax, and could entail their landholdings into \"cacicazgos\". These elites played an intermediary role between the Spanish rulers and indigenous commoners. Since in Mesoamerica and the Andean civilizations, indigenous peoples had existing traditions of payment of tribute and required labor service, the Spanish could tap into these systems to extract wealth. There were few Spaniards and huge indigenous populations, so utilizing indigenous intermediaries was a practical solution to the incorporation of the indigenous population into the new regime of rule. By maintaining hierarchical divisions within communities, indigenous noblemen were the direct interface between the indigenous and Spanish spheres and kept their positions so long as they continued to be loyal to the Spanish crown.\nThe exploitation and demographic catastrophe that indigenous peoples experienced from Spanish rule in the Caribbean also occurred \nas Spaniards expanded their control over territories and their indigenous populations. The crown set the indigenous communities legally apart from Spaniards (as well as Blacks), who made up the \"Rep\u00fablica de Espa\u00f1oles\", with the creation of the \"Rep\u00fablica de Indios\". The crown attempted to curb Spaniards' exploitation, banning Spaniards' bequeathing their private grants of indigenous communities' tribute and encomienda labor in 1542 in the New Laws. In Mexico, the crown established the General Indian Court (\"Juzgado General de Indios\"), which heard disputes affecting individual indigenous as well as indigenous communities. Lawyers for these cases were funded by a half-real tax, an early example of legal aid for the poor. A similar legal apparatus was set up in Lima.\nThe Spaniards systematically attempted to transform structures of indigenous governance to those more closely resembling those of Spaniards, so the indigenous city-state became a Spanish town and the indigenous noblemen who ruled became officeholders of the town council (cabildo). Although the structure of the indigenous cabildo looked similar to that of the Spanish institution, its indigenous functionaries continued to follow indigenous practices. In central Mexico, there exist minutes of the sixteenth-century meetings in Nahuatl of the Tlaxcala cabildo. Indigenous noblemen were particularly important in the early period of colonization, since the economy of the encomienda was initially built on the extraction of tribute and labor from the commoners in their communities. As the colonial economy became more diversified and less dependent on these mechanisms for the accumulation of wealth, the indigenous noblemen became less important for the economy. However, noblemen became defenders of the rights to land and water controlled by their communities. In colonial Mexico, there are petitions to the king about a variety of issues important to particular indigenous communities when the noblemen did not get a favorable response from the local friar or priest or local royal officials.\nWorks by historians in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries have expanded the understanding of the impact of the Spanish conquest and changes during the more than three hundred years of Spanish rule. There are many such works for Mexico, often drawing on native-language documentation in Nahuatl, Mixtec, and Yucatec Maya. For the Andean area, there are an increasing number of publications as well. The history of the Guaran\u00ed has also been the subject of a recent study.\nIn 2000, Pope John Paul II apologized for the wrongs done by the Catholic Church, including those to indigenous peoples. In 2007 Pope Benedict XVI issued a less sweeping apology for the wrongs done in the conversion of indigenous peoples.\nCouncil of the Indies.\nIn 1524 the Council of the Indies was established, following the system of system of Councils that advised the monarch and made decisions on his behalf about specific matters of government. Based in Castile, with the assignment of the governance of the Indies, it was thus responsible for drafting legislation, proposing the appointments to the King for civil government as well as ecclesiastical appointments, and pronouncing judicial sentences; as maximum authority in the overseas territories, the Council of the Indies took over both the institutions in the Indies as the defense of the interests of the Crown, the Catholic Church, and of indigenous peoples. With the 1508 papal grant to the crown of the Patronato real, the crown, rather than the pope, exercised absolute power over the Catholic Church in the Americas and the Philippines, a privilege the crown zealously guarded against erosion or incursion. Crown approval through the Council of the Indies was needed for the establishment of bishoprics, building of churches, appointment of all clerics.\nIn 1721, at the beginning of the Bourbon monarchy, the crown transferred the main responsibility for governing the overseas empire from the Council of the Indies to the Ministry of the Navy and the Indies, which were subsequently divided into two separate ministries in 1754.\nViceroyalties.\nThe impossibility of the physical presence of the monarch and the necessity of strong royal governance in The Indies resulted in the appointment of viceroys (\"vice-kings\"), the direct representation of the monarch, in both civil and ecclesiastical spheres. Viceroyalties were the largest territory unit of administration in the civil and religious spheres and the boundaries of civil and ecclesiastical governance coincided by design, to ensure crown control over both bureaucracies. Until the eighteenth century, there were just two viceroyalties, with the Viceroyalty of New Spain (founded 1535) administering North America, a portion of the Caribbean, and the Philippines, and the viceroyalty of Peru (founded 1542) having jurisdiction over Spanish South America. Viceroys served as the vice-patron of the Catholic Church, including the Inquisition, established in the seats of the viceroyalties (Mexico City and Lima). Viceroys were responsible for good governance of their territories, economic development, and humane treatment of the indigenous populations.\nIn the eighteenth-century reforms, the Viceroyalty of Peru was reorganized, splitting off portions to form the Viceroyalty of New Granada (Colombia) (1739) and the Viceroyalty of Rio de la Plata (Argentina) (1776), leaving Peru with jurisdiction over Peru, Charcas, and Chile. Viceroys were of high social standing, almost without exception born in Spain, and served fixed terms.\nAudiencias, the high courts.\nThe Audiencias were initially constituted by the crown as a key administrative institution with royal authority and loyalty to the crown as opposed to conquerors and first settlers. Although constituted as the highest judicial authority in their territorial jurisdiction, they also had executive and legislative authority, and served as the executive on an interim basis. Judges (\"oidores\") held \"formidable power. Their role in judicial affairs and in overseeing the implementation of royal legislation made their decisions important for the communities they served.\" Since their appointments were for life or the pleasure of the monarch, they had a continuity of power and authority that viceroys and captains-general lacked because of their shorter-term appointments. They were the \"center of the administrative system [and] gave the government of the Indies a strong basis of permanence and continuity.\"\nTheir main function was judicial, as a court of justice of second instance \u2013 court of appeal \u2013 in penal and civil matters, but also the Audiencias were courts the first instance in the city where it had its headquarters, and also in the cases involving the Royal Treasury. Besides court of justice, the Audiencias had functions of government as counterweight the authority of the viceroys, since they could communicate with both the Council of the Indies and the king without the requirement of requesting authorization from the viceroy. This direct correspondence of the Audiencia with the Council of the Indies made it possible for the council to give the Audiencia direction on general aspects of government.\nAudiencias were a significant base of power and influence for American-born elites, starting in the late sixteenth century, with nearly a quarter of appointees being born in the Indies by 1687. During a financial crisis in the late seventeenth century, the crown began selling Audiencia appointments, and American-born Spaniards held 45% of Audiencia appointments. Although there were restrictions of appointees' ties to local elite society and participation in the local economy, they acquired dispensations from the cash-strapped crown. Audiencia judgments and other functions became more tied to the locality and less to the crown and impartial justice.\nDuring the Bourbon Reforms in the mid-eighteenth century, the crown systematically sought to centralize power in its own hands and diminish that of its overseas possessions, appointing peninsular-born Spaniards to Audiencias. American-born elite men complained bitterly about the change, since they lost access to power that they had enjoyed for nearly a century.\nCivil administrative districts, provinces.\nDuring the early era and under the Habsburgs, the crown established a regional layer of colonial jurisdiction in the institution of Corregimiento, which was between the Audiencia and town councils. Corregimiento expanded \"royal authority from the urban centers into the countryside and over the indigenous population.\" As with many colonial institutions, corregimiento had its roots in Castile when the Catholic Monarchs centralize power over municipalities. In the Indies, corregimiento initially functioned to bring control over Spanish settlers who exploited the indigenous populations held in encomienda, in order to protect the shrinking indigenous populations and prevent the formation of an aristocracy of conquerors and powerful settlers. The royal official in charge of a district was the Corregidor, who was appointed by the viceroy, usually for a five-year term. Corregidores collected the tribute from indigenous communities and regulated forced indigenous labor. Alcald\u00edas mayores were larger districts with a royal appointee, the \"Alcalde mayor\".\nAs the indigenous populations declined, the need for corregimiento decreased and then suppressed, with the alcald\u00eda mayor remaining an institution until it was replaced in the eighteenth-century Bourbon Reforms by royal officials, Intendants. The salary of officials during the Habsburg era were paltry, but the corregidor or alcalde mayor in densely populated areas of indigenous settlement with a valuable product could use his office for personal enrichment. As with many other royal posts, these positions were sold, starting in 1677. The Bourbon-era intendants were appointed and relatively well paid.\nCabildos or town councils.\nSpanish settlers sought to live in towns and cities, with governance being accomplished through the town council or \"Cabildo\". The cabildo was composed of the prominent residents (\"vecinos\") of the municipality, so that governance was restricted to a male elite, with majority of the population exercising power. Cities were governed on the same pattern as in Spain and in the Indies the city was the framework of Spanish life. The cities were Spanish and the countryside indigenous. In areas of previous indigenous empires with settled populations, the crown also melded existing indigenous rule into a Spanish pattern, with the establishment of cabildos and the participation of indigenous elites as officials holding Spanish titles. There were a variable number of councilors (\"regidores\"), depending on the size of the town, also two municipal judges (\"alcaldes menores\"), who were judges of first instance, and also other officials as police chief, inspector of supplies, court clerk, and a public herald. They were in charge of distributing land to the neighbors, establishing local taxes, dealing with the public order, inspecting jails and hospitals, preserving the roads and public works such as irrigation ditches and bridges, supervising public health, regulating festive activities, monitoring market prices, or the protection of Indians.\nAfter the reign of Philip II, the municipal offices, including the councilors, were auctioned to alleviate the need for money of the Crown, even the offices could also be sold, which became hereditary, so that the government of the cities went on to hands of urban oligarchies. In order to control the municipal life, the Crown ordered the appointment of \"corregidores\" and \"alcaldes mayores\" to exert greater political control and judicial functions in minor districts. Their functions were governing the respective municipalities, administering of justice and being appellate judges in the \"alcaldes menores\"' judgments, but only the \"corregidor\" could preside over the \"cabildo\". However, both charges were also put up for sale freely since the late 16th century.\nMost Spanish settlers came to the Indies as permanent residents, established families and businesses, and sought advancement in the colonial system, such as membership of cabildos, so that they were in the hands of local, American-born (\"crillo\") elites. During the Bourbon era, even when the crown systematically appointed peninsular-born Spaniards to royal posts rather than American-born, the cabildos remained in the hands of local elites.\nFrontier institutions \u2013 presidio and mission.\nAs the empire expanded into areas of less dense indigenous populations, the crown created a chain of presidios, military forts or garrisons, that provided Spanish settlers protection from Indian attacks. In Mexico during the sixteenth-century Chichimec War guarded the transit of silver from the mines of Zacatecas to Mexico City. As many as 60 salaried soldiers were garrisoned in presidios. Presidios had a resident commanders, who set up commercial enterprises of imported merchandise, selling it to soldiers as well as Indian allies.\nThe other frontier institution was the religious mission to convert the indigenous populations. Missions were established with royal authority through the Patronato real. The Jesuits were effective missionaries in frontier areas until their expulsion from Spain and its empire in 1767. The Franciscans took over some former Jesuit missions and continued the expansion of areas incorporated into the empire. Although their primary focus was on religious conversion, missionaries served as \"diplomatic agents, peace emissaries to hostile tribes ... and they were also expected to hold the line against nomadic nonmissionary Indians as well as other European powers.\" On the frontier of empire, Indians were seen as \"sin raz\u00f3n\", (\"without reason\"); non-Indian populations were described as \"gente de raz\u00f3n\" (\"people of reason\"), who could be mixed-race castas or black and had greater social mobility in frontier regions.\nCatholic Church organization.\nChristian evangelization of non-Christian peoples was a key factor in Spaniards' justification of the conquest of indigenous peoples in what was called \"the spiritual conquest\". In 2000, Pope John Paul II apologized for errors committed by the Catholic Church, including forced conversion.\nEarly evangelization.\nDuring the early colonial period, the crown authorized friars of Catholic religious orders (Franciscans, Dominicans, and Augustinians) to function as priests during the conversion of indigenous populations. During the early Age of Discovery, the diocesan clergy in Spain was poorly educated and considered of a low moral standing, and the Catholic Monarchs were reluctant to allow them to spearhead evangelization. Each order set up networks of parishes in the various regions (provinces), sited in existing indigenous settlements, where Christian churches were built and where evangelization of the indigenous was based. Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s requested Franciscan and Dominican friars be sent to New Spain immediately after the conquest of Tenochtitlan to begin evangelization. The Franciscans arrived first in 1525 in a group of twelve, the Twelve Apostles of Mexico. Among this first group was Toribio de Benavente, known now as \"Motolinia\", the Nahuatl word for poor.\nEstablishment of the church hierarchy.\nAfter the 1550s, the crown increasingly favored the diocesan clergy over the religious orders. The diocesan clergy (also called the secular clergy) were under the direct authority of bishops, who were appointed by the crown, through the power granted by the pope in the Patronato real. Religious orders had their own internal regulations and leadership. The crown had authority to draw the boundaries for dioceses and parishes. The creation of the ecclesiastical hierarchy of the diocesan clergy marked a turning point in the crown's control over the religious sphere. The structure of the hierarchy was in many ways parallel to that of civil governance. The pope was the head of the Catholic Church, but the granting of the Patronato real to the Spanish monarchy gave the king the power of appointment (patronage) of ecclesiastics. The monarch was head of the civil and religious hierarchies. The capital city of a viceroyalty became of the seat of the archbishop. The region overseen by the archbishop was divided into large units, the diocese, headed by a bishop. The diocese was in turn divided into smaller units, the parish, staffed by a parish priest.\nIn 1574, Philip II promulgated the Order of Patronage (\"Ordenaza del Patronato\") ordering the religious orders to turn over their parishes to the secular clergy, a policy that secular clerics had long sought for the central areas of empire, with their large indigenous populations. Although implementation was slow and incomplete, it was an assertion of royal power over the clergy and the quality of parish priests improved, since the Ordenanza mandated competitive examination to fill vacant positions.\n Religious orders along with the Jesuits then embarked on further evangelization in frontier regions of the empire.\nJesuits.\nThe Jesuits resisted crown control, refusing to pay the tithe on their estates that supported the ecclesiastical hierarchy and came into conflict with bishops. The most prominent example is in Puebla, Mexico, when Bishop Juan de Palafox y Mendoza was driven from his bishopric by the Jesuits. The bishop challenged the Jesuits' continuing to hold Indian parishes and function as priests without the required royal licenses. His fall from power is viewed as an example of the weakening of the crown in the mid-seventeenth century since it failed to protect their duly appointed bishop. The crown expelled the Jesuits from Spain and The Indies in 1767 during the Bourbon Reforms.\nHoly Office of the Inquisition.\nInquisitional powers were initially vested in bishops, who could root out idolatry and heresy. In Mexico, Bishop Juan de Zum\u00e1rraga prosecuted and had executed in 1539 a Nahua lord, known as Don Carlos of Texcoco for apostasy and sedition for having converted to Christianity and then renounced his conversion and urged others to do so as well. Zum\u00e1rraga was reprimanded for his actions as exceeding his authority. When the formal institution of the Inquisition was established in 1571, indigenous peoples were excluded from its jurisdiction on the grounds that they were neophytes, new converts, and not capable of understanding religious doctrine.\nSociety.\nDemographic impact of colonization.\nIt has been estimated that over 1.86 million Spaniards emigrated to the Americas in the period between 1492 and 1824, with millions more continuing to immigrate following independence.\nNative populations declined significantly during the period of Spanish expansion. In Hispaniola, the indigenous Ta\u00edno pre-contact population before the arrival of Columbus of several hundred thousand had declined to sixty thousand by 1509. The population of the Native American population in Mexico declined by an estimated 90% (reduced to 1\u20132.5 million people) by the early 17th century. In Peru, the indigenous Amerindian pre-contact population of around 6.5 million declined to 1 million by the early 17th century. The overwhelming cause of the decline in both Mexico and Peru was infectious diseases, such as smallpox and measles, although the brutality of the encomienda also played a significant part in the population decline.\nOf the history of the indigenous population of California, Sherburne F. Cook (1896\u20131974) was the most painstakingly careful researcher. From decades of research, he made estimates for the pre-contact population and the history of demographic decline during the Spanish and post-Spanish periods. According to Cook, the indigenous Californian population at first contact, in 1769, was about 310,000 and had dropped to 25,000 by 1910. The vast majority of the decline happened after the Spanish period, during the Mexican and US periods of Californian history (1821\u20131910), with the most dramatic collapse (200,000 to 25,000) occurring in the US period (1846\u20131910).\nSpanish American populations and race.\nThe largest population in Spanish America was and remained indigenous, what Spaniards called \"Indians\" (\"indios\"), a category that did not exist before the arrival of the Europeans. The Spanish Crown separated them into the \"Rep\u00fablica de Indios\". Europeans immigrated from various provinces of Spain, with initial waves of emigration consisting of more men than women. They were referred to as \"Espa\u00f1oles\" and \"Espa\u00f1olas\", and later being differentiated by the terms indicating place of birth, \"peninsular\" for those born in Spain; \"criollo/criolla\" or \"Americano/Ameriana\" for those born in the Americas. Enslaved Africans were imported to Spanish territories, primarily to Cuba. As was the case in peninsular Spain, Africans (\"negros\") were able buy their freedom (horro), so that in most of the empire free Blacks and Mulatto (Black + Spanish) populations outnumbered slave populations. Spaniards and Indigenous parents produced Mestizo offspring, who were also part of the Rep\u00fablica de Espa\u00f1oles.\nEconomy.\nEarly economy of indigenous tribute and labor.\nIn areas of dense, stratified indigenous populations, especially Mesoamerica and the Andean region, Spanish conquerors awarded perpetual private grants of labor and tribute to particular indigenous settlements, in encomienda they were in a privileged position to accumulate private wealth. Spaniards had some knowledge of the existing indigenous practices of labor and tribute, so that learning in more detail what tribute particular regions delivered to the Aztec Empire prompted the creation of Codex Mendoza, a codification for Spanish use. The rural regions remained highly indigenous, with little interface between the large numbers of indigenous and the small numbers of the Rep\u00fablica de Espa\u00f1oles, which included Blacks and mixed-race castas. Tribute goods in Mexico were most usually lengths of cotton cloth, woven by women, and maize and other foodstuffs produced by men. These could be sold in markets and thereby converted to cash. In the early period for Spaniards, formal ownership of land was less important than control of indigenous labor and receiving tribute. Spaniards had seen the disappearance of the indigenous populations in the Caribbean, and with that, the disappearance of their main source of wealth, propelling Spaniards to expand their regions of control. With the conquests of the Aztec and Inca empires, large numbers of Spaniards emigrated from the Iberian peninsula to seek their fortune or to pursue better economic conditions for themselves. The establishment of large, permanent Spanish settlements attracted a whole range of new residents, who set up shop as carpenters, bakers, tailors and other artisan activities.\nSugar and slavery.\nThe early Caribbean proved a massive disappointment for Spaniards, who had hoped to find mineral wealth and exploitable indigenous populations. Gold existed in only small amounts, and the indigenous peoples died off in massive numbers. For the colony's continued existence, a reliable source of labor was needed. That was of enslaved Africans. Cane sugar imported from the Old World was a high value, a low bulk export product that became the bulwark of tropical economies of the Caribbean islands and coastal Tierra Firme (the Spanish Main), as well as Portuguese Brazil.\nSilver.\nSilver was the bonanza the Spaniards sought. Large deposits were found in a single mountain in the viceroyalty of Peru, the Cerro Rico, in what is now Bolivia, and in several places outside of the dense indigenous zone of settlement in northern Mexico, Zacatecas and Guanajuato. In the Andes, Viceroy Francisco de Toledo revived the indigenous rotary labor system of the \"mita\" to supply labor for silver mining. In Mexico, the labor force had to be lured from elsewhere in the colony, and was not based on traditional systems of rotary labor. In Mexico, refining took place in \"haciendas de minas\", where silver ore was refined into pure silver by amalgamation with mercury in what was known as the patio process. Ore was crushed with the aid of mules and then mercury could be applied to draw out the pure silver. Mercury was a monopoly of the crown. In Peru, the Cerro Rico's ore was processed from the local mercury mine of Huancavelica, while in Mexico mercury was imported from the Almad\u00e9n mercury mine in Spain. Mercury is a neurotoxin, which damaged and killed human and mules coming into contact with it. In the Huancavelica region, mercury continues to wreak ecological damage.\nDevelopment of agriculture and ranching.\nTo feed urban populations and mining workforces, small-scale farms (ranchos), (estancias), and large-scale enterprises (haciendas) emerged to fill the demand, especially for foodstuffs that Spaniards wanted to eat, most especially wheat. In areas of sparse population, ranching of cattle (\"ganado mayor\") and smaller livestock (\"ganado menor\") such as sheep and goats ranged widely and were largely feral. There is debate about the impact of ranching on the environment in the colonial era, with sheep herding being called out for its negative impact, while others contest that. With only a small labor force to draw on, ranching was an ideal economic activity for some regions. Most agriculture and ranching supplied local needs, since transportation was difficult, slow, and expensive. Only the most valuable low bulk products would be exported.\nAgricultural export products.\nCacao beans for chocolate emerged as an export product as Europeans developed a taste for sweetened chocolate. Another important export product was cochineal, a color-fast red dye made from dried insects living on cacti. It became the second-most valuable export from Spanish America after silver.\n19th century.\nDuring the Napoleonic Peninsular War in Europe between France and Spain, assemblies called \"juntas\" were established to rule in the name of Ferdinand VII of Spain. The Libertadores (Spanish and Portuguese for \"Liberators\") were the principal leaders of the Spanish American wars of independence. They were predominantly \"criollos\" (Americas-born people of European ancestry, mostly Spanish or Portuguese), bourgeois and influenced by liberalism and in some cases with military training in the mother country.\nIn 1809 the first declarations of independence from Spanish rule occurred in the Viceroyalty of Peru. The first two were in Upper Peru, present-day Bolivia, at Charcas (present day Sucre, 25 May), and La Paz (16 July); and the third in present-day Ecuador at Quito (10 August). In 1810 Mexico declared independence, with the Mexican War of Independence following for over a decade. In 1821 Treaty of C\u00f3rdoba established Mexican independence from Spain and concluded the War. The Plan of Iguala was part of the peace treaty to establish a constitutional foundation for an independent Mexico.\nThese began a movement for colonial independence that spread to Spain's other colonies in the Americas. The ideas from the French and the American Revolution influenced the efforts. All of the colonies, except Cuba and Puerto Rico, attained independence by the 1820s. The British Empire offered support, wanting to end the Spanish monopoly on trade with its colonies in the Americas.\nIn 1898, the United States achieved victory in the Spanish\u2013American War with Spain, ending the Spanish colonial era. Spanish possession and rule of its remaining colonies in the Americas ended in that year with its sovereignty transferred to the United States. The United States took occupation of Cuba, the Philippines, and Puerto Rico. Puerto Rico continues to be a possession of the United States, now officially continues as a self-governing unincorporated territory.\nIn popular culture.\nIn the twentieth century, there have been a number of films depicting the life of Christopher Columbus. One in 1949 stars Fredric March as Columbus. With the 1992 commemoration (and critique) of Columbus, more cinematic and television depictions of the era appeared, including a television miniseries with Gabriel Byrne as Columbus. \"Christopher Columbus: The Discovery\" (1992) has Georges Corroface as Columbus with Marlon Brando as Tom\u00e1s de Torquemada and Tom Selleck as King Ferdinand and Rachel Ward as Queen Isabela. \"1492: The Conquest of Paradise\" stars G\u00e9rard Depardieu as Columbus and Sigourney Weaver as Queen Isabel. A 2010 film, \"Even the Rain\" starring Gael Garc\u00eda Bernal, is set in modern Cochabamba, Bolivia during the Cochabamba Water War, following a film crew shooting a controversial life of Columbus. A 1995 Bolivian-made film is in some ways similar to \"Even the Rain\" is \"To Hear the Birds Singing\", with a modern film crew going to an indigenous settlement to shoot a film about the Spanish conquest and end up replicating aspects of the conquest.\nFor the conquest of the Aztec Empire, the 2019 eight-episode Mexican television miniseries \"Hern\u00e1n\" depicts such historical events. Other notable historical figures in the production are Malinche, Cort\u00e9s cultural translator, and other conquerors Pedro de Alvarado, Crist\u00f3bal de Olid, Bernal D\u00edaz del Castillo. Showing the indigenous sides are Xicotencatl, a leader of the Spaniards' Tlaxcalan allies, and Aztec emperors Moctezuma II and Cuitl\u00e1huac. The story of Do\u00f1a Marina, also known as Malinche, was the subject of a Mexican television miniseries in 2018. A major production in Mexico was the 1998 film, \"The Other Conquest\", which focuses on a Nahua man in the post-conquest era and the evangelization of central Mexico.\nThe epic journey of \u00c1lvar N\u00fa\u00f1ez Cabeza de Vaca has been portrayed in a 1991 feature-length Mexican film, \"Cabeza de Vaca\". The similarly epic and dark journey of Lope de Aguirre was made into a film by Werner Herzog, \"Aguirre, the Wrath of God\" (1972), starring Klaus Kinski.\n\"The Mission\" was a 1996 film idealizing a Jesuit mission to the Guaran\u00ed in the territory disputed between Spain and Portugal. The film starred Robert De Niro, Jeremy Irons, and Liam Neeson and It won an Academy Award.\nThe life of seventeenth-century Mexican nun, Sor Juana In\u00e9s de la Cruz, renowned in her lifetime, has been portrayed in a 1990 Argentine film, \"I, the Worst of All\" and in the television miniseries \"Juana In\u00e9s\". Seventeenth-century Mexican trickster Mart\u00edn Garatuza was the subject of a late nineteenth-century novel by Mexican politician and writer, Vicente Riva Palacio. In the twentieth century, Garatuza's life was the subject of a 1935 film and a 1986 telenovela, \"Mart\u00edn Garatuza\".\nFor the independence era, the 2016 Bolivian-made film made about Mestiza independence leader Juana Azurduy de Padilla, \"Juana Azurduy, Guerrillera de la Patria Grande\", is part of the recent recognition of her role in the independence of Argentina and Bolivia.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "53092", "revid": "36112485", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53092", "title": "Stan Rice", "text": "American professor, poet and artist (1942\u20132002)\nStanley Travis Rice Jr. (November 7, 1942 \u2013 December 9, 2002) was an American professor, poet and artist. He was the husband of author Anne Rice.\nBiography.\nRice was born in Dallas, Texas, in 1942. He met his future wife Anne O'Brien in high school. They briefly attended North Texas State University together, before marrying in 1961 and moving to San Francisco in 1962, to enroll at San Francisco State University, where they both earned their bachelor's and master's degrees.\nRice was a professor of English and Creative Writing at San Francisco State University. In 1977, he received the Academy of American Poets' Edgar Allan Poe Award for \"Whiteboy\", and in subsequent years was also the recipient of the Joseph Henry Jackson Award, as well as a writing fellowship from the National Endowment for the Arts. Rice retired after 22 years as Chairman of the Creative Writing program as well as Assistant Director of the Poetry Center in 1989.\nIt was the death of his and Anne's first child, daughter Michele (1966\u20131972), at age six of leukemia, which led to Stan Rice becoming a published author. His first book of poems, based on his daughter's illness and death, was titled \"Some Lamb\", and was published in 1975. He encouraged his wife to quit her work as a waitress, cook and theater usher in order to devote herself full-time to her writing, and both eventually encouraged their son, novelist Christopher Rice, to become a published author as well.\nRice, his wife and his son moved to the Garden District, New Orleans, in 1988, where he eventually opened the Stan Rice Gallery. In 1989, they purchased the Brevard-Rice House, 1239 First Street, built in 1857 for Albert Hamilton Brevard.\nStan Rice's paintings are represented in the collections of the Ogden Museum of Southern Art and the New Orleans Museum of Art. He had a one-person show at the James W. Palmer Gallery, Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York. The Art Galleries of Southeastern Louisiana presented an exhibition of selected paintings in March 2005. Prospective plans are underway to present exhibitions of Rice's paintings at various locations in Mexico.\nIn \"Prism of the Night\", Anne Rice said of Stan: \"He's a model to me of a man who doesn't look to heaven or hell to justify his feelings about life itself. His capacity for action is admirable. Very early on he said to me, 'What more could you ask for than life itself'?\"\nPoet Deborah Garrison was Rice's editor at Alfred A. Knopf for his 2002 collection, \"Red to the Rind\", which was dedicated to novelist son Christopher, in whose success as a writer his father greatly rejoiced. Garrison said of Rice: \"Stan really attempted to kind of stare down the world, and I admire that.\"\nKnopf's Victoria Wilson, who edited Anne's novels and worked with Stan Rice on his 1997 book, \"Paintings\", was particularly impressed by his refusal to sell his artworks, saying, \"The great thing about Stan is that he refused to play the game as a painter, and he refused to play the game as a poet.\"\nPersonal life.\nRice was an atheist.\nDeath.\nStan Rice died of brain cancer at age 60, on December 9, 2002, in New Orleans where he lived and was survived by Anne and Christopher, as well as his mother, Margaret (1921-2018); a brother, Larry; and two sisters, Nancy and Thia.\nRice is entombed in Metairie Cemetery in New Orleans.\nPoetry video recordings.\nTwo series of recordings \u2013 one from 1973 at San Francisco State University and the other from 1996 at the poet's New Orleans home by filmmaker Blair Murphy \u2013 capturing Stan Rice reading several of his poems are on the YouTube site dedicated to the poet.\nFootnotes.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53094", "revid": "39635320", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53094", "title": "Gaseous", "text": ""}
{"id": "53095", "revid": "48271279", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53095", "title": "Taos", "text": "Taos or TAOS may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "53096", "revid": "50984205", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53096", "title": "Elric of Melnibon\u00e9", "text": "Fictional character\nElric of Melnibon\u00e9 is a fictional character created by English writer Michael Moorcock and the protagonist of a series of sword and sorcery stories taking place on an alternative Earth. The proper name and title of the character are Elric VIII, 428th Emperor of Melnibon\u00e9. Later stories by Moorcock marked Elric as a facet of the Eternal Champion.\nElric first appeared in print in Moorcock's novella \"The Dreaming City\" (\"Science Fantasy\" No. 47, June 1961). Moorcock's doomed albino antihero is one of the better-known characters in fantasy literature, having crossed over into a wide variety of media, such as comics, music, film, and role-playing games. The stories have been continuously in print since the 1970s.\nDescription.\nElric is described in 1972's \"Elric of Melnibon\u00e9\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is the colour of a bleached skull, his flesh; and the long hair which flows below his shoulders is milk-white. From the tapering, beautiful head stare two slanting eyes, crimson and moody, and from the loose sleeves of his yellow gown emerge two slender hands, also the colour of bone.\nElric is the last emperor of the stagnating island civilization of Melnibon\u00e9. Physically weak, the anemic Elric must use drugs (special herbs) to maintain his health and vitality. From childhood, he read freely in the immense royal library and learned of the world outside the Dreaming Isle. Perhaps due to this in-depth study, unlike other members of his race, Elric has a conscience. He witnesses the decadence of his culture, which once ruled the known world, and worries about the rise of the Young Kingdoms populated by humans (Melnibon\u00e9ans consider themselves separate from humanity), along with the threat they pose to his empire. Because of Elric's introspective self-loathing and hatred of Melnibon\u00e9an traditions, his subjects find him odd and unfathomable. However, his cousin Yyrkoon (next in the line of succession, as Elric has no heirs) interprets this behaviour as weakness and plots Elric's death. Complicating matters is Yyrkoon's sister Cymoril, who is deeply in love with Elric; Yyrkoon covets her, and part of his plan for usurpation is to marry Cymoril himself.\nIn addition to his skill with herbs, Elric is an accomplished sorcerer and summoner. As emperor of Melnibon\u00e9, Elric is able to call for aid upon the traditional patron of the Melnibon\u00e9 emperors, Arioch, a Lord of Chaos and Duke of Hell. From the first story, Elric uses ancient pacts and agreements with not only Arioch, but various other beings\u2014some gods, some demons\u2014to help him accomplish his tasks.\nElric's discovery of the sword Stormbringer serves as both his greatest asset and disadvantage. The sword confers upon Elric strength, health, and fighting prowess, allowing him to do away with his dependence on drugs, but it must be fed by the souls of intelligent beings. In the end, the blade takes everyone close to Elric and eventually Elric's own soul as well. Most of Moorcock's stories about Elric feature this relationship with Stormbringer, and how it\u2014despite Elric's best intentions\u2014brings doom to everything he holds dear.\nSetting.\nMelnibon\u00e9 ( ), also known as the Dragon Isle, is a fictional country, an island among the Young Kingdoms.\nCenturies before Elric's birth, Melnibon\u00e9 ruled its world through sorcerous might and sheer power. By the time of Elric's birth, it has slipped from its preeminent place, being one of many nations. The Melnibon\u00e9ans are not wholly human. They are skilled with magic and beautiful, though psychologically similar to cats, with a callous nature. They are bound by many ancient customs.\nMelnibon\u00e9's capital and only surviving city is Imrryr, known as \"The Dreaming City\". Most of the rest of the island has been allowed to revert to wilderness. Caverns exist below the island, in which dragons sleep, awaiting the Melnibon\u00e9ans' summons to war.\nInfluences.\nMoorcock acknowledges the work of Bertolt Brecht, particularly \"Threepenny Novel\" and \"The Threepenny Opera\", as \"one of the chief influences\" on the initial Elric sequence; he dedicated 1972's \"Elric of Melnibon\u00e9\" to Brecht. In the same dedication, he cited Poul Anderson's \"Three Hearts and Three Lions\" and Fletcher Pratt's \"The Well of the Unicorn\" as similarly influential texts. Moorcock has referred to Elric as a type of the \"doomed hero\", one of the oldest character-types in literature, akin to such hero-villains as Mervyn Peake's Steerpike in the \"Gormenghast\" trilogy, Poul Anderson's Scafloc in \"The Broken Sword\", T. H. White's Lancelot in \"The Once and Future King\", J. R. R. Tolkien's cursed hero T\u00farin Turambar, and Jane Gaskell's Zerd in \"The Serpent\". John Clute considers Elric to be a deliberate parody of Robert E. Howard's Conan.\nThe story of Kullervo from Finnish mythology has been proposed as having influence on Poul Anderson's 1954 novel \"The Broken Sword\" and Tolkien's T\u00farin Turambar. Moorcock has stated that \"Anderson's a definite influence [on Elric], as stated. But oddly, the Kalevala was read to us at my boarding school when I was about seven\", and \"from a very early age I was reading Norse legends and any books I could find about Norse stories\". Moorcock in the same post stated that \"one thing I'm pretty sure of, I was not in any way directly influenced by Prof. T[olkien]\".\nElric's albinism appears influenced by Monsieur Zenith, an albino Sexton Blake villain whom Moorcock appreciated enough to write into later multiverse stories. Moorcock read Zenith stories in his youth and has contributed to their later reprinting, remarking that it \"took me forty years to find another copy of Zenith the Albino! In fact it was a friend who found it under lock and key and got a copy of it to Savoy who are, at last, about to reprint it! Why I have spent so much energy making public the evidence of my vast theft from Anthony Skene, I'm not entirely sure...\". Moorcock later said: \"As I've said in my introduction to \"Monsieur Zenith: The Albino\", the Anthony Skene's character was a huge influence. For the rest of the character, his ambiguities in particular, I based him on myself at the age I was when I created Elric, which was 20\". The influence of Zenith on Elric is often cited in discussions of Zenith.\nList of stories.\nElric has appeared in many stories since 1962, which have been republished in several collections.\nIn popular culture.\nAnthologies.\nTwo anthologies of works by other authors set in the Moorcock multiverse have been published:\nComics.\nThe Elric saga has also been adapted for comics and graphic novels several times:\nVideo game.\nA video game based on \"Elric\" was in development by Haiku Studios and to be published by Psygnosis for the PlayStation during the late 1990s.\nStormbringer.\nThere have also been several references in popular culture to Elric's sword Stormbringer.\nCritical response.\nWriting for NPR, Jason Sheehan calls Elric \"far and away the coolest, grimmest, moodiest, most elegant, degenerate, drug-addicted, cursed, twisted and emotionally weird mass murderer of them all\".\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53097", "revid": "84417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53097", "title": "Sangre de Cristo Range", "text": "American mountain range\nThe Sangre de Cristo Range is a mountain range in the Rocky Mountains in southern Colorado in the United States, running north and south along the east side of the Rio Grande Rift. The mountains extend southeast from Poncha Pass for about through south-central Colorado to La Veta Pass, approximately west of Walsenburg, and form a high ridge separating the San Luis Valley on the west from the watershed of the Arkansas River on the east. The Sangre de Cristo Range rises over above the valleys and plains to the west and northeast.\nAccording to the USGS, the range is the northern part of the larger Sangre de Cristo Mountains, which extend through northern New Mexico. \nUsage of the terms \"Sangre de Cristo Range\" and \"Sangre de Cristo Mountains\" is varied; however, this article discusses only the mountains between Poncha Pass and La Veta Pass.\nNotable peaks.\nA 14er is a mountain peak that has an elevation of at least 14,000 feet. Colorado has 53, the most of any state. There are 10 14ers in the Sangre de Cristo Range, which can be seen in the table below. \nGeography.\nThe Sangre de Cristo Mountains run from Poncha Pass in Central Colorado to Glorieta Pass near Santa Fe, New Mexico. Most of the range is shared by two National Forests, which abut along the range divide. Most of the northeast (Arkansas River) side is located within the San Isabel National Forest, while most of the southwest (San Luis Valley) side is included in the Rio Grande National Forest. The central part of the range is designated as the Sangre de Cristo Wilderness. The Great Sand Dunes National Park and Preserve sits on the southwestern flank of the range at the edge of the San Luis Valley. The range divide is traversed by no paved roads, only by four-wheel drive and foot trails over Hayden Pass, Hermit Pass, Music Pass, Medano Pass, and Mosca Pass.\nThe highest peak in the range, located in the south, is Blanca Peak at ; it is flanked by three other fourteeners: Little Bear Peak, Mount Lindsey, and Ellingwood Point. Other well-known peaks are the fourteeners of the Crestone group: Kit Carson Mountain, Crestone Peak, Crestone Needle, and Humboldt Peak. Two sub-peaks of Kit Carson Mountain, Challenger Point and Columbia Point, are named in memory of the crews of the Space Shuttle Challenger and the Space Shuttle Columbia.\nThe range is also home to many high peaks in the 13,000 to 14,000 foot (3,900-4,300\u00a0m) range as it continues into New Mexico. In New Mexico most of the mountain area is managed by the US Forest Service in the Carson and Santa Fe National Forests.\nGeology.\nThe Colorado Sangre de Cristos are fault-block mountains similar to the Teton Range in Wyoming and the Wasatch Range in Utah. Major fault lines run along the east and west sides of the range, and cut right through the mountains in some places. Like all fault-block mountain ranges, the Sangre de Cristos lack foothills which means the highest peaks rise abruptly from the valleys to the east and west, rising in only a few miles in some places. The mountains were pushed up around 5 million years ago, basically as one large mass of rock. The Sangre de Cristo range is still being uplifted today as faults in the area remain active. Due to uplift (elevation increase) and erosion, rock layers are missing, causing gaps in the range, called \"unconformities.\"\nOn the west side is the San Luis Valley, a portion of the Rio Grande Rift. On the southeast side is the Raton Basin, a quiet but still active volcanic field. On the northeast side are the Wet Mountains and the Front Range, areas of Precambrian igneous and metamorphic rocks formed during the Colorado orogeny some 1.7 billion years ago and then uplifted more recently during the Laramide orogeny.\nThe Blanca Massif is also Precambrian rock, while most of the rest of the Sangres is composed of younger Permian-Pennsylvanian (about 250-million-year-old) rock, a mix of sedimentary conglomerates, silty mudstones and shales, sandstones, limestone beds and igneous intrusions. These sedimentary rocks originated as sediment eroded from the Ancestral Rocky Mountains. Crestone Conglomerate are a feature on many of the peaks, including Crestone Needle. The conglomerate settled near the uplift and contains boulders as large as 6 feet in diameter.\nHistory.\nAntonio Valverde y Cosio named the Sangre de Cristo range after the red-hue that he saw during the snowy sunrise. Sangre de Cristo means Blood of Christ in English.\nIn the formation of the range, we can see fossils of footprints, shells and bones.\nIn August 2009, the Sangre de Cristo Range was dedicated as a National Heritage Area (NHA), an area of cultural, natural, and historic preservation.\nEconomy.\nToday, tourism is the main economic activity.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53098", "revid": "1743697", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53098", "title": "Rio Grande rift", "text": "Continental rift zone in the southwest United States\nThe Rio Grande rift is a north-trending continental rift zone. It separates the Colorado Plateau in the west from the interior of the North American craton on the east. The rift extends from central Colorado in the north to the state of Chihuahua, Mexico, in the south. The rift zone consists of four basins that have an average width of . The rift can be observed on location at Rio Grande National Forest, White Sands National Park, Santa Fe National Forest, and Cibola National Forest, among other locations.\nThe Rio Grande rift has been an important site for humans for a long time, because it provides a north\u2013south route that follows a major river. The Rio Grande follows the course of the rift from southern Colorado to El Paso, where it turns southeast and flows toward the Gulf of Mexico. Important cities, including Albuquerque, Santa Fe, Taos, Espa\u00f1ola, Las Cruces, El Paso, and Ciudad Ju\u00e1rez, lie within the rift.\nGeology.\nThe Rio Grande rift represents the easternmost manifestation of widespread extension in the western U.S. during the past 35 million years. The rift consists of three major basins and many smaller basins, less than . The three major basins (from northernmost to southernmost) are the San Luis, Espa\u00f1ola, and Albuquerque basins. The rift's northern extent is delineated by the upper Arkansas River basin between Leadville and Salida, Colorado. Further south, the rift is defined by a network of smaller, less topographically distinct alternating basins and ranges. The distinction between these smaller basins and those of the Basin and Range Province becomes blurred in northern Mexico.\nBasin size generally decreases to the north in the rift, though the Espa\u00f1ola covers approximately north\u2013south and east\u2013west, and the San Luis is roughly . These basins may contain smaller units within them, such as the Alamosa basin within the San Luis, which is bounded by the San Juan and Tusas mountains on the west and the Sangre de Cristo Mountains in the east. The Albuquerque basin is the largest of the three basins, spanning north\u2013south and east\u2013west at its widest points. It is the oldest of the three major basins, and contains of Paleogene clastic sediments deposited on Precambrian basement. The southernmost Albuquerque basin contains pre-rift volcanic deposits, while the central and northern portions contain volcanics erupted during rifting. \nIn cross-section, the geometry of the basins within the rift are asymmetrical half-grabens, with major fault boundaries on one side and a downward hinge on the other. Which side of the basin has the major fault or the hinge alternates along the rift. The alternation between these half-grabens occurs along transfer faults, which trend across the rift to connect the major basin-bounding faults and occur between basins or, in places, within basins. The Precambrian basement changes relief sharply in this area, from below sea level at the bottom of the Albuquerque basin to above sea level in the nearby Sandia Mountains, which flanks the Albuquerque basin to the east. Flanking mountains are generally taller along the east side of the rift (although some of this relief may be Laramide in origin). The thickness of the crust increases to the north beneath the rift, where it may be as much as thicker than it is in the south. The crustal thickness underneath the rift is on average , thinner by than the Colorado Plateau on the west and the Great Plains to the east.\nFormation of the rift began with significant deformation and faulting with offsets of many kilometers starting about 35\u00a0Ma. The largest-scale manifestation of rifting involves a pure-shear rifting mechanism, in which both sides of the rift pull apart evenly and slowly, with the lower crust and upper mantle (the lithosphere) stretching like taffy. This extension is associated with very low seismic velocities in the upper mantle above approximately depth associated with relatively hot mantle and low degrees of partial melting. This intrusion of the asthenosphere into the lithosphere and continental crust is thought to be responsible for nearly all of the volcanism associated with the Rio Grande rift.\nThe sedimentary fill of the basins consists largely of alluvial fan and mafic volcanic flows. The most alkalic lavas erupted outside the rift. The sediments that were deposited during rifting are commonly known as the Santa Fe Group. This group contains sandstones, conglomerates, and volcanics. Aeolian deposits are also present in some basins.\nThe Rio Grande rift is intersected in northern New Mexico by the NE-SW trending Jemez Lineament which extends well into Arizona. The lineament is defined by aligned volcanic fields and several calderas in the area, including the Valles Caldera National Preserve in the Jemez Mountains. The Jemez Lineament is thought to be a hydrous subduction zone scar, separating Precambrian basement rock of the Yavapai-Mazatzal transition zone from the Mazaztl Province proper. Also on the Colorado Plateau but further north lies the San Juan volcanic field in the San Juan Mountains of Colorado.\nThe youngest eruptions in the rift region are in the Valley of Fires, New Mexico, and are approximately 5,400\u00a0years old. The Socorro, New Mexico, region of the central rift hosts an inflating mid-crustal sill-like magma body at a depth of 19\u00a0km that is responsible for anomalously high earthquake activity in the vicinity, including the largest rift-associated earthquakes in historic times (two events of approximately magnitude 5.8) in July and November 1906. Earth and space-based geodetic measurements indicate ongoing surface uplift above the Socorro magma body at approximately 2\u00a0mm/year.\nGeologic history.\nThe Rio Grande rift's tectonic evolution is fairly complex. The fundamental change in the western margin of the North American plate from one of subduction to a transform boundary occurred during Cenozoic time. The Farallon plate continued to be subducted beneath western North America for at least 100\u00a0million years during Late Mesozoic and early Cenozoic time. Compressional and transpressional deformation incurred by the Laramide Orogeny lasted until about 40\u00a0Ma in New Mexico. This deformation may have been a result of the coupling between the subducting Farallon plate and the overlying North American Plate. Crustal thickening occurred due to Laramide compression. After the Laramide Orogeny and until 20\u00a0Ma, a major period of volcanic activity occurred throughout the southwestern United States. Injection of hot magmas weakened the lithosphere and allowed for later extension of the region.\nCenozoic extension started about 30\u00a0million years ago (Ma). There are two phases of extension observed: late Oligocene and middle Miocene. The first period of extension produced broad, shallow basins bounded by low-angle faults. The crust may have been extended as much as 50% during this episode. Widespread magmatism in mid-Cenozoic time suggests that the lithosphere was hot, the brittle-ductile transition was relatively shallow. There is evidence that the second period of extension began earlier in the central and northern Rio Grande rift than in the south. A third period of extension may have begun in the early Pliocene.\nOne theory is that the Colorado Plateau acts as a semi-independent microplate and one way of explaining the creation of the Rio Grande rift is by the simple rotation of the Colorado Plateau 1-1.5\u00b0 in a clockwise direction relative to the North American craton. Other explanations that have been offered are that the extension is driven by mantle forces, such as large-scale mantle upwelling or small-scale mantle convection at the edge of the stable craton; collapse of over-thickened continental crust; initiation of transform faulting along the western margin of the North American plate; or detachment of a fragment of the Farallon plate beneath the Rio Grande region that enhanced asthenospheric upwelling in the slab window.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53099", "revid": "294180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53099", "title": "Vancouver Island", "text": "Largest island in British Columbia, Canada\nVancouver Island is an island in the northeastern Pacific Ocean and part of the Canadian province of British Columbia. The island is in length, in width at its widest point, and in total area, while are of land. The island is the largest by area and the most populous along the west coasts of the Americas.\nThe southern part of Vancouver Island and some of the nearby Gulf Islands are the only parts of British Columbia or Western Canada to lie south of the 49th parallel. The southeast part of the island has one of the warmest climates in Canada, and since the mid-1990s has been mild enough in a few areas to grow Mediterranean crops such as olives and lemons.\nThe population of Vancouver Island was 864,864 as of 2021. Nearly half of that population (~400,000) live in the metropolitan area of Greater Victoria on the southern tip of the island, which includes Victoria, the capital of British Columbia. Other notable cities and towns on Vancouver Island include Nanaimo, Campbell River, Courtenay, Port Alberni and Parksville, all on or near the east coast.\nIndigenous peoples have inhabited Vancouver Island for thousands of years, long before the arrival of Spanish and British naval expeditions in the late 18th century. The Spanish and British conjointly named it \"Quadra's and Vancouver's Island\" in commemoration of the friendly negotiations held in 1792 between the Spanish commander of Fort San Miguel in Nootka Sound, Juan Francisco de la Bodega y Quadra, and British naval captain George Vancouver, during the Nootka Crisis. (Bodega y Quadra's name was eventually dropped.) It is one of several North American locations named after George Vancouver, who between 1791 and 1794 explored the Pacific Northwest.\nVancouver Island is the world's 43rd largest island, Canada's 11th largest island, and Canada's second most populous island after the Island of Montreal.\nHistory.\nIndigenous peoples.\nVancouver Island has been the homeland of many indigenous peoples for thousands of years. The groupings, by language, are the Kwakwaka\u02bcwakw (also known as the \"Kwakiutl\"), Nuu-chah-nulth, and various Coast Salish peoples. While there is some overlap, Kwakwaka\u02bcwakw territory includes northern and northwestern Vancouver Island and adjoining areas of the mainland, the Nuu-chah-nulth span most of the west coast, while the Coast Salish cover the southeastern Island and southernmost extremities along the Strait of Juan de Fuca. Their cultures are connected to the natural resources abundant in the area.\nKwakwaka\u02bcwakw.\nThe Kwakwaka\u02bcwakw today number about 5,500, who live in British Columbia on northern Vancouver Island and the mainland. They are also known as \"Kwakiutl\" in English, from one of their tribes, but they prefer their autonym \"Kwakwaka\u02bcwakw\". Their indigenous language, part of the Wakashan family, is Kwak\u02bcwala. The name Kwakwaka\u02bcwakw means \"speakers of Kwak\u02bcwala\". The language is now spoken by less than 5% of the population\u2014about 250 people. Today, 17 separate tribes make up the Kwakwaka\u02bcwakw. Some Kwakwaka\u02bcwakw groups are now extinct. Kwak\u02bcwala is a Northern Wakashan language, a grouping shared with Haisla, Heiltsuk and Wuikyala. Kwakwaka\u02bcwakw centres of population on Vancouver Island include communities such as Fort Rupert, Alert Bay and Quatsino, the Kwakwaka\u02bcwakw tradition of the potlatch was banned by the federal government of Canada in 1885, but has been revived in recent decades.\nNuu-chah-nulth.\nThe Nuu-chah-nulth (pronounced [nu\u02d0\u02a7an\u02c0u\u026c]), are indigenous peoples in Canada. Their traditional home is on the west coast of Vancouver Island. In pre-contact and early post-contact times, the number of nations was much greater, but as in the rest of the region, smallpox and other consequences of contact resulted in the disappearance of some groups and the absorption of others into neighbouring groups.\nThey were among the first Pacific peoples north of California to come into contact with Europeans, as the Spanish, Americans and British attempted to secure control of the Pacific Northwest and the trade in otter pelts, with Nootka Sound becoming a focus of these rivalries. The Nuu-chah-nulth speak a Southern Wakashan language and are closely related to the Makah of the Olympic Peninsula, Washington state and the Ditidaht.\nCoast Salish.\nThe Coast Salish are the largest of the southern groups. They are a loose grouping of many tribes with numerous distinct cultures and historically speak one of the Coast Salish languages. On Vancouver Island, Coast Salish peoples' territory traditionally spans from the northern limit of the Strait of Georgia on the east side of Vancouver Island and covers most of southern Vancouver Island. Distinct nations within the Coast Salish peoples on Vancouver Island include the Stz'uminus, the K\u02bc\u00f3moks of the Comox Valley area, the Cowichan of the Cowichan Valley, the Esquimalt, the Saanich of the Saanich Peninsula, the Songhees of the Victoria area and the Snuneymuxw in the Nanaimo area.\nEuropean exploration.\nEuropeans began to explore the island in 1774 when rumours of Russian fur traders caused Spain to send a number of expeditions to assert its long-held claims to the Pacific Northwest. The first expedition was that of the \"Santiago\", under the command of Juan Jos\u00e9 P\u00e9rez Hern\u00e1ndez. In 1775, a second Spanish expedition under the Spanish Peruvian captain Juan Francisco de la Bodega y Quadra was sent. By 1776, Spanish exploration had reached Bucareli Bay including the mouth of the Columbia River between Oregon and Washington, and Sitka Sound.\nVancouver Island came to the attention of Britain after the third voyage of Captain James Cook, who spent a month during 1778 at Nootka Sound, on the island's western coast. Cook claimed it for Great Britain. Maritime fur trader, John Meares arrived in 1786 and set up a single-building trading post near the native village of Yuquot (Friendly Cove), at the entrance to Nootka Sound in 1788. The fur trade began expanding into the island, eventually leading to permanent settlement.\nDispute over sovereignty.\nThe island was further explored by Spain in 1789 with Esteban Jos\u00e9 Mart\u00ednez, who established the settlement of Yuquot and the artillery battery of Fort San Miguel at Friendly Cove, which Spain called Puerto de San Lorenzo de Nuca. This was to be the only Spanish settlement, as well as a whaling factory in Red Bay, Labrador, in what would later be Canada. Asserting their claim of exclusive sovereignty and navigation rights, the Spanish force seized the Portuguese-flagged British ships.\nBritish naval captain George Vancouver was sent to Nootka Sound in 1792 in order to negotiate a settlement. His Spanish counterpart in the negotiations was Juan Francisco de la Bodega y Quadra, who was commandant of Santa Cruz de Nuca in 1792. Vancouver had sailed as a midshipman with Cook. The negotiations between Vancouver and Bodega y Quadra ended in a deadlock with nothing resolved. Vancouver insisted the entire Spanish establishment be turned over, but Bodega y Quadra held that there were no buildings seized in 1789, and the only possible land was a tiny and useless cove nearby. The two decided to refer the entire matter back to their respective governments. The friendly meeting between Bodega y Quadra and Vancouver led the former to propose that the island be named after both: \"Quadra and Vancouver Island\", which became the original name. While we know this island today as \"Vancouver Island\", the British explorer had not intentionally meant to name such a large body of land solely after himself. In his September 1792 dispatch log report for the British Admiralty, Captain Vancouver reveals that his decision here was rather meant to honour a request by Bodega y Quadra that Vancouver:\nwould name some port or island after us both in commemoration of our meeting and friendly intercourse that on that occasion had taken place (Vancouver had previously feted Bodega y Quadra on his ship); ...and conceiving no place more eligible than the place of our meeting, I have therefore named this land ... The Island of Quadra and Vancouver.\nBodega y Quadra wrote, however, that it was Vancouver who made the suggestion of combining their names to designate some geographical feature.\nIn 1792, the Spanish explorer Dionisio Alcal\u00e1 Galiano and his crew were the first Europeans to circumnavigate Vancouver Island. On April 8, 1806, Captain John D'Wolf of Bristol, Rhode Island, sailed the \"Juno\" to Nahwitti (Newettee), a small inlet in the northwestern promontory of Vancouver's Island. The captain described Newettee as one of the southernmost harbours frequented by American fur traders at 51 degrees north and 128 degrees west. He relates that since Captain Robert Gray of Tiverton, Rhode Island, had sailed the Columbia River in 1792, the trade of the northwest coast had been almost entirely in the hands of Boston merchants, so much so that the natives called all traders \"Boston Men\".\nA settlement was not successfully negotiated and ownership of the island remained in dispute between the Kingdom of Great Britain and the Spanish Empire in the early 1790s. The two countries nearly began a war over the issue; the confrontation became known as the Nootka Crisis. That was averted when both agreed to recognize the other's rights to the area in the first Nootka Convention in 1790, a first step to peace. Finally, the two countries signed the second Nootka Convention in 1793 and the third Convention in 1794. As per that final agreement, the Spanish dismantled their fort at Nootka and left the area, giving the British sovereignty over Vancouver Island and the adjoining islands (including the Gulf Islands).\nFor decades, Quadra's and Vancouver's Island was the most prominent name on maps of the coast, and appeared on most British, French and Spanish maps of the period. But as Spanish interests in the region dwindled, so did the use of Bodega y Quadra's name. The Hudson's Bay Company played a major part in the transition; by 1824 'Vancouver's Island' had become the usual designation in its correspondence for the island.\nA quarter of a century later, Vancouver Island had become such a well-known geographical feature that the founding of the Colony of Vancouver Island in 1849 gave this name full official status. Period references to \"Vancouver\" referred to Vancouver Island until the naming of the city of Vancouver in 1885.\nBritish settlement.\nBy March 1843, James Douglas of the Hudson's Bay Company and a missionary had arrived and selected an area for settlement. Construction of the fort began in June of that year. This settlement was a fur trading post originally named Fort Albert (afterward Fort Victoria). The fort was located at the Songhees settlement of Camosack (Camosun), northwest of the present-day Empress Hotel on Victoria's Inner Harbour.\nIn 1846, the Oregon Treaty, which ended the Oregon boundary dispute, was signed by the British and the United States to settle the question of the U.S. Oregon Country borders. The Treaty made the 49th parallel latitude north the official border between the two countries. In order to ensure that Britain retained all of Vancouver Island and the southern Gulf Islands, however, it was agreed that the border would swing south around that area.\nIn 1849, the Colony of Vancouver Island was established. The Colony was leased to the Hudson's Bay Company (HBC) for an annual fee of seven shillings; the company's responsibility in return was to increase the population by promoting colonization. The first independent settler arrived that year: Captain Walter Grant started a homestead in Sooke. Following the brief governorship of Richard Blanshard, James Douglas, Chief Factor of the Hudson's Bay post, assumed the role in 1851.\nThe island's first legislative assembly was formed in 1856. Government buildings were built and were occupied in 1859; the replacement, today's Parliament Buildings, were opened in 1898.\nFort Victoria had become an important base when prospectors, miners and merchants began arriving for the Fraser Canyon Gold Rush in 1858. The Hudson's Bay lease expired in 1859 and the island reverted to Great Britain. The burgeoning town was incorporated as Victoria in 1862. Victoria became the capital of the colony of Vancouver Island, retaining this status when the island was amalgamated with the mainland in 1866.\nA British naval base, including Esquimalt Royal Navy Dockyard and a naval hospital, was established at Esquimalt in 1865 and eventually taken over by the Canadian military. Today, as CFB Esquimalt, it is the home port of the Maritime Forces Pacific and parts are designated as National Historic Sites of Canada.\nUnion and Confederation.\nThe economic situation of the colony declined following the Cariboo Gold Rush of 1861\u20131862, and pressure grew for amalgamation of the colony with the mainland colony of British Columbia (which had been established in 1858). The two colonies were merged in 1866 into the United Colonies of Vancouver Island and British Columbia by the Act for the Union of the colonies, passed by the Imperial Parliament. Arthur Kennedy was appointed governor of the united entity. (He would leave office in 1866 and later became Governor of the West African Settlements, British West Africa.) Victoria became the capital but the legislative assembly was located in New Westminster on the Lower Mainland. The capital was moved to Victoria in 1868.\nConfederation.\nBy 1867, Canada was established by the first of the British North America Acts, the \"Constitution Act, 1867\" and the United Colonies joined Canada on 20 July 1871 through the British Columbia Terms of Union, following negotiations that secured the interests of the colonial elite in relation to a rail connection that would unite the colonies with the rest of Canada, establish Indian lands policy that would effectively perpetuate BC's pre-Confederation practices, and enshrine colonial officials' security of position. Victoria was named the capital of the province of British Columbia. Three delegates were appointed to the federal government.\nGeography.\nVancouver Island is located in the southwestern corner of the province of British Columbia. It is separated from the mainland of British Columbia by Johnstone Strait and Queen Charlotte Strait on the north and northeast, and by the Strait of Georgia on the southeast, which along with the Strait of Juan de Fuca along its southwest separate it from the United States. West of the island is the open Pacific Ocean, while to its north is Queen Charlotte Sound. The Straits of Georgia and Juan de Fuca are now officially part of the Salish Sea, which also includes Puget Sound.\nThe Vancouver Island Ranges run most of the length of the island, dividing it into a wet and rugged west coast and a drier, more rolling east coast. The highest point in these ranges and on the island is the Golden Hinde, at . Located near the centre of Vancouver Island in Strathcona Provincial Park, it is part of a group of peaks that include the only glaciers on the island, the largest of which is the Comox Glacier. The west coast shoreline is rugged and in many places mountainous, characterized by its many fjords, bays, and inlets. The interior of the island has many lakes (Kennedy Lake, north of Ucluelet, is the largest) and rivers.\nThe 49th parallel north crosses the island just north of Ladysmith on the east and Ucluelet on the west, while the 50th parallel north passes through Campbell River.\nSouthern Vancouver Island is typically considered to refer to the area south of Courtenay, while Northern Vancouver Island, or the northern region of the island, begins in the area an hour north of Campbell River towards Sayward. Those cities and the area between Southern and Northern Vancouver Island, such as Nanaimo, Parksville, Qualicum Beach, Deep Bay, and Port Alberni, make up the Central Island region\".\nRivers.\nThere are a number of rivers draining the island, some of which though short are large in volume. Among the more notable rivers are the Somass River in the Alberni Valley, the Nimpkish River in the North Island region, the Englishman River up island from Nanaimo near Parksville, and the Cowichan River whose basin forms the Cowichan Valley region in the South Island region.\nClimate.\nThe climate of Vancouver Island is the mildest in Canada, with temperatures on the coast even in January being usually above . In summer, the warmest days usually have a maximum of . The southeastern part of the island notably has a warm summer (Csb) Mediterranean climate with numerous vineyards.\nThe rain shadow effect of the island's mountains, as well as the mountains of Washington's Olympic Peninsula, creates wide variation in precipitation. The west coast is considerably wetter than the east coast. Average annual precipitation ranges from at Hucuktlis Lake on the west coast (making it the wettest place in North America) to only at Victoria Gonzales, the driest recording station in the provincial capital of Victoria. Precipitation is heaviest in the autumn and winter. Snow is rare at low altitudes, but is common on the island's mountaintops in winter. Skiing is popular at Mount Washington in the mid-island, with an elevation of .\nA notable feature of Vancouver Island is the extension of summer dryness to latitudes as high as 50\u00a0\u00b0N. Only in the extreme north of the island near Port Hardy is the rainfall of the driest summer month as much as \"one fifth\" that of the wettest months from November to March. West coasts of other continents at similar latitudes have a practically even distribution of rainfall throughout the year.\nGeology.\nVancouver Island is mostly made up of volcanic and sedimentary rock which were formed offshore on the now disappeared Kula oceanic plate. Around 55\u00a0million years ago during the Paleogene Period, a microplate of the Kula Plate subducted below the North American continental margin with great strain. A volcanic arc on the surface of the Kula Plate was thus accreted and fused onto the western edge of North America. These terranes were subjected to extreme warping from continued subduction of the Kula plate, leading to the formation of the distorted Insular Mountains. Much of the central mountainous region around Strathcona Park is part of the Karmutsen Formation, which is a sequence of tholeiitic pillow basalts and breccias. Since Vancouver Island has become an accretionary wedge on the North American continent, the Kula Plate has fully subducted beneath it and the remnants of the Farallon Plate, the Juan de Fuca Plate, are now subducting below the island. This process has led to Vancouver Island being one of the most seismically active regions in Canada. The Cascadia subduction zone off the coast of the island forms a section of the Ring of Fire. The area has been known to host megathrust earthquakes in the past, the last being the Cascadia earthquake of 1700. The Forbidden Plateau, in the east of the Vancouver Island Ranges, was the epicentre of the 1946 Vancouver Island earthquake that registered 7.3 on the moment magnitude scale, the strongest ever recorded on land in Canada.\nVancouver Island was the location of the observation of the episodic tremor and slip (ETS) seismic phenomenon.\nEcology.\nVancouver Island lies in the temperate rainforest biome. On the southern and eastern portions of the island, this is characterized by Douglas fir, western red cedar, arbutus (or madrone), Garry oak, salal, Oregon grape, and manzanita; moreover, Vancouver Island is the location where the Douglas fir was first recorded by Archibald Menzies. Vancouver Island is also the location where some of the tallest Douglas fir were recorded. This southeastern portion of the island is the most heavily populated region of Vancouver Island and a major area for recreation. The northern, western, and most of the central portions of the island are home to the coniferous \"big trees\" associated with British Columbia's coast \u2013 western hemlock, western red cedar, Pacific silver fir, yellow cedar, Douglas fir, grand fir, Sitka spruce, and western white pine. It is also characterised by bigleaf maple, red alder, sword fern, and red huckleberry.\nThe fauna of Vancouver Island is similar to that found on the mainland coast, with some notable exceptions and additions. For example, mountain goats, moose, coyotes, porcupines, skunks, chipmunks, and numerous species of small mammals, while plentiful on the mainland, are absent from Vancouver Island. Grizzly bears are absent from the island, where black bears are prevalent, but in 2016, a pair of grizzlies were sighted swimming between smaller islands off the coast near Port McNeill. Vancouver Island does support most of Canada's Roosevelt elk, however, and several mammal species and subspecies, such as the Vancouver Island marmot are unique to the island. Columbian black-tailed deer are plentiful, even in suburban areas such as in Greater Victoria, as well as the native Douglas squirrels. The Eastern grey squirrel is found in the south and is considered invasive for its voracious appetite and scaring away of the Douglas squirrels. The island has the most concentrated population of cougars in North America. The Vancouver Island wolf, a subspecies of grey wolf, is found only on the north part of the island. Harbour seals and river otters are common.\nResident orcas live in two major groups, one in the waters of the south island and one in the north, while a third group of transient orcas roam much farther and avoid the resident orcas. Residents are watched from a distance and are numbered, with many being named as well. Humpback whales and grey whales are often seen on their migration between Alaskan waters where they feed in the summer and southern waters such as around California and Mexico where they give birth in the winter.\nThe island's rivers, lakes, and coastal regions are renowned for their fisheries of trout, salmon, and steelhead.\nAfter near-total extirpation by fur traders in the 18th and 19th centuries, sea otters (\"Enhydra lutris\") were protected by an international treaty in 1911. Despite protection, the remnant population off Vancouver Island died out with the last sea otter taken near Kyuquot in 1929. From 1969 to 1972, 89 sea otters were flown or shipped from Alaska to the west coast of Vancouver Island. This population expanded to over 3,000 as of 2005[ [update]], and their range on the island's west coast expanded from Cape Scott in the north to Barkley Sound to the south.\nDemographics.\nThe majority of Vancouver Island's population lives in the Capital Regional District, more specifically in the primate city and the provincial capital of Victoria. With a population of 397,237 (2021), Greater Victoria is the island's largest population centre and one of its two census metropolitan areas. The island's other metropolitan area is Nanaimo, which has a population of 115,459 as of 2021. There are also five census agglomeration areas (Alberni Valley, Campbell River, Comox Valley, Cowichan Valley, and Oceanside) as defined by Statistics Canada.\nEconomy.\nTechnology.\nWithin the island's largest city, Victoria, there is a significant IT and technology industry. According to the Victoria Advanced Technology Council website, over 800 technology companies operate in the Victoria area, with combined annual revenues of $1.95\u00a0billion.\nHigh-speed internet is delivered to the island by Shaw Communications, Telus, and various local providers with their own networks. Wireless Internet connections can be found all over the island, many free for public use.\nThe island generates much of its own power at several hydroelectric stations, but increased demand has required the construction of several high-voltage power cables, both HVDC and AC, connecting to the Canadian Mainland since 1968.\nLogging.\nOutside of Victoria, Vancouver Island's economy is largely dominated by the forestry industry. Many of the logging operations are for export, although, historically, were for sawn lumber and pulp and paper operations. Recently, rotations are much shorter than the historical 80 years. Logging operations involving old-growth forests such as those found in Clayoquot Sound are controversial and, due to the Clayoquot protests, gained international attention through the efforts of activists and environmental organizations. Another source of controversy all over the island are logging operations occurring in community watersheds.\nFishing.\nFishing plays a large role in the lives of many islanders. Commercial fishing vessels operate out of the island's ports and harbours, and coastal fish farms produce many tons of Atlantic salmon yearly.\nTourism.\nIn recent years the government of British Columbia has engaged in an advertising program to draw more tourists to beach resorts in places such as Tofino and Ucluelet. Sport fishing, whale watching, hiking, scuba diving, surfing, and skiing are just a few things for which tourists visit Vancouver Island. Visitors also come to see Victoria's 19th-century architecture, and the many villages which line the coast such as Cowichan Bay, Chemainus, and Qualicum Beach. The cities of Victoria and Nanaimo also draw large numbers of visitors, and in 2022 the Vancouver Island tourism region generated $3.2 billion of gross spending in the region, accounting for approximately 18% of BC's total overnight spending.\nFood products.\nConsumer food products companies also exist in the various cities and towns on Vancouver Island. Bakeries, dairies, food processing plants, breweries, wineries, of varying size and scope, are found all along the island. Some of these organizations have international customer reach. \nAgriculture is confined primarily to the fertile soils found in low-lying areas on the southern and eastern portions of the island. Those areas have the best climate for agricultural production. The total amount of farmland area on Vancouver Island in 2021 was over {{Convert|41,000|ha|acre}}.\nEducation.\nVancouver Island is home to a handful of universities, several colleges and trade-schools, hundreds of public schools, and a few dozen private schools (including Montessori and Waldorf schools).\nPublic school districts.\nThere are 12 school districts on Vancouver Island with several elementary, junior high, and high schools in each. Three school districts are in the Greater Victoria area and the other eight cover the rest of the island to the north. All public schooling falls under the jurisdiction of the British Columbia Ministry of Education.\nTransport.\nSea.\nMarine transport is very important to Vancouver Island for access to the mainland of British Columbia and Washington. There are no bridges or tunnels connecting the island to the mainland, although the idea of building one has been brought up many times. Major technical issues and cost are the largest barriers to a fixed link currently, though exact public support for the idea is not currently known. The only vehicle access to Vancouver Island is by ferry. BC Ferries, Washington State Ferries and Puget Sound Navigation Company (Black Ball Transport) operate the seven vehicle-ferry routes to the island.\nIn the 1860s a plan was started to link Vancouver Island to the mainland at Bute Inlet, by a bridge, using Ripple Rock as a mid-support for the bridge. This plan continued through the years, and caused political opposition to destroying Ripple Rock until it was decided to destroy the rock to improve safety for mariners.\n Crossing time: 1 hour 35 minutes; 8 sailings per day year-round with added sailings depending on day and season)\n Crossing time: 2 hours; 8 round trips daily \u2013 varies in winter.\n Crossing time: 1 hour 35 minutes; Sailings every 2 hours with extra sailings during the summer and holidays.\n Crossing time: 35 minutes- 3 hours depending on island of departure; 4 or more trips daily.\n Crossing time: 1 hour 20 minutes; 4 round trips daily.\n Service daily or on alternate days; changes seasonally.\n Crossing time: 2 hours (not counting stops in the San Juan Islands)\n Note that this ferry service is inactive.\n According to the Washington State Department of Transport: International service to and from Sidney, B.C. remains suspended until further notice due to continued significant crewing and vessel availability challenges. There will be no service to and from Sidney through at least Spring of 2030.\n Crossing time: 1 hour 30 minutes; 1 to 4 round trips daily; changes seasonally.\n Crossing time: 1 hour 15 minutes; 3 to 6 round trips daily\n Crossing time: 2 hour 45 minutes; 1 to 3 round trips daily\nRail.\nIsland Corridor Foundation (ICF) was established in 2006 for the purpose of owning and managing the former Esquimalt and Nanaimo (E&amp;N) Rail Corridor on Vancouver Island now known as the Island Rail Corridor. The ICF established a contract with Southern Railway of British Columbia (SRY) to move all rail freight on the Island to and from the Lower Mainland. SRY assumed operational control from RailAmerica in July 2006 and currently only offers local freight service on the Nanaimo segment of the Victoria\u2013Courtenay mainline (called the Victoria Subdivision by the railroad). The Port Alberni branch line (called the Port Alberni Subdivision by the railroad) has been out of service since 2002. Passenger service, which had been operated by VIA Rail under contract, was halted in 2011 after it was identified that a portion of the line failed to meet operating requirements for passenger service. Since then, there have been ongoing efforts to secure funding from various levels of government to complete the necessary repairs, but the issue remains fluid.\nWestern Forest Products operated the Englewood Railway which was Canada's last logging railway, running from Woss to Beaver Cove on the northern end of the island. The former Canadian National Railway line running from Victoria to the Cowichan Valley was abandoned in the late 1980s/early 1990s, and the former grade between Victoria and Sooke is now the multi-use Galloping Goose Regional Trail. The BC Forest Discovery Centre has a narrow-gauge railway winding around the park, and the Alberni Pacific Railway operates a tour train during the summer from the restored E&amp;N Railway station in Port Alberni to the McLean's Mill on former E&amp;N Railway trackage that is now owned by the ICF.\nRoad.\nThere is one major north\u2013south highway system on the island, which runs along the eastern side. It begins in Victoria as Highway 1 which is part of the Trans-Canada Highway system as far as Nanaimo. There, Highway 19 takes over and continues to Port Hardy. The route is a patchwork of two-, four-, and six-lane roadways between Victoria and Port Hardy. The engineering characteristics and traffic control systems of the roadway vary widely from one city or district to the next and include the following variations:\nTrans-Canada Highway:\nHighway 19:\nProposals have been made for a mainland-to-island fixed link for over a century. Because of the extreme depth and soft seabed of the Georgia Strait, and the potential for seismic activity, a bridge or tunnel would face monumental engineering, safety, and environmental challenges at a prohibitive cost.\nAnother north\u2013south route is Highway 17 a four-lane divided highway that has a mix of interchanges and traffic lights. It connects Victoria with the Saanich Peninsula, terminating the Vancouver Island portion of its route at the Swartz Bay ferry terminal.\nThe main east\u2013west routes are mostly two-lane but are generally free of the congestion seen on some of the four-lane highways. They comprise the following:\nVancouver Island is also well served by secondary routes, a growing number of which have efficient roundabouts in place of the traffic lights that can back up traffic on the main highway routes. Numerous active and decommissioned logging and forest service roads provide access to the backcountry.\nMany communities are served by public and private transit. Greater Victoria is one of the few places in North America where double-decker buses are used in the regular public transit system. Tofino Bus All Island Express serves all major cities on Vancouver Island.\nAir.\nThere are 52 certified airports, registered aerodromes and heliports on Vancouver Island. This number includes seven aerodromes and airports in Greater Victoria.\nVictoria International Airport, {{airport codes|YYJ|CYYJ}}, is the major airport on Vancouver Island. In 2018, it was the 11th busiest airport in Canada in terms of passenger movements (1,924,385). As of 2020, carriers include Air Canada Express, Air Canada Rouge, Air North, Alaska Airlines, Pacific Coastal Airlines, WestJet and WestJet Encore. They offer a variety of direct flights of short and medium distances including to and from Seattle, Calgary, Edmonton, Vancouver, Whitehorse and Toronto. Air Canada Rouge, Pacific Coastal Airlines, Sunwing Airlines, Swoop and WestJet offer seasonal services to several destinations including Mexico.\nOther land-based airports with scheduled services are Campbell River, CFB Comox, (Comox Valley Airport), Nanaimo, Port Hardy, Qualicum Beach and Tofino/Long Beach. In addition, there are seven water airports with scheduled services, Campbell River, Comox, Nanaimo Harbour, Port Alberni, Tofino Harbour, Victoria and Victoria Inner Harbour.\nMuch of the floatplane traffic is downtown-to-downtown service between Victoria Inner Harbour, Nanaimo Harbour and Vancouver Harbour, the primary carriers being Harbour Air Seaplanes, Seair Seaplanes and Corilair. Harbour Air also flies to other areas around Vancouver, service to Kenmore Air Harbor Seaplane Base on Seattle's Lake Union is provided by Kenmore Air. Smaller airlines include Tofino Air, Pacific Seaplanes and Sunshine Coast Air. These carriers make several daily scheduled flights, weather permitting. Helicopter service is provided by Helijet in Victoria and various private operators elsewhere."}
{"id": "53101", "revid": "44161768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53101", "title": "Natal (province)", "text": "Province of South Africa, 1910 to 1994\nThe Province of Natal (), commonly called Natal, was a province of South Africa from May 1910 until May 1994. Its capital was Pietermaritzburg. During this period rural areas inhabited by the black African population of Natal were organised into the Bantustan of KwaZulu, which was progressively separated from the province, becoming partially autonomous in 1981. For the significant population of Indian South Africans residing in Natal, the third-largest city of Durban was organised for them. Of the white population mostly in the largest city of Johannesburg, the majority were English-speaking people of British descent, causing Natal to become the only province to vote \"No\" to the creation of a republic in the referendum of 1960, due to very strong monarchist, pro-British Commonwealth, and anti-secessionist sentiment. In the latter part of the 1980s, Natal was in a state of violence between the Inkatha Freedom Party and the African National Congress, with violence subsiding soon after the first non-racial election in 1994.\nIn 1994, the KwaZulu Bantustan was reincorporated into the territory of Natal and the province was redesignated as KwaZulu-Natal.\nDistricts in 1991.\nDistricts of the province and population at the time of the 1991 census.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53103", "revid": "20507308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53103", "title": "David Copperfield (disambiguation)", "text": "David Copperfield is a novel by Charles Dickens.\nDavid Copperfield may also refer to:\nFilm.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "53104", "revid": "7745", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53104", "title": "Software patch", "text": ""}
{"id": "53107", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53107", "title": "East Midlands", "text": "Region of England\nThe East Midlands is one of nine official regions of England. It comprises the eastern half of the area traditionally known as the Midlands. It consists of Derbyshire, Leicestershire, Lincolnshire (except for North Lincolnshire and North East Lincolnshire), Northamptonshire, Nottinghamshire, and Rutland. The region has a land area of , with an estimated population 5,063,164 in 2024. With a sufficiency-level world city ranking, Nottingham is the only settlement in the region to be classified by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network.\nThe main cities in the region are Derby, Leicester, Lincoln and Nottingham. The largest towns in these counties are Boston, Chesterfield, Coalville, Corby, Glossop, Grantham, Kettering, Loughborough, Newark-on-Trent, Northampton, Mansfield, Oakham, Swadlincote and Wellingborough.\nPhysical features.\nThe highest point at is Kinder Scout, in the Peak District of the southern Pennines in northwest Derbyshire near Glossop. Other hilly areas of in altitude, together with lakes and reservoirs, rise in and around the Charnwood Forest north of Leicester, and in the Lincolnshire Wolds.\nThe region's major rivers, the Nene, the Soar, the Trent, and the Welland, flow in a northeasterly direction towards the Humber and the Wash. The Derwent, conversely, rises in the High Peak before flowing south to join the Trent some before its conflux with the Soar, and the Witham flows in an arch, first north to Lincoln before heading south to the Wash.\nThe centre of the East Midlands area lies roughly between Bingham, Nottinghamshire and Bottesford, Leicestershire. The geographical centre of England lies in Higham on the Hill in west Leicestershire, close to the boundary between the Leicestershire and Warwickshire. Some 88 per cent of the land is rural in character, although agriculture accounts for less than three per cent of the region's jobs.\nChurch Flatts Farm in Coton in the Elms, South Derbyshire, is the furthest place from the sea in the UK (). In April 1936 the first Ordnance Survey trig point was sited at Cold Ashby in Northamptonshire. The Royal Society of Wildlife Trusts and The Wildlife Trusts are based next to the River Trent and Newark Castle railway station. The National Centre for Earth Observation is at the University of Leicester.\nGeology.\nThe region is home to large quantities of limestone, and the East Midlands Oil Province. Charnwood Forest is noted for its abundant levels of volcanic rock, estimated to be approximately 600\u00a0million years old.\nA quarter of the UK's cement is manufactured in the region, at three sites in Hope and Tunstead in Derbyshire, and Ketton Cement Works in Rutland. Of the aggregates produced in the region, 25 per cent are from Derbyshire and four per cent from Leicestershire. Lincolnshire and Nottinghamshire each produce around 30 per cent of the region's sand and gravel output.\nBarwell in Leicestershire was the site of Britain's largest meteorite () on 24 December 1965. The 2008 Lincolnshire earthquake was 5.2 in magnitude.\nEnvironment.\nAreas of the East Midlands designated by the East Midlands Biodiversity Partnership as Biodiversity Conservation Areas include:\nAreas of the East Midlands designated by the East Midlands Biodiversity Partnership as Biodiversity Enhancement Areas include:\nTwo of the nationally designated Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty are:\nForestry.\nSeveral towns in the southern part of the region, including Market Harborough, Desborough, Rothwell, Corby, Kettering, Thrapston, Oundle and Stamford, lie within the boundaries of what was once Rockingham Forest \u2013 designated a royal forest by William the Conqueror and was long hunted by English kings and queens.\nThe National Forest is an environmental project in central England run by The National Forest Company. Areas of north Leicestershire, south Derbyshire and south-east Staffordshire covering around are being planted in an attempt to blend ancient woodland with new plantings. It stretches from the western outskirts of Leicester in the east to Burton upon Trent in the west, and is planned to link the ancient forests of Needwood and Charnwood.\nSherwood Forest in Nottinghamshire attracts many visitors, and is perhaps best known for its ties with the legend of Robin Hood.\nGovernance.\nRegional financial funding decisions for the East Midlands are taken by East Midlands Councils, based in Melton Mowbray. East Midlands Councils is an unelected body made up of representatives of local government in the region. The defunct East Midlands Development Agency was headquartered next to the BBC's East Midlands office in Nottingham and made financial decisions regarding economic development in the region. Since the Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition government launched its austerity programme after the 2010 general election, regional bodies such as those have been devolved to smaller groups on a county level. As a region, there is no overriding body with significant financial or planning powers for the East Midlands.\nThe East Midlands Combined Authority was established in 2024.\nUrban areas.\nThe East Midlands region contains many urban areas which include:\nTowns and cities.\nMajor towns and cities in the East Midlands region include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTransport.\nIn total, 9% of all jobs in the region are in logistics. Traffic in the region is growing at 2% per year \u2013 the highest growth rate of all UK regions. It is estimated that about 140,000 heavy goods vehicle journeys are made inside the region each day.\nRoad.\nThe M1 (part of the E13 European route) serves the four largest urban areas in the region and affords a motorway link between London, Yorkshire, and North East England. Additionally, the M6 begins on the south-western edge of the region, providing links to the West Midlands and North West England. Both connect to other major routes providing further links to other parts of the UK.\nTo the east of the largest cities lies the A1 (part of the European route E15), which is important for journeys to and from ports on England's north-east coast and the capital, and is a major artery for the United Kingdom's agricultural industry. The A46 largely follows the Fosse Way, which has linked the south-western and north-eastern parts of England since Roman times. The A43 dual carriageway connects the East Midlands via the M40 motorway corridor with the university city of Oxford, as well as South of England and Solent ports further afield. The historically important A5 runs along the south-west Leicestershire boundary to the south of Lutterworth and Hinckley. The A14 runs through the north of Northamptonshire, serving the settlements of Kettering and Corby alongside surrounding areas, and is a major route between the region and the East of England, including the university city of Cambridge, and the major port of Felixstowe.\nAirports.\nEast Midlands Airport in North West Leicestershire is situated in proximity to the region's largest cities; from the centres of Derby and Nottingham, with central Leicester being away and Lincoln further north east being away. The airport is the region's biggest public airport, used by over 4\u00a0million passengers annually.\nRivalry between the region's three biggest cities has led to a long-running discussion about the identity of both the airport, and region, with the East Midlands rarely found on any non-political map of the UK. The name was at one point changed to Nottingham East Midlands Airport so as to include the name of the city that is supposedly most internationally recognisable. However, the airport has a Derby phone number and postcode, and is in Leicestershire, but is officially assigned to Nottingham by IATA. As a result of the dispute, the name change was reverted.\nThree of the world's four main international air-freight companies (integrators) have their UK operations at EMA: DHL, UPS and TNT Express (TNT bought by UPS); FedEx have theirs at Stansted. It is the second-largest freight airport in the UK after Heathrow, but most freight from EMA is carried on dedicated planes, whereas most freight from Heathrow is carried on passenger planes (bellyhold). Royal Mail have their main airport hubs at Heathrow and EMA, as EMA is conveniently near the M1, A42 and A50. Heathrow takes some 60 per cent of UK air freight, and EMA some 10 per cent, with Stansted, Manchester and Gatwick next. Air freight has grown at EMA from 1994 to 2004 from about 10,000 to over 250,000\u00a0tonnes. The main hours of cargo flying are from 20:00\u201305:00; domestic cargo flies into the airport in the evening, then from 23:30 to 01:30 cargo flies to European capitals and from 03:00\u201305:00 from Europe to EMA. It is the UK's twelfth-largest passenger airport; the runway is the UK's sixth-longest at . Royal Mail flights from EMA go to Belfast, Edinburgh, Inverness, Aberdeen, Newcastle, Exeter and Bournemouth, and it is the largest UK Royal Mail air hub, with eleven flights per night. DHL is the main route carrier at EMA by far with 20 flights per night, UPS have 6, and TNT have 2 (Belfast and Li\u00e8ge); for hubs in Europe, DHL flies to Leipzig, UPS to Cologne, and TNT at Li\u00e8ge.\nSmaller airports in the region include Retford Gamston Airport, Nottingham Airport, Leicester Airport, Hucknall Airfield, Sywell Aerodrome, Bruntingthorpe Aerodrome and Humberside Airport. Robin Hood Airport Doncaster Sheffield lies just outside the East Midlands in South Yorkshire.\nRailway.\nThree of the United Kingdom's mainline railways serve the region: the Midland Main Line, the East Coast Main Line, and the West Coast Main Line (Northampton Loop) providing services terminating at London St Pancras, London King's Cross and London Euston respectively. The three lines provide regular high-speed services to London, at up to , serving Wellingborough, Kettering, Corby, Market Harborough, Leicester, Loughborough, Derby, East Midlands Parkway, Nottingham, Chesterfield, Grantham, Newark North Gate and Retford. Northampton and Long Buckby are served by the Northampton Loop of the West Coast Main Line. England's primary south-west to north-east Cross Country Route runs through Derby and Chesterfield. Worksop, , Lincoln, Matlock, Melton Mowbray, Skegness, Boston, Spalding and Oakham are served by regional services The Chiltern Main Line also serves the western fringe of the region, at Kings's Sutton.\nA land speed record for trains was broken in the region. Although the record was set in 1938, the current world speed record for steam trains is held by 4468 \"Mallard\", which clocked between Grantham and Peterborough, pulling six coaches on the East Coast Main Line near Little Bytham in Lincolnshire, on 3 July 1938. The \"Mallard\" record was unbroken by any British rail train until 6 June 1973, when an InterCity 125 between Northallerton and Thirsk reached . \"Mallard\" in 1938 had six carriages and a dynamometer car. The national electric-train speed record (pre-High Speed 1) of was set on the same stretch as the Mallard record, on 17 September 1989 by Class 91 91010.\nThere were plans to bring a new high-speed rail line through the East Midlands as part of the High Speed 2 project, of which Phase 2 would have brought a new line connecting Birmingham to Leeds, with a proposed station in Toton known as the East Midlands Hub It would also have served the region via \"classic-compatible\" tracks serving Chesterfield and Sheffield, the latter of which is just outside the region in Yorkshire &amp; the Humber.\nWater.\nThe Trent is a navigable river used to transport goods to the Humber, as well as passing by many power stations. The Trent is the only river in England able to supply cooling water for power stations for most of its length; it has the largest water capacity in England, although it is not the longest.\nSeveral rivers in the region gave their name to early Rolls-Royce jet engines, namely the Nene, the Welland, and the Soar.\nTrams.\nNottingham is the only city in the region served by a light railway system, operated by Nottingham Express Transit.\nTransport policy.\nAs part of the transport planning system, the later defunct Regional Assembly was under statutory requirement to produce a Regional Transport Strategy to provide long term planning for transport in the region. This involved region wide transport schemes such as those carried out by the Highways Agency and Network Rail.\nLocal transport authorities in the region carry out planning through a Local Transport Plan (LTP). The most recent LTPs are for the period 2006\u201311. The following East Midland transport authorities published an LTP online: Derbyshire, Leicestershire. Lincolnshire, Northamptonshire, Nottinghamshire and Rutland U.A. The unitary authorities of Derby, Leicester and Nottingham They have each written a joint LTP in collaboration with their respective local county councils.\nHistory.\nRomans.\nA historical basis for such a region exists in the territory of the Corieltauvi tribe. When the Romans took control, they made Leicester (Ratae Corieltauvorum) one of their main forts. The main town in the region in Roman times was Lincoln, at the confluence of the Fosse Way and Ermine Street.\nAnglo-Saxons and the Danelaw.\nAfter the withdrawal of the Romans, the area was settled by Angles, a Germanic people who gave the East Midlands most of the place-names it has today. They eventually founded the Kingdom of Mercia, meaning \"borderlands,\" as it borders the Welsh people to the west. The region also corresponds to the later Five Boroughs of the Danelaw, the area that Vikings from Denmark controlled. In about 917 the region was subdivided between Danelaw (Vikings) to the north, and Mercia (Anglo-Saxons) to the south. By 920 this border had moved north to the River Humber. Evidence of the Danelaw can be seen in place-name endings of the region's villages, particularly towards the east. The Danes under Canute recaptured the area between about 1016 and 1035, but it came back under English control after Canute's death that same year.\nCivil War.\nThe region's two main battles in the English Civil War were the Battle of Naseby in northern Northamptonshire on 14 June 1645, and the Battle of Winceby on 11 October 1643 in eastern Lincolnshire.\nScientific heritage.\nIsaac Newton, born in Grantham in 1642, is perhaps the most prolific scientist. His accomplishments include calculus, Newton's laws of motion, and Newton's law of universal gravitation, among many others. There is a shopping centre named in his honour in Grantham. Thomas Simpson from Leicestershire is known for Simpson's rule. Roger Cotes invented the concept of the radian in 1714, but the term was not named until 1873.\nHenry Cavendish, loosely connected with Derbyshire, discovered hydrogen in 1766 (although the element's name came from Antoine Lavoisier), and Cavendish was the first to estimate an accurate mass of the Earth in 1798 in his Cavendish experiment. The Cavendish Laboratory at the University of Cambridge is named after a relative. Herbert Spencer coined the term \"survival of the fittest\" in 1864, which was once strongly linked with social Darwinism. Sir John Flamsteed was the first Astronomer Royal of the Royal Observatory, Greenwich in 1675. Robert Bakewell, of Dishley in Leicestershire and known for his English Leicester sheep, arrived at selective breeding; his English Longhorns were the first cattle bred for beef.\nGeorge Boole, pioneer of Boolean logic (upon which all digital electronics and computers depend), was born in Lincoln in 1815. The application of Boole's theory to digital circuit design would come in 1937 by Claude Shannon. Boole's grandson, the physicist G. I. Taylor, made significant experimental contributions to quantum mechanics. The first practical demonstration of radar was near Daventry in 1935. Robert Robinson, of Chesterfield in Derbyshire, invented the circular symbol in 1925 for the pi bonds of the benzene ring, as found on structural diagrams of aromatic compounds. Nicola Pellow, a maths undergraduate at Leicester Polytechnic, whilst at CERN in November 1990, wrote the world's second web browser.\nSilicone was discovered in 1899 by Prof Frederic Kipping at University College, Nottingham. Michael Creeth of Northampton discovered the hydrogen-bonding mechanism between DNA bases, allowing the structure of DNA to be discovered. Nottinghamshire's Ken Richardson was in charge of the team at Pfizer in Sandwich, Kent that in 1981 discovered Fluconazole (Diflucan), the world's leading antifungal medication, especially useful for those with weakened immune systems. It has few side effects. Richardson is one of the few Britons in the National Inventors Hall of Fame. Don Grierson at the University of Nottingham was the first to produce a Genetically modified tomato, which became the first GM food on sale in the UK and in the United States.\nLouis Essen, a Nottingham physicist, made advances in the quartz clock in the 1930s at the National Physical Laboratory in Teddington, to produce the quartz ring clock in 1938, and the caesium clock, known as the atomic clock, in 1955. During the war he invented the cavity resonance wavemeter to find the first accurate value of the speed of light. The atomic clock works on differences in magnetic spin. Before Essen's invention, the second was defined in terms of the orbit of the Earth round the Sun; he changed it in 1967 to be based on the hyperfine structure of the caesium-133 atom. Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), in Paris, takes the average of 300 atomic clocks around the world.\nOn the early morning of Tuesday 26 February 1935 the radio transmitter at Daventry was used for the \"Daventry Experiment\" which involved the first practical demonstration of radar, by its inventor Robert Watson-Watt and Arnold Frederic Wilkins. They used a radio receiver installed in a van at Litchborough (just off the A5 about south of Daventry) to receive signals bounced off a metal-clad Handley Page Heyford bomber flying across the radio transmissions. The interference picked up from the aircraft allowed its approximate navigational position to be estimated, and therefore proved that it was possible to detect the position of aircraft using radio waves. The success of the experiment persuaded the British government to fund the development of a network of full scale radar stations on the south coast of England, which became known as Chain Home, which provided a decisive advantage to the RAF in the Battle of Britain in 1940.\nCulture and identity.\nLanguage and dialect.\nParts of the East Midlands use a distinctive form of spoken dialect and accent. It also has some history in the beginnings of Received Pronunciation and southern England accents. However, spoken dialect and accent in the northern area of the East Midlands is far more similar to Northern English.\nIdentity.\nThere is no modern Midlander, or East Midlander, identity. As Robert Shore wrote: \"no one is more sceptical about the existence of an overarching Midland identity than Midlanders themselves.\" Inhabitants of the East Midlands tend to identify themselves either on a county or town basis, regarding the East Midlands as simply a bureaucratic area that lumps together dissimilar places. In the North of the region, in areas such as North Nottinghamshire and North Derbyshire, people culturally identify as Northerners. For example, a study by YouGov in 2018 found that a quarter of the inhabitants of the region identified as Northerners.\nA new area of the North Midlands has been proposed, but this has not taken off. In Bassetlaw, the most northern local authority in the East Midlands area, many of the shared services such as NHS are with South Yorkshire, not with other Midlands areas. The television signal comes mainly from the Emley Moor transmitting station, which broadcasts local news from BBC Look North and Calendar News. And its officially designated BBC Local Radio station in terms of radio coverage is BBC Radio Sheffield. In 2016 Bassetlaw District Council voted to become part of the Sheffield City Region because of the strong local ties.\nFood and cuisine.\nThe area is known historically for its food, examples of which include Red Leicester, the Lincolnshire sausage, the Melton Mowbray pork pie, Stilton, the Bakewell pudding, and the Bramley apple.\nThe arts.\nLord Byron and D. H. Lawrence are perhaps the region's best known authors, although the latter only gained full recognition in the late 20th century. The Key Words Reading Scheme (\"Peter and Jane\") was first produced in 1964 by Ladybird of Loughborough and is still in print. The books originated in 1948 with an idea from Douglas Keen of Heanor; the first was \"British Birds and Their Nests\". Ladybird Books were published in Loughborough throughout their 1960s and 1970s heyday, with the site closing in 1998.\nJoseph Wright of Derby was an artist whose paintings symbolised the struggle between science and religious values in the Age of Enlightenment. He was also suggested to be \"the first professional painter to express the spirit of the Industrial Revolution\".\nCharles Frederick Worth, born in Lincolnshire in 1825, is considered to be the founder of Parisian \"haute couture\", ostensibly as the world's first true fashion designer.\nReligion.\nWilliam Booth of Nottingham founded The Salvation Army in 1865. Another religious order, the Pilgrim Fathers, originated from Babworth near Retford. The Quakers, also known as the Religious Society of Friends, were founded by Leicestershire-born (Fenny Drayton) George Fox, who had an inspiration whilst living in Mansfield in 1647. Thomas Cranmer from Aslockton compiled the Church of England Book of Common Prayer.\nIndustrial heritage.\nThe region can claim the world's first factory, Sir Richard Arkwright's Cromford Mill. The world's oldest working factory can also be found in the area, producing textiles at Lea Bridge, owned by John Smedley. Both sites are part of the region's only World Heritage Site, the Derwent Valley Mills. An opportunist employee of the Derbyshire textile factories, Samuel Slater of Belper saw his chance and (illegally) eloped in 1789 to Rhode Island in the US after memorising the layout of the textile machinery while working at Jedediah Strutt's Milford Mill. He was warmly welcomed by the inhabitants of the newly formed USA, so much so that he was later named the \"Father of the American Industrial Revolution\".\nBritain's hosiery and knitwear industry was largely based in the region, and in the 1980s it had more textile workers than any other British region. The stocking frame was invented 1587 in Calverton, Nottinghamshire by Rev William Lee; these were the first known knitting machines and heralded the industrial revolution by providing the necessary machinery. The world's first (horse-powered) cotton mill was built in central Nottingham in 1768. Marvel's Mill in Northampton was the first cotton mill to be powered by water.\nJohn Barber of Nottinghamshire had invented a simple gas turbine in 1791 (when living in Nuneaton). Lincoln was the site of the first tank (first built on 8 September 1915, Little Willie was the first tank, and is the oldest surviving tank in the world, originally called the No.1 Lincoln Machine), and Grantham the first diesel engine (in 1892). The jet engine was first developed in the region in Lutterworth and Whetstone, with the VTOL engine also (initially) developed in Hucknall. The first jet aircraft flew from RAF Cranwell in May 1941. During the Second World War, Derby was an important strategic location, as it was in Derby that Rolls-Royce developed and manufactured their iconic Merlin aero-engine. During the Second World War, all of R-R's engineering staff had been transferred to Belper.\nDerby was home to two railway workshops, Derby Works and Derby Litchurch Lane Works initially for the Midland Railway, then the London, Midland &amp; Scottish Railway, and finally British Rail. British Rail Research Division in Derby invented the APT (British Rail Class 370) and Maglev. The first steel rails were laid in 1857 at Derby railway station for the Midland Railway. Derby Litchurch Lane Works remains in operation under the ownership of Alstom\nAt its peak, Corby Steelworks was the largest in Britain. The collapsible baby buggy was invented in 1965 at Barby, Northamptonshire by Owen Maclaren. Ford's \u00a38\u00a0million Daventry Parts Distribution Centre (Ford Parts Centre) was fully opened on 6 September 1972, the first southern section opened in 1968, and was the UK's largest building by floor area for many years at , and is situated opposite the Cummins factory.\nThe largest camera in the world was built in 1957 in Derby for Rolls-Royce, which weighed 27\u00a0tonnes and was around high, wide and long, with a lens made by Cooke Apochromatic. Cooke Optics and Taylor-Hobson were major supplier of lenses for Hollywood; \"Star Wars\" was filmed with their lenses, filmed in England. Horace W. Lee invented the inverted telephoto lens (known as the Ang\u00e9nieux retrofocus) in 1931, lengthening the back focal length of the camera for the 1930s Technicolor Process and for vignetting.\nArthur Warmisham of Taylor &amp; Hobson invented the first non-telescopic 35\u00a0mm zoom lens, the Cooke Varo 40\u2013\u00a0120mm Lens, in a camera manufactured by Bell &amp; Howell of the US. The popular 35\u00a0mm Eyemo film camera came with Cooke lenses. Much of World War II aerial photography, where definition was important, was through Cooke lenses, due to their Apochromatic process. In the 1950s and 1960s, the Cooke Speed Panchro lenses were the most popular choice for cinema films, then from the 1970s their Varotal zoom lens, which would win Gordon Henry Cook the 1988 Gordon E. Sawyer Award at the Oscars. Harold Hopkins (physicist), of Leicester, also did important work on the zoom lens (he largely invented it) and fibre-optics.\nJ. P. Knight of Nottingham is credited with inventing green and red traffic lights, installed in London on 9 December 1868, but these lasted only three weeks; traffic lights would be introduced only from the 1920s, again in London (from an American-led design scheme). The first modern-day traffic lights were installed in Piccadilly from August 1926. Edgar Purnell Hooley, a Nottinghamshire surveyor, in 1901 was in Denby and found a stretch of road surface that was smooth from an accidental leak of tar over the surface. He patented a process of mixing tar with chipped stones in 1902, forming Tarmac, a name which he patented. Radcliffe Road (A6011) in West Bridgford in 1902 was the first tarmac road ( long) in the world.\nMettoy was a firm in the St James area of Northampton, which from 1933 produced Corgi toys (mostly made in Swansea and designed in Northampton), and in the 1970s it made the space hopper; the company collapsed in 1983, moving to Swansea. In Leicestershire was Palitoy, another world-famous firm in Coalville; General Mills bought it in 1968, but production ceased in 1984 and the site was closed by Hasbro in 1994. Pedigree Dolls &amp; Toys (Sindy) was in Wellingborough, closing in 1982. The first plastic DVD case was made in Corby by Amaray. Britain's first out-of-town shopping centre was opened in November 1964 by GEM at West Bridgford, on a site later owned by ASDA.\nMuch integrated circuit and semiconductor research was carried out by Plessey at Caswell near Towcester, ahead of the achievements in America by Jack Kilby; Plessey invented a model of the integrated circuit in 1957. Caswell was later a site for manufacturing monolithic microwave integrated circuits in the 1990s by Marconi. On 15 December 1966, the first electronic telephone exchange in Europe opened at Ambergate in Derbyshire.\nTorksey railway viaduct, built across the Trent in 1849, is considered to be the first box girder bridge, designed by Sir John Fowler, 1st Baronet. The tallest freestanding structure in the region is the chimney of West Burton power station (north Nottinghamshire) at . Nottingham Combined Heating and Power Scheme is the largest district heating system in the UK, centred on the Eastcroft incinerator, opened in 1973.\nSecond World War.\nMost of the region was protected by a solitary RAF station, RAF Digby near Sleaford, part of No. 12 Group RAF and controlled from RAF Watnall. Within the East Midlands, only Nottingham was heavily bombed during the Second World War's Blitz, due to the presence of a large Royal Ordnance factory. However, much of the aerial obliteration of Germany was directed from the region, with two bomber groups based in Lincolnshire (No.1 and No.5), and a few squadrons in South Nottinghamshire. The proliferation of Second World War airfields in Lincolnshire led to it being known as Bomber County.\nRegional governance.\nThe government office region was created in 1994. Government funding decisions moved from Melton Mowbray (the East Midlands Regional Assembly) to Nottingham (the East Midlands Development Agency) in April 2010.\nDemographics.\nFor teenage pregnancy rates in the region, Nottingham is the top-tier authority. Of the council districts, Corby has the highest rate. Of the top-tier authorities, Rutland has the lowest rate for any district in England. The council district with the lowest rate is South Northamptonshire, although it has a rate greater than that of Rutland. Rutland has the highest total fertility rate for British counties (top-tier authorities). The borough of Boston has the highest TFR for district councils.\nThe region has the second-lowest overall population density in England (after South West England), eased by the low population density of Lincolnshire and Rutland. In 2007, the region had a lower percentage of degree-educated people than the English average. Of the region's population, 29.5 per cent live in rural areas.\nEthnicity.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSocial deprivation.\nThe region as a whole is less deprived than the West Midlands and regions in the North of England. By measurement of Lower Layer Super Output Areas, the East Midlands has more in common with the South of England (except London) than the North, in that it has more areas in the 20 per cent least deprived areas than the 20 per cent most deprived areas, but less so than regions in Southern England. This has been explained by academic statisticians, who claim the area straddles the north\u2013south divide.\nThe region does not show typical economic characteristics of Northern England (which the West Midlands does), although it is not as affluent as large parts of the South of England. Economically, the East Midlands bears a similarity to South West England.\nIn March 2011, the average unemployment claimant count for the region was 3.6 per cent. Nottingham and Leicester were the highest with 5.8 per cent each. Next were Corby and Lincoln with 4.9 per cent. The lowest were Rutland and South Northamptonshire with 1.4 per cent each, and Harborough, with 1.6 per cent.\nElections.\nThe East Midlands is represented by forty-seven Members of Parliament (MPs), a gain of one after the most recent Periodic Review. At the 2024 general election, the region elected twenty-nine Labour Party MPs, fifteen Conservatives, two from Reform UK and one independent. Labour Party MPs were primarily elected in Derbyshire (where they won all eleven seats) and Nottinghamshire, whilst Conservatives were mostly elected in Leicestershire and Lincolnshire.\nIn 2009, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire county councils changed control from Labour to Conservative. From 1993 to 2005, Northampton was controlled by Labour, but has since been controlled by the Conservatives. Lincolnshire and Leicestershire have historically been Conservative, hence all the main county councils are Conservative controlled.\nMEPs.\nThe East Midlands was a five-member constituency for the European Parliament.\nRegions.\nEurostat NUTS.\nIn the Eurostat Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics (NUTS), the East Midlands form a level-1 NUTS region, coded \"UKF\", which is subdivided as follows:\nLocal government.\nThe official region consists of the following subdivisions:\nEconomy.\nThe Manufacturing Advisory Service for the region was based on the A606 in Melton Mowbray, next to East Midlands Councils.\nManufacturing.\nIn 2003, 23% of economic output in the East Midlands was in manufacturing, compared to 15% in the UK.\nFor engineering, Rolls-Royce (the world's second-largest maker of aircraft engines) in Sinfin and Rolls-Royce Marine Power Operations are both in Derby. Siemens Industrial Turbomachinery (former GEC, then Alstom) make industrial gas turbines in Lincoln, with a former division making aero-engine components, part of ITP Engines based at Whetstone, next door to Hardinge Machine Tools UK (former Bridgeport). Cytec Industries UK (owned since 2016 by Solvay) have a composites research centre in the south of Heanor. Meggitt Polymers &amp; Composites (formerly Dunlop) are on the A512 in Shepshed, who make seals for aircraft.\nTriumph Motorcycles and Ultima Sports (sports cars) are in Hinckley. Cummins make diesel engines in Daventry, and build AC generators in Stamford, with its spares division at Wellingborough (near Mahle). 80% of the world's Formula One cars are made in Northamptonshire. At the north of Motorsport Valley, Cosworth and MAHLE Powertrain (Cosworth Technology before January 2005) are next to the Nene in Northampton, with an engine block plant in Wellingborough. Force India and Delta Motorsport are at Silverstone, Mercedes AMG High Performance Powertrains is in Brixworth, and Mercedes-Benz F1 at Brackley.\nNear Leicester, Noble are in Barwell and Fenix Automotive in Braunstone. Eibach UK (shock absorbers) is off the B581 in Broughton Astley. KTM UK (high-performance motorcycles) is at Buckingham Industrial Estate in southeast Brackley; to the west, next door was Brawn GP (Honda F1 before 2008) in Evenley. Van Hool UK (coachwork) is in Wellingborough.\nCaetano UK is based near Coalville, a UK coachwork distributor for National Express. AGC Automotive UK make automotive glass (tempered glass and laminated glass) on Round Spinney Industrial Estate in Northampton. Plastic Omnium Automotive make automotive exteriors in the west of Measham. On a former airfield is Lippstadt-based Hella UK (LED automobile lighting, and Europe's largest automobile lighting manufacturer) in Chipping Warden and Aston le Walls. Ilmor is in Brixworth, and Bowler Offroad is in Belper.\nJCB Power Systems is near Foston, Derbyshire and nearby Toyota Manufacturing UK (TMUK) is at Burnaston, where its 3,000 employees make the Auris and Avensis. Resonate Group (formerly DeltaRail Group) is in Derby, and train manufacturer Bombardier UK (British Rail Engineering Limited before 1996 then ABB Adtranz) is at Derby Litchurch Lane Works, in Litchurch; it built the Nottingham Express Transit AT6/5 trams in 2004, the Electrostar, Turbostar and Aventra fleets, and London Underground trains. APPH (part of BBA Aviation) make aircraft landing gear next to Kirkby-in-Ashfield railway station. Raleigh Bicycle Company is based in New Eastwood.\nEssentra Packaging (formerly Payne) nearby in Giltbrook, next to IKEA, makes tear tape, owned by Essentra. Giant UK (high performance bicycles) on the Charnwood Edge Business Park in Cossington. Mettler Toledo UK (industrial weighing) is in the west of Beaumont Leys. Ferodo is in Chapel-en-le-Frith, having made brake pads since its founder Herbert Frood invented them in Combs in 1897. Carbolite, which makes industrial furnaces, is in the Hope Valley.\nFKI who own Brush Electrical Machines is in Loughborough, home to the Energy Technologies Institute and John Taylor &amp; Co, which although entering administration in 2009, is the largest bell foundry in the world. Eco-Bat Technologies, based in South Darley, smelt, mine lead, being the world's biggest producer, and own eighteen sites across the world. Scott Bader develop and manufacture polyester resins for glass-reinforced plastic (fiberglass, and gelcoats) at Wollaston.\nTata Steel Tubes Europe is in Corby. Barnes Aerospace have their European headquarters in central Derby. JJ Churchill make turbine blades for jet engines in the east of Market Bosworth. Ross Ceramics north of Derby make ceramic cores for casting turbine blades (at Rolls-Royce). The Alumasc Group is in Burton Latimer. Sealed Air UK on the Telford Way Industrial Estate, makes Bubble Wrap, which its parent USA company invented in 1960.\nThe Motor Industry Research Association has an important test track at Higham on the Hill. Hendrickson Europe make truck suspensions at Sywell Airport. Timsons make printers in Kettering. Heckler &amp; Koch is in Lenton. On the Dukeries Industrial Estate, Worksop Galvanizers (Wedge Group) have the largest galvanizing bath (zinc) in the UK. Cooper Bussmann (formerly Hawker Fusegear) makes electrical fuses in Burton on the Wolds. Pearce Signs, one of the UK's largest sign-makers, is based in New Basford. Nylacast is an international engineered plastics company based in Humberstone, Leicester. Sapa are on the Saw Pit Lane Industrial Estate with Storetec, the UK base of Wanzl shopping trolleys.\nRPC Group in Rushden, is a large (international, the largest of its type in Europe) packaging company, and make the bottles for Heinz Tomato Ketchup. Granger's, on the Clover Nook Industrial Estate at Pinxton, make Cherry Blossom shoe polish. Fusion Provida based in Chesterfield makes pipe jointings and electrofusion fittings for the oil and gas industry. Vaillant UK (Hepworth Heating before 2002, with headquarters in Remscheid) make Glow-worm boilers near Belper School.\nThe Watchkeeper WK450 UAV is built jointly by Thales and Elbit in west Leicester; it is tested at Aberporth Airport in Wales; 54 are on order, costing \u00a31bn. BAE Systems Land &amp; Armaments had a tank factory, which closed in May 2011 when it lost the FRES contract, given to General Dynamics; the site, owned by Thales, initially made naval radar systems. The large Sunningdale site on Braunstone Frith was the British Shoe Corporation. Chemring Defence UK (military pyrotechnics) is at Draycott and Church Wilne. Invicta Plastics (injection moulding) is on Scudamore Road.\nHoval, near Newark Northgate station, make industrial boilers in Lincoln for international customers, and have a Royal Warrant. Jayplas, the UK's biggest plastic recycling company is based in Great Oakley, with a plastic recycling site in South Normanton. Fairline Boats are based on the Nene in Oundle; nearby are Poclain Hydraulics UK on the Nene Business Park.\nLaser Performance makes the Laser sailing boat in Long Buckby. Abbott &amp; Co.(Newark) Ltd, Established in 1870 and based in The Newark Boiler Works, made boilers in the 1870s for the Royal Navy and since then design and build a large range of pressure vessels, some of which were used on HMS Queen Elizabeth (R08).\nSpector Lumenex (part of Tyco) make warning systems in Mapperley. Flowserve UK (formerly Worthington-Simpson, then Ingersoll-Dresser) in Balderton are the largest manufacturer of industrial pumps in the UK. Hako Machines UK, a Schleswig-Holstein supplier of industrial sweepers and road cleaners are in Crick. Bostik, which from 1930 until 1990, was owned by British United Shoe Machinery of Leicester, still has a main factory and research site (its construction division) in Belgrave; until 1962 it was made by BB Chemical, with its other main brand being the water-resistant Prestik for making sealing strips.\nTaylor Hobson (an international metrology company) is in Leicester, bought by Ametek in 2004; with a former division of the company, Cooke Optics, a camera lens manufacturer, further north in Thurmaston. The Gent fire alarm company, owned by Honeywell since 2005, is north of Humberstone. Matsuura Machinery UK (CNC machine tools) is in Coalville.\nArdagh (Metal Box from 1962, then Impress Group) make tin cans north of Fabrikat; Pandrol UK in Worksop make resilient rail fastenings. ThyssenKrupp UK is in Lenton, and further north is ZF Services UK (wind turbine and automotive gears). In Nottingham is Thomas &amp; Betts UK (formerly W &amp; J Furse, and bought by ABB in 2012), a world leader in lightning and earthing protection.\nConstruction and building materials.\nTopps Tiles are in Enderby, with the national distribution centre of British Gas, the largest warehouse of gas spare parts in Europe, next door. Aggregate Industries (part of LafargeHolcim since July 2015, when Paris-based Lafarge merged with Swiss-based Holcim) is based at Bardon Hall in Bardon. Mountsorrel has the largest granite quarry in Europe, owned by the French company, Lafarge (owned by Redland plc until 1997). BPB plc (British Plasterboard), the world's largest manufacturer of plasterboard (calcium sulphate) who own British Gypsum, is based in East Leake, Nottinghamshire. They also have a large site at Barrow upon Soar. Artex Ltd., part of the same company, is in Ruddington.\nH\u00f6rmann UK (garage doors) is in Coalville. Barratt Developments (housing) is in Ellistown and Battleflat (Bardon), southeast of Coalville; Ibstock is the largest brick manufacturer (900\u00a0million a year, with twenty factories) in the UK, nearby; . Lafarge Aggregates &amp; Concrete UK is in Syston. Roca UK and Laufen UK (sanitaryware) are in the north of Coalville, on the Hermitage Industrial Estate, towards Stephenson College. Krohne UK at Wellingborough make Coriolis mass flowmeters. AvantiGas (former Shell Gas LPG) is at Duckmanton in Staveley. Sandvik Mining and Construction UK are on the Astron Business Park, Swadlincote, near Brunel Healthcare. DSF Refractories &amp; Minerals are the UK's last main refractory company at Friden.\nCaterpillar Building Construction Products makes backhoe loaders, wheel loaders, telehandlers, and mini excavators. Terex Pegson make mobile caterpillar-tracked crushing machines next to the railway in Coalville. SAME Deutz-Fahr UK, is a tractor manufacturer based in Barby north of Daventry, owned by Treviglio of Italy.\nPremier Pitches of Nether Handley, at Unstone in northeast Derbyshire, made the pitch for Wembley Stadium, as well as many other main pitches. Hewitt Sportsturf,r in Cosby, supplied the turf (360 rolls) for the Olympic Stadium in March 2011, although it was grown near Scunthorpe; a division of the company, Petersfield Growing Mediums, which supplies compost, has a Royal Warrant. Werner UK (Britain's leading manufacturer of metal step ladders) moved its ABRU site to Essex in 2016.\nTextiles and clothing.\nThe fashion company Paul Smith is in Lenton. The high end metallic thread supplier Lurex is based in Whetstone, Leicestershire. The lingerie companies Gossard, Aristoc, Pretty Polly, and Berlei (formerly owned by Courtaulds, later CUK Clothing) were based in Daybrook; most of their hosiery was made at West Mill in Belper.\nSpeedo International Limited is near Experian, (formerly in Bobbers Mill near Basford before 2010). Its LZR Racer suit helped Michael Phelps win eight golds at the 2008 Olympics. In Enderby is Next, created by George Davies in 1981, which is the largest company in the region (and the Midlands) by number of employees with 59,000, and has the second largest turnover (\u00a33\u00a0billion) of companies headquartered in the region, after Boots (\u00a36\u00a0billion).\nBoden (clothing) is on the Meridian estate in Leicester. Wolsey (clothing) is northeast of Leicester, east of Rushey Mead. Scott Nichol make traditional socks in Hinckley. Per Una have a factory near Cossington. Much of Britain's lingerie and hosiery is made in the region. Guilford Europe (former Guilford Kapwood), at Somercotes, makes fabric (warp knitting) for sports clothing and automotive products, and have been owned by Lear Corporation since 2012.\nMany footwear companies such as Shoe Zone (which bought out Stead and Simpson), are based in Leicester. Brantano Footwear UK, based in Leicester before 2002, were in Ellistown and Battleflat until March 2017, just south of Coalville, near Nestl\u00e9's national distribution centre. Loake make shoes at Kettering, and have a Royal appointment. Church's Shoes are at Northampton. Tricker's shoes in Northampton have a royal warrant. Sanders &amp; Sanders and Grenson make shoes in Rushden. Crockett &amp; Jones make shoes in the northeast of Northampton. The BLC Leather Technology Centre is in Moulton and SATRA, in west Kettering, both conduct footwear research. Aspex make sports sunglasses in Moulton, near Moulton College.\nSports Direct is based in Shirebrook. At the Trent Business Centre is Sunspel, who introduced the t-shirt to the British market; nearby Meadowmead make premium furniture, and Aga Rangemaster Group make kitchen sinks. Duresta Upholstery is in Long Eaton, with a factory of DFS opposite. W&amp;G Sissons on the Chesterfield Est, owned by Franke, has been the UK's largest manufacturer of stainless steel sinks since the 1950s. Parker Knoll make high-end furniture on the Greenhill Industrial Estate, south of Alfreton. Gunn &amp; Moore (GM), north of Trent Bridge cricket ground, is an exclusive cricket bat manufacturer.\nWild Country, on the Tideswell Industrial Estate, are the UK's leading manufacturer of rock-climbing equipment. Blacks Leisure Group (previous owner of Blacks and Millets before financial failure and takeover by JD Sports) was based in Duston, in the west of Northampton, and is on the Swan Valley Ind Est, near the UK &amp; Ireland base of Levi Strauss &amp; Co. Joules country clothing is east of Market Harborough and the Northamptonshire boundary at Dingley.\nGeorge at Asda, based at Lutterworth, in 2009 overtook M&amp;S to become Britain's leading fashion retailer. TW Kempton are a main manufacturer of uniforms for the armed and police services opposite the National Space Centre in north Leicester; they also own the Fortis body armour and make PASGT nylon fibre helmets for troops.\nRetail.\nWilko head office is at Manton, Worksop; it was founded by James Kemsey Wilkinson in Leicester in 1930. In Lenton, are the head offices of Games Workshop, the producers of Warhammer miniatures. Pendragon PLC, the car dealership and the Sherwood Park industrial area is in Annesley. Sytner Group is in Enderby, a prestige car retailer. Dunelm Group, the furnishings company, is next to Lafarge in Syston; the company is named after Bill Adderley's house on Greenhill Road in Coalville; nearby is Pukka Pies. In Leicester is the nearly-defunct photographic equipment company Jessops, bought and relaunched as Jessops Europe by businessman Peter Jones and Fox's Confectionery (maker of Fox's Glacier Mints), with both on the Braunstone Frith estate. Also in Leicester are the bookmaker Mark Jarvis (next to Radio Leicester), the European HQ of National Car Rental, and Otis UK (lifts, near the National Space Centre). Jacobs is on the Meridian Business Park in Braunstone. Machine Mart is near BioCity in Nottingham. East of the Walkers plant in Beaumont Leys is Office Depot UK (and Viking Direct UK) on the Bursom Industrial Estate. Crown Crest in Belgrave owns Poundstretcher. Goldsmiths (jewellers) are based at the western end of Braunstone Frith.\nIn Northampton is Avon Products UK; its products reach 6 million women per week. East Midlands Railway has its head office in Derby. Porterbrook, one of the UK's three rolling stock companies is in Derby. The former East Midlands Electricity is owned by E.ON UK (supply, since Powergen bought EME in June 1998) and Western Power Distribution (distribution, who bought Central Networks in April 2011), which is based in Long Whatton and Diseworth; the area has around a 5,000\u00a0MW demand for electricity. Nearby at Castle Donington is the home of the (separate) headquarters of BMI (in Donington Hall) and bmibaby. Sixt, the car rental firm, has its UK base in Chesterfield, the base of Auto Windscreens. Booker Group, the Cash &amp; Carry, (Happy Shopper and 2,700 Premier Stores, and famous for the Booker Prize) in Wellingborough.\nMaclaren, the pushchair maker, is next to Long Buckby railway station; BabyStyle is in Sileby. There are three main distribution centres in the area at Magna Park in Leicestershire (the largest of its kind in Europe), and Brackmills and the Daventry International Railfreight Terminal in Northamptonshire. J D Wetherspoon have their main distribution centre at Daventry, and Currys (founded in Leicester in 1888 on Belgrave Gate) have theirs at Newark-on-Trent. Oxford University Press have their national distribution centre at North Kettering Business Park in Rushton). Monsoon Accessorize have their national distribution centre to the east on Octavian Park in Irchester. In Kilsby on the DIRFT estate, Tesco have their Daventry Grocery, the largest supermarket depot in the country. North of the A428 is Tesco's Clothing Distribution Centre.\nFood processing.\nSilver Spoon makes all of its demerara and brown sugar at Newark-on-Trent. Swizzels Matlow makes children's confectionery in New Mills. Carlsberg has been brewed in Northampton since 1974, with twelve UK depots, and also brews Holsten Pils, and has brewed Tetley since 2011. Cott Beverages UK is in Kegworth. Greencore UK (former Derby-based Hazlewood Foods) is at Barlborough Links; its site at Manton Wood Enterprise Zone, Worksop claims to be the world's largest sandwich factory. United Biscuits has a large factory in Ashby-de-la-Zouch where it makes its KP Snacks including Hula Hoops, Skips and Nik Naks. Oxo, Saxa salt, Super Noodles, and Bisto are made by Premier Foods in the west of Worksop. Tangerine Confectionery are at Holmewood (formerly Cadbury Trebor Bassett).\nCat food such as Whiskas is made in Melton Mowbray by Masterfoods; their Waltham Centre for Pet Nutrition claims to be the world's leading authority on petfood research. Also southwest of the town next to the railway, Samworth Brothers have owned Ginsters since 1977 and Soreen since 2014, and have 8,000 UK employees. Whitworths, the food company, is in Irthlingborough; they also have a Victoria Mills flour site in Irchester.\nThe crisp company Walkers (owned by PepsiCo and the UK's biggest grocery brand) makes 10\u00a0million bags of crisps a day at the biggest crisp factory in the world at Beaumont Leys. Beaumont Park is PepsiCo's main research centre in the UK. Pork Farms is in Lenton, Nottingham. Thorntons is a big employer south of Alfreton in Swanwick on a former colliery, since the factory opened in 1985. At Latimer Park (Burton Latimer) is Alpro, who make soya milk products, and a huge Morrisons depot. To the west is Weetabix, which sources its wheat from a radius around Kettering, and also make Weetos in Corby; Ready Brek was bought from Lyons in 1990.\nLong Clawson Dairy are the biggest producers of Stilton cheese in the UK; the cheese, with Shropshire Blue, is also made in Cropwell Bishop and Colston Bassett. Faccenda Group of Brackley is the second largest processor of chicken in the UK; the company also has the former Cranberry Foods site at Scropton in Derbyshire, the second biggest turkey processor in the UK after Bernard Matthews. In Wigston, Charnwood Foods (former RHM Group) make pizza bases for Pizza Hut and is owned by Premier Foods; Rossa Ice Cream is next to the Grand Union Canal and nearby is Jacob's Bakery who make 25\u00a0million biscuits a week. D\u00e9lifrance UK is in north-west Wigston.\nGreencore Prepared Foods on Moulton Park make half of M&amp;S's sandwiches and sandwich filler pots. Sealord UK make all of Waitrose's white fish products near Caistor. Kettleby Foods, part of Samworth Brothers, make most of Tesco's ready meals in Melton Mowbray. PAS (Grantham) (owned by McCain) make chips at Easton. Isoma of Swadlincote makes food handling equipment; Interlevin Refrigeration at Castle Donington is near the M&amp;S distribution centre; Parry Catering and Fabrication in Draycott make catering appliances and equipment.\nRoquette (former ABF-owned ABR Foods) produce starch and bioethanol at Corby near RS Components, and a Morrisons frozen-food depot is near Weldon. Opposite Charles Lawrence in Newark, Laurens Patisseries (owned by Bakkav\u00f6r UK) are Europe's largest manufacturer of cream cakes. Kerry Ingredients make Homepride flour in Gainsborough.\nHealth care.\nBoots UK is based in Lenton in Nottingham, with 2,500 UK stores, where Stewart Adams developed Ibuprofen in the 1960s on Rutland Road in West Bridgford, and Vision Express are nearby. Boots was the biggest chemist chain in the world; A.S. Watson Group is the world's biggest health retail company. Crookes Healthcare, formerly Boots and later Reckitt Benckiser, make Strepsils and Optrex, and Boots Contract Manufacturing (BCM) make products for other firms; it makes Benylin for McNeil. On the ng2 business park, Specsavers have their corporate eyecare and contact lens division. Three out of the four main UK opticians are sited in Nottingham. The MRI scanner was developed at the University of Nottingham by Sir Peter Mansfield; MRI scanners were developed mainly by GEC Medical; MRI is based on nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) of the hydrogen nucleus; Raymond Vahan Damadian of the USA also claims invention of MRI.\nQueen's Medical Centre (QMC) is one of the largest teaching hospitals in Europe, and the largest hospital in the UK. The CT scanner (X-ray computed tomography) was invented by Newark's Sir Godfrey Hounsfield. Both inventions received Nobel Prizes for Medicine (2003 for MRI and 1979 for CT). Glenfield Hospital (under the UHL NHS Trust) is one of England's main hospitals for coronary care and respiratory diseases; it has a strong international reputation for medical research in cardiac and respiratory health and carried out the world's first percutaneous coronary intervention on a two-year-old child in August 2012 with the largest ECMO unit in the UK.\nEMAS is based in Bilborough. There are three (charity-funded) air ambulance services: the western one is based at EMA, the eastern one is based at RAF Waddington, and the southern one (shared with Warwickshire) is at Coventry Airport. NHS East Midlands is at Sandiacre. 3M Health Care (former Riker Laboratories) has a factory in the north of Loughborough with its head office next to the railway station.\nBioCity Nottingham is an important centre for cutting-edge bioscience. Slimming World, who help people lose weight, is in Pinxton, near Alfreton; on the other side of the railway NHS Supply Chain was formed in 2006 in Somercotes; nearby Diversey UK (formerly JohnsonDiversey) has a manufacturing plant, and is at Weston Favell. Dalatek Plastics make pharmaceutical containers on the Maun Valley Ind Park at Sutton in Ashfield next to the railway.\nBrunel Healthcare (formerly Peter Black, Perrigo then NeutraHealth), owned by Elder Pharmaceuticals, in Swadlincote makes food supplements. At Carlton in Lindrick north of Worksop, Robinson Healthcare makes first aid equipment. Patterson Medical UK (including sorbothane insoles) are in Huthwaite, Notts, and Fresenius Medical Care UK (provides most of the NHS's kidney dialysis) are there too.\nHigh technology.\nBelkin UK (and Linksys) UK is in Rushden, Misco is in Wellingborough, and RS Components is in Corby. Pegasus Software, producer of well-known accounting software, is in the south of Kettering. Serif Europe is in West Bridgford; Serif developed PagePlus in the 1990s which was the first low-cost DTP software. AVG Technologies has its UK head office on Newark's industrial estate. Experian have a large data centre at Fairham House south of Ruddington, with two others in Texas and Brazil. The Ruddington site is connected by a 640\u00a0Gbps dark fibre and runs on IBM's z10 with Tivoli. Inter-Activa is at the LCB Depot in Leicester city centre.\nNexor is in Nottingham. Entalysis, a business performance management software company, is located in Burton upon Trent town centre. Amphenol Jaybeam in the west of Wellingborough makes cellular telephone base station antennas. Texas Instruments UK have their Semiconductor Design Centre at Northampton, formerly in Bedford from 1957 to 2005. GE Sensing UK is at Groby. Oclaro UK (formerly Bookham), at Caswell Research Centre in Greens Norton makes indium phosphide wafers and researches photonic integrated circuits and DSDBR tunable lasers.\nFinance.\nSince 1997 Capital One, the Virginia-based credit card company, has had its European HQ at Trent House in Nottingham's city centre in a former Boots UK printing works next to the railway station since 2009 have taken over the company's Loxley House next door as their HQ. Dublin-based Experian, one of two UK credit-referencing companies, was founded in the city in 1980 (owned by GUS until 2006) and has a large UK HQ to its south west, near the River Trent. TDX Group in Nottingham, is owned by Equifax. Santander (former Alliance &amp; Leicester) is based in Narborough. Barclaycard is headquartered in Northampton, and Nationwide has a large administrative centre at Moulton Park. Egg Banking was on Pride Park in Derby, until Barclays closed the site in 2011, and moved the business to its Northampton credit card site.\nCastle Meadow Campus is the name of a large HMRC site in Nottingham, being the national arm of HMRC that looks after the Enterprise Investment Scheme, Corporate Venturing Scheme, Venture Capital Trusts, and Enterprise Management Incentives, HMRC's Pension Schemes Services, and the Residency department, which deals with Double Taxation Treaties and inheritance tax. It has the Valuation Office Agency for the East Midlands and East of England. Royal Mail have a main administrative centre at Rowland Hill House, opposite the Queen's Park Sports Centre in Chesterfield (HR, pensions, and Vehicle Services). Royal Mail have their National Distribution Centre at Crick. The Bank of England's MPC Agency for the East Midlands is near Experian and its economic data.\nNatWest Group has a documents centre (Williams Lea) in Shepshed, where it prints its statements for England and Wales. Orion Security Print, north of Stanton steel works in Ilkeston, produces Odeon cinema tickets and library cards. An office of RR Donnelley west of South Wigston, next to the railway, deals with all of Barclaycard's mail. Barclaycard have their Payment Acceptance Centre in Northampton.\nRural.\nLincolnshire and Rutland are very agricultural, with much of the UK's arable crops grown in this area. The RAF have many bases in this area, with the main RAF College at Cranwell near Sleaford; the East Midlands Universities Air Squadron is at Cranwell, also home of the Eastern Region of the Sea Cadet Corps, and the Officer and Aircrew Selection Centre. The RAF's six AWACS aircraft are at RAF Waddington. 16th Regiment Royal Artillery is in Rutland.\nAfter Norfolk, Lincolnshire is the second largest potato producer in the country, and grows 30% of the country's vegetables. Interflora has its UK HQ in Sleaford; Lincolnshire is the world's leading producer of daffodils (narcissus family); 40% of the flowers bought in the UK are grown there; Butters Group supply many bulbs (Amaryllis) from Low Fulney. The county produces each year enough sugar beet for 350\u00a0million bags of sugar and enough wheat for 250\u00a0million loaves. Fowler-Welch Coolchain are based in Spalding, as is Bakkav\u00f6r (formerly Geest) which is the UK's largest provider of fresh prepared foods.\nPrinces (formerly Premier Foods) have a large operation in Little Sutton near Long Sutton canning vegetables with Fray Bentos meat, and Batchelors peas. Magnadata Group in Boston have the contract for the UK's rail tickets (for ATOC); the orange-style tickets have been in operation since 1990. Silver Spoon's Bardney plant makes the market-leading Askey's dessert toppings. John Deere have their UK base at Langar on the Nottinghamshire/Leicestershire boundary. The British Geological Survey is in Keyworth. Weatherbys in Wellingborough administer the British horseracing industry, having produced the General Stud Book since 1791.\nEntertainment.\nSkegness and the Lincolnshire coast provides seaside entertainment for many in the East Midlands with its Butlins 200-acre resort at Ingoldmells. Nottingham and Leicester are both popular night time destinations.\nCenter Parcs UK opened their first leisure facility at the Sherwood Holiday Village site at Rufford, near Ollerton, together with their headquarters and call centre in Sherwood Energy Village business park, built upon the former Ollerton Colliery site in Ollerton, Nottinghamshire.\nThe YHA is based in Matlock. Gala Bingo is based in Nottingham; Coral have over 1,800 UK shops. Twycross Zoo is just south of Measham in Leicestershire, and the National Space Centre is in Belgrave in north Leicester. Carlsbro (electronics and speakers) are at South Normanton. Peavey Electronics UK (loudspeakers), are southwest of Corby.\nRockingham Motor Speedway is in Corby, and other racetracks include Donington Park and Mallory Park in Leicestershire, and Cadwell Park in Lincolnshire. Silverstone Circuit hosts the British Grand Prix, although the southern half of the track is outside the region. Rutland Water is popular for sailing, fishing and bird-watching. The Peak District National Park became the first national park in the United Kingdom in 1951.\nEducation.\nSecondary education.\nMost secondary schools in the East Midlands are comprehensives, although Lincolnshire retains fifteen state grammar schools.\nThere are around 180,000 students in the region's secondary schools; this is the second lowest number of students in a region in England, after the North East, and more than 100,000 lower than the figure for the West Midlands. Some of the East Midlands' urban secondary schools hold truancy rates above that of the national average, whereas truancy rates in the region's rural secondary schools tend to be lower than the national average.\nNottingham City schools tend to perform less well in terms of GCSE standards, with some Leicester schools suffering a similar problem. Rutland (amongst the highest-performing areas in the region where GCSE standards are concerned) has one of the highest percentages of pupils reaching the threshold of five grade A\u2013C GCSEs (including Maths and English) in England. On a District Council level, Rushcliffe in Nottinghamshire tends to attain some of the region's best GCSE results. Leicestershire and Derbyshire also regularly tend to produce GCSE results at a standard greater than the national average.\nAt A-level, Nottinghamshire, Lincolnshire and Derbyshire regularly generate results greater than the national average. Nottingham tends to produce better results at A-level than it does at GCSE.\nThere are eighteen further education colleges in the region, including: New College Nottingham, Central College Nottingham, Leicester College, and Lincoln College.\nThe regional Learning and Skills Council was headquartered at the Meridian Business Park in Braunstone Town, southwest of Leicester. The LSC has been replaced by the Young People's Learning Agency, and the Skills Funding Agency.\nUniversities.\nThe East Midlands' universities include:\nThe region has the lowest proportion of part-time students in England. The region has a higher influx of young people into the region at the university stage than out of the region into other regions' universities. Only 25% of the region's students undertaking a first degree are native to the region.\nSports.\nThe region has a good sporting tradition, with some of the most well-known sports personalities \u2013- David Gower (Leicestershire C.C.C.), Gary Lineker, Rory Underwood (Leicester Tigers) and Jonathan Agnew.\nThe British Gliding Association is based in Leicester on Meridian Business Park, in Braunstone. The National Ice Skating Association is based in Nottingham (and many of Britain's Olympic ice skaters train in Nottingham); Nottingham Panthers are in the Elite Ice Hockey League. The British Caving Association is at Great Hucklow, the UK sports governing body. The British Canoe Union is in Bingham.\nThe first 1978 BDO World Darts Championship was held in Nottingham, in February 1978, being largely the idea of Nick Hunter, a BBC sports producer, and the event first introduced Sid Waddell.\nFootball.\nNotts County F.C. is the world's oldest professional football club, with Nottingham Forest F.C. being the oldest football league side after Notts County's relegation to the National League in 2019. Sam Weller Widdowson brought in shin pads in 1874. The first referee's whistle was at Nottingham in 1872.\nAdmiral Sportswear at Wigston in Leicestershire made the England football strip from 1974 to 1982, when the company went bankrupt; in 1974 it was the first company to introduce replica kits. Umbro took over the England kit after the in 1984. Nike make the England kit today.\nThe East Midlands is home to several professional and semi-professional association football (soccer) clubs.\nRugby Union.\nThe East Midlands is home to two top-tier (Aviva Premiership) clubs.\nLeicester Tigers are an English rugby union club based in Leicester at the Welford Road stadium and play in the Aviva Premiership. They were formed in 1880; their colours are green, burgundy and white. Leicester Tigers are one of the most successful Rugby Union teams in Europe and the most successful English club since the introduction of league rugby in 1987, having won the European Cup twice, the first tier of English rugby ten times, and the Anglo-Welsh Cup seven times.\nNorthampton Saints are a professional rugby union club from Northampton, England. They were formed in 1880, and play in black, green, and gold colours. The team play their home games at Franklin's Gardens, which has a capacity of 15,500. Their biggest rivals are Leicester Tigers.\nCricket.\nNottinghamshire (Trent Bridge), Leicestershire (Grace Road), Derbyshire (County Cricket Ground, Derby) and Northamptonshire (County Cricket Ground, Northampton) are in the Cricket T20 North group; Northamptonshire was formerly in the Midlands group.\nBasketball.\nLeicester Riders, who play at Leicester Arena, are the oldest club in British basketball, founded in 1967.\nMotor sports.\nRML Group (Ray Mallock) BTCC and WTCC motorsport team is in Wellingborough, next to the UK HQ of Vredestein tyres (Dutch). Craft-Bamboo Racing WTCC are at Silverstone.\nSwimming.\nThe Amateur Swimming Association is the world's first swimming governing body, founded 1869, and based in Loughborough. British Swimming have one of its three Intensive Training Centres at Loughborough University's Loughborough Pool in their Sport Development Centre.\nLocal media.\nTelevision.\nThe BBC East Midlands region of BBC Television, based in Nottingham, produces several regional television programmes including the news programme \"East Midlands Today\", broadcast from Waltham transmitting station. This excludes most of Northamptonshire, north Nottinghamshire and north Derbyshire.\nMost of Lincolnshire is covered by the BBC Yorkshire and Lincolnshire's \"Look North\" and Yorkshire Television's \"Calendar\" South, both broadcast from Belmont transmitting station. North Nottinghamshire, northeast Derbyshire, the eastern High Peak and northern Derbyshire Dales are covered by BBC Yorkshire's \"Look North\" and Yorkshire Television's \"Calendar\" North, both broadcast from Emley Moor transmitting station. The western area of the High Peak is covered by BBC North West and Granada Television from Winter Hill transmitting station. \n\"ITV News Central East\" covers much of the East Midlands, broadcasting from ITV Central's Birmingham studios. Some western parts of the region can receive \"ITV News Central West\".\nMost of Northamptonshire is part of the BBC East and Anglia Television region, which broadcast \"Look East\" and \"Anglia Tonight\" respectively from Sandy Heath transmitting station. Southern parts of Northamptonshire receive the Thames Valley micro-region of ITV Meridian and \"South Today\".\nMidlands Asian Television, based in Leicester, caters to the area's large South Asian population.\nNewspapers.\nThere are a number of daily newspapers, the largest of which include the \"Derby Telegraph\", \"Derbyshire Times\", \"Leicester Mercury\", \"Lincolnshire Echo\", \"Northampton Chronicle and Echo\", and \"Nottingham Evening Post\". Most of the daily papers are owned by Trinity Mirror.\nMagazines.\nThere are many regional lifestyle publications, the largest and most widely read being \"Life&amp;Style Magazine\", \"FHP Magazine\", \"Nottinghamshire Life\" and \"City Life and County Living\". National magazine publishers in the region include Key Publishing, Mortons of Horncastle and Bourne Publishing Group.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53108", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53108", "title": "Graphics file format summary", "text": ""}
{"id": "53109", "revid": "49401372", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53109", "title": "New Wave", "text": "New Wave may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "53111", "revid": "50581219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53111", "title": "List of Latin names of countries", "text": "This list includes the Roman names of countries, or significant regions, known to the Roman Empire.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53112", "revid": "49683800", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53112", "title": "West Midlands (county)", "text": "County of England\nWest Midlands is a metropolitan and ceremonial county in the larger West Midlands region of England. A landlocked county, it is bordered by Staffordshire to the north and west, Worcestershire to the south, and is almost surrounded by Warwickshire to the east. The largest settlement is the city of Birmingham.\nThe county has an area of and is almost entirely urban, with a population of 3,036,605 in 2024; this made it the second most populous county in England after Greater London. Birmingham is located in the centre of the county, with Solihull and the city of Coventry to the east and West Bromwich and the city of Wolverhampton to the west. Sutton Coldfield lies to the north. Nearly all of the county's settlements belong to the West Midlands and Coventry conurbations, but the \"Meriden Gap\" between them is rural. For local government purposes West Midlands comprises seven metropolitan boroughs: Birmingham, Coventry, Dudley, Sandwell, Solihull, Walsall, and Wolverhampton. They collaborate through the West Midlands Combined Authority. The county was historically part of Shropshire, Staffordshire, Warwickshire, and Worcestershire.\nThe west of the county encloses the valley of the River Tame and its tributaries; the highest point of the surrounding area is Turners Hill, at . West Midlands contains the Sutton Park Site of Special Scientific Interest, which has an area of and is one of the largest urban parks in Europe. The area between Solihull and Coventry is part of the Forest of Arden, and the rivers Sowe and Sherbourne flow through Coventry.\nStatus.\nThe metropolitan county exists in law, as a geographical frame of reference, and as a ceremonial county. As such it has a Lord Lieutenant and a High Sheriff. Between 1974 and 1986, the West Midlands County Council was the administrative body covering the county; this was abolished on 31 March 1986, and the constituent metropolitan boroughs effectively became unitary authorities. A new administrative body for the county (and some of the district surrounding it as Non-Constituent members), the West Midlands Combined Authority, was created in June 2016. Since May 2017, the authority has been headed by a directly elected Mayor of the West Midlands, a position currently held by Richard Parker of the Labour and Co-operative Parties. Other county-wide bodies include the West Midlands Police, the West Midlands Fire Service and Transport for West Midlands.\nThe county is sometimes described as the \"West Midlands metropolitan area\" or the \"West Midlands conurbation\" or \"Greater Birmingham\", although these have different, less clearly defined, boundaries. The main conurbation or urban area does not include Coventry, for example. The name \"West Midlands\" is also used for the much larger West Midlands region, which sometimes causes confusion. Geographically the county is on the eastern side of the region, the western side comprising Shropshire and Herefordshire and the southern side comprising Worcestershire and Warwickshire.\nHistory.\nAlthough the modern county has only existed since 1974, the settlements of the West Midlands have long been important centres of commerce and industry as well as developing a good local infrastructure. Coventry was one of England's most important cities during the Middle Ages, with its prosperity built upon wool and cloth manufacture. Birmingham and Wolverhampton have a tradition of industry dating back to the 16th century, when small metal-working industries developed. Birmingham was known for its manufacture of small arms, whereas Wolverhampton became a centre of lock manufacture and brass working. The coal and iron ore deposits of the Black Country area provided a ready source of raw materials. The area grew rapidly during the Industrial Revolution, and by the 20th century had grown into one large conurbation. Coventry was slower to develop, but by the early 20th century it had become an important centre of bicycle and car manufacture.\n1966 saw a substantial reform in the local government of the area as the patchwork of county boroughs with municipal boroughs and urban district councils in between was replaced by a core of county boroughs covering a contiguous area, roughly as follows:\nNear the area, three other towns remained separate (Halesowen, Stourbridge and Sutton Coldfield), while Aldridge and Brownhills joined to form a single unit, called Aldridge-Brownhills. In the same year, a single West Midlands Constabulary was formed for the Black Country county boroughs, whilst Birmingham retained its Birmingham City Police and Solihull continued being policed by the Warwickshire Constabulary. The West Midlands Passenger Transport Authority was established in 1968.\nCounty creation.\nIn 1974, the Local Government Act 1972 came into effect, creating the metropolitan county of West Midlands. This area was based on the seven county boroughs and the other non-county boroughs and urban districts around the fringe of the conurbation.\nThe new area consisted of seven new metropolitan boroughs, with Aldridge-Brownhills added to Walsall; Halesowen and Stourbridge to Dudley and Sutton Coldfield to Birmingham. A new borough of Sandwell was formed by the merger of West Bromwich and Warley. The actual designation of Warley itself was abolished and the three towns of Smethwick, Oldbury and Rowley Regis reinstated as component parts of Sandwell, although these areas formed the Warley postal district. Solihull took in much of the suburban fringe to the east of Birmingham, including the former villages of Chelmsley Wood and Castle Bromwich, also Birmingham Airport, and the area of countryside between Solihull and Coventry, whilst Coventry itself received only small changes and Wolverhampton was unaltered. This led to (apart from in the east, with Coventry and the Meriden Gap) quite a tightly defined metropolitan border, excluding such places as Burntwood, Bromsgrove, Cannock, Kidderminster, Lichfield and Wombourne which had been considered for inclusion in the West Midlands metropolitan area by the Redcliffe-Maud Report.\nThe 1974 reform created the West Midlands County Council that covered the entire area and dealt with strategic issues. A new West Midlands Police service was formed covering the entire area, with the West Midlands Constabulary and Birmingham City Police abolished, and also taking over responsibility from the county forces.\nWest Midlands was also established as a new ceremonial county, with the offices of Lord Lieutenant and High Sheriff created. Its constituent components had previously been, for ceremonial purposes, under the equivalent offices of Warwickshire (Birmingham CB, Coventry CB, Solihull CB, Sutton Coldfield MB and Meriden RD), Staffordshire (Wolverhampton CB, Walsall CB, West Bromwich CB, Dudley CB and Aldridge-Brownhills UD) and Worcestershire (Warley CB, Stourbridge MB and Halesowen MB).\nWest Midlands County Council.\nBetween 1974 and 1986, the county had a two-tier system of local government, and the seven districts shared power with the West Midlands County Council. However, the Local Government Act 1985 abolished the metropolitan county councils, and the West Midlands County Council ceased to exist in 1986. Most of its functions were devolved to the West Midland boroughs, which effectively became unitary authorities, with responsibility for most local authority functions.\nFollowing the abolition of the county council, some county-wide bodies continued to exist, which were administered by various joint-boards of the seven districts, among these were the West Midlands Police, the West Midlands Fire Service and the West Midlands Passenger Transport Executive.\nBoundary changes.\nIn 1994, the western/southern shores of Chasewater, plus the adjacent Jeffreys Swag, were transferred from the Metropolitan Borough of Walsall to the District of Lichfield, Staffordshire. Further boundary changes came into effect in 1995, when part of the Hereford and Worcester parish of Frankley (including the south-west part of Bartley Reservoir) was transferred to Birmingham and became part of the county.\nWest Midlands Combined Authority.\nOn 17 June 2016, a new administrative body, the West Midlands Combined Authority was created for the county, under the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009, which created several other combined authorities in England. The new body has powers over transport, economic development, skills and planning. A new directly elected position of Mayor of the West Midlands was created in 2017 to chair the new body. The first Mayoral election was held in May 2017, and the position was won by Andy Street of the Conservative Party.\nGeography.\nThe West Midlands is a landlocked county that borders the counties of Warwickshire to the east, Worcestershire to the south, and Staffordshire to the north and west.\nThe West Midlands County is one of the most heavily urbanised counties in the UK. Birmingham, Wolverhampton, the Black Country and Solihull together form the third most populous conurbation in the United Kingdom with a combined population of around 2.44 million. However, the West Midlands is not entirely urban; Coventry is separated from the West Midlands conurbation by a stretch of green belt land approximately across, known as the \"Meriden Gap\", which retains a strongly rural character. A smaller piece of green belt between Birmingham, Walsall and West Bromwich includes Barr Beacon and the Sandwell Valley.\nThe highest point in the West Midlands is Turners Hill, with an elevation of . The hill is a Site of Special Scientific Interest. Barr Beacon is another hill in the West Midlands, located on the border of Birmingham and Walsall, with a height of .\nThere are 23 Sites of Special Scientific Interest in the county. One of these SSSIs is Sutton Park in Sutton Coldfield, which has an area of . As a result, it is one of the largest urban parks in Europe, and the largest outside of a capital city in Europe. The park also has national nature reserve status.\nThere are numerous rivers that pass through the county, including the River Tame. The river basin is the most urbanised basin in the United Kingdom, with approximately 42% of the basin being urbanised. The River Tame is fed by the River Rea, River Anker, and the River Blythe, which in turn is fed by the River Cole. The River Sowe and River Sherbourne both flow through Coventry. The River Stour flows through the west of the West Midlands county.\nLike other metropolitan counties, the West Midlands is divided into districts called metropolitan boroughs. There are seven boroughs in the West Midlands, six of which are named after the largest settlement in their administrative area. The West Midlands is unusual amongst the metropolitan counties in that three of its boroughs have city status; Coventry is a city by ancient prescriptive usage, Birmingham was granted city status in 1889, and Wolverhampton in 2000 as a \"Millennium City\".\nEconomy.\nThe Forensic Science Service, Linpac, Lafarge Cement UK and IMI plc are on the Birmingham Business Park in Bickenhill. The National Exhibition Centre (NEC) is just north. ZF Lemf\u00f6rder UK's site at Bickenhill makes axle modules for Land Rover. Newey and Eyre, Britain's largest electrical wholesaler, is at Sheldon. Neopost UK is off the A452. Goodrich UK is in Shirley. TRW Conekt have a main automotive engineering research centre at The Green Business Park in Shirley Heath. The Mormons (Latter Day Saints) have their European HQ in Solihull.\nThe UK's VAT Registration Service, for Value Added Tax is at HMRC in Wolverhampton. Flint Ink UK in the east of the town centre, was the largest ink supplier in the British Empire, before being bought in 1998.\nTurner Powertrain Systems is the world market leader for transmissions for backhoe loaders, mini excavators telescopic handlers, and site dumpers is further south, near Dunstall Hill. Tata Steel (former site of British Steel Seamless Tubes until 1995) have their Wednesfield Steelpark (built in 1999) on the Walsall boundary.\nEssar Steel UK in west Dudley, is the largest independent steel toll processor in the UK.\nHadley Group near the Soho Foundry is the largest cold roll forming manufacturer in the UK. Caparo Precision Tubes in Oldbury, is the UK's largest producer of electric resistance welded (ERW) steel tubes, and Wellman Group make boilers to the west. Metsec, east of Oldbury, is one of the UK's largest cold roll-forming companies. The AA have a main office in Rounds Green, west of Oldbury. 2 Sisters Food Group, Britain's largest processor of chicken, is based in the West Midlands.\nThe national headquarters of One Stop is in Brownhills, at Clayhanger. Poundland is in Willenhall. Wedge Group, based in Willenhall, is the largest hot dip galvanising company in the UK. Assa Abloy UK (and Yale UK, former Yale &amp; Towne), is also in Willenhall, as the town is known for manufacture of locks. A.F. Blakemore, supplies most of the SPAR shops in the UK. \nEducation.\nThe West Midlands contains ten universities, seven of which are in Birmingham:\nBoth Coventry University and the University of Warwick are in Coventry whilst University of Wolverhampton is located in Wolverhampton with campuses in Telford and Walsall.\nEach of the local authorities has at least one further education college for students aged over 16, and since September 1992 all of the local authorities have operated traditional 5\u20137 infant, 7\u201311 junior, and 11-16/18 secondary schools for students in compulsory education. This followed the demise of 5\u20138 first, 8\u201312 middle and 12-16/18 secondary schools in the Sutton Coldfield area.\nFor 18 years before September 1990, Dudley had operated 5\u20138 first, 8\u201312 middle, and 12-16/18 secondary schools before then, while Halesowen (September 1972 until July 1982) and Aldridge-Brownhills (September 1972 until July 1986) had both operated 5\u20139 first, 9\u201313 middle and 13-16/18 secondary schools.\nMany local authorities still have sixth form facilities in secondary schools, though sixth form facilities had been axed by most secondary schools in Dudley since the early 1990s (and in Halesowen in 1982) as the local authorities changed direction towards further education colleges.\nAll secondary state education in Dudley and Sandwell is mixed comprehensive, although there are a small number of single sex and grammar schools existing in parts of Birmingham, Solihull, Wolverhampton and Walsall.\nIn August 2009, Matthew Boulton College and Sutton Coldfield College merged to become Birmingham Metropolitan College, one of the largest further and higher education institutions in the country. Plans are afoot for the construction of a new campus in the Perry Barr area of Birmingham.\nMedia.\nTelevision.\nThe area is served by BBC West Midlands and ITV Central which both broadcast from Birmingham, the local based-television station TalkBirmingham also covers the area. Television signals are received from the Sutton Coldfield transmitting station.\nRadio.\nIn terms of BBC Local Radio, the area is served by BBC Radio WM and BBC CWR covering Coventry.\nCommercial radio stations include Hits Radio Birmingham, Capital Midlands, Capital Mid-Counties, Heart West Midlands, Hits Radio Coventry &amp; Warwickshire, Smooth West Midlands, Greatest Hits Radio Birmingham &amp; The West Midlands, and Greatest Hits Radio Black Country &amp; Shropshire.\nCommunity radio stations include:\nSport.\nThe West Midlands is home to numerous sports teams. In rugby union, the West Midlands is home to various clubs including Wasps RFC, Birmingham Barbarians, Sutton Coldfield RFC, Moseley Rugby Football Club, Birmingham &amp; Solihull RFC, and Coventry RFC.\nIn rugby league, the Midlands Hurricanes are the only team from the county playing in the professional ranks, currently in the third tier League 1.\nIn association football, there are six Premier League and Football League teams in the county of which two, Aston Villa, and Wolverhampton Wanderers, play in the Premier League. The following clubs are often referred to as the West Midlands \"Big Six\":\nThe West Midlands is also home to Warwickshire County Cricket Club, who are based at Edgbaston Cricket Ground, which also hosts Test matches and One Day Internationals. The Birmingham Panthers basketball team replaced the Birmingham Bullets and are currently based at a facility provided by the University of Wolverhampton in Walsall.\nThe West Midlands has its own Quidditch team, West Midlands Revolution (after its part in the Industrial Revolution), which won the Quidditch Premier League in 2017.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53113", "revid": "12418561", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53113", "title": "Charing Cross", "text": "Point from which distances from London are measured\nCharing Cross ( ) is a junction in Westminster, London, England, where six routes meet. Since the early 19th century, Charing Cross has been the notional \"centre of London\" and became the point from which distances from London are measured. Clockwise from north, the routes that meet at Charing Cross are: the east side of Trafalgar Square leading to St Martin's Place and then Charing Cross Road; the Strand leading to the City; Northumberland Avenue leading to the Thames Embankment; Whitehall leading to Parliament Square; The Mall leading to Admiralty Arch and Buckingham Palace; and two short roads leading to Pall Mall and St James's. \nHistorically, the name was derived from the hamlet of \"Charing\" ('Riverbend') that occupied the area of this important road junction in the middle ages, together with the grand Eleanor cross that once marked the site. The medieval monumental cross, the Charing Cross (1294\u20131647), was the largest and most ornate instance of a chain of medieval Eleanor crosses running from Lincoln to this location. It was a landmark for many centuries of the hamlet of Charing, Westminster, which later gave way to government property; a little of the Strand; and Trafalgar Square. The cross in its historical forms has lent its name to its locality, including Charing Cross Station. On the forecourt of this terminus station stands the ornate Queen Eleanor Memorial Cross, a taller emulation of the original, built to mark the station's opening in 1864.\nA bronze equestrian statue of Charles I, erected in 1675, stands on a high plinth, situated roughly where the medieval monumental cross (the 'Charing Cross') had previously stood for 353 years, since its construction in 1294, until it was destroyed in 1647 by the revolutionary government of Oliver Cromwell. The famously beheaded King, appearing ascendant, is the work of French sculptor Hubert Le Sueur. Charing Cross is marked on contemporary maps as the road junction around the statue's traffic island. It is a thoroughfare in postal addresses: Drummonds Bank, on the corner with The Mall, retains the address 49 Charing Cross and 1-4 Charing Cross continues to exist. The name previously applied to the whole stretch of road between Great Scotland Yard and Trafalgar Square, but since January 1931 most of this section of road has been designated part of the 'Whitehall' thoroughfare.\nHistory.\nLocation and etymology.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;Erect a rich and stately carved cross,\nWhereon her statue shall with glory shine;\nAnd henceforth see you call it Charing Cross.&lt;/poem&gt;\u2014\u200a\nThe name of the lost hamlet, Charing, is derived from the Old English word \"\u010bierring\", a river bend, in this case, referring to a bend in the Thames. A debunked folk etymology claimed the name is a corruption of \"ch\u00e8re reine\" (\"dear queen\" in French), but the name pre-dates Queen Eleanor's death by at least a hundred years.\nThe suffix \"Cross\" refers to the Eleanor cross made during 1291\u201394 by order of King Edward I as a memorial to his wife, Eleanor of Castile. This place latter comprised little more than wayside cottages serving the Royal Mews in the northern area of Trafalgar Square, and built specifically for the Palace of Whitehall (much of the east side of Whitehall). A variant from the hazy Middle English orthography of the late fourteenth century is \"Cherryngescrouche\".\nThe stone cross was the work of the medieval sculptor, Alexander of Abingdon. It was destroyed in 1647 on the orders of the purely Parliamentarian phase of the Long Parliament or Oliver Cromwell himself in the Civil War. A -high stone sculpture in front of Charing Cross railway station, erected in 1865, is a reimagining of the medieval cross, on a larger scale, more ornate, and not on the original site. It was designed by the architect E. M. Barry and carved by Thomas Earp of Lambeth out of Portland stone, Mansfield stone (a fine sandstone) and Aberdeen granite; and it stands 222 yards (203 metres) to the north-east of the original cross, focal to the station forecourt, facing the Strand.\nSince 1675 the site of the cross has been occupied by a statue of Charles I, the king beheaded during the Cromwellian era, mounted on a horse. The site is recognised by modern convention as the centre of London for determining distances (whether geodesically or by road network) in preference to other measurement points (such as St Paul's Cathedral which remains the root of the English and Welsh part of the Great Britain road numbering scheme). Charing Cross is marked on modern maps as a road junction, and was used in street numbering for the section of Whitehall between Great Scotland Yard and Trafalgar Square. Since 1 January 1931 this segment has more logically and officially become the northern end of Whitehall.\nSt Mary Rounceval.\nAt some time between 1232 and 1236, the Chapel and Hospital of St Mary Rounceval was founded at Charing. It occupied land at the corner of the modern Whitehall and into the centre of Northumberland Avenue, running down to a wharf by the river. It was an Augustinian house, tied to a mother house at Roncesvalles in the Pyrenees. The house and lands were seized for the king in 1379, under a statute \"for the forfeiture of the lands of schismatic aliens\". Protracted legal action returned some rights to the prior, but in 1414, Henry V suppressed the 'alien' houses. The priory fell into a long decline from lack of money and arguments regarding the collection of tithes with the parish church of St Martin-in-the-Fields. In 1541, religious artefacts were removed to St Margaret's, and the chapel was adapted as a private house; its almshouse were sequestered to the Royal Palace.\nIn 1608\u201309, the Earl of Northampton built Northumberland House on the eastern portion of the property. In June 1874, the duke's property at Charing Cross was purchased by the Metropolitan Board of Works for the formation of Northumberland Avenue.\nThe frontage of the Rounceval property caused the narrowing at the end of the Whitehall entry to Charing Cross, and formed the section of Whitehall formerly known as Charing Cross, until road widening in the 1930s caused the rebuilding of the south side of the street which created a wide thoroughfare.\nBattle.\nIn 1554, Charing Cross was the site of the final battle of Wyatt's Rebellion. This was an attempt by Thomas Wyatt and others to overthrow Queen Mary I of England, soon after her accession to the throne, and replace her with Lady Jane Grey. Wyatt's army had come from Kent, and with London Bridge barred to them, had crossed the river by what was then the next bridge upstream, at Hampton Court. Their circuitous route brought them down St Martin's Lane to Whitehall.\nThe palace was defended by 1000 men under Sir John Gage at Charing Cross; they retreated within Whitehall after firing their shot, causing consternation within, thinking the force had changed sides. The rebels \u2013 themselves fearful of artillery on the higher ground around St James's \u2013 did not press their attack and marched on to Ludgate, where they were met by the Tower Garrison and surrendered.\nCivil war removal.\nThe Eleanor Cross was pulled down, by order of Parliament, in 1647, at the time of the English Civil War, becoming the subject of a popular Royalist ballad:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;Methinks the common-council shou'd\nOf it have taken pity,\n'Cause, good old cross, it always stood\nSo firmly in the city.\nSince crosses you so much disdain,\nFaith, if I were you,\nFor fear the King should rule again,\nI'd pull down Tiburn too.&lt;/poem&gt;\nAt the Restoration (1660 or shortly after) eight of the regicides were executed here, including the notable Fifth Monarchist, Colonel Thomas Harrison. A statue of Charles I was, likewise in Charles II's reign, erected on the site. This had been made in 1633 by Hubert Le Sueur, in the reign of Charles I, but in 1649 Parliament ordered a man to destroy it; however he instead hid it and brought it back to the new King, Charles II (Charles I's son), and his Parliament who had the statue erected here in 1675.\nA prominent pillory, where malefactors were publicly flogged, stood alongside for centuries. About 200 yards to the east was the Hungerford Market, established at the end of the 16th century; and to the north was the King's Mews, or Royal Mews, the stables for the Palace of Whitehall and thus the King's own presence at the Houses of Parliament (Palace of Westminster). The whole area of the broad pavements of what was a three-way main junction with private (stables) turn-off was a popular place of street entertainment. Samuel Pepys records in his diaries visiting the taverns and watching the entertainments and executions that were held there. This was combined with the south of the mews when Trafalgar Square was built on the site in 1832, the rest of the stable yard becoming the National Gallery primarily.\nA major London coaching inn, the \"Golden Cross\" \u2013 first mentioned in 1643 \u2013 faced this junction. From here, in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, coaches linked variously terminuses of: Dover, Brighton, Bath, Bristol, Cambridge, Holyhead and York. The inn features in \"Sketches by Boz\", \"David Copperfield\" and \"The Pickwick Papers\" by Charles Dickens. In the latter, the dangers to public safety of the quite low archway to access the inn's coaching yard were memorably pointed out by Mr Jingle:\n\"Heads, heads \u2013 take care of your heads\", cried the loquacious stranger as they came out under the low archway which in those days formed the entrance to the coachyard. \"Terrible place \u2013 dangerous work \u2013 other day \u2013 five children \u2013 mother \u2013 tall lady, eating sandwiches \u2013 forgot the arch \u2013 crash \u2013 knock \u2013 children look round \u2013 mother's head off \u2013 sandwich in her hand \u2013 no mouth to put it in \u2013 head of family off.\"\nThe story echoes an accident of 11 April 1800, when the Chatham and Rochester coach was emerging from the gateway of the Golden Cross, and \"a young woman, sitting on the top, threw her head back, to prevent her striking against the beam; but there being so much luggage on the roof of the coach as to hinder her laying herself sufficiently back, it caught her face, and tore the flesh in a dreadful manner.\"\nThe inn and its yard, pillory, and what remained of the Royal Mews, made way for Trafalgar Square, and a new Golden Cross Hotel was built in the 1830s on the triangular block fronted by South Africa House. A nod to this is made by some offices on the Strand, in a building named Golden Cross House.\nCross memorial.\nThe railway station opened in 1864, fronted on the Strand with the Charing Cross Hotel. In 1865, a replacement cross was commissioned from E. M. Barry by the South Eastern Railway as the centrepiece of the station forecourt. It is not a replica, being of an ornate Victorian Gothic design based on George Gilbert Scott's Oxford Martyrs' Memorial (1838). The Cross rises in three main stages on an octagonal plan, surmounted by a spire and cross. The shields in the panels of the first stage are copied from the Eleanor Crosses and bear the arms of England, Castile, Leon and Ponthieu; above the 2nd parapet are eight statues of Queen Eleanor. The Cross was designated a Grade II* monument on 5 February 1970. The month before, the bronze equestrian statue of Charles, on a pedestal of carved Portland stone, was given Grade I listed protection.\nThe rebuilding of a monument to resemble the one lost under Cromwell's low church Britain took place in 1864 in Britain's main era of medieval revivalism. The next year the memorial was completed and Cardinal Wiseman died, having been appointed the first Archbishop of Westminster in 1850, with many Anglican churches also having restored or re-created their medieval ornamentations by the end of the century. By this time England was the epicentre of the Gothic Revival. It was intertwined with deeply philosophical movements associated with a re-awakening of \"High Church\" or Anglo-Catholic self-belief (and by the Catholic convert Augustus Welby Pugin) concerned by the growth of religious nonconformism.\nThe cross, having been revived, gave its name to a railway station, a tube station, a police station, a hospital, a hotel, a theatre, and a music hall (which had lain beneath the arches of the railway station). Charing Cross Road, the main route from the north (which became the east side of Trafalgar Square), was named after the railway station, itself a major destination for traffic, rather than after the original cross.\nOfficial use as central point.\nBy the late 18th century, the Charing Cross district was increasingly coming to be perceived as the \"centre\" of the metropolis (supplanting the traditional heartland of the City to the east). From the early 19th century, legislation applicable only to the London metropolis used Charing Cross as a central point to define its geographical scope. Its later use in legislation waned in favour of providing a schedule of local government areas and became mostly obsolete with the creation of Greater London in 1965.\nRoad distances from London continue to be measured from Charing Cross. Prior to its selection as a commonly agreed central datum point, various points were used for this purpose. John Ogilby's \"Britannia\" of 1675, of which editions and derivations continued to be published throughout the 18th century, used the \"Standard\" (a former conduit head) in Cornhill; while John Cary's \"New Itinerary\" of 1798 used the General Post Office in Lombard Street. \nThe milestones on the main turnpike roads were mostly measured from their terminus which was peripheral to the free-passage urban, London roads. Ten of these are notable: Hyde Park Corner, Whitechapel Church, the southern end of London Bridge, the east end of Westminster Bridge, Shoreditch Church, Tyburn Turnpike (Marble Arch), Holborn Bars, St Giles's Pound, Hicks Hall (as to the Great North Road), and the Stones' End in The Borough. Some roads into Surrey and Sussex were measured from St Mary-le-Bow church in the City. Some of these structures were later moved or destroyed, but reference to them persisted as if they still remained in place. An exaggerated but well-meaning criticism was that \"all the Books of Roads ... published, differ in the Situation of Mile Stones, and instead of being a Guide to the Traveller, serve only to confound him\".\nWilliam Camden speculated in 1586 that Roman roads in Britain had been measured from London Stone, a claim thus widely repeated, but unsupported by archaeological or other evidence.\nTransport.\nTo the east of the Charing Cross road junction is Charing Cross railway station, situated on the Strand. On the other side of the river, connected by the pedestrian Golden Jubilee Bridges, are Waterloo East and Waterloo stations.\nThe nearest London Underground stations are Charing Cross and Embankment.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53114", "revid": "122189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53114", "title": "OpenStep", "text": "Object-oriented application programming interface specification\nOpenStep is an object-oriented application programming interface (API) specification developed by NeXT. It provides a framework for building graphical user interfaces (GUIs) and developing software applications. OpenStep was designed to be platform-independent, allowing developers to write code that could run on multiple operating systems, including NeXTSTEP, Windows NT, and various Unix-based systems. It has influenced the development of other GUI frameworks, such as Cocoa for macOS, and GNUstep.\nOpenStep was principally developed by NeXT and Sun Microsystems, to allow advanced application development on Sun's operating systems, specifically Solaris. NeXT produced a version of OpenStep for its own Mach-based Unix OS, stylized in all capital letters as OPENSTEP. The software libraries that shipped with OPENSTEP are a superset of the original OpenStep specification, including many features from the original NeXTSTEP.\nHistory.\nWorkstations from Sun Microsystems were originally programmed at a relatively low-level making calls directly to the underlying Unix operating system and the SunView window system toolkit, and to libraries built atop those interfaces. This led to complex programming even for simple projects. An attempt to address this with an object oriented programming model was made in the mid-1980s with Sun's NeWS windowing system, but the combination of a complex application programming interface (API) and generally poor performance led to little real-world use and the system was eventually abandoned.\nSun then began looking for other options. Taligent was considered to be a competitor in the operating system and object markets, and Microsoft's Cairo was at least a consideration, even without any product releases from either. Taligent's theoretical newness was often compared to NeXT's older but mature and commercially established platform. Sun held exploratory meetings with Taligent before deciding upon building out its object application framework OpenStep in partnership with NeXT as a \"preemptive move against Taligent and Cairo\". Bud Tribble, a founding designer of the Macintosh and of NeXTStep, was now SunSoft's Vice President of Object Products to lead this decision. The 1993 partnership included a $10 million investment from Sun into NeXT. The deal was described as \"the first unadulterated piece of good news in the NeXT community in the last four years\".\nThe basic concept was to take a cut-down version of the NeXTSTEP operating system's object layers and adapt them to run on Sun's Solaris operating system, more specifically, Solaris on SPARC-based hardware. Most of the OpenStep effort was to strip away those portions of NeXTSTEP that depended on Mach or NeXT-specific hardware being present. This resulted in a smaller system that consisted primarily of Display PostScript, the Objective-C runtime and compilers, and the majority of the NeXTSTEP Objective-C libraries. Not included was the basic operating system, or the lower-level display system.\nSteve Jobs said \"We are ahead today, but the race is far from over. ... [In 1996,] Cairo will be very close behind, and Taligent will be very far behind.\" Sun's CEO Scott McNealy said, \"We have no insurance policy. We have made a firm one-company, one-architecture decision, not like Taligent getting a trophy spouse by signing up HP.\"\nThe first draft of the API was published by NeXT in mid 1994. Later that year they released an OpenStep compliant version of NeXTSTEP as OPENSTEP for Mach, supported on several of their platforms as well as Sun SPARC systems. NeXT submitted the OpenStep specification to the industry's object standards bodies. The official OpenStep API, published in September 1994, was the first to split the API between Foundation and Application Kit and the first to use the \"NS\" prefix. Early versions of NeXTSTEP use an \"NX\" prefix and contain only the Application Kit, relying on standard Unix libc types for low-level data structures. OPENSTEP for Mach remained NeXT's primary operating system product until the company merged with Apple Computer in 1997. OPENSTEP for Mach was then combined with technologies from the existing classic Mac OS to produce Mac OS X. iOS and iPadOS are also descendents of OPENSTEP for Mach, but targeted at touchscreen mobile phones and tablets, respectively.\nSun originally adopted the OpenStep environment with the intent of complementing Sun's CORBA-compliant object system, Solaris NEO (formerly known as Project DOE), by providing an object-oriented user interface toolkit to complement the object-oriented CORBA plumbing. The port involved integrating the OpenStep AppKit with the Display PostScript layer of the Sun X11 server, making the AppKit tolerant of multi-threaded code (as Project DOE was inherently heavily multi-threaded), implementing a Solaris daemon to simulate the behavior of Mach ports, extending the SunPro C++ compiler to support Objective-C using NeXT's ObjC runtime, writing an X11 window manager to implement the NeXTSTEP look and feel as much as possible, and integrating the NeXT development tools, such as Project Builder and Interface Builder, with the SunPro compiler. In order to provide a complete end-user environment, Sun also ported the NeXTSTEP-3.3 versions of several end-user applications, including Mail.app, Preview.app, Edit.app, Workspace Manager, and the Dock.\nThe OpenStep and CORBA parts of the products were later split, and NEO was released in late 1995 without the OpenStep environment. In March 1996, Sun announced Joe, a product to integrate NEO with Java. Sun shipped a beta release of the OpenStep environment for Solaris on July 22, 1996, and made it freely available for download in August 1996 for non-commercial use, and for sale in September 1996. OpenStep/Solaris was shipped only for the SPARC architecture.\nDescription.\nOpenStep differs from NeXTSTEP in various ways:\nThe OpenStep API specification defines three major components: Foundation Kit, the software framework; Application Kit, the GUI and graphics front-end; and Display PostScript, a 2D graphics system (for drawing windows and other graphics on the screen).\nBuilding on OpenStep.\nThe standardization on OpenStep also allowed for the creation of several new library packages that were delivered on the OpenStep platform. Unlike the operating system as a whole, these packages were designed to run stand-alone on practically any operating system. The idea was to use OpenStep code as a basis for network-wide applications running across different platforms, as opposed to using CORBA or some other system.\nPrimary among these packages was Portable Distributed Objects (PDO). PDO was essentially an even more \"stripped down\" version of OpenStep containing only the Foundation Kit technologies, combined with new libraries to provide remote invocation with very little code. Unlike OpenStep, which defined an operating system that applications would run in, under PDO the libraries were compiled into the application itself, creating a stand-alone \"native\" application for a particular platform. PDO was small enough to be easily portable, and versions were released for all major server vendors.\nIn the mid-1990s, NeXT staff took to writing in solutions to various CORBA magazine articles in a few lines of code, whereas the original article would fill several pages. Even though using PDO required the installation of a considerable amount of supporting code (Objective-C and the libraries), PDO applications were nevertheless considerably smaller than similar CORBA solutions, typically about one-half to one-third the size.\nThe similar D'OLE provided the same types of services, but presented the resulting objects as COM objects, with the goal of allowing programmers to create COM services running on high-powered platforms, called from Microsoft Windows applications. For instance one could develop a high-powered financial modeling application using D'OLE, and then call it directly from within Microsoft Excel. When D'OLE was first released, OLE by itself only communicated between applications running on a single machine. PDO enabled NeXT to demonstrate Excel talking to other Microsoft applications across a network before Microsoft themselves were able to implement this functionality (DCOM).\nAnother package developed on OpenStep was Enterprise Objects Framework (EOF), an object-relational mapping product.\nImplementations.\nOPENSTEP for Mach.\nNeXT's first operating system was NeXTSTEP, a sophisticated Mach-UNIX based operating system that originally ran only on NeXT's Motorola 68k-based workstations and that was then ported to run on 32-bit Intel x86-based \"IBM-compatible\" personal computers, PA-RISC-based workstations from Hewlett-Packard, and SPARC-based workstations from Sun Microsystems.\nNeXT completed an implementation of OpenStep on their existing Mach-based OS and called it OPENSTEP for Mach 4.0 (July, 1996), 4.1 (December, 1996), and 4.2 (January, 1997). It was, for all intents, NeXTSTEP 4.0, and still retained flagship NeXTSTEP technologies (such as DPS, UNIX underpinnings, user interface characteristics like the Dock and Shelf, and so on), and retained the classic NeXTSTEP user interface and styles. OPENSTEP for Mach was further improved, in comparison to NeXTSTEP 3.3, with vastly improved driver support \u2013 however the environment to actually write drivers was changed with the introduction of the object-oriented DriverKit.\nOPENSTEP for Mach supported Intel x86-based PC's, Sun's SPARC workstations, and NeXT's own 68k-based architectures, while the HP PA-RISC version was dropped. These versions continued to run on the underlying Mach-based OS used in NeXTSTEP. OPENSTEP for Mach became NeXT's primary OS from 1995 on, and was used mainly on the Intel platform. In addition to being a complete OpenStep implementation, the system was delivered with a complete set of NeXTSTEP libraries for backward compatibility. This was an easy thing to do in OPENSTEP due to library versioning, and OPENSTEP did not suffer in bloat because of it.\nSolaris OpenStep.\nIn addition to the OPENSTEP for Mach port for SPARC, Sun and NeXT developed an OpenStep compliant set of frameworks to run on Sun's Solaris operating system. After developing Solaris OpenStep, Sun lost interest in OpenStep and shifted its attention toward Java. As a virtual machine development environment, Java served as a direct competitor to OpenStep. Unlike other versions, Solaris OpenStep had Interface Builder and Project Builder sold in a separate package called Workshop OpenStep.\nOPENSTEP Enterprise.\nNeXT also delivered an implementation running on top of Windows NT 4.0 called OPENSTEP Enterprise (often abbreviated OSE). This was an unintentional demonstration on the true nature of the portability of programs created under the OpenStep specification. Programs for OPENSTEP for Mach could be ported to OSE with little difficulty. This allowed their existing customer base to continue using their tools and applications, but running them on Windows, to which many of them were in the process of switching. Never a clean match from the UI perspective, probably due to OPENSTEP's routing of window graphics through the Display Postscript server\u2014which was also ported to Windows\u2014OSE nevertheless managed to work fairly well and extended OpenStep's commercial lifespan.\nOPENSTEP and OSE had two revisions (and one major one that was never released) before NeXT was purchased by Apple in 1997.\nRhapsody, Mac OS X Server 1.0.\nAfter acquiring NeXT, Apple intended to ship Rhapsody as a reworked version of OPENSTEP for Mach for both the Mac and standard PCs. Rhapsody was OPENSTEP for Mach with a Copland appearance from Mac OS 8 and support for Java and Apple's own technologies, including ColorSync and QuickTime; it could be regarded as OPENSTEP 5. Two developer versions of Rhapsody were released, known as Developer Preview 1 and 2; these ran on a limited subset of both Intel and PowerPC hardware. Mac OS X Server 1.0 was the first commercial release of this operating system, and was delivered exclusively for PowerPC Mac hardware.\nDarwin, Mac OS X 10.0 and later.\nAfter replacing the Display Postscript WindowServer with Quartz, and responding to developers by including better backward compatibility for classic Mac OS applications through the addition of Carbon, Apple released Mac OS X and Mac OS X Server, starting at version 10.0; Mac OS X was renamed to macOS in 2016.\nmacOS's primary programming environment is essentially OpenStep (with certain additions such as XML property lists and URL classes for Internet connections) with macOS ports of the development libraries and tools, now called Cocoa.\nmacOS has since become the single most popular desktop Unix-like operating system in the world. Although it was possible to port applications built for OpenStep to earlier versions of macOS, macOS has since evolved beyond OpenStep substantially.\nGNUstep.\nGNUstep, a free software implementation of the NeXT libraries, began at the time of NeXTSTEP, predating OpenStep. While OpenStep and OSE were purchased by Apple, who effectively ended the commercial development of implementing OpenStep for other platforms, GNUstep is an ongoing open source project aiming to create a portable, free software implementation of the Cocoa/OpenStep libraries.\nGNUstep also features a fully functional development environment, reimplementations of some of the newer innovations from macOS's Cocoa framework, as well as its own extensions to the API.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53115", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53115", "title": "Lie groups", "text": ""}
{"id": "53116", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53116", "title": "Rs232c", "text": ""}
{"id": "53117", "revid": "445772", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53117", "title": "Milwaukee", "text": "Largest city in Wisconsin, United States\nMilwaukee is the most populous city in the state of Wisconsin. Located on the western shore of Lake Michigan, it is the 31st-most populous city in the United States and the fifth-most populous city in the Midwest with a population of 577,222 at the 2020 census. The Milwaukee metropolitan area, with over 1.57 million residents, is the 40th-largest metropolitan area in the nation. It is the county seat of Milwaukee County.\nMilwaukee was inhabited by many indigenous cultures, particularly the Potawatomi, Menominee, and Ho-Chunk. In the early 19th century, European settlers established the city as a hub for trade and industry, capitalizing on its location as a port. Its history was heavily influenced by Central European immigrants, and it remains a center of German-American culture. Milwaukee grew into a major brewing center, with the Miller, Pabst, and Schlitz breweries shaping its industrial identity. The city also became known for its strong labor movement. While it is an ethnically and culturally diverse city, it continues to be one of the most racially segregated cities as a result of early-20th century redlining.\nMilwaukee is rated as a \"Sufficiency\" city by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network, with a regional GDP of over $130\u00a0billion in 2023. The city is home to \"Fortune\" 500 companies Northwestern Mutual, Fiserv, ManpowerGroup, Rockwell Automation, and WEC Energy Group. Its cultural institutions include the Harley-Davidson Museum, Milwaukee Art Museum, Milwaukee Public Museum, and Summerfest, one of the world's largest music festivals. It is home to several higher education institutions, such as Marquette University, Milwaukee School of Engineering, and the University of Wisconsin\u2013Milwaukee. The city's major league professional sports teams include the Milwaukee Brewers (MLB) and Milwaukee Bucks (NBA).\nHistory.\nName.\nThe etymological origin of the name \"Milwaukee\" is disputed. Wisconsin academic Virgil J. Vogel has said, \"the name [...] Milwaukee is not difficult to explain, yet there are a number of conflicting claims made concerning it.\"\nOne theory says it comes from the Anishinaabemowin/Ojibwe word , meaning \"good land\", or words in closely related languages that mean the same. These included Menominee and Potawatomi. This theory was popularized by a line by Alice Cooper in the 1992 comedy film \"Wayne's World\". Another theory is that it stems from the Meskwaki language, whose term for \"gathering place\" is \"mahn-a-waukee\". The city of Milwaukee itself claims that the name is derived from , a Potawatomi word for \"council grounds\".\nThe name of the future city was spelled in many ways prior to 1844. People living west of the Milwaukee River preferred the modern-day spelling, while those east of the river often called it \"Milwaukie\". Other spellings included \"Melleokii\" (1679), \"Millioki\" (1679), \"Meleki\" (1684), \"Milwarik\" (1699), \"Milwacky\" (1761), \"Milwakie\" (1779), \"Millewackie\" (1817), \"Milwahkie\" (1820), and \"Milwalky\" (1821). The \"Milwaukee Sentinel\" used \"Milwaukie\" in its headline until it switched to \"Milwaukee\" on November 30, 1844. The city of Milwaukie, Oregon, retains the alternate spelling.\nIndigenous cultures.\nIndigenous cultures lived along the waterways for thousands of years. The first recorded inhabitants of the Milwaukee area were various Native American tribes: the Menominee, Meskwaki, Mascouten, Sauk, Potawatomi, and Ojibwe (all Algic/Algonquian peoples), and the Ho-Chunk (Winnebago, a Siouan people). Many of these people had lived around Green Bay before migrating to the Milwaukee area at about the time of European contact.\nIn the second half of the 18th century, the Native Americans living near Milwaukee played a role in all the major European wars on the American continent. During the French and Indian War, a group of \"Ojibwas and Pottawattamies from the far [Lake] Michigan\" (i.e., the area from Milwaukee to Green Bay) joined the French-Canadian Daniel Li\u00e9nard de Beaujeu at the Battle of the Monongahela. In the American Revolutionary War, the Native Americans around Milwaukee were some of the few groups to ally with the rebel Continentals.\nAfter the American Revolutionary War, the Native Americans fought the United States in the Northwest Indian War as part of the Council of Three Fires. During the War of 1812, they held a council in Milwaukee in June 1812, which resulted in their decision to attack Chicago in retaliation against American expansion. This resulted in the Battle of Fort Dearborn on August 15, 1812, the only known armed conflict in Chicago. This battle convinced the American government to remove these groups of Native Americans from their indigenous land. After being attacked in the Black Hawk War in 1832, the Native Americans in Milwaukee signed the 1833 Treaty of Chicago with the United States. In exchange for ceding their lands in the area, they were to receive monetary payments and lands west of the Mississippi in Indian Territory.\nEuropean settlement.\nEuropeans arrived in the Milwaukee area before the 1833 Treaty of Chicago. French missionaries and traders first passed through the area in the late 17th and 18th centuries. Alexis Laframboise, coming from Michilimackinac (now in Michigan), settled a trading post in 1785 and is considered the first resident of European descent in the Milwaukee region.\nOne story on the origin of Milwaukee's name says,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe spelling \"Milwaukie\" lives on in Milwaukie, Oregon, named after the Wisconsin city in 1847, before the current spelling was universally accepted.\nMilwaukee has three \"founding fathers\": Solomon Juneau, Byron Kilbourn, and George H. Walker. Solomon Juneau was the first of the three to come to the area, in 1818. He founded a town called Juneau's Side, or Juneautown, that began attracting more settlers. In competition with Juneau, Byron Kilbourn established Kilbourntown west of the Milwaukee River. He ensured the roads running toward the river did not join with those on the east side. This accounts for the large number of angled bridges that still exist in Milwaukee today. Further, Kilbourn distributed maps of the area which only showed Kilbourntown, implying Juneautown did not exist or the river's east side was uninhabited and thus undesirable. The third prominent developer was George H. Walker. He claimed land to the south of the Milwaukee River, along with Juneautown, where he built a log house in 1834. This area grew and became known as Walker's Point.\nThe first large wave of settlement to the areas that would later become Milwaukee County and the City of Milwaukee began in 1835, following removal of the tribes in the Council of Three Fires. Early that year it became known that Juneau and Kilbourn intended to lay out competing town-sites. By the year's end both had purchased their lands from the government and made their first sales. There were perhaps 100 new settlers in this year, mostly from New England and other Eastern states. On September 17, 1835, the first election was held in Milwaukee; the number of votes cast was 39.\nBy 1840, the three towns had grown, along with their rivalries. There were intense battles between the towns, mainly Juneautown and Kilbourntown, which culminated with the Milwaukee Bridge War of 1845. Following the Bridge War, on January 31, 1846, the towns were combined to incorporate as the City of Milwaukee, and elected Solomon Juneau as Milwaukee's first mayor.\nGrowth and immigration.\nMilwaukee began to grow as a city as high numbers of immigrants, mainly German, made their way to Wisconsin during the 1840s and 1850s. Scholars classify German immigration to the United States in three major waves, and Wisconsin received a significant number of immigrants from all three. The first wave from 1845 to 1855 consisted mainly of people from Southwestern Germany, the second wave from 1865 to 1873 concerned primarily Northwestern Germany, while the third wave from 1880 to 1893 came from Northeastern Germany. By 1900, 34 percent of Milwaukee's population was of German background. The largest number of German immigrants to Milwaukee came from Prussia, followed by Bavaria, Saxony, Hanover, and Hesse-Darmstadt. Milwaukee gained its reputation as the most German of American cities not just from the large number of German immigrants it received, but also for the sense of community that the immigrants established.\nMost German immigrants came to Wisconsin in search of inexpensive farmland. However, immigration began to change in character and size in the late 1840s and early 1850s, due to the 1848 revolutionary movements in Europe. After 1848, hopes for a united Germany had failed, and revolutionary and radical Germans, known as the \"Forty-Eighters\", immigrated to the U.S. to avoid imprisonment and persecution by German authorities.\nOne of the most famous \"liberal revolutionaries\" of 1848 was Carl Schurz. He later explained in 1854 why he came to Milwaukee,\n\"It is true, similar things [cultural events and societies] were done in other cities where the Forty-eighters [\"sic\"] had congregated. But so far as I know, nowhere did their influence so quickly impress itself upon the whole social atmosphere as in 'German Athens of America' as Milwaukee was called at the time.\"\nSchurz was referring to the various clubs and societies Germans developed in Milwaukee. The American Turners established its own Normal College for teachers of physical education and the German-English Academy. Milwaukee's German element is still strongly present; the city celebrates its German culture by annually hosting a German Fest in July and an Oktoberfest in October. Milwaukee boasts a number of German restaurants, as well as a traditional German beer hall. A German language immersion school is offered for children in grades K\u20135.\nAlthough the German presence in Milwaukee after the Civil War remained strong and their largest wave of immigrants had yet to land, other groups also made their way to the city. Foremost among these were Polish immigrants. Because Milwaukee offered the Polish immigrants an abundance of low-paying entry-level jobs, it became home to one of the largest Polish-American communities. For many residents, Milwaukee's South Side is synonymous with the Polish community. Milwaukee County's Polish population of 30,000 in 1890 rose to 100,000 by 1915. St. Stanislaus Catholic Church and the surrounding neighborhood was the center of Polish life in Milwaukee. As the Polish community surrounding St. Stanislaus continued to grow, Mitchell Street became known as the \"Polish Grand Avenue\". As Mitchell Street grew more dense, the Polish population started moving south to the Lincoln Village neighborhood, home to the Basilica of St. Josaphat and Kosciuszko Park. Other Polish communities started on the East Side of Milwaukee. Jones Island was a major commercial fishing center settled mostly by Kashubians and other Poles from around the Baltic Sea. Milwaukee has the fifth-largest Polish population in the U.S. at 45,467, ranking behind New York City (211,203), Chicago (165,784), Los Angeles (60,316) and Philadelphia (52,648). The city holds Polish Fest, an annual celebration of Polish culture and cuisine.\nIn addition to the Germans and Poles, Milwaukee received a large influx of other European immigrants from Lithuania, Italy, Ireland, France, Russia, Bohemia, and Sweden, who included Jews, Lutherans, and Catholics. Italian Americans total 16,992 in the city, but in Milwaukee County, they number at 38,286. The largest Italian-American festival in the area, \"Festa Italiana\", is held in the city, while \"Irishfest\" is the largest Irish-American festival in southeast Wisconsin. By 1910, Milwaukee shared the distinction with New York City of having the largest percentage of foreign-born residents in the United States. In 1910, European descendants (\"Whites\") represented 99.7% of the city's total population of 373,857. Milwaukee has a strong Greek Orthodox Community, many of whom attend the Annunciation Greek Orthodox Church on Milwaukee's northwest side, designed by Wisconsin-born architect Frank Lloyd Wright. Milwaukee has a sizable Croatian population, with Croatian churches and their own historic and successful soccer club The Croatian Eagles at Croatian Park in Franklin, Wisconsin.\nMilwaukee also has a large Serbian population, who have developed Serbian restaurants, a Serbian K\u20138 School, and Serbian churches, along with an American Serb Hall. The American Serb Hall in Milwaukee is known for its Friday fish fries and popular events. Many U.S. presidents have visited Milwaukee's Serb Hall in the past. The Bosnian population is growing in Milwaukee as well due to late-20th-century immigration after the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina.\nDuring this time, a small community of African Americans migrated from the South in the Great Migration. They settled near each other, forming a community that came to be known as Bronzeville. As industry boomed, more migrants came, and African-American influence grew in Milwaukee.\nIn 1892, Whitefish Bay, South Milwaukee, and Wauwatosa were incorporated. They were followed by Cudahy (1895), North Milwaukee (1897) and East Milwaukee, later known as Shorewood, in 1900. In the early 20th century, West Allis (1902), and West Milwaukee (1906) were added, which completed the first generation of \"inner-ring\" suburbs.\n20th century to present.\nDuring the first sixty years of the 20th century, Milwaukee was the major city in which the Socialist Party of America earned the highest votes. Milwaukee elected three mayors who ran on the ticket of the Socialist Party: Emil Seidel (1910\u20131912), Daniel Hoan (1916\u20131940), and Frank Zeidler (1948\u20131960), with Victor L. Berger elected as the first socialist congressman in 1910. Often referred to as \"Sewer Socialists\", the Milwaukee Socialists were characterized by their practical approach to government and labor. On October 14, 1912, former president Theodore Roosevelt, who ran for a third term under his progressive, Bull Moose Party, survived an assassination attempt by salonkeeper John Fleming Shrank, while making a speech at the Gilpatrick Hotel. On November 24, 1917, Milwaukee was the site of a terrorist explosion when a large black powder bomb exploded at the central police station at Oneida and Broadway. Nine members of the department were killed in the blast, along with a female civilian, Catherine Walker. It was suspected at the time that the bomb had been placed outside the church by anarchists, particularly the \"Galleanist\" faction led by adherents of Luigi Galleani. At the time, the bombing was the most fatal single event in national law enforcement history.\nIn the 1920s, Chicago gangster activity came north to Milwaukee during the Prohibition era. Al Capone, noted Chicago mobster, owned a home in the Milwaukee suburb Brookfield, where moonshine was made. The house still stands on a street named after Capone.\nBy 1925, around 9,000 Mexicans lived in Milwaukee, but the Great Depression forced many of them to move back south. In the 1950s, the Hispanic community was beginning to emerge. They arrived for jobs, filling positions in the manufacturing and agricultural sectors. During this time there were labor shortages due to the immigration laws that had reduced immigration from Eastern and Southern Europe. Additionally, strikes contributed to the labor shortages.\nIn the mid-20th century, African Americans from Chicago moved to the North side of Milwaukee. Milwaukee's East Side has attracted a population of Russians and other Eastern Europeans who began migrating in the 1990s, after the end of the Cold War. Many Hispanics of mostly Puerto Rican and Mexican heritage live on the south side of Milwaukee. In the 1930s the city was severely segregated via redlining. In 1960, African-American residents made up 15 percent of Milwaukee's population, yet the city was still among the most segregated of that time. As of 2019, at least three out of four black residents in Milwaukee would have to move to create racially integrated neighborhoods.\nMilwaukee's population peaked at 741,324 in 1960, where the Census Bureau reported the city's population as 91.1% white and 8.4% black. By the late 1960s, Milwaukee's population had started to decline as people moved to suburbs, aided by ease of highways and offering the advantages of less crime, new housing, and lower taxation. Milwaukee had a population of 594,833 by 2010, while the population of the overall metropolitan area increased. Given its large immigrant population and historic neighborhoods, Milwaukee avoided the severe declines of some of its fellow \"Rust Belt\" cities.\nSince the 1980s, the city has begun to make strides in improving its economy, neighborhoods, and image, resulting in the revitalization of neighborhoods such as the Historic Third Ward, Lincoln Village, the East Side, and more recently Walker's Point and Bay View, along with attracting new businesses to its downtown area. These efforts have substantially slowed the population decline and have stabilized many parts of Milwaukee. Largely through its efforts to preserve its history, Milwaukee was named one of the \"Dozen Distinctive Destinations\" by the National Trust for Historic Preservation in 2006. Historic Milwaukee walking tours provide a guided tour of Milwaukee's historic districts, including topics on Milwaukee's architectural heritage, its glass skywalk system, and the Milwaukee Riverwalk.\nIn the 2010s and 2020s, Milwaukee underwent several development projects, including the opening of the Bradley Symphony Center. The Hop streetcar system began operation in 2018, and the Fiserv Forum opened the same year.\nThe city was hit by widespread flash flooding on August 9\u201310, 2025, after the second-most recorded rain over a two-day period in the city's history.\nGeography.\nMilwaukee lies along the shores and bluffs of Lake Michigan at the confluence of three rivers: the Menomonee, the Kinnickinnic, and the Milwaukee. Smaller rivers, such as the Root River and Lincoln Creek, also flow through the city.\nMilwaukee's terrain is sculpted by the glacier path and includes steep bluffs along Lake Michigan that begin about a mile (1.6\u00a0km) north of downtown. In addition, west of Milwaukee is the Kettle Moraine and lake country that provides an industrial landscape combined with inland lakes.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which, is land and is water. The city is overwhelmingly (99.89% of its area) in Milwaukee County, but there are two tiny unpopulated portions that extend into neighboring counties.\nCityscape.\nNorth\u2013south streets are numbered, and east\u2013west streets are named. However, north\u2013south streets east of 1st Street are named, like east\u2013west streets. The north\u2013south numbering line is along the Menomonee River (east of Hawley Road) and Fairview Avenue/Golfview Parkway (west of Hawley Road), with the east\u2013west numbering line defined along 1st Street (north of Oklahoma Avenue) and Chase/Howell Avenue (south of Oklahoma Avenue). This numbering system is also used to the north by Mequon in Ozaukee County, and by some Waukesha County communities.\nMilwaukee is crossed by Interstate 43 and Interstate 94, which come together downtown at the Marquette Interchange. The Interstate 894 bypass (which as of May 2015 also contains Interstate 41) runs through portions of the city's southwest side, and Interstate 794 comes out of the Marquette interchange eastbound, bends south along the lakefront and crosses the harbor over the Hoan Bridge, then ends near the Bay View neighborhood and becomes the \"Lake Parkway\" (WIS-794).\nOne of the distinctive traits of Milwaukee's residential areas are the neighborhoods full of so-called Polish flats. These are two-family homes with separate entrances, but with the units stacked one on top of another instead of side-by-side. This arrangement enables a family of limited means to purchase both a home and a modestly priced rental apartment unit. Since Polish-American immigrants to the area prized land ownership, this solution, which was prominent in their areas of settlement within the city, came to be associated with them.\nThe tallest building in the city is the U.S. Bank Center in downtown Milwaukee, at 601 feet ( 183m ) tall, completed in 1973. In 2024 \"Architectural Digest\", a prominent design publication, rated Milwaukee's skyline as the 15th most beautiful skyline in the world.\nClimate.\nMilwaukee's location in the Great Lakes Region often has rapidly changing weather, producing a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Dfa\"), with cold, snowy winters, and hot, humid summers. The warmest month of the year is July, with a mean temperature of , while January is the coldest month, with a mean temperature of .\nBecause of Milwaukee's proximity to Lake Michigan, a convection current forms around mid-afternoon in light wind, resulting in the so-called \"lake breeze\" \u2013 a smaller scale version of the more common sea breeze. The lake breeze is most common between March and July. This onshore flow causes cooler temperatures to move inland usually , with much warmer conditions persisting further inland. Because Milwaukee's official climate site, Milwaukee Mitchell International Airport, is only from the lake, seasonal temperature variations are less extreme than in many other locations of the Milwaukee metropolitan area.\nAs the sun sets, the convection current reverses and an offshore flow ensues causing a land breeze. After a land breeze develops, warmer temperatures flow east toward the lakeshore, sometimes causing high temperatures during the late evening. The lake breeze is not a daily occurrence and will not usually form if a southwest, west, or northwest wind generally exceeds . The lake moderates cold air outbreaks along the lakeshore during winter months.\nAside from the lake's influence, overnight lows in downtown Milwaukee year-round are often much warmer than suburban locations because of the urban heat island effect. Onshore winds elevate daytime relative humidity levels in Milwaukee as compared to inland locations nearby.\nThunderstorms in the region can be dangerous and damaging, bringing hail and high winds. In rare instances, they can bring a tornado. However, almost all summer rainfall in the city is brought by these storms. In spring and fall, longer events of prolonged, lighter rain bring most of the precipitation. A moderate snow cover can be seen on or linger for many winter days, but even during meteorological winter, on average, over 40% of days see less than on the ground.\nMilwaukee tends to experience highs that are or above on about nine days per year, and lows at or below on six to seven nights. Extremes range from set on July 24, 1934, down to on both January 17, 1982, and February 4, 1996. The 1982 event, also known as Cold Sunday, featured temperatures as low as in some of the suburbs as little as to the north of Milwaukee.\nClimate change.\nAccording to the United States' Environmental Protection Agency, Milwaukee is threatened by ongoing climate change which is warming the planet. These risks include worsened heat waves because many of its residents do not possess air conditioners, concerns about the water quality of Lake Michigan, and increased chances of flooding from intense rainstorms. In 2018, Milwaukee mayor Tom Barrett announced that the city would uphold its obligations under the Paris Agreement, despite the United States' withdrawal, and set a goal moving a quarter of the city's electricity sources to renewable energy by 2025. These have included expansions in the city's solar power-generating capacity and a wind turbine's installation near the Port of Milwaukee. Other actions being taken include local incentives for energy-saving upgrades to homes and businesses.\nWater.\nIn the 1990s and 2000s, Lake Michigan experienced large algae blooms, which can threaten aquatic life. Responding to this problem, in 2009 the city became an \"Innovating City\" in the Global Compact Cities Program. The Milwaukee Water Council was also formed in 2009. Its objectives were to \"better understand the processes related to freshwater systems dynamics\" and to develop \"a policy and management program aimed at balancing the protection and utilization of freshwater\". The strategy used the Circles of Sustainability method. Instead of treating the water quality problem as a single environmental issue, the Water Council draws on the Circles method to analyze the interconnection among ecological, economic, political and cultural factors. This holistic water treatment helped Milwaukee win the US Water Alliance's 2012 US Water Prize. In 2009 the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee also established the University of Wisconsin\u2013Milwaukee School of Freshwater Sciences, the first graduate school of limnology in the United States.\nAs of 2021[ [update]], there are more than 3,000 drinking fountains in the Milwaukee Public School District; 183 had lead levels above 15 parts per billion (ppb). 15 ppb is the federal action level in which effort needs to be taken to lower these lead levels. In the city, more than 10% of children test positive for dangerous lead levels in their blood as of 2019[ [update]].\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMilwaukee is the 31st-most populous city in the United States, and anchors the 39th-most populous metropolitan statistical area in the US. Its combined statistical area population makes it the 29th-most populous in the US. The city's population has dropped at every census count since 1970. In 2012, Milwaukee was listed as a gamma city by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network.\n2020 census.\nIn the 2020 United States census, the population was 577,222. The population density was . There were 257,723 housing units at an average density of . Ethnically, the population was 20.1% Hispanic or Latino of any race. When grouping both Hispanic and non-Hispanic people together by race, the city was 38.6% Black or African American, 36.1% White, 5.2% Asian, 0.9% Native American, 9.0% from other races, and 10.1% from two or more races.\nThe 2020 census population of the city included 1,198 people incarcerated in adult correctional facilities and 9,625 people in university student housing.\nIn American Community Survey estimates for 2016\u20132020, the median household income was $43,125, and the median family income was $51,170. Male full-time worker median income was $42,859, versus $37,890 for female workers. The per capita income for the city was $24,167. About 19.6% of families and 24.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including 35.1% of those under age 18 and 14.5% of those age 65 or over. Of the population age 25 and over, 84.4% were high school graduates or higher and 24.6% had a bachelor's degree or higher.\nRacial and ethnic groups.\nIn the 2010 Census, 44.8% of the population was White (37.0% non-Hispanic white), 40.0% was Black or African American, 0.8% American Indian and Alaska Native, 3.5% Asian, 3.4% from two or more races. 17.3% of Milwaukee's population was of Hispanic, Latino, or Spanish origin (they may be of any race) (11.7% Mexican, 4.1% Puerto Rican).\nIn the 2006\u20132008 American Community Survey, 38.3% of Milwaukee's residents reported having African American ancestry and 20.8% reported German ancestry. Other significant population groups include Polish (8.8%), Irish (6.5%), Italian (3.6%), English (2.8%), and French (1.7%). According to the 2010 United States census, the largest Hispanic backgrounds in Milwaukee as of 2010 were: Mexican (69,680), Puerto Rican (24,672), Other Hispanic or Latino (3,808), Central American (1,962), South American (1,299), Cuban (866) and Dominican (720). Per the 2022 American Community Survey five-year estimates, the German American population was 87,601. Per the 2023 American Community Survey one-year estimates, the Mexican American population was 82,845, comprising over 60% of the city's Latino population.\nin 2002, the Milwaukee metropolitan area was cited as being the most segregated in the U.S. in a \"Jet Magazine\" article. The source of this information was a segregation index developed in the mid-1950s and used since 1964. In 2003, a non-peer-reviewed study was conducted by hired researchers at the University of Wisconsin\u2013Milwaukee which claimed Milwaukee is not \"hypersegregated\" and instead ranks as the 43rd most integrated city in America. According to research by demographer William H. Frey using the index of dissimilarity method and data from the 2010 United States census, Milwaukee has the highest level of black-white segregation of any of the 100 largest metropolitan areas in the United States. Through continued dialogue between Milwaukee's citizens, the city is trying to reduce racial tensions and the rate of segregation. With demographic changes in the wake of white flight, segregation in metropolitan Milwaukee is primarily in the suburbs rather than the city, as in the era of Father Groppi.\nIn 2015, Milwaukee was rated as the \"worst city for black Americans\" based on disparities in employment and income levels. The city's black population experiences high levels of incarceration and a severe educational achievement gap.\nPer the 2022 American Community Survey five-year estimates, the Hmong American population was 11,469, numerically the largest Hmong population of any city in Wisconsin. In 2013, Mark Pfeifer, the editor of the \"Hmong Studies Journal\", stated Hmong in Milwaukee had recently been moving to the northwest side of Milwaukee; they historically lived in the north and south areas of Milwaukee. The Hmong American Peace Academy/International Peace Academy, a K\u201312 school system in Milwaukee centered on the Hmong community, opened in 2004.\nPolish people, Slavs, European Jews, people from the Mediterranean including Greeks, Italians, and Syrians immigrated to Milwaukee after 1880.\nReligion.\nIn 2010, approximately 51.8% of residents in the Milwaukee area said they regularly attended religious services. In 2012, 24.6% of the Milwaukee area population identified as Catholic, 10.8% as Lutheran, 1.6% as Methodist, and 0.6% as Jewish. The Milwaukee metro area contains the majority of the state's Jewish population, and has a long history of Jewish immigration from German-speaking and Eastern European countries.\nThe Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Milwaukee is headquartered in the city. The School Sisters of St. Francis have their motherhouse in Milwaukee, and several other religious orders have a significant presence in the area, including the Jesuits and Franciscans. Milwaukee, where Joseph Kentenich was exiled from 1952 to 1965, is the center for the Schoenstatt Movement in the US.\nMilwaukee is home to numerous historic Catholic parishes, including the Cathedral of St. John the Evangelist. The oldest church building in Milwaukee is St. Joan of Arc Chapel, which was built c.\u20091420 in France and presently located on the Marquette University campus. The Basilica of St. Josaphat was the first church to be given basicila designation in Wisconsin and the third in the US. Holy Hill National Shrine of Mary, Help of Christians, northwest of Milwaukee in Hubertus, Wisconsin, was made a basilica in 2006.\nThe Episcopal Diocese of Milwaukee is based in the city, as are several Lutheran bodies, including the Greater Milwaukee Synod of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America; the South Wisconsin District of the Lutheran Church \u2013 Missouri Synod, which operates Concordia University Wisconsin in the suburb of Mequon; and the Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod, which was founded in Milwaukee in 1850 and has headquarters in the suburb of Waukesha. Milwaukee Lutheran High School and Wisconsin Lutheran High School are the nation's oldest Lutheran high schools.\nThe St. Sava Serbian Orthodox Cathedral is a landmark of the Serbian community in Milwaukee, located by the American Serb hall, which the congregation also operated until putting it up for sale in January 2021 due to financial challenges caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has a presence in the Milwaukee area. The Milwaukee area has two stakes, with fourteen wards and four branches among them. The closest temple is the Chicago Illinois Temple. The area is part of the Wisconsin Milwaukee Mission.\nEconomy.\nMilwaukee is the home to the international headquarters of five \"Fortune\" 500 companies: Northwestern Mutual, Fiserv, ManpowerGroup, Rockwell Automation, and WEC Energy Group. Other companies based in Milwaukee include Harley-Davidson, Briggs &amp; Stratton, Brady Corporation, Baird (investment bank), Alliance Federated Energy, Sensient Technologies, Hal Leonard, Direct Supply, Rite-Hite, the American Society for Quality, A. O. Smith, Rexnord, Master Lock, Marcus Corporation, REV Group, American Signal Corporation, GE Healthcare, Diagnostic Imaging and Clinical Systems, and MGIC Investments.\nThe Milwaukee metropolitan area ranks fifth in the United States in terms of the number of \"Fortune\" 500 company headquarters as a share of the population. Milwaukee also has a large number of financial service firms, particularly those specializing in mutual funds and transaction processing systems, and a number of publishing and printing companies. Service and managerial jobs are the fastest-growing segments of the Milwaukee economy, and health care alone makes up 27% of the jobs in the city.\nBrewing.\nMilwaukee became synonymous with Germans and beer beginning in the 1840s. The Germans had long enjoyed beer and set up breweries when they arrived in Milwaukee. By 1856, there were more than two dozen breweries in Milwaukee, most of them owned and operated by Germans. Besides making beer for the rest of the nation, Milwaukeeans enjoyed consuming the various beers produced in the city's breweries. As early as 1843, pioneer historian James Buck recorded 138 taverns in Milwaukee, an average of one per forty residents. Today, beer halls and taverns are abundant in the city, but only one of the major breweries\u2014Miller\u2014remains in Milwaukee.\nMilwaukee was once the home to four of the world's largest beer breweries (Schlitz, Blatz, Pabst, and Miller), and was the number one beer producing city in the world for many years, giving it the nickname \" Brew City \". As late as 1981, Milwaukee had the greatest brewing capacity in the world. Despite the decline in its position as the world's leading beer producer after the loss of two of those breweries, Miller Brewing Company remains a key employer by employing over 2,200 of the city's workers. Because of Miller's position as the second-largest beer-maker in the U.S., the city remains known as a beer town. The city and surrounding areas are seeing a resurgence in microbreweries, nanobreweries and brewpubs with the craft beer movement.\nThe historic Milwaukee Brewery in \"Miller Valley\" at 4000 West State Street, is the oldest functioning major brewery in the United States. In addition to Miller and the heavily automated Leinenkugel's brewery in the old Blatz 10th Street plant, other stand-alone breweries in Milwaukee include Milwaukee Brewing Company, a microbrewery in Walker's Point neighborhood; Lakefront Brewery, a microbrewery in Brewers Hill; and Sprecher Brewery, a German brewery that also brews craft sodas. Since 2015, nearly two dozen craft brewing companies have been established in the city.\nOther industries.\nMilwaukee was situated as a port city and a center for collecting and distributing produce. Some of the new immigrants who were settling into the new state of Wisconsin during the middle of the 19th century were wheat farmers. By 1860, Wisconsin was one of the major producers of wheat. Rail transport was needed to transport this grain from the wheat fields of Wisconsin to Milwaukee's harbor. Improvements in railways at the time made this possible.\nThere was intense competition for markets with Chicago, situated across the state line in Illinois, and, to a lesser degree, with Racine and Kenosha in Wisconsin. Eventually, Chicago won out due to its superior financial markets and transportation position, including the Chicago Portage and being the hub of the railroad lines in the United States. Milwaukee did solidify its place as the commercial capital of Wisconsin and an important market in the Midwest.\nBecause of its easy access to Lake Michigan and other waterways, Milwaukee's Menomonee Valley has historically been home to manufacturing, stockyards, rendering plants, shipping, and other heavy industry. Manufacturing was concentrated on the north side, with a peak of over 50 manufacturers in that industrialized area.\nReshaping of the valley began with the railroads built by city co-founder Byron Kilbourn to bring product from Wisconsin's farm interior to the port. By 1862 Milwaukee was the largest shipper of wheat on the planet, and related industry developed. Grain elevators were built and, due to Milwaukee's dominant German immigrant population, breweries sprang up around the processing of barley and hops. A number of tanneries were constructed, of which the Pfister &amp; Vogel tannery grew to become the largest in America.\nIn 1843 George Burnham and his brother Jonathan opened a brickyard near 16th Street. When a durable and distinct cream-colored brick came out of the clay beds, other brickyards sprang up to take advantage of this resource. Because many of the city's buildings were built using this material it earned the nickname \"Cream City\", and consequently the brick was called Cream City brick. By 1881 the Burnham brickyard, which employed 200 men and peaked at 15\u00a0million bricks a year, was the largest in the world.\nFlour mills, packing plants, breweries, railways and tanneries further industrialized the valley. With the marshlands drained and the Kinnickinnic and Milwaukee Rivers dredged, attention turned to the valley. Along with the processing industries, bulk commodity storage, machining, and manufacturing entered the scene. The valley was home to the Milwaukee Road, Falk Corporation, Cutler-Hammer, Harnischfeger Corporation, Chain Belt Company, Nordberg Manufacturing Company and other industry giants. Early in the 20th century, Milwaukee was home to several pioneer brass era automobile makers, including Ogren (1919\u20131922).\nCulture.\nMilwaukee is a popular location for sailing, boating, and kayaking on Lake Michigan, ethnic dining, and cultural festivals. Often referred to as the City of Festivals, Milwaukee has various cultural events which take place throughout the summer at Henry Maier Festival Park, on the lake. Museums and cultural events, such as Jazz in the Park, occur weekly in downtown parks.\nMuseums.\nThe Milwaukee Art Museum is perhaps Milwaukee's most visually prominent cultural attraction, especially its $100\u00a0million wing designed by Santiago Calatrava in his first American commission. The museum includes a \"brise soleil\", a moving sunscreen that unfolds similarly to the wing of a bird. The Grohmann Museum at the Milwaukee School of Engineering contains the world's most comprehensive art collection dedicated to the evolution of human work. Haggerty Museum of Art on the Marquette University campus houses several classical masterpieces and is open to the public. The Villa Terrace Decorative Arts Museum is the former home of Lloyd Smith, president of the A.O. Smith corporation, and has a terraced garden, an assortment of Renaissance art, and rotating exhibits. Charles Allis Art Museum, in the Tudor-style mansion of Charles Allis, hosts several changing exhibits every year in the building's original antique furnished setting.\nThe Milwaukee Public Museum has been Milwaukee's primary natural history and human history museum for 125 years, with over of permanent exhibits. Exhibits feature Africa, Europe, the Arctic, Oceania, and South and Middle America, ancient Western civilizations, dinosaurs, the tropical rainforest, streets of Old Milwaukee, a European Village, live insects and arthropods, a Samson gorilla replica, the Puelicher Butterfly Wing, hands-on laboratories, and animatronics. The museum also contains an IMAX movie theater/planetarium. Milwaukee Public Museum owns the world's largest dinosaur skull.\nDiscovery World, Milwaukee's largest museum dedicated to science, is just south of the Milwaukee Art Museum along the lakefront. Visitors are drawn by its interactive exhibits, saltwater and freshwater aquariums, as well as touch tanks and digital theaters. A double helix staircase wraps around the kinetic sculpture of a human genome. The S/V Dennis Sullivan Schooner Ship docked at Discovery World is the world's only re-creation of an 1880s-era three-masted vessel and the first schooner to be built in Milwaukee in over 100 years. It teaches visitors about the Great Lakes and Wisconsin's maritime history. Betty Brinn Children's Museum is geared toward children under ten years of age and is filled with hands-on exhibits and interactive programs, offering families a chance to learn together. Voted one of the top ten museums for children by Parents Magazine, it exemplifies the philosophy that constructive play nurtures the mind.\nPabst Mansion was built in 1892 by beer tycoon Frederick Pabst and was once considered the jewel of Milwaukee's famous avenue of mansions called the \"Grand Avenue\". Interior rooms have been restored with period furniture, to create an authentic replica of a Victorian Mansion. The Milwaukee County Historical Society features Milwaukee during the late 19th century through the mid-20th century, including a research library. The Wisconsin Black Historical Society documents and preserves the historical heritage of African descent in Wisconsin, exhibiting collecting and disseminating materials depicting this heritage. America's Black Holocaust Museum, founded by lynching survivor James Cameron, featured exhibits which chronicle the injustices suffered throughout history by African Americans in the United States. The Jewish Museum Milwaukee is dedicated to preserving and presenting the history of the Jewish people in southeastern Wisconsin and celebrating the continuum of Jewish heritage and culture.\nThe Harley-Davidson Museum, opened in 2008, pays tribute to Harley-Davidson motorcycles. The Mitchell Gallery of Flight at Milwaukee Mitchell International Airport exhibits Milwaukee's aviation history.\nPerforming arts.\nMilwaukee is home to a large performing arts scene, with numerous groups and venues showcasing a variety of performances. The Bel Canto Chorus and Florentine Opera contribute to the city's choral and operatic traditions. The Milwaukee Symphony Orchestra and Milwaukee Ballet represent classic performing arts in the city. The Milwaukee Repertory Theater, Milwaukee Opera Theatre, and Milwaukee Public Theatre each provide diverse theatrical experiences, from classic plays to contemporary works. First Stage Children's Theater, the Milwaukee Youth Theatre, and Milwaukee Youth Arts Center provide children's theater entertainment. For live music, venues like The Rave/Eagles Ballroom, Riverside Theater, Turner Hall, and the Pabst Theater host concerts across a range of genres, while Present Music offers contemporary performances. Other notable venues include the Miller High Life Theatre, Skylight Music Theatre, and the Wisconsin Conservatory of Music.\nPublic art and monuments.\nMilwaukee has some 75 sculptures to honor the many people and topics reflecting the city's history. Among the more prominent monuments are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAdditionally, Milwaukee has a burgeoning mural arts scene. Black Cat Alley is a well-known arts destination in a one-block alleyway in the East Side neighborhood of Milwaukee, recognized for its street art mural installations. It is behind the historic Oriental Theatre and includes both temporary and semi-permanent installations by a variety of artists and art groups. Another highly visible corridor of street art in Milwaukee is on the south side in the Walker's Point neighborhood, especially along 5th and 2nd streets.\nFestivals.\nThe city hosts an annual lakefront music festival called Summerfest. Listed in the \"1999 Guinness Book of World Records\" as the largest music festival in the world, in 2017 Summerfest attracted 831,769. The adjacent city of West Allis has been the site of the Wisconsin State Fair for over a century.\nMilwaukee hosts a variety of primarily ethnically themed festivals throughout the summer. Held generally on the lakefront Summerfest grounds, these festivals span several days (typically Friday plus the weekend) and celebrate Milwaukee's history and diversity. Festivals for the LGBT (PrideFest) and Polish (Polish Fest) communities are typically held in June. Summerfest spans 11 days at the end of June and beginning of July. There are French (Bastille Days), Greek, Italian (Festa Italiana) and German (German Fest) festivals in July. The African, Arab, Irish (Irish Fest), Mexican, and American Indian events wrap it up from August through September. Milwaukee is also home to Trainfest, the largest operating model railroad show in America, in November.\nCuisine.\nMilwaukee's ethnic cuisines include German, Italian, Russian, Hmong, French, Serbian, Polish, Thai, Chinese, Mexican, Indian, Korean, Japanese, Vietnamese, Turkish, Middle Eastern, and Ethiopian.\nMilwaukee County hosts the Zoo-A La Carte at the Milwaukee County Zoo, and various ethnic festivals like Irish Fest, Polish Fest, German Fest, and Festa Italiana celebrate various types of cuisine in summer months.\nMusic.\nMilwaukee has a long history of musical activity. The first organized musical society, called \"Milwaukee Beethoven Society\" formed in 1843, three years before the city was incorporated.\nThe large concentrations of German and other European immigrants contributed to the musical character of the city. Saengerfeste were held regularly.\nIn the early 20th century, guitarist Les Paul and pianist Liberace were some of the area's most famous musicians. Both Paul, born in Waukesha, and Liberace, born in West Allis, launched their careers in Milwaukee music venues. Paramount Records, primarily a jazz and blues record label, was founded in Grafton, a northern suburb of Milwaukee, and operated active between 1917 and 1932. Hal Leonard Corporation, founded in 1947, is one of the world's largest music print publishers, and is headquartered in Milwaukee. More recently, Milwaukee has a history of rock, hip-hop, jazz, soul, blues, punk, ska, industrial music, electronica, world music, and pop music bands.\nMilwaukee's most famous music venue is Summerfest. Founded in 1968, Summerfest features 700\u2013800 live musical acts across 12 stages during 11 days over a 12-day period beginning in late June; while the dates adjust each year, Summerfest always includes July 4. On the Summerfest grounds, the largest venue is the American Family Insurance Amphitheater with a 23,000 person capacity. Adjacent is the BMO Harris Pavilion, which has a capacity of roughly 10,000. The BMO Harris Pavilion also hosts numerous concerts and events outside of Summerfest; other stages are also used during the numerous other festivals held on the grounds.\nVenues such as Pabst Theater, Marcus Center for Performing Arts, the Helene Zelazo Center for the Performing Arts, Marcus Amphitheater (Summerfest Grounds), Riverside Theater, the Northern Lights Theater, and The Rave frequently bring internationally known acts to Milwaukee. 'Jazz in the Park', a weekly jazz show held at downtown Cathedral Square Park, has become a summer tradition; free, public performances with a picnic environment. Nearby Pere Marquette Park hosts \"River Rhythms\" on Wednesday nights.\nMusicians and musical acts originating in the Milwaukee area include Steve Miller (rock), Wladziu Valentino Liberace (piano), Al Jarreau (jazz), Eric Benet (neo-soul), Speech (hip-hop), Daryl Stuermer (rock), Streetz-n-Young Deuces (hip-hop), BoDeans (rock), Les Paul (jazz), the Violent Femmes (alternative), Coo Coo Cal (rap), Die Kreuzen (punk), Andy Hurley of Fall Out Boy (punk), Rico Love (R&amp;B), Andrew 'The Butcher' Mrotek of The Academy Is... (alt-rock), Showoff (pop-punk), The Promise Ring (indie), Lights Out Asia (post-rock), the Gufs (alt rock), Brief Candles (rock), IshDARR (rap), Decibully (indie), and Reyna (synth-pop).\nSports.\nCurrently, Milwaukee's sports teams include:\nThe city is represented in two of the four major professional sports leagues in the United States and Canada\u2013the Milwaukee Brewers of Major League Baseball and the Milwaukee Bucks of the National Basketball Association. Milwaukee does not have a National Football League team or a National Hockey League team. For a short time, Milwaukee was home to the NFL's Badgers, from 1922 to 1926. Today, the city is generally considered a second home market for the NFL's Green Bay Packers. The team split its home schedule between Green Bay and Milwaukee from 1933 to 1994, although most home games during that time were played in Green Bay. Of the games played in Milwaukee, the majority were played at County Stadium. However, by 1991, the Packers claimed that revenue from the Milwaukee games were 60% of the revenue generated from the Green Bay games, and Milwaukee officials did not act upon the Packers' request that County Stadium be replaced with an updated stadium. The Packers' longtime flagship station is Milwaukee-based WTMJ AM 620.\nMilwaukee also has a strong history of nonprofessional sports dating back to the 19th century. Abraham Lincoln watched cricket in Milwaukee in 1849 when he attended a game between Chicago and Milwaukee. In 1854, the Milwaukee Cricket Club had 150 members.\nMilwaukee was the host city of the International Cycling Classic, which included the men's and women's \"Superweek\" Pro Tour races, featuring cyclists and teams from across the United States and more than 20 other countries.\nParks and recreation.\nMilwaukee is known for its well-developed Milwaukee County Parks system. The \"Grand Necklace of Parks\", designed by famed landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted, includes Lake Park and Bradford Beach, River Park (now Riverside Park), and West Park (now Washington Park). Milwaukee County Parks offer facilities for sunbathing, picnics, grilling, disc golf, and ice skating. Milwaukee has over 140 parks with over of parks and parkways. During the summer months, Cathedral Park in downtown Milwaukee hosts \"Jazz in the Park\" on Thursday nights. Nearby Pere Marquette Park hosts \"River Rhythms\" on Wednesday nights.\nThe Milwaukee Riverwalk is a continuous pedestrian walkway along the Milwaukee River containing art displays, caf\u00e9s and restaurants. It extends from the Historic Third Ward district to Caesars Park near Brady Street. It also links to the Hank Aaron State Trail, Lakeshore State Park, and Erie Street Plaza. The Hank Aaron State Trail is a shared-use path that travels east-west between Lakeshore State Park to Wauwatosa via the Menomonee Valley.\nLakeshore State Park consists of on the shores of Lake Michigan. It is situated adjacent to both Discovery World and Henry Maier Festival Park. It is the only urban state park in Wisconsin and features restored prairie and a pebble beach.\nNature centers.\nMilwaukee's parks are home to several nature centers. Mitchell Park Horticultural Conservatory is composed of three beehive-shaped glass domes that span in diameter and are high. They are properly referred to as the world's first conoidal domes. They cover of display area and were constructed in stages from 1959 to 1967. The conservatory includes the Tropical Dome, the Arid Dome and the Show Dome, which hosts four seasonal (cultural, literary, or historic) shows and one Christmas-themed exhibit held annually in December for visitors to enjoy.\nThe Urban Ecology Center offers programming for adults and children from its three branches located in Riverside Park, Washington Park, and the Menomonee Valley (near Three Bridges Park). The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources operates a nature center at Havenwoods State Forest. The city is also served by two nearby suburban nature centers. Wehr Nature Center is operated by Milwaukee County in Whitnall Park, spread across Franklin, Greendale and Hales Corners. Admission is free, and parking costs $5 per vehicle. The Schlitz Audubon Nature Center in Bayside, Wisconsin, charges admittance fees for visitors.\nThe Monarch Trail, on the Milwaukee County Grounds in Wauwatosa, is a trail that highlights the fall migration of the monarch butterflies.\nMarkets.\nMilwaukee Public Market, in the Third Ward neighborhood, is an indoor market that sells produce, seafood, meats, cheeses, vegetables, candies, and flowers from local businesses. It opened in 2005 and drew inspiration from Pike Place Market in Seattle, envisioning a space to support local vendors.\nMilwaukee County Farmers Markets, held in season, sell fresh produce, meats, cheeses, jams, jellies, preserves and syrups, and plants. Farmers markets also feature artists and craftspeople. Locations include: Aur Farmers Market, Brown Deer Farmers Market, Cudahy Farmers Market, East Town Farm Market, Enderis Park Farmers Market, Fondy Farmers Market, Mitchell Street Market, Riverwest Gardeners' Market, Silver Spring Farmers Market, South Milwaukee Farmers Market, South Shore Farmers Market, Uptown Farmers Market, Wauwatosa Farmers Market, West Allis Farmers Market, and Westown Market on the Park.\nGovernment and politics.\nMilwaukee has a mayor-council form of government. With the election of Mayor John O. Norquist in 1988, the city adopted a cabinet form of government with the mayor appointing department heads not otherwise elected or appointed\u2014notably the Fire and Police Chiefs. While this gave the mayor greater control of the city's day-to-day operations, the Common Council retains almost complete control over the city's finances and the mayor, with the exception of his proposed annual budget, cannot directly introduce legislation. The Common Council consists of 15 members, one from each district in the city.\nMilwaukee has a history of giving long tenures to its mayors; from Frank Zeidler to Tom Barrett, the city had only four elected mayors (and one acting) in a 73-year period. When 28-year incumbent Henry Maier retired in 1988, he held the record for longest term of service for a city of Milwaukee's size, and when Barrett retired in 2021, he was the longest-serving mayor of any of the United States' 50 largest cities.\nIn addition to the election of a Mayor and Common Council on the city level, Milwaukee residents elect county representatives to the Milwaukee County Board of Supervisors, as well as a Milwaukee County Executive. The current County Executive is David Crowley.\nMilwaukee has been a Democratic stronghold for more than a century at the federal level. At the local level, Socialists often won the mayorship and (for briefer periods) other city and county offices during much of the first sixty years of the 20th century. The city is split between seven State Senate districts, each of which is divided between three state Assembly districts. All but four state legislators representing the city are Democrats; the four Republicans\u2014two in the State Assembly and two in the State Senate\u2014represent outer portions of the city that are part of districts dominated by heavily Republican suburban counties. In 2008, Barack Obama won Milwaukee with 77% of the vote. Tim Carpenter (D), Lena Taylor (D), Robyn Vining (D), LaTonya Johnson (D), Chris Larson (D), Alberta Darling (R), and Dave Craig (R) represent Milwaukee in the State Senate; Daniel Riemer (D), JoCasta Zamarripa (D), Marisabel Cabrera (D), David Bowen (D), Jason Fields (D), LaKeshia Myers (D), Sara Rodriguez (D), Dale P. Kooyenga (R), Kalan Haywood (D), David Crowley (D), Evan Goyke (D), Jonathan Brostoff (D), Christine Sinicki (D), Janel Brandtjen (R), and Mike Kuglitsch (R) represent Milwaukee in the State Assembly.\nMilwaukee makes up the overwhelming majority of Wisconsin's 4th congressional district. The district is heavily Democratic, with victory in the Democratic primary often being considered tantamount to election. The district is currently represented by Democrat Gwen Moore. A Republican has not represented a significant portion of Milwaukee in Congress since Charles J. Kersten lost his seat in the 5th district in 1954 to Democrat Henry S. Reuss. The small portions of the city extending into Waukesha and Washington counties are part of the 5th District, represented by Republican Scott L. Fitzgerald.\nMilwaukee's Mexican Consulate serves 65 counties in Wisconsin and the Upper Peninsula of Michigan.\nCrime.\nIn 2001 and 2007, Milwaukee ranked among the ten most dangerous large cities in the United States. Despite its improvement since then, As of 2012[ [update]] Milwaukee fared worse when comparing specific crime types to the national average (e.g., homicide, rape, robbery, aggravated assault)\nThe Milwaukee Police Department's Gang Unit was reactivated in 2004 after Nannette Hegerty was sworn in as chief. In 2006, 4,000 charges were brought against suspects through Milwaukee's Gang Unit. In 2013 there were 105 murders in Milwaukee and 87 homicides the following year. In 2015, 146 people were killed in the city. In 2020, Milwaukee was ranked the tenth most dangerous city in the US.\nPoverty.\nAs of 2016[ [update]], Milwaukee currently ranks as the second poorest U.S. city with over 500,000 residents, falling behind only Detroit. In 2013, a Point-In-Time survey estimated 1,500 people were homeless on Milwaukee's streets each night, although as of 2022 the estimate has reduced to 832. The city's homeless and poor are aided by several local nonprofits, including the Milwaukee Rescue Mission.\nEducation.\nOf persons in Milwaukee aged 25 and above, 89.2% have a high school diploma and 32.4% have a bachelor's degree or higher.\nPrimary and secondary education.\nMilwaukee Public Schools (MPS) includes almost all of the city of Milwaukee. It is the largest school district in Wisconsin and among the largest in the nation; it had an enrollment of 69,115 as of the 2021-2022 academic year. Milwaukee Public Schools operate as magnet schools, with individualized specialty areas for interests in academics or the arts. The district operates 156 schools, including 18 high schools.\nMilwaukee is also home to over two dozen private or parochial high schools and numerous private middle and elementary schools. Eight high schools are operated by the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Milwaukee. In 1990, Milwaukee became the first city in the United States to offer a school voucher program.\nHigher education.\nThe University of Wisconsin\u2013Milwaukee is a public research university in the Downer Woods neighborhood and the largest college or university in the city. Marquette University, a private Jesuit institution near downtown Milwaukee founded in 1881, is the state's largest private college. Discipline-specific institutions include the Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee Institute of Art and Design and Milwaukee School of Engineering. The public Milwaukee Area Technical College provides technical and vocational education. Women's colleges include Alverno College and Mount Mary University. Other higher education institutions in the city and its suburbs include Bryant &amp; Stratton College, Carroll University, Concordia University Wisconsin, Herzing University, Nashotah House, Saint Francis de Sales Seminary and Wisconsin Lutheran College.\nMedia.\nMilwaukee's daily newspaper is the \"Milwaukee Journal Sentinel\", which was formed when the morning paper the \"Milwaukee Sentinel\" merged with the afternoon paper \"Milwaukee Journal\". The city has two free distribution alternative publications, \"Shepherd Express\" and \"Wisconsin Gazette\". Other local newspapers, city guides, and magazines with large distributions include \"Milwaukee Magazine\", \"Milwaukee Neighborhood News Service\", \"Milwaukee Independent\", \"Riverwest Currents\", \"The Milwaukee Courier\" and \"Milwaukee Community Journal\". Urban Milwaukee and OnMilwaukee.com are online-only publications providing political and real-estate news as well as stories about cultural events and entertainment. The \"UWM Post\" is the independent, student-run weekly at the University of Wisconsin\u2013Milwaukee.\nMilwaukee's major network television affiliates are WTMJ 4 (NBC), WITI 6 (Fox), WISN 12 (ABC), WVTV 18/24 (CW/MyNetworkTV), and WDJT 58 (CBS). Spanish-language programming is on WTSJ-LD 38 (Visi\u00f3n Latina) and WYTU-LD 63 (Telemundo). Milwaukee's public broadcasting stations are WMVS 10 and WMVT 36.\nOther television stations in the Milwaukee market include WMKE-CD 7 (Quest), WVCY 30 (FN), WBME-CD 41 (Me-TV), WMLW-TV 49 (Independent), WWRS 52 (TBN), Sportsman Channel, and WPXE 55 (ION)\nThere are numerous radio stations throughout Milwaukee and the surrounding area.\nThere are two cable PEG channels in Milwaukee: channels 13 and 25.\nUntil 2015, Journal Communications (a NYSE-traded corporation) published the \"Journal Sentinel\" and well over a dozen local weekly newspapers in the metropolitan area. At that time, Journal was split into the Journal Media Group for publishing, while the television and radio stations went to the E. W. Scripps Company (Journal founded WTMJ-TV, along with WTMJ and WKTI). As a result, it was criticized for having a near-monopoly in local news coverage. Journal Media Group merged with Gannett in 2016, while Scripps sold the radio stations in 2018 to Good Karma Brands, effectively splitting off the monopoly completely.\nThe city is the home of Red Letter Media, independent filmmakers responsible for such works as \"Space Cop\".\nInfrastructure.\nHealth care.\nMilwaukee's health care industry includes several health systems. The Milwaukee Regional Medical Complex, between 8700 and 9200 West Wisconsin Avenue, is on the Milwaukee County grounds. This area includes the Children's Hospital of Wisconsin, Froedtert Hospital, BloodCenter of Wisconsin, the Ronald McDonald House, Curative Rehabilitation, and the Medical College of Wisconsin. Aurora Health Care includes St. Luke's Medical Center, Aurora Sinai Medical Center, Aurora West Allis Medical Center, and St. Luke's SouthShore. Ascension includes St. Joseph's Hospital, St. Francis Hospital, St. Mary's Hospital, The Wisconsin Heart Hospital, Elmbrook Memorial (Brookfield), and other outpatient clinics in the Milwaukee area. The Medical College of Wisconsin is one of two medical schools in Wisconsin and the only one in Milwaukee.\nOther health care non-profit organizations in Milwaukee include national headquarters of the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology and the Endometriosis Association.\nTransportation.\nAccording to the 2022 American Community Survey, 66% of working city of Milwaukee residents commuted by driving alone, 11.1% carpooled, 4.5% used public transportation, and 4.3% walked. About 2% used all other forms of transportation, including taxicab, motorcycle, and bicycle. About 12.1% of working city of Milwaukee residents worked at home. In 2015, 17.9% of city of Milwaukee households were without a car, which increased to 18.7% in 2016. The national average was 8.7 percent in 2016. Milwaukee averaged 1.3 cars per household in 2016, compared to a national average of 1.8 per household.\nA 2015 study by Walk Score ranked Milwaukee as the 15th most walkable out of the 50 largest U.S. cities. As a whole, the city has a score of 62 out of 100. However, several of the more densely populated neighborhoods have much higher scores: Juneautown has a score of 95; the Lower East Side has a score of 91; Yankee Hill scored 91; and the Marquette and Murray Hill neighborhoods both scored 89 each. Those ratings range from \"A Walker's Paradise\" to \"Very Walkable.\"\nAirports.\nMilwaukee has two airports. Milwaukee Mitchell International Airport (KMKE) on the southern edge of the city handles the region's commercial traffic and is categorized as a medium-hub primary commercial service facility. Lawrence J. Timmerman Airport (KMWC), known locally as Timmerman Field, is on the northwest side of the city and is categorized as a regional reliever airport facility, used mainly for general or private aviation.\nMitchell International has one terminal with two concourses and 38 gates. Its peak year of annual traffic was 9.8 million passengers in 2010; the airport served 6.3 million annual passengers in 2024. Mitchell is served by twelve airlines, which offer roughly 240 daily departures and 245 daily arrivals. Approximately 90 cities are served directly from Mitchell International. It is the largest airport in Wisconsin. The airport is connected to the Amtrak \"Hiawatha\" train service.\nIntercity rail and bus.\nMilwaukee's Amtrak station was renovated in 2007 to create Milwaukee Intermodal Station near downtown Milwaukee and the Third Ward. The station replaced the previous main railway station, Everett Street Depot, to improve access between Milwaukee's local transit and Amtrak riders. Milwaukee is served by Amtrak's \"Hiawatha\" passenger train up to seven times daily between Milwaukee Intermodal Station and Chicago Union Station. The \"Borealis\" provides daily service to Chicago and Saint Paul, Minnesota, and is supplemental to the long-distance cross-country \"Empire Builder\", connecting Milwaukee to Portland, Oregon and Seattle, Washington.\nIn 2010, $800\u00a0million in federal funds were allocated to the creation of high-speed rail links from Milwaukee to Chicago and Madison, but the funds were rejected by Wisconsin governor Scott Walker. In 2016, WisDOT and IDOT conducted studies to upgrade service on the Amtrak \"Hiawatha\" line from seven to ten times daily between downtown Milwaukee and downtown Chicago. As a result of the 2021 infrastructure bill and the \"Amtrak Connects Us\" initiative, the Milwaukee Intermodal Station is again projected to serve passenger trains to Madison and Green Bay, with the goal of the new routes being operational by 2035.\nIntercity bus services to the city include Amtrak Thruway, Badger Bus, Flixbus, Greyhound Lines, Indian Trails, Jefferson Lines, Lamers Bus Lines, Megabus, Wisconsin Coach Lines and other intercity bus operators.\nTransit.\nThe Milwaukee County Transit System provides bus services within Milwaukee County. The Badger Bus station in downtown Milwaukee provides bus service between Milwaukee and Madison. An East/West Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) line between downtown and the Milwaukee Regional Medical Center is also currently under construction.\nA modern streetcar system, The Hop, connects Milwaukee Intermodal Station, downtown Milwaukee, and Ogden Avenue on the city's Lower East Side. The initial M-Line opened for service on November 2, 2018. Service to the lakefront, through the Couture, on the L-Line opened on October 29, 2023.\nMilwaukee has no commuter rail system. Previous efforts to develop one proposed a 0.5% sales tax in Milwaukee, Racine and Kenosha counties to fund an expansion of Metra's Union Pacific North Line to Milwaukee Intermodal Station. A 1990s Wisconsin DOT plan determined the path forward for east-west transportation in Milwaukee to be a mix of a comprehensive light rail system, an expansion of I-94 with HOV lanes, and increased bus service to Waukesha County. Despite being awarded $289 million for this plan from the federal government, local Republican leaders rescinded support for light rail. The \"locally preferred alternative\" would have connected destinations including downtown Milwaukee, UW-Milwaukee, and the Milwaukee Regional Medical Center.\nHighways.\nThree of Wisconsin's Interstate highways intersect in Milwaukee. Interstate 94 (I-94) comes north from Chicago to enter Milwaukee and continues west to Madison. The stretch of I-94 from Seven Mile Road to the Marquette Interchange in Downtown Milwaukee is known as the North-South Freeway. I-94 from downtown Milwaukee west to Wisconsin 16 is known as the East-West Freeway.\nI-43 enters Milwaukee from Beloit in the southwest and continues north along Lake Michigan to Green Bay via Sheboygan and Manitowoc. I-43 southwest of I-41/I-894/US 41/US 45 Hale Interchange is known as the Rock Freeway. I-43 is cosigned with I-894 East and I-41/US 41 South to I-94 is known as the Airport Freeway. At I-94, I-43 follows I-94 to the Marquette Interchange. I-43 continues north known as the North-South Freeway to Wisconsin Highway 57 near Port Washington.\nApproved in 2015, Interstate 41 follows I-94 north from the state line before turning west at the Mitchell Interchange to the Hale Interchange and then north to Green Bay via Fond du Lac, Oshkosh and Appleton. I-41/US 41/US 45 from the Hale Interchange to Wisconsin Hwy 145 is known as the Zoo Freeway.\nMilwaukee has two auxiliary Interstate Highways, I-894 and I-794. I-894 bypasses downtown Milwaukee on the west and south sides of the city from the Zoo Interchange to the Mitchell Interchange. I-894 is part of the Zoo Freeway and the Airport Freeway. I-794 extends east from the Marquette Interchange to Lake Michigan before turning south over the Hoan Bridge toward Milwaukee Mitchell International Airport, turning into Highway 794 along the way. This is known as the Lake Freeway.\nMilwaukee is also served by three US Highways. U.S. Highway 18 (US\u00a018) provides a link from downtown to points west heading to Waukesha along Wells Street, 17th/16th Streets, Highland Avenue, 35th Street, Wisconsin Avenue, and Blue Mound Road. US\u00a041 and US\u00a045 both provide north\u2013south freeway transportation on the western side of the city. The freeway system in Milwaukee carries roughly 25% of all travel in Wisconsin. Milwaukee County is also served by several Wisconsin highways, namely 24, 32, 36, 38, 57, 59, 100, 119, 145, 175, 181, 190, 241, and 794.\nBicycling.\nAs of 2022[ [update]], Milwaukee has of on-street bicycle facilities, including various kinds of bicycle lanes, bicycle boulevards, and trails. In the following year, the city set a goal of increasing their protected bicycle lanes from to by 2026.\nIn 2006, Milwaukee obtained bronze-level status from the League of American Bicyclists, a rarity for a city its size, then silver-level status in 2019.\nThe Bicycle Federation of Wisconsin holds an annual Bike to Work Week. The event, held in May each year, has frequently featured a commuter race between a car, a bus, and a bike; and also a morning ride into work with the mayor.\nIn 2008, the city identified over of streets on which bike lanes will fit. It created a plan labeling of those as high priority for receiving bike lanes. As part of the city's Bicycle and Pedestrian Task Force's mission to \"make Milwaukee more bicycle and pedestrian friendly\", as of 2008[ [update]], over 700 bike racks have been installed throughout the city. Since October 2018, when it enacted a Complete Streets policy, the city continuously considers the addition of bicycle facilities to roadways as part of new road projects.\nIn 2009, the Milwaukee County Transit System began installing bicycle racks to the front of county buses. This \"green\" effort was part of a settlement of an asbestos lawsuit filed by the state against the county in 2006. The lawsuit cites the release of asbestos into the environment when the Courthouse Annex was demolished.\nIn August 2014, Milwaukee debuted a bicycle sharing system called Bublr Bikes, which is a partnership between the City of Milwaukee and a local non-profit, Midwest Bike Share (dba Bublr Bikes). As of August 2023[ [update]], the system operates over 100 stations in the city and neighboring West Allis and Wauwatosa.\nWater.\nMilwaukee's main port, the Port of Milwaukee, handled 2.3 million metric tons of cargo through its municipal port in 2022. Commodities handled include salt, steel, limestone, general cargoes, over-dimensional cargoes, grain, fertilizers, biodiesel, and ethanol. The port is a key ferry and cruise ship destination on Lake Michigan. It is home to the Lake Express ferry, which offers service from Milwaukee to Muskegon, Michigan. The United States Coast Guard Sector Lake Michigan is based at the port. McKinley Marina is the city's only public marina.\nCity development.\nOn February 10, 2015, a streetcar connecting the Milwaukee Intermodal Station with the city's Lower East Side was approved by the Common Council, bringing decades of sometimes acrimonious debate to a pause. On a 9\u20136 vote, the council approved a measure that established the project's $124\u00a0million capital budget, its estimated $3.2\u00a0million operating and maintenance budget and its route, which includes a lakefront spur connecting the line to the proposed $122\u00a0million, 44-story Couture. Construction on the Milwaukee Streetcar began March 2017, with initial operation by mid-2018. This project was later named to The Hop, and became a free transit system. The Lakefront service was expected to start operation by 2019.\nIn 2024, \"Architectural Digest\" rated Milwaukee's skyline as the 15th most beautiful skyline in the world. Part of that skyline includes the Northwestern Mutual Tower and Commons stands tall and has 32 stories, making it the second tallest building in Milwaukee.\nFiserv Forum, a new multipurpose arena at 1111 Vel R. Phillips Avenue, has been built to accommodate the Milwaukee Bucks and Marquette Golden Eagles, as well as college and professional ice hockey games. Construction on the $524\u00a0million project began in November 2015 and opened to the public on August 26, 2018. The arena is intended to be the focal point of a \"live block\" zone that includes public space surrounded by both commercial and residential developments. The arena has a transparent facade and a curved roof and side that is meant to evoke the water forms of nearby Lake Michigan and the Milwaukee River.\nSister cities.\nMilwaukee's sister cities are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53121", "revid": "49265856", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53121", "title": "438", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 438 (CDXXXVIII) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Theodosius and Glabrio (or, less frequently, year 1191 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 438 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53123", "revid": "5645282", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53123", "title": "Unitary authority", "text": "Type of local government body that covers two levels of government\nA unitary authority is a type of local authority in New Zealand and the United Kingdom. Unitary authorities are responsible for all local government functions within its area or performing additional functions that elsewhere are usually performed by a multiple tiers of local government.\nTypically unitary authorities cover towns or cities which are large enough to function independently of a council or other authority. An authority can be a unit of a county or combined authority.\nNew Zealand.\nIn New Zealand, a unitary authority is a territorial authority (district, city or metropolitan area) that also performs the functions of a regional council (first-level division). There are five unitary authorities, they are (with the year they were constituted): Gisborne District Council (1989), Tasman District Council (1992), Nelson City Council (1992), Marlborough District Council (1992), and Auckland Council (2010).\nThe Chatham Islands, located east of the South Island, have a council with its own special legislation, constituted (1995) with powers similar to those of a regional authority.\nUnited Kingdom.\nEach of the four countries of the United Kingdom uses a different term to describe their unitary authorities. However, the Office for National Statistics uses the collective term 'unitary administration' to describe all local government areas which operate as unitary authorities.\nEngland.\nIn England, \"unitary authorities\" are those local authorities set up in accordance with the Local Government Changes for England Regulations 1994 made under powers conferred by the Local Government Act 1992 to form a single tier of local government in specified areas and which are responsible for almost all local government functions within such areas. While outwardly appearing to be similar, single-tier authorities formed using older legislation are not \"unitary authorities\" thus excluding e.g. the Council of the Isles of Scilly or any other single-tier authority formed under the older legislation and not since given the status of a unitary authority.\nThis is distinct from the two-tier system of local government which still exists in much of England, where local government functions are divided between county councils (the upper tier) and district or borough councils. Until 1996, two-tier systems existed in Scotland and Wales, but these have now been replaced by systems based on a single tier of local government with some functions shared between groups of adjacent authorities. A single-tier system has existed in Northern Ireland since 1973.\nFor many years, the description of the number of tiers in UK local government arrangements has routinely ignored any current or previous bodies at the lowest level of authorities elected by the voters within their area such as parish (in England and Wales) or community councils; such bodies do not exist or have not existed in all areas.\nNorthern Ireland.\nNorthern Ireland is divided into eleven districts for local government purposes. In Northern Ireland local councils have no responsibility for education, road building or housing (though they do nominate members to the advisory Northern Ireland Housing Council). Their functions include waste and recycling services, leisure and community services, building control and local economic and cultural development. Since their reorganisation in 2015 councils in Northern Ireland have also taken on responsibility for planning functions. The collection of rates is handled by the Land and Property Services agency.\nScotland.\nLocal authorities in Scotland are unitary in nature but not in name. The Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994 created a single tier of local government throughout Scotland. On 1 April 1996, 32 local government areas, each with a council, replaced the previous two-tier structure, which had regional, islands and district councils. Comhairle nan Eilean Siar (formerly the Western Isles Council) uses the alternative Gaelic designation \"Comhairle\". While the phrase \"unitary authority\" is not used in Scottish legislation (whether from the Scottish Parliament or the UK Parliament), the term can be encountered (used either descriptively or erroneously) in a few official publications and in (usually erroneous) use by United Kingdom government departments.\nWales.\nLocal authorities in Wales are unitary in nature but are described by the Local Government (Wales) Act 1994 as \"principal councils\", and their areas as principal areas. Various other legislation (e.g. s.91(1) Environment Act 1995) includes the counties and county boroughs of Wales within their individual interpretations of the phrase \"unitary authority\" as an interpretive not a definitive description. In s.2 of the Act each council formed for a county is allocated the respective English and Welsh descriptions of \"County Council\" or \"Cyngor Sir\", each council formed for a County Borough is allocated the respective descriptions of \"County Borough Council\" or \"Cyngor Bwrdeistref Sirol\"; in all cases the shorter alternative forms \"Council\" or \"Cyngor\" can be used.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53124", "revid": "40123752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53124", "title": "Unitary Authority", "text": ""}
{"id": "53125", "revid": "15947543", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53125", "title": "Unitary Authority Area", "text": ""}
{"id": "53126", "revid": "3113", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53126", "title": "Unitary authority area", "text": ""}
{"id": "53129", "revid": "9755426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53129", "title": "Yorkshire and the Humber", "text": "Region of England\nYorkshire and the Humber is one of the nine official regions of England at the first level of ITL for statistical purposes. It is one of the three regions covering Northern England, alongside the North West England and North East England regions, and covers the historic and cultural Yorkshire area. \nYorkshire and the Humber is made up of the counties of East Riding of Yorkshire, North Yorkshire (excluding areas in the Tees Valley which are instead part of North East England), South Yorkshire, West Yorkshire, and the districts of North Lincolnshire and North East Lincolnshire that are in the county of Lincolnshire (with the rest of the county being within the East Midlands). The population of Yorkshire and the Humber in 2021 was 5,480,774 with its largest settlements being Leeds, Sheffield, Bradford, Hull, and York.\nGeographical context.\nGeology.\nIn the Yorkshire and the Humber region, there is a very close relationship between the major topographical areas and the underlying geology. The Pennine chain of hills in the west is of Carboniferous origin. The central vale is Permo-Triassic. The North York Moors in the north-east of the region are Jurassic in age, while the Yorkshire Wolds and Lincolnshire Wolds to the south east are Cretaceous chalk uplands.\nClimate.\nThis region of England generally has cool summers and relatively mild winters, with the upland areas of the North York Moors and the Pennines experiencing the coolest weather and the Vale of York the warmest. Weather conditions vary from day to day as well as from season to season. The latitude of the area means that it is influenced by predominantly westerly winds with depressions and their associated fronts, bringing with them unsettled and windy weather, particularly in winter. Between depressions, there are often small mobile anticyclones that bring periods of fair weather. In winter anticyclones bring cold dry weather. In summer the anticyclones tend to bring dry, settled conditions which can lead to drought. For its latitude, this area is mild in winter and cooler in summer due to the influence of the Gulf Stream in the northern Atlantic Ocean.\nAir temperature varies on a daily and seasonal basis. Cities such as Sheffield, Leeds, and Bradford are generally cooler due to their inland and upland location, while York, Hull, and Wakefield are warmer due to their lowland location. The temperature is usually lower at night; January is the coldest time of the year and July is usually the warmest month.\nSnow is not uncommon in the winter, Yorkshire is mostly hilly/mountainous, and the Yorkshire Dales and the Pennines can have extreme snowstorms with high snowdrifts. Inland/upland settlements, such as Skipton or Ilkley, have more snow than coastal towns. Hull and Scarborough have less snow as their weather is moderated by the ocean.\nClimate data for settlements in the region:\nLocal government.\nThe official region consists of the following subdivisions:\nNorth Lincolnshire, North East Lincolnshire, East Riding of Yorkshire and Kingston upon Hull unitary authorities used to be part of Humberside which meant the region was called Yorkshire &amp; Humberside.\nRegional assembly.\nThe Yorkshire and Humber Assembly was a partnership of all local authorities in the region and representatives of various economic, social and environmental sectors. The full Assembly normally met three times a year, normally in February, June and October.\nThe full Assembly is responsible for providing regional leadership, agreeing regional strategic priorities, directing the development of the Integrated Regional Framework and endorsing key regional strategies. Membership comprises all 22 local authorities in this region, plus 15 Social, Economic and Environmental partners, and the National Parks for planning purposes.\nOn 31 March 2009, the Assembly was abolished and replaced by Local Government Yorkshire and Humber, until its subsequent closure in 2015.\nYorkshire is one of the two regions (along with the North West) that were expected to have a referendum about the establishment of an elected regional assembly. When the North East region of England rejected having an elected regional assembly in a referendum, the then Deputy Prime Minister John Prescott announced that he would not move orders for other referendums before the relevant provisions expired in June 2005.\nThe committees for the region ceased to exist after 12 April 2010; regional ministers were not reappointed by the incoming Cameron\u2013Clegg coalition government, with the associated government offices abolished in 2011.\nEuropean Parliament.\nBefore the UK exit from the European Union on 31 January 2020, the European constituency of Yorkshire and the Humber was coterminous with the English region.\nDemographics.\nPopulation, density and settlements.\nThe region has fewer degree-educated adults than the England average and the UK's highest rate of cancer.\nTeenage pregnancy.\nFor top-tier authorities, Kingston upon Hull has the highest teenage pregnancy rate, closely followed by North East Lincolnshire. For top-tier authorities, North Yorkshire has the lowest teenage pregnancy rate.\nRotherham had the UK's youngest grandmother \u2013 26 years old. Her 12-year-old daughter gave birth on 26 August 1999.\nSocial deprivation.\nFor multiple deprivation in England, measured by the Indices of deprivation 2007, the most deprived council districts in the region are, in descending order \u2013 Kingston upon Hull (11th in England), Bradford (32nd), Doncaster (41st), Barnsley (43rd), North East Lincolnshire (49th), Sheffield (63rd), Wakefield (66th), Rotherham (68th), Kirklees (82nd), Leeds (85th), and Scarborough (97th). These areas are mostly represented by Labour MPs, with a few Conservative MPs representing parts of Leeds (with a Lib Dem MP) and North East Lincolnshire, and all of Scarborough. Apart from Scarborough, they are unitary authorities.\nThe least deprived districts are, in descending order \u2013 Harrogate, Hambleton, Richmondshire, Craven, and Selby \u2013 all in North Yorkshire. Like all of North Yorkshire, they are represented by Conservative MPs, aside from Selby which elected a Labour MP at the 2023 Selby and Ainsty by-election. At county level, the least deprived areas are, in descending order \u2013 North Yorkshire, York and the East Riding of Yorkshire which all have roughly the same level of deprivation, and lower than the majority of England, including Cheshire and Northamptonshire.\nThe region as a whole is one of the more deprived in England, measured by having far more Lower Layer Super Output Areas (LSOAs) in the 20% most deprived districts than the 20% least deprived districts.\nKingston upon Hull has the highest proportion of people not in education, employment or training NEETs in the region (and fairly high for the UK \u2013 10.6%). This is another demographic extreme it shares with Knowsley in Merseyside.\nIn March 2011 the region had the third highest overall unemployment claimant count in England with 4.4%. For the region, Hull has the highest rate with 7.8% which is the highest for any English district; North East Lincolnshire is next with 6.4%, and Doncaster has 5.2%. Richmondshire has the lowest rate with 1.8% and Harrogate is next lowest with 1.9%.\nElections.\nIn the 2015 general election, 39% of the region's electorate voted Labour, 33% Conservative, 16% UKIP, 7% Liberal Democrat and 4% Green. Labour had almost twice as many seats than the Conservatives with 33 Labour, 19 Conservative and 2 Liberal Democrat. There was a 2.5% swing from Conservative to Labour. However, although Labour has around 60% of the region's seats, the geographic spread is mostly Conservative, due to the Labour seats having a much smaller geographic area.\nIn the 2017 general election, Sheffield Hallam incumbent Nick Clegg (Liberal Democrats) was defeated by Labour candidate Jared O'Mara, with Labour taking all of South Yorkshire while remaining concentrated in the other coalfield areas and Hull. However, the 2019 general election saw Labour lose ground, mainly to the Conservatives, within the region.\nONS ITL.\nIn the Office for National Statistics International Territorial Levels (ITL), Yorkshire and the Humber is a level-1 ITL region, coded \"UKE\", which is subdivided as follows:\nTransport.\nTransport policy.\nAs part of the national transport planning system, the Regional Assembly is required to produce a Regional Transport Strategy to provide long-term planning for transport in the region. This involves region wide transport schemes such as those carried out by the Highways Agency and Network Rail.\nWithin the region the local transport authorities plan for the future by producing Local Transport Plans (LTP) which outline their strategies, policies and implementation programmes. The most recent LTP is that for the period 2006\u201311. In the Yorkshire and The Humber region the following transport authorities have published their LTP online: East Riding of Yorkshire U.A., Kingston upon Hull, North East Lincolnshire U.A., North Lincolnshire U.A., North Yorkshire, South Yorkshire, West Yorkshire and York U.A.\nRoad.\nThe M62 motorway is Yorkshire's main east\u2013west thoroughfare, and north\u2013south routes are the M1 and the A1, with only the A1 continuing further north, with an upgrade to motorway status currently being built between Leeming and Barton. The other main north\u2013south road in the region is the A19. The M180 (continuing as the A180) connects the ports at Grimsby and Immingham via the M18 (European route E22).\nThe A64 road connects areas in the north-east of the region to the main body of motorways. The M1 was originally designed to finish at the A1 at Doncaster; this section became the M18 in December 1967. The section from the Thurcroft Interchange to Leeds (originally known as the Leeds-Sheffield Spur) was essentially designed to replace the A61, which is still the main road that connects the centres of Sheffield, Barnsley, Wakefield and Leeds, and continues through Harrogate and Ripon to Thirsk. The M180 is shadowed by the A18, which is the main road through Scunthorpe. The single-carriageway A1079 connects Hull to York, and has been exceeding its designed capacity for many years.\nThe main north\u2013south and east\u2013west routes interchange at a series of junctions to the south and east of Leeds, near Castleford. Leeds and Bradford have inner-city urban motorways, while Sheffield has the Sheffield Parkway and Hull has the \"Clive Sullivan Way\" (A63) which connect the city centres with the motorway network. Leeds has an inner-ring road network made mostly out of purpose-built motorway stretches which is mostly sub-terrain to the north of the city centre. Bradford, Huddersfield, Sheffield and York have inner-ring roads made by re-aligning existing roads while Halifax has a town-centre relief scheme made up of the Aachen Way and the North Bridge flyovers. The Office of the Traffic Commissioner central office is on the B6159 in east Leeds (Hillcrest House), which processes England and Wales LGV and PSV licences.\nThe Humber Bridge, the tallest bridge in the UK at 538\u00a0feet, was the world's longest suspension bridge from 17 July 1981 until 5 April 1998; it was built to connect with a proposed new town near the A15/M180 interchange.\nRail.\nThe central hubs of the rail network in the region are Leeds, Sheffield and York. The East Coast Main Line passes through Leeds and York, operated by London North Eastern Railway which has its headquarters in York. The Midland Main Line finishes at Sheffield, with a less regular service to Leeds, operated by East Midlands Railway. East\u2013west routes are operated by TransPennine Express to Manchester and Liverpool. Leeds has a fairly extensive commuter network and an electrified section in the North of Bradford provides many commuter services. Sheffield has a smaller commuter rail network and there are also less extensive systems in Doncaster, Huddersfield, Wakefield and Harrogate, which connect the districts of the settlements to the centre by rail. The express service between Leeds and Huddersfield is notably quick.\nThe South Yorkshire Passenger Transport Executive and West Yorkshire Metro subsidise commuters' travel with discount schemes. Class 399 tram-trains were introduced in Sheffield in 2017.\nHull is connected to London by Hull Trains' services. North Yorkshire has a skeleton train network, with Scarborough and York being the main destinations. The Yorkshire Coast Line connects Hull to Scarborough. The Hull to York Line runs along the north of the Humber through Selby, and takes in Sherburn-in-Elmet and nearby rural stations south of York, being of great use to commuters to York since being reopened in the 1980s.\nSouth of the Humber, Scunthorpe and nearby rural stations are connected by the South Humberside Main Line, run by Northern. Grimsby is connected (also through Scunthorpe) on TransPennine Express' South TransPennine route from Sheffield (originating at Manchester Airport).\nThe region is home to a rail land speed record. On 1 November 1987, an InterCity 125 travelled at 238\u00a0km/h between Northallerton and Thirsk.\nMass transit.\nOnly Sheffield has its own mass-transit system, the Sheffield Supertram, owned by SYPTE and run by Stagecoach. Leeds and Bradford have more developed commuter rail systems but lack any mass transit system. The Leeds Supertram was an approved scheme in Leeds. However, the funding was pulled and the scheme has been replaced by the proposed Leeds Trolleybus scheme, which itself, was also cancelled. In the past Bradford, Halifax, Huddersfield, Kingston upon Hull, Leeds, Rotherham, Sheffield and York have all had mass-transit systems.\nAir.\nAirports in the region are Leeds Bradford Airport at Yeadon, Doncaster Sheffield Airport (which opened in April 2005 on the former RAF Finningley) near Doncaster and Humberside Airport (which opened in April 1974 on the former RAF Kirmington) near Brigg in North Lincolnshire. Leeds Bradford Airport is the largest in the region by passenger numbers, Robin Hood boasts the longest runway (2.7\u00a0km) of any airport in the region and Humberside Airport boasts an active heliport. Jet2.com, a popular low-cost airline at Leeds Bradford has around fifty Boeing 737 aircraft.\nSheffield City Airport formerly served the city of Sheffield. However, the airport struggled to attract many scheduled services and closed following the opening of Doncaster Sheffield Airport.\nLying outside of the region Teesside International Airport (former RAF Middleton St George) serves the northernmost areas of the region, being next to the River Tees, and less than a mile from Over Dinsdale on North Yorkshire's northern edge. There are day and night direct rail connections from the region to Manchester Airport. National Express coach services also run directly to Heathrow Airport from the region.\nWater.\nHull has daily ferries (former North Sea Ferries) to Zeebrugge and Rotterdam (Europoort). Hull also has a large freight port and an active fishing port. Immingham carries much freight transport via DFDS Tor Line and the Stena Line. Goole is Britain's most inland port and is used mostly for importing commodities such as coal and timber.\nThe region also has a canal network. The Leeds and Liverpool Canal links West Yorkshire with the North West and the Aire and Calder Navigation links Leeds and the coal fields of West and North Yorkshire with the ports to the East of the region. There are also several smaller canals in the region, often built for quite specific purposes. Many stretches of the smaller canals in the region have been backfilled. The steepest locks in Britain are at Bingley \u2013 Bingley Five Rise Locks, built by John Longbotham, who designed the canal.\nEconomy.\nUntil 2011, Yorkshire Forward was the Regional Development Agency charged with improving the Yorkshire and Humber economy, where some 270,000 businesses contribute to an economy worth in excess of \u00a380\u00a0billion. The region has the second lowest rate of GVA in England. However, Leeds has a much higher average GVA than most of South Yorkshire. Business Link Yorkshire until November 2011 was on the Capitol Business Park in Dodworth, west of the M1 near Barnsley near the bypass (A628). The region's Manufacturing Advisory Service was until March 2016 at Saint Martins House in Potternewton next to Chapel Allerton Hospital, on the former A61, with two other offices at the Advanced Manufacturing Park, Catcliffe off the A630 Sheffield Parkway, and also on \"St. Georges Road\" in the west of Hull; the functions are now represented by the organisation Made in Yorkshire. The UKTI office for the region was off the A653, directly south of Bridgewater Place in Holbeck, and its successor (in July 2016) DIT Yorkshire and the Humber is at the Digital Media Centre near Barnsley Interchange, run by Mark Robson.\nNHS Yorkshire and the Humber, the regional strategic health authority, was at the roundabout at the bottom of \"Kirkstall Road\" in Leeds, with another office in the north of Sheffield. The charity-funded Yorkshire Air Ambulance, established in October 2000, is based at Nostell Priory south-east of Wakefield on the A638 (previously at Leeds Bradford Airport) and RAF Topcliffe (previously until 2012 at Bagby Airfield near Thirsk); the helicopter can land on the main hospitals' roofs. The state-funded Yorkshire Ambulance Service is based next to Coca-Cola on the Wakefield 41 Business Park, near the A650. National Blood Service for the area is off the A6102 in the north of Sheffield, at the west end of the Northern General Hospital.\nAs of February 2025, the average property price in Yorkshire and the Humber is \u00a3232,511, reflecting a 4.1% increase over the past twelve months. Rental prices have also risen by 5.6% during this period, with the average monthly rent reaching \u00a31,001. Some areas have outperformed the regional average, including Harrogate, where prices have risen by 6.2%, and Leeds, which has seen a 6.9% increase. \nYorkshire in the past has been synonymous with coal mining. Many pits closed in the 1990s, with the last two that were open in the Pontefract area at Kellingley (closed on 18 December 2015) and Sharlston. In South Yorkshire, there was Maltby Main Colliery and Hatfield Colliery (closed in June 2015) at Stainforth. The NUM was very Yorkshire-dominated. Coal still plays a part in the economy \u2013 there are two large power stations along the Aire Valley, with Drax being the second largest in Europe with 3,945\u00a0MW of capacity, and Eggborough which is owned by the Czech Republic's Energetick\u00fd a pr\u016fmyslov\u00fd holding (EPH) since 2014 and was owned by British Energy until 2010; Ferrybridge C closed on 23 March 2016. The distribution area once looked after by the regional electricity company Yorkshire Electricity is now looked after by Northern Powergrid (former YEDL), owned by Berkshire Hathaway (since 2001) of Omaha, Nebraska. The supply side of the region is now owned by npower (former National Power, now owned by RWE of Essen, Germany). Of the UK's oil, 29% is refined on the Humber.\nEast and North.\nScunthorpe is where steel is smelted by British Steel Limited (former Corus Group before September 2010 then Tata Steel Europe until June 2016) in the east of the town; it is the largest steelworks in the UK. Golden Wonder crisps are made in Frodingham, opposite the steel works (former site of Riley's Potato Crisps); the brand originated in Scotland. Esca Food Solutions (another plant was in Milton Keynes before October 2007) make all the beef patties for McDonald's in the UK and Ireland at their factory in Crosby in the north-west of the town, processing around 7000 cattle a week \u2013 about 12,000\u00a0kg an hour; 2.25m cattle are killed in the UK each year. IAC Group (Ecomold before 2008) have a car interiors plant on the Foxhills Industrial Estate in the north of Scunthorpe off the A1077; to the west, Can-Pack UK (parent company in Krak\u00f3w) is on the Skippingdale Industrial Estate, and makes aluminium beverage cans; further north, Nisa (retailer) have their headquarters on the Normanby Enterprise Park, in Flixborough off the B1430.\nFurther south on the Foxhills Industrial Estate towards the A1077, Wren Kitchens have a large factory in a former B&amp;Q warehouse, which closed in 2009; next-door to the north, 2 Sisters Food Group have a large chicken processing plant (Premier Fresh Foods before 2000), built in 1988 as one of the largest plants of its type in Europe, which processes around 1,900,000 chickens per week (customers include KFC). TSC Foods on the Queensway Industrial Estate at the A18/A1029 roundabout in south-east Scunthorpe supply many foodservice products (sauces) to most UK pub chains. Caparo Merchant Bar, next to the steel works in Scunthorpe, are the UK's largest producer of merchant bar; nearby is British Steel Wire Rod. Vossloh Cogifer UK (former Corus Cogifer before 2012), a joint venture of Vossloh Cogifer (of Reichshoffen) and the former Corus Rail, make railway points to the west of Scunthorpe; Voestalpine also make train tracks too at a huge foundry in Austria\nPipers Crisps are on a former airfield next to the A15 at Elsham; next door is IG Industries who produce polyethylene films (shrink wrap). There are two large oil refineries west of Immingham, owned by ConocoPhillips (Jet) and TotalEnergies. Kimberly-Clark made all of its \"Huggies\" nappies for Europe at Barton-upon-Humber until 2013; since 2016, the site has been the headquarters and factory of Wren Kitchens. Techrete on the B1207 in the north of Hibaldstow, next to the railway line, is the UK's leading maker of architectural precast cladding. County Turf, off the B1207 (Ermine Street) in Appleby made the turf for Wembley Stadium, who replaced Inturf of Wilberfoss. There is a large CEMEX cement plant at Winteringham off the A1077 at the meeting point of the New River Ancholme and the Humber (Ferriby Sluice).\nGrimsby is home of England's fishing industry (although most fish is transported from the Peterhead area of Scotland via road), and has many frozen food factories such as Young's Seafood. The seafood industry is worth \u00a31.8\u00a0billion to North East Lincolnshire; most of Britain's seafood comes from Grimsby. HM Revenue &amp; Customs in the town centre administers the UK's deregistration of VAT for companies, and the VAT Annual Accounting Scheme. Auto-Trail makes motorhomes on the Europarc, Grimsby, owned by Paris-based Trigano. Wyndeham Gait is a main printer next to the A180/A16 roundabout.\nCardsave is a merchant account provider. Cofely Fabricom Engie (former GDF SUEZ), an engineering consultancy based on the A1173 in Immingham, work in the oil and gas industry, and nearby to the east is a large Knauf plaster board plant. Hydro Agri had an important large fertiliser plant (built by Fisons in 1951) on the side of the railway; now PB Kent and its subsidiary Humber Palmers (both owned by Origin Enterprises of Ireland) make fertiliser there. In Healing (former Little Coates) next to the Humber, Lenzing Fibers Grimsby make Lyocell (Tencel), where it was first made by Courtaulds in 1988, who owned the site until bought by AkzoNobel in 1998. Greenergy have a biodiesel plant at Immingham West Terminal.\nAarhusKarlshamn UK (AAK, edible oils) is at Hull Ferry Terminal. The Valuation Office Agency for the north of England is near King George Dock. Smith &amp; Nephew (wound management division) and Reckitt Benckiser medical and household products companies originated in Hull, and still have large factories there. When Reckitt &amp; Colman merged with the Dutch Benckiser in 1999, much production was moved from Hull to Swindon. Heron Frozen Foods is based there near St Andrew's Quay, and Cranswick plc are a food-processing company based in the north of Hull, which makes up-market (\"Taste the Difference\") gourmet sausages for Tesco and Sainsbury's, and The Black Farmer, in West Carr; Cranswick Country Foods have their main poultry processing site off the B1237 in the north of Stoneferry.\nCroda Europe has a chemical factory on the north side of the A1165 in Newland next to River Hull; further south in Sculcoates, Crown Paints have a factory on the west side of the River Hull. Walker Group in Hull own Victoria Plumb bathrooms, and the brand MFI. Aunt Bessie's is a large food company in the west of Hull near the A63 and Hessle. Nearby Norbert Dentressangle claim to run the largest pea processing factory in the world at the junction of the A1166 and the \"Clive Sullivan Way\" (A63), which has supplied all of Birds Eye's peas since June 2008.\nIdeal Standard, the plumbing company, now in north Hull next to the Hull\u2013Scarborough line (Yorkshire Coast Line), was formed in Hull in 1936. Ideal Heating, owned by Stelrad and based nearby, make domestic boilers, and have diversified into air source heat pumps and solar thermal water heaters. Comet, who originated there, had some main offices on \"George Street\". Gamebore Cartridge on the A1165 at Drypool, Hull and Hull Cartridge, on the Acorn Industrial Estate north of Ideal, both make shotgun cartridges. Logan Teleflex (former Fabricom Airport Systems, and owned by Daifuku) makes luggage sorting systems near the B1237/A1033 junction in north Hull. KCOM Group (former Kingston Communications) is a telecommunications company based next to Hull City Hall.\nSeven Seas, owned by Merck Group, made cod liver oil and multivitamins (Haliborange) on the A1033 in Marfleet until 2015; next door is Willerby Holiday Homes, the UK's largest manufacturer of holiday homes; nearby, Paneltex is a group of engineering companies for vehicle bodies, on the Kingston International Park on the A1033, opposite Saltend; next door is Atlas Leisure Homes (in Preston). Humdinger (owned by Zetar) on the A1033 makes branded savoury snacks. Airbath (part of Reva Industries) is in north-east Hull. Fenner Dunlop Europe who claim to be the world's largest conveyor belt manufacturer, in Marfleet, have their own cricket pitch and their Hainsworth Research Centre.\nBP Saltend (in Preston) is Europe's largest producer of acetic acid, and part of the worldwide BP Acetyls group; next door, Ineos Enterprises makes vinyl acetate monomer (VAM) and Vivergo (bioethanol) is nearby. Fenner is in Hessle. BAE Systems Military Air &amp; Information (former Blackburn Aircraft, and under threat of imminent closure) at Brough is known as the \"Home of the Hawk\", and recently made the Hawk 128, with a fully digital cockpit. Kohler Mira Ltd make showers on the Melton West Business Park, south of the A63. Guardian Industries makes float glass in Goole; Timloc, part of Alumasc Group, make ventilation for buildings. Croda International, the chemical company, is in East Cowick, near the M62/M18 Langham Interchange. Swift Group in Cottingham are the only UK manufacturer of caravans. Yara UK have a fertiliser blending plant (former Phosyn before 2006) on the A1079 on a former airfield in Barmby Moor. Bridlington is Europe's largest lobster port.\nThere are many Royal Air Force bases in North Yorkshire, close to the A1(M), Catterick Garrison is the largest army base in Europe near Richmond, and home of the Infantry Training Centre. The Defence School of Transport Leconfield is near Beverley. RAF Fylingdales is an important, though secret, part of NATO's Ballistic Missile Early Warning System; the Emergency Planning College at Easingwold provided courses to prepare for nuclear war. Dishforth Airfield was the first place in the UK to get the Apache helicopter in 2003 for the Army Air Corps, and has had helicopters since 1991, currently having three squadrons of Lynx helicopters. The helicopters train over the North York Moors. 4th Regiment Royal Artillery is at Alanbrooke Barracks (former RAF Topcliffe, and former HQ of 15th Infantry Brigade, which is now at Imphal Barracks). GCHQ (former Composite Signals Organisation) have a site in the west of Scarborough. RAF Leeming is the only RAF station in Northern England that flies jet aircraft; the Yorkshire Universities Air Squadron flies from RAF Linton-on-Ouse (previously it had flown from RAF Church Fenton until 2013).\nNestl\u00e9 in the UK are based in York, with Mackintosh's operations in Halifax. Persimmon plc (the UK's second largest builder of houses, building around 14,000 houses in 2014) is at the A19/A64 Fulford Interchange. The Shepherd Building Group (who own Portakabin), and Portasilo, which makes bulk handling equipment such as silos, are in Huntington off the A1036 in the east of York; AlphaGraphics UK are next door (formerly in Seamer), and to Monks Cross retail park. London North Eastern Railway has its headquarters in York. Terry's chocolate was closed in September 2005 by its new owner Kraft Foods, and production moved to Poland. Costcutter is based on the A1079 in Dunnington. Best Western Hotels UK are based at Clifton Without. CPP Group (credit card insurance) are on Holgate Park on the A59 in the north-west of the city centre; Aviva have a large site on Rougier Street (B1227) for equity release, life insurance, and pensions.\nRolawn at the Laveracks Industrial Estate on the B1228 in Elvington is Europe's largest producer of lawn turf, with its Medallion brand being the UK market leader. DBS National Security Vetting is at Imphal Barracks in Fulford on the A19. Tangerine Confectionery is off the A59, in Acomb Ings in the west of York, which makes toffee and fudge; its old site on Coppergate is now Jorvik Viking Centre; the neighbouring British Sugar plant closed in 2007. Sherbet fountains have been made in York since 1925; the brand was bought by Tangerine from Cadbury in 2008. York Handmade Brick Company, who have supplied bricks for The Shard and London Bridge railway station are based in the village of Alne, north of York.\nStreamline, the UK's main merchant account provider formerly owned by NatWest, is on the B6162 at Harlow Hill in the west of Harrogate; Principal Hotel Company UK (hotels), is at Oatlands in the south of the town, where Hein Gericke UK is on Hornbeam Park, next to Harrogate College. Dunlopillo, a world-leading manufacturer of latex foam mattresses was for many years off the A61 at Pannal, south of Harrogate, until 2003, and from 2008 has now been headquartered in Huntingdon (Cambs). The Canadian McCain Ltd has been in Scarborough since 1969; Legrand UK make cable management systems at Cayton south of Scarborough on the B1261 next to McCain, and along the road from the coach builder Plaxton. Boyes (retail) are in Eastfield. Dale Power Solutions, south of the B1261 on the Eastfield Industrial Estate, make electrical power supply equipment. Deep Sea Electronics make generator controllers on the Hunmanby Industrial Estate, off the A165, south of Filey. Whitby Seafoods Ltd is in Whitby; they are the biggest producer of scampi in the UK, and supply Wetherspoons. Westlers, based on the B1257 in Amotherby make tinned convenience food, and the MoD's military ration packs (also made by Vestey Foods of Coulsdon in London). Dalepak is based in Leeming Bar which is owned by ABP Food Group; Vale of Mowbray have made pork pies in Aiskew since 1928. Reed Boardall have the UK's second largest cold storage site on the west side of the A1 at Boroughbridge (the largest is now in Wisbech in Cambridgeshire).\nJohn Smith's Brewery is at Tadcaster, owned by Heineken UK, which started brewing Newcastle Brown Ale in May 2010, and Samuel Smith Old Brewery. At Masham, there is the Theakston Brewery and the Black Sheep Brewery. Just to the north in Aiskew, Masons Gin have a distillery. Skipton Building Society is in Skipton. Silver Cross, the iconic pram manufacturer named after Silver Cross Street in Leeds, is headquartered in Broughton at the junction of the A59 and A56 west of Skipton, although its \"Heritage\" prams are made in Bingley (most are made overseas). Next to Bentham railway station (close to the Lancashire boundary) Kidde Products UK make foam fire extinguishers. Quorn is made in Stokesley by Marlow Foods. The Rural Payments Agency have a main office at Northallerton. Econ Engineering on the A61 Ripon bypass near the B6265 roundabout are Britain's leading manufacturer of salt gritters. Severfield is at Topcliffe on the east side of the A168, on a former airfield; they built the Olympic International Broadcast Centre in London. At another former airfield at Tockwith, further south, Stage One built the Olympic Cauldron, the glowing Olympic Rings, and the aerial stage objects.\nAustin Reed, who own Viyella, was on the A61 at the western end of Thirsk Racecourse until 2016. Slingsby Aviation make gliders and planes in Kirkbymoorside, on the A170. Perry Slingsby Systems (part of Forum Energy Technologies), next to Slingsby make remotely operated underwater vehicles (ROVs), who have helped to develop the NATO Submarine Rescue System. Karro Food Group based at Malton, are a pork processor, formerly part of Vion NV. South of Selby, Saint-Gobain Glass UK (Solaglas) has made float glass for low emissivity windows since 2000 next to the A19 at the A645 roundabout, directly south of the Eggborough power station. Optare make buses on a large industrial estate in Sherburn-in-Elmet (previously in Cross Gates in Leeds before May 2011), and have been part of Hinduja Group since 2012.\nWest and South.\nLeeds is now a centre of financial services companies, with Direct Line and First Direct based there, as well as Asda, Arla Foods UK (maker of Lurpak and Anchor butter) in Stourton near the A639 junction 44 of the M1 (formerly in Kirkstall near Yorkshire Television). The Green Flag roadside recovery firm has its main call centre (in Farsley). HSBC opened their first UK call centre in the city, taking advantage of its advanced communications network which also led to the founding of Freeserve in Leeds. The Department of Health has a large administration operation at Quarry House, a local landmark. The Child Maintenance and Enforcement Commission was at One Leeds City Office Park until 2012, off the A653 south of Bridgewater Place. The NHS Appointments Commission and former NHS Yorkshire and the Humber were next to the north side of the A65 at the A58(M) junction near the former Park Lane College, where further east along the A58 is the Callcredit credit reference agency, and on the opposite side of the inner ring-road from the Skills for Care sector skills council. The Waddingtons board game company was founded in Leeds, as was the Burton tailoring company (the Burton Group became the Arcadia Group) and Marks &amp; Spencer. The Tetley's Brewery closed in 2011 and moved operations to Northampton (Carlsberg). Aramark UK is in West Park, Leeds, in the north of the city, off the ring road.\nThe British Library is sited at Thorpe Arch near Wetherby, home of Goldenfry. Dr. Oetker products are made at Colton near M1 junction 46 and Sherburn-in-Elmet; at Thorpe Park Business Park in the east of Leeds (Austhorpe) also is Northern Gas Networks and Republic (retailer). Ellie Louise, a clothes retailer, is at Sturton Grange north of Garforth on the A642, south of M1 junction 47 on the Helios 47 Industrial Estate, near Ginetta Cars. Unilever Leeds (former Gibbs Proprietaries from 1965, then Elida Gibbs from 1971, then Elida Faberg\u00e9) have their aerosol division at Whinmoor, in north-east Leeds, administered by Lever Faberg\u00e9. It claims to be the largest aerosol factory in the world, and has their research centre, and makes Impulse, Lynx, Dove and Sure. Agfa Graphics (Belgian) have their only UK factory next to Faberg\u00e9 in Whinmoor, making computer to plate offset printers; 85% of the world's banknotes are printed with the parent company's technology. Nearby in Seacroft is Komori UK (printing presses).\nSymington's make breakfast cereals on the Thornes Farm Business Park, near the A63 (M1 junction 45). Sound Leisure is the UK's leading manufacturer of juke boxes. WABCO Vehicle Control Systems UK (air brakes) is in Morley, and QHotels are on \"Bruntcliffe Road\" (A650) in Bruntcliffe. East of Morley off the A6110 is DePuy International (orthopaedics). Hermes Europe (former Parcelnet before 2009, which was Directline and Speedlink before 1999), based at Capitol Park on the A650 at Topcliffe, is the UK's largest home delivery company, and is part of Grattan's parent company. Hainsworth makes speciality textiles such as military uniforms and in 1975 produced the first Nomex flame-retardant flight suits for fast-jet pilots in the UK; their TITAN outfit is used by riot police and firefighters, with ceremonial fabrics made from worsted barathea, and uniform caps for the Household Division, and uniforms for others such as London Underground. Clariant UK, the chemical company, was in Yeadon, with a factory in Horsforth; Brenntag UK is based at the A65/A658 junction at Rawdon Park in Yeadon (former Albion Chemicals before 2006) next to the fire station.\nEMIS Health are off the A658 in central Yeadon, and are a main supplier of GP computer systems. Craftsman Tools on the A659 in Otley make toolholding systems and fixtures. Sinclairs make the \"Silvine\" brand of stationery at Otley. Allied Glass based in south Leeds at the A61/A639 junction, and also has a main plant at Knottingley east of town on the A645, makes glass bottles for whisky. Toggi outdoor clothing (equestrian) is at Confederation Park at the M621 junction 2 with the A643, and with Champion who make riding hats and body protectors; 600 Group, based near junction 2 of the M621, are the world's biggest manufacturer of manual and CNC lathes; it makes Colchester-Harrison lathes, and Pratt Burnerd International lathe-chucks with a lathe factory at Heckmondwike. Sulzer Pumps UK have a large manufacturing facility on the A6110 near the A643 roundabout. Pland Stainless make large sinks for laboratories and hospitals. Leeds is the second largest manufacturing city in the UK, after London.\nMorrisons is based in Bradford; it has 132,000 staff and opened its first supermarket in 1961 in a converted cinema; it turned over \u00a317.6\u00a0billion in 2015, and is the region's second largest company. Also in Bradford are Club 18-30, Seabrook Potato Crisps, Safestyle UK, Vanquis Banking Group, Yorkshire Building Society, Stylo, the Grattan (owned by Otto GmbH since 2000) catalogue retailer, and Yorkshire Water. Santander UK (former Abbey) has its savings division there. The Halifax bank (former Building Society) is based in Halifax, the Yorkshire Bank and Leeds Building Society in Leeds, and with UK Asset Resolution (former Bradford &amp; Bingley) and Landmark Mortgages in Crossflatts. The area between Leeds, Bradford and Wakefield is known as the Rhubarb Triangle.\nEmpire Stores of Bradford was Britain's first mail order firm in 1890, bought by Redcats UK (French) and closed in 2009; it is now the site of Redcats UK in the north of the town centre. BASF Performance Products (Ciba Specialty Chemicals until 2008, then Allied Colloids before 1997) is in Low Moor; it makes many chemicals including thickening agents. Bowers Metrology Group, on the B6381 near the junction with A6177 at Bradford Moor, are a leading measuring instruments company, and part of Spear &amp; Jackson. Equifax is off the A650 in central Bradford, opposite the Leisure Exchange; next door NatWest Group have a call centre. Federal-Mogul, off the A650 in east Bradford, makes automotive parts (gudgeon pins and pistons). Princes Soft Drinks have their main factory south of the A650 at Tong Street; Next have a large warehouse nearby.\nBorgWarner Turbo Systems make automotive turbochargers (including variable-geometry turbochargers) on the Euroway Industrial Estate off the M606, and produces around 750,000 a year; Jacuzzi UK is nearby. Knightsbridge Furniture is on the B6165 in Lister Hills. Nufarm UK (A H Marks before 2008), make chemicals for phenoxy herbicides, between Wyke and Oakenshaw. Hield (luxury clothing) is in Trident parish, south of the city centre. Pace plc (owned since 2016 by Arris International) in Saltaire is the global market leader in set-top boxes; Pace bought part of Acorn, and based its set top boxes on the RISC OS, which it owned. Denso Marston make car radiators in Shipley; HM Revenue &amp; Customs has its main national payments office between the River Aire and the Leeds Liverpool canal at Shipley, opposite Salt's Mill, in a hexagonal building. Brook Taverner is Europe's largest corporate clothing supplier in Ingrow, off the A629. Cinetic Landis UK, at Cross Hills on the B6265, make CNC-controlled grinding machines.\nReflecting Roadstuds Ltd, where cat's eyes were invented by Percy Shaw, are in Boothtown, in the north of Halifax. Rhodia Novecare UK are at Holywell Green, south of Halifax, and make surfactants for cosmetics; to the north sia Fibral make non-woven abrasives at Greetland off the B6114 (which leads to the Scammonden Bridge) with the company's UK HQ in Brighouse. Gower Furniture (owned by Nobia) is north-east of Halifax in Holmfield in Bradshaw. McVitie's Cake Company (Jamaica Ginger and Lyle's Golden Syrup cakes, and HobNob flapjacks) is in west Halifax. Timeform (horse racecards) are near the A58/A629 roundabout in the north of the town centre and the A58 bridge over Hebble Brook. Crosslee plc, south of Hipperholme on the A644 towards Brighouse, is Europe's largest independent tumble dryer manufacturer, under the \"White Knight\" brand. Calrec Audio, an electronics firm that makes mixing desks, are on the A6033 at Nutclough, Hebden Bridge. Cressi-Sub UK (scuba gear) are at Atlas Mill, Brighouse; Kent Introl (control valves) are in the east of Brighouse off the A644. Bedford Shelving are to the west. Marshalls plc (paving stones) are next to the River Calder in Elland and Arran Isle (hardware), near Suma Foods. Terberg DTS UK, supply its own distribution tractors and Schopf aircraft tow tractors from Lowfields Business Park, next to the River Calder off the A629 in Elland; nearby Weir Power &amp; Industrial make Hopkinson and Batley brands of valves.\nFox's Biscuits (part of Northern Foods) and Cattles are in Batley; HSL Manufacturing (High Seat Ltd) are on Grange Road Industrial Estate (B6128) in the east of Batley, north of Hanging Heaton. Rohm and Haas UK (former Morton International, making chemicals) is on the B6117 in Dewsbury Moor, on the south edge of Heckmondwike. Birkby's Plastics make automotive components in Liversedge, and was the first company in the UK to mould plastic in the First World War. Rieter Automotive make car furnishings on the A638 in Heckmondwike. TMD Friction make brake pads (Mintex part of BBA) off the A638 at Chain Bar, Cleckheaton; Tangerine Confectionery (Lion Confectionery) is on the A643. Status International UK (lightbulbs) is in the centre of Cleckheaton. Mars Complementary Petcare is off the A62 on the Oakwell Way Industrial Estate at Birstall, next to Birstall Shopping Park; nearby is Pitchero, a sports website firm. Poundstretcher is in Deighton east of Huddersfield.\nDavid Brown Ltd. is in Lockwood in Huddersfield; this company owned Aston Martin from 1947 to 1972 and the company is now part of Textron. In Huddersfield are Cummins Turbo Technologies (former Holset) who make turbochargers, VTL Group make automotive components, Fired Up Group who own Armco Security and Corby of Windsor (trouser press), Brook Crompton (electric motors) and Graham Group (plumbing retail). To the east of Fired Up is Britannia Rescue (owned by LV) at the A616/B6432 junction. Broadbent, make industrial centrifuges in central Huddersfield. Many fabric companies are in Huddersfield and the surrounding areas; Taylor &amp; Lodge, owned by Bulmer &amp; Lumb of Bradford, wove cloth for the 2011 Royal Wedding; Dugdale Bros &amp; Co are in the centre. Novaglaze produced the glass for the London Eye. Trojan Plastics is the UK's largest bath manufacturer in Milnsbridge in west Huddersfield next to the River Colne. Thornton &amp; Ross healthcare is on the A62 next to the River Colne in Linthwaite. Dathan Tool &amp; Gauge (cutting tools) are in Meltham. John Cotton at the A62/A644 junction in Mirfield are Europe's largest producer of duvets. Camira Fabrics (fabrics for public transport) is based at Hopton Mills, south of Mirfield, with a manufacturing site off the B6108 in the east of Meltham, and makes the upholstery for London buses; further north next to River Calder is a site of Dr. Reddy's Laboratories in the south of Mirfield. Overlooked by the Emley Moor tower at the \"Grange Moor Roundabout\" off the A637 and A642 (towards Wakefield) at Grange Moor in Kirkburton is Bonmarch\u00e9, previously owned by Peacocks until 2012.\nHickson &amp; Welch (owned by Arch Chemicals) were in Castleford and closed in 2005. Netto UK (previously owned by Asda) was in South Elmsall until 2011. Nestle made Toffee Crisp and After Eight in Castleford until 2012 then made in Halifax, and Haribo makes liquorice and Pontefract cakes in Pontefract. Burberry had a main clothing factory in Castleford until the end of 2015, which is planned to move to Leeds. Cott Beverages are between the A645 and the railway in the east of Pontefract (former Benjamin Shaw &amp; Sons before 2006); Tangerine Confectionery (former Cadbury-owned Monkhill Confectionery) make Butterkist (the UK's best-selling) popcorn north of Cott Beverages, near Pontefract Monkhill railway station, on the site which claims to be the birthplace of liquorice. Ardagh Glass UK is in the south of Knottingley, with sites at Monk Bretton and Wheatley (Doncaster). St\u00f6lzle Flaconnage (former Bagley's before 1994) makes glass containers, between the A645 and the Aire and Calder Navigation, and further along the A645, Tradebe recycle solvents. Total Lubricants UK is in Knottingley (Ferrybridge Hill) on the B6136. Plasmor (concrete) is in the south-east of Knottingley, with a large site at Great Heck next to a former airfield where H+H (Danish) make aircrete; both sites imported pulverised fuel ash (PFA) from the former Eggborough power station; in east Knottingley, off the A645, Croda Hydrocarbons (bitumen) closed in 2008.\nTeva Pharmaceutical Industries UK is next to the M62 at Castleford, near Glasshoughton railway station. LPA Group off the A655 in Hopetown, Normanton makes LED lighting for trains; Poundworld was founded on a Wakefield market in 1974, and the family-owned company has 240 shops. To the west, Napier Brown (part of Real Good Food) makes Whitworths' sugar in Hopetown. On the other side of the M62 (junction 31) in Whitwood, Pioneer Technology UK closed their large plasma TV factory in March 2009. Coca-Cola UK claim to have the largest soft drinks factory in the world at its 41-acre site, with 71,000 sq metres of buildings, at Outwood, which was built in 1989, and produces 6,000 cans (over 100 cans a second, on three canning lines) and 3,300 bottles a minute (seven PET bottling lines, the fastest 2 litre bottling plant in the world), producing 100\u00a0million cases of soft drinks a year; the bottle caps are made out of HDPE. To keep up with supply, Rexam have a can factory next door. Nearby is the headquarters of Card Factory, with over 800 shops is Britain's biggest card shop chain and started in 1997; opposite is the Yorkshire Purchasing Organisation, which buys stock for most of the region's metropolitan boroughs and North Yorkshire, on south-west side of Wakefield 41. On the other side of the roundabout is Mitre Sports International. Morrisons have their Rathbones Bakeries on Wakefield 41.\nGroup Rhodes off the A638 in east Wakefield, make machine cells. On the Flanshaw Industrial Estate in west Wakefield is Technal (aluminium facades) and Wicona, part of Norsk Hydro. Bombardier built trains at Horbury until 2006 where they made CrossCountry's Class 221 \"Super Voyager\" and Class 220 \"Voyager\" (and were also assembled at the BN plant in Bruges, Belgium and Crespin in France, the former ANF Industrie). Northern Foods are now based at Trinity Business Park off the A636 south of Wakefield town centre. Wakefield Shirt Group is next to the River Calder. Double TWO shirts are based off the A638 in central Wakefield. Nooter/Eriksen UK is off the A636 next to Denby Dale railway station, and produce heat recovery steam generator (HRSGs)\nSheffield is known for its steel industry, which has declined in recent years. Outokumpu (former British Steel plc Stainless) near the Tinsley Viaduct make stainless steel, just north of the former airport, with access via the A631. Polestar is on the A631 in former Brinsworth, now in Sheffield (Tinsley).On the opposite side of the A631 is Betafence UK, part of the world's main fencing manufacturer, and its second biggest plant; near the start of the A631 is Tuffnells Parcel Express (owned by Connect Group since 2014). Nearby, Nederman UK make fume extraction equipment. Durham Duplex and High Speed and Carbide make razor blades and industrial knives on the B6082 in Wood Hill. Nearby Davy Markham (owned by IVRCL) on the A6102 at Darnall, fabricate steel and it has one of largest engineering workshops in western Europe. In the same area is William Cook Cast Products.\nEgginton make cutlery in Netherthorpe, in the St Vincent's Quarter east of the Shalesmoor A61 roundabout, which owns Ibberson, George Wostenholm, William Rodgers (who make the Fairbairn\u2013Sykes fighting knife), and Joseph Rodgers, the world's oldest brand of cutlery known for their pen-knives and military knives. Magtec, on the B6083 in Brightside next to the River Don, makes diesel-electric hybrid drive systems that can be retro-fitted to vehicles. Technicut is the UK's market leader in rotary cutting tools on the A6178 in Brightside. Arconic Forgings is at Carbrook off the A6102. Gripple make connectors for wire fences. British Silverware is off the A6109, in the industrial area. SCX Group in Wincobank built the retractable roof for the No. 1 Court (Wimbledon). Polestar, at Tinsley off the A631 next to the M1, claim to have the most advanced gravure printing plant in Europe. Tinsley Bridge off the A631 makes suspension springs and torsion bars. SIG plc (Europe's largest insulation distributor) and Stanley Tools UK are at the former city airport, with a manufacturing plant off the A631 on the Hellaby Industrial Estate next to the M18, and had a former site on the B6075 in Sheffield. Siemens VAI UK is on Sheffield Business Park near the former airport, with EVO Group, who own the Banner stationery company, and Ansys (Fluent and CFX computational fluid dynamics software) has one of two main offices. Go Outdoors, owned by JD Sports since 2016, are in the south of Sheffield, near Bramall Lane off the A61; Hi Gear Products, their brand is on the Boston Street Industrial Estate.\nCadbury UK (formerly Bassett's) make liquorice allsorts in the north of Sheffield on the A61 next-door to Owlerton Stadium; it is Cadbury's Gum &amp; Liquorice division, and also makes Belvita and Oreo for UK market. Swann Morton is a world-leading manufacturer of scalpel blades and medical equipment at Owlerton opposite Bassetts on the A61. Plusnet (owned by BT), learndirect (owned by Ufi Ltd), Online Centres Network, and Jobcentre Plus are in the city centre. Virgin Media have a main contact centre (former Telewest) directly south of Don Valley Stadium, and next to the tram line. Spear &amp; Jackson, the garden tool company, are in the north of Sheffield. B. Braun Medical is at High Green, next to the A616 roundabout in Chapeltown, and Ronseal (owned by Sherwin-Williams) is nearby further south on northern edge of Chapeltown. MachineWorks in Sheffield is the leading developer of CNC simulation on the B6069 near Sheffield Botanical Gardens.\nRosebys were in Rotherham, before 2008, and KP make their nuts in Eastwood, to the north of the town. MTL Group, a steel fabrication company, is based off the A631 in Brinsworth who claim to have the largest press brake in the world (made by Ursviken). Swinden House is home of Liberty Speciality Steels's main Swinden Technology Centre, its main R&amp;D centre in the UK, opposite Rotherham General Hospital on the A618. Brinsworth Strip Mills, run by Liberty Speciality Steels (former Corus Steel Narrow Strip), is opposite the Magna museum, south of the A6178, and makes narrow strip steel. The Primary Mill makes steel billets and blooms \u2013 continuous casting with an electric arc furnace with a melting shop, and is also known as Aldwarke Works. Thrybergh Mill is east of the river off the A630, making steel bar, in a rolling mill. The Brightbar Mill is off the A6123, on the west side of the railway next to Rawmarsh, making coiled bar, in a rolling mill. These three sites around are known as Rotherham Works. Beatson Clark (owned by Newship Group) makes glass containers off the A6123 north of Rotherham Central railway station.\nDormer Tools UK (owned by Sandvik) is on Waverley Business Park (Advanced Manufacturing Park) in Catcliffe, off the B6066 next to Morrisons. LuK UK (owned by the Schaeffler Group) make clutches at Wales, south of Aston near the M1 junction 31 with the A57. Jeld-Wen UK (former Boulton &amp; Paul) make doors on Swallownest Industrial Estate on the B6200 in Aston cum Aughton. Laycast were nearby until November 2006, based off the B6200 at Aston cum Aughton, at which steel flywheels, vibration dampers and compacted graphite iron clutch plates were cast at its foundry. Kiveton Park Steel is on the B6059 next to Kiveton Park railway station, mostly in North and South Anston (east of Wales).\nMacalloy in Dinnington is a world-leader in threaded tension bar. Fresh-Pak Chilled Foods, off the A633 at Waterside Park, Wombwell, make most of the egg mayonnaise (250\u00a0tonnes a week) found in British sandwiches and for sandwich fillers. Morphy Richards and Roberts Radio are based between Swinton and Mexborough. Maplin Electronics is based on the former site of Manvers Main Colliery in Wath-upon-Dearne, off the A6023, with the call centre of EE (former Orange) broadband next door. The UK Commission for Employment and Skills (Sector Skills Councils) is nearby, next to Dearne Valley College, which also looks after Investors in People. Stelrad in Swinton Bridge is the UK's largest producer of domestic radiators, producing 2.5\u00a0million a year, and Europe's leading radiator company, based off the A6022. MGB Plastics, on the A6123 in north Rotherham on Barbot Hall Industrial Estate, are the UK's largest manufacturer of wheelie bins, making around 1 million per year.\nNorth-east of Barnsley is Ardagh Glass at Monk Bretton. Slightly further north is Mr Kipling at Carlton; the site was Lyons Cakes (making their Battenberg cakes, Viennese Whirls and Swiss rolls) before April 1995, then RHM's Manor Bakeries until 2007, and makes their \"exceedingly good\" fruit pies; one million chocolate yule logs are made there and it is the largest mince pie factory in the world. Jack Fulton (Frozen Value Ltd) is next to the railway, off the A637 at Darton. Wharncliffe Publishing are in Barnsley, and to the east on the A628 in Oakwell, Potters Europe (former Ballotini) make glass microspheres for road reflectors. Galpharm International (bought by Perrigo in January 2008) and Koyo Bearings are at Dodworth near Barnsley. BRC on the Claycliffe Industrial Estate, off the A637 in the north of Barnsley, makes rebar (steel reinforcement). Naylor Industries, off the B6096 between Wombwell and Darfield make earthenware pipes for drainage. Kostal UK make steering column switches and electrical connectors off the A635 at Highgate in Goldthorpe. On the A6195 Grimethorpe Bypass at Little Houghton is the NDC of ASOS.com, in the Dearne Valley, near the former site of Houghton Main Colliery. Lotus Professional (owned since 2012 by SCA) is off the A6102 north of Oughtibridge, north-west of Sheffield, in Wortley.\nDFS is at Adwick le Street near the A1/A638 junction. Crompton Lighting have their main factory in Wheatley Park on the A630 in north-east Doncaster. Unipart have a headquarters next to Wabtec, who make railway air brakes, off the A6182 near Potteric Carr at the J3 Business Park, near VolkerRail; nearby are two Amazon fulfilment centres, with another at the Doncaster iPort in Rossington. Relate (former Marriage Guidance Council) is based off the A6182 \u2013 and on same site VolkerRail Doncaster is next to DB Cargo UK (former EWS), Schenck Process UK, and Thales have a data centre next door. Webasto have their UK headquarters next to Lakeside Village, Doncaster on the A6182, and make sunroofs and air-conditioning systems. McCormick Tractors had a tractor plant in Doncaster until 2007. Bridon International, a world-leading manufacturer of wire ropes (part of Melrose Industries), are based at Balby Carr, off St Catherines Interchange junction 3 of the M18, and Montracon (vehicle trailers) are headquartered there, with a manufacturing site at Market Weighton; nearby are Darfen Durafencing have been trading for over 100 years, and are the market leader in permanent fencing. Pegler Yorkshire (owned by Aalberts) are near the A630 in Balby Carr, further along from Bridon, with MSI-Quality Forgings opposite with Global-MSI who manufacture petrol station forecourts. Polypipe (uPVC pipes) is in Edlington. CME Sanitary Systems in Warmsworth (a former division of Polypipe, now owned by Wirquin of France) makes the UK's best selling plastic toilet seats off the Warmsworth Interchange of the A1(M). Fellowes UK (stationery) is based on West Moor Park, off West Moor Interchange junction 4 of the M18 (A630) in Armthorpe. Wirquin UK (plumbing) is off the B6376 in Warmsworth.\nEducation.\nThere are 15 local education authorities in the Yorkshire and Humber region. The schools in each authority are listed in the following \u2013\nSecondary education.\nSchools are mostly comprehensive, with some grammar schools in North Yorkshire, Calderdale and Kirklees.\nThere are around 235,000 at the region's secondary schools, the 4th lowest for English regions. The region has the highest overall truancy rate in England for both urban and rural areas. Inside the region for districts, Leeds has the highest rate with 6.9% persistent truants at secondary school, then Hull is second with 6.3%. Calderdale has the lowest truancy rate for unitary authorities, almost half that of Leeds, followed by North Lincolnshire. For districts Craven has the lowest rate.\nThe schools in Hull have often performed among the worst (on average) in England at GCSE after Knowsley in Merseyside. To Hull's credit, three schools in its LEA get above-average GCSE results whereas Knowsley usually has none (it managed two in 2010). Also at GCSE, schools in Barnsley and Bradford have low-achieving results with Barnsley the worst of these, and the lowest in the region in 2010. All three of these areas coincidentally have an above-average teenage pregnancy problem. In past years, Doncaster would be included in this group, but has managed to perform much better. For the metropolitan areas, Calderdale and Wakefield consistently perform the best, with both above the England average. Rotherham usually has the best results in South Yorkshire, but in 2010 it was Doncaster. York and North Yorkshire consistently perform the best at GCSE in the region, and with the East Riding of Yorkshire have results above the UK average.\nSchoolchildren in Kingston upon Hull are most likely not to pass any GCSEs \u2013 over 6% with Bradford having a similar proportion, closely followed by Sheffield and North East Lincolnshire. The East Riding of Yorkshire and North Lincolnshire have the fewest not passing any GCSEs, followed by York.\nFor OFSTED inspections across England, the region has the highest proportion of schools (2.7%) with bad behaviour and the lowest proportion (16.3%) of schools with good behaviour. South West England has the best behaving schoolchildren. Inside the region, Hull has the highest proportion (16.7%) of schools with bad behaviour \u2013 the worst in England (Wandsworth and Bristol come joint second) \u2013 and York schools have the highest proportion (30%) of schools with outstanding behaviour.\nAt A-level North Lincolnshire, Kirklees, Hull, York and North Yorkshire perform quite well with Kirklees consistently being the best by a large margin and one of the highest in England, all having results above the England average. Wakefield and Calderdale were also close to the England average. The excellent Kirklees result is due to Greenhead College in Huddersfield, and North Lincolnshire's results are due to the John Leggott College, also a sixth form college. The districts of South Yorkshire perform the least in the area at A-level with Rotherham having the best results in this area, slightly below-average, and the other three districts achieve similar results, much lower than those in the former districts of Humberside. Leeds and Bradford now get the lowest results in West Yorkshire.\nFor both A-level and GCSE, Barnsley and Bradford are very low performing, with Barnsley usually getting the lowest A-level results in the region, but in 2010 North East Lincolnshire came bottom with unusually low results. Hull and northern Lincolnshire have a wide socio-economic diversity \u2013 many under-achieving pupils at 16 but with high performers at A-level. Hull, although much worse at GCSE, outperforms the East Riding of Yorkshire at A-level.\nSchool children in North Yorkshire (with York and Kirklees) are the most likely to go to university \u2013 they also get the best A level results, and those in the East Riding of Yorkshire are likely to go to university, but get lower overall A level results.\nColleges.\nThere are twenty-seven FE colleges. The main five colleges are Bradford College, East Riding College, Doncaster College, Grimsby Institute, and Hull College.\nUniversities.\nThere are ten universities and three higher education colleges in Yorkshire and the Humber, along with (in 2007) 27 Further Education colleges teaching some Higher Education courses.\nThe Krebs Cycle was discovered at the University of Sheffield in 1937. Liquid crystal displays were developed by the University of Hull in 1972, in conjunction with the Royal Radar Establishment in Worcestershire. Low fat spreads were developed at the University of Leeds (in conjunction with Unilever) in the 1980s, and in the 1930s William Astbury's x-ray diffraction experiments at the university started the road to the discovery of the double helix structure.\nSheffield Hallam University is the largest in the region with 37,000 students, but does not have the most funding. The University of Leeds is not too far behind. The University of York, a large collegiate university, gets much less funding than Leeds and Sheffield, but has quite a high research grant for its size, about half that of Leeds or Sheffield. The other universities do not have large research grants. Leeds and Sheffield have around twice as much total income than any other university. York and Bradford are the two smallest universities.\nLocal media.\nTelevision.\nThe region receives various regional television programmes:\nDigital switchover took place in August 2011 for most of the region, with Emley Moor (the main TV transmitter for West, South and North Yorkshire) converting to digital in mid-September. Emley Moor is the tallest free-standing structure in the UK, and the 25th tallest in the world, and was designed by Ove Arup. The original tower famously collapsed in March 1969.\nRadio.\nHigh Hunsley transmitter covers most of the region and overlap into other regions. Local commercial stations include Hits Radio West Yorkshire (Bradford), Greatest Hits Radio Yorkshire, Hits Radio South Yorkshire (Sheffield), Heart Yorkshire (Tingley), Capital Yorkshire and 107.8 Beverley FM.\nBBC Local Radio services in the region include stations for Humberside, Leeds, Sheffield, York and Tees which serves Whitby.\nNational radio is broadcast from Belmont in the south-east, Bilsdale for North Yorkshire, and Holme Moss for South and West Yorkshire. Moorside Edge east of Scammonden Water near the M62 is a main 5 Live transmitter on 909\u00a0MW.\nNews and other print.\nPolestar Petty in central Leeds, with web offset, for many years printed \"TVTimes\", \"Radio Times\", and many colour supplements, including the \"Daily Mail\" weekend magazine, but closed in December 2014.\nLocal newspapers are the \"Bradford Telegraph and Argus\", \"Evening Courier\", \"Grimsby Telegraph\", \"Huddersfield Examiner\", \"Hull Daily Mail\", \"The Scarborough News\", \"Scunthorpe Telegraph\", \"Sheffield Star\", \"The Press (York)\", \"Wakefield Express\", \"Yorkshire Evening Post\" and \"Yorkshire Post\".\nRR Donnelley UK Directory of Flaxby Moor, printed the \"Yellow Pages\", until the site closed at the end of 2015. Polestar Chantry, off the A650 on the Wakefield 41 estate, prints \"Marie Claire\", \"Good Housekeeping\", \"Woman's Weekly\", \"Real Life\", \"BBC Good Food\", \"BBC Gardeners' World\", \"Prima\", \"Woman &amp; Home\", \"Red\", and \"Country Life\". Polestar Sheffield prints the \"Telegraph\" magazine, and \"Hello!\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53130", "revid": "41219559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53130", "title": "North East England", "text": "Region of England\nNorth East England, often referred to as simply the North East within England, is one of nine official regions of England. It consists of County Durham, Northumberland, Tyne and Wear and part of North Yorkshire. With 2.6 million residents in 2022, it is the least populous region of England. Its largest settlements include Newcastle upon Tyne, Sunderland, Middlesbrough, Gateshead, Darlington and Hartlepool. The North East is covered by two mayoral combined authorities: North East Combined Authority and Tees Valley Combined Authority. It is one of three regions, the other two being North West England and Yorkshire and the Humber, that make up Northern England.\nHistory.\nThe region's historic importance is displayed by Northumberland's ancient castles, the two World Heritage Sites of Durham Cathedral and Durham Castle, and Hadrian's Wall, one of the frontiers of the Roman Empire. In fact, Roman archaeology can be found widely across the region and a special exhibition based around the Roman Fort of Segedunum at Wallsend and the other forts along Hadrian's Wall are complemented by the numerous artifacts that are displayed in the Great North Museum Hancock in Newcastle. St. Peter's Church in Monkwearmouth, Sunderland and St. Pauls in Jarrow also hold significant historical value and have a joint bid to become a World Heritage Site.\nThe area has a strong religious past, as can be seen in works such as the Lindisfarne Gospels and the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\". The works of Cuthbert (634\u2013687\u00a0AD), Bede (673\u2013735\u00a0AD) and Hilda of Whitby (614\u2013680\u00a0AD) were hugely influential in the early church, and are still venerated by some today. These saints are usually associated with the monasteries on the island of Lindisfarne, Wearmouth-Jarrow, and the Abbey at Whitby, though they are also associated with many other religious sites in the region. Bede is regarded as the greatest Anglo-Saxon scholar. He worked at the monasteries of Wearmouth and Jarrow, translating some forty books on all areas of knowledge, including nature, history, astronomy, poetry and theological matters such as the lives of the saints. His best known work is \"The Ecclesiastical History of the English People\". One of the most famous pieces of art and literature created in the region is the \"Lindisfarne Gospels\", thought to be the work of a monk named Eadfrith, who became Bishop of Lindisfarne in 698. This body of work is thought to have been created in honour of Cuthbert, around 710\u2013720.\nIn 793, the Vikings arrived on the shores of north-east England with a raiding party from Norway who attacked the monastic settlement on Lindisfarne. The monks fled or were slaughtered, and Bishop Higbald sought refuge on the mainland. A chronicler recorded: \"On the 8th June, the harrying of the heathen miserably destroyed God's church by rapine and slaughter.\" There were three hundred years of Viking raids, battles and settlement until William the Conqueror defeated King Harold at Hastings in 1066. The \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" notes the change from raiding to settlement when it records that in 876 the Vikings \"Shared out the land of the Northumbrians and they proceeded to plough and support themselves\"\nThe Anglo-Saxon Kingdom of Northumbria extended from the Scottish borders (then Pictish borders) at the Firth of Forth to the north, and to the south of York, its capital, down to the Humber. The last independent Northumbrian king from 947\u20138 was Eric Bloodaxe, who died at the Battle of Stainmore, Westmorland, in 954. After Eric Bloodaxe's death, all England was ruled by Eadred, the grandson of Alfred the Great; and so began the machinery of national government. Today, the Viking legacy can still be found in the language and place names of north-east England and in the DNA of its people. The name Newcastle comes from the castle built shortly after the conquest in 1080 by Robert Curthose, William the Conqueror's eldest son.\nSub-divisions.\nThe region has the following sub-divisions:\nCreated in 1994, the region was defined as Northumberland, Tyne and Wear, County Durham and Cleveland. A 1996 local-government reform created ceremonial counties and unitary authorities, allowing districts to govern outside their designated counties. The reform also abolished Cleveland with it split between County Durham and North Yorkshire, the latter county covers parts of two regions since.\nThe region is mostly parished with some remaining unparished areas following the 1974 creation of the Cleveland districts, Darlington, Tyne and Wear districts, Derwentside and Wear Valley.\nLocal government.\nElections.\nThe North East has a strong tendency to vote Labour. In the 2015 election, 47% of the electorate voted Labour, while 25% voted Conservative, 17% UKIP, 6% Liberal Democrat and 4% Green. At the 2009 European election, Labour got 25% of the region's vote, the Conservatives 20%, the Liberal Democrats 18%, and UK Independence Party 15%. However, in recent years, the North East has seen a significant swing away from Labour. In the 2019 election, many constituencies were targeted by the Conservatives and their representation increased to 10 MPs. The region wide vote shares were 43% for Labour and 38% for the Conservatives, with the Brexit Party a distant third on 8%.\nBodies.\nIn November 2004, a referendum on whether a directly elected regional assembly should be set up for North East England resulted in a decisive \"no\" vote. The number of people who voted against the plans was 696,519 (78%), while 197,310 (22%) voted in favour. John Prescott, the Deputy Prime Minister at the time, admitted that his plans for regional devolution had suffered an \"emphatic defeat\" to the no campaign, spearheaded by Dominic Cummings. Bernard Jenkin, the Conservative spokesman for the regions, said the vote would mean the end of plans for a North East Assembly. He told the BBC: \"The whole idea of regional government has been blown out of the water by this vote\".\nThe former Association of North East Councils was based in Newcastle upon Tyne, and the preceding North East Assembly was based in Gateshead until its dissolution in 2009. Local enterprise partnerships were established, these later became combined authorities. The North East Combined Authority was established in 2014 and covered much of the region excluding Tees Valley. North of Tyne authorities later split off, leaving authorities south of the River Tyne.\nThe Tees Valley boroughs (Darlington, Hartlepool, Stockton-on-Tees, Redcar &amp; Cleveland, and Middlesbrough) established the Tees Valley Combined Authority in 2016.\nGeography.\nThe region is generally hilly and sparsely populated in the North and West, and urban and arable in the East and South. The highest point in the region is The Cheviot, in the Cheviot Hills, at .\nThe region contains the urban centres of Tyneside, Wearside, and Teesside and is noted for the rich natural beauty of its coastline, Northumberland National Park, and the section of the Pennines that includes Teesdale and Weardale.\nClimate.\nNorth East England has a Marine west coast climate (generally found along the west coast of middle latitude continents) with narrower temperature ranges than the south of England and sufficient precipitation in all months. Summers and winters are mild rather than extremely hot or cold, due to the strong maritime influence of the North Atlantic Current of the Gulf Stream. The Met Office operates several weather stations in the region and are able to show the regional variations in temperature and its relation to the distance from the North Sea. The warmest summers in the region are found in Stockton-on-Tees and the Middlesbrough area, with a 1981\u20132010 July average high of .\nPrecipitation is often low by English standards, in spite of the low levels of sunshine, with Stockton-on-Tees averaging only annually, and with the seaside town of Tynemouth (despite its slightly sunnier climate) recording annually. The summers on the northern coastlines are significantly cooler than in the southern and central inland areas: Tynemouth is only just above in July. Further inland, frosts during winter are more common, due to the higher elevations and distance from the sea.\nBiodiversity.\nThe region has a diverse landscape that includes maritime cliffs and extensive moorland that contains a number of rare species of flora and fauna. Of particular importance are the saltmarshes of Lindisfarne, the Tees Estuary, the heaths, bogs and traditional upland hay meadows of the North Pennines, and the Arctic-alpine flora of Upper Teesdale.\nThe beauty of the Northumbrian coastline has led to its designation as an area of outstanding natural beauty (AONB)\nstretching 100 miles from Berwick-Upon-Tweed to the River Coquet estuary. Among the 290 bird species identified on the Farne Islands, is the rare seabird the roseate tern. One of the foremost bird sanctuaries and observatory for migratory and wading birds in the UK is now operated at Saltholme which is part of a wider site of special scientific interest called Seal Sands. The Saltholme reserve is managed by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB). This project was pronounced as one of the best places to view birds by Bill Oddie, the former host of the BBC's \"Spring Watch\" Programme. In December 2012 he also presented the project with a prize as the UK's favorite National Lottery funded project.\nThe seal colony at Seal Sands on the mouth of the River Tees is thriving and in 2013 had more than 60 harbour seals. This is the only breeding colony of this species on the northeast coast. \"Rainton Meadows\" is also a recently created bird-watching site. The region is also the English stronghold of black grouse and contains 80\u201390% of the UK population of yellow marsh saxifrage.\nThe Magnesian Limestone grasslands of East Durham are a unique habitat not found anywhere else in the world which is particularly important to many species of butterfly and moths.\nThe Northeast of England also features woodland such as Kielder Forest, the largest man-made forest in Europe. This is located within Northumberland National Park and contains an important habitat for the endangered red squirrel.\nDemographics.\nThe North East has the smallest population of all English regions.\nThe North East with Scotland, the South West of England, Wales and Northern Ireland are the British regions to have seen the least immigration in over 50 years.\nThe Northeast of England as a region has the lowest rate of HIV infection in the UK, but has the highest rate of heart attacks among men and of lung cancer among women in England, along with the highest male lung cancer rate in the UK.\nIn 2010, the region had the second highest trade union membership among UK men.\nHigher education students from the North East are most likely to pick a university in their home region. The last immigration wave before the 21st century was in the late 1990s as a result of the government's dispersal policy scheme that relocated asylum seekers and new arrivals throughout the country. In 2017, most migrants were non-EU born, and about 60,000 EU-born.\nPopulation genetics.\nNorth East England, together with Tweeddale, was the ancient British tribal kingdom of Bernicia (Bryneich) and is notable for providing the stable ancestry of its present indigenous population, which has been identified by DNA analysis to be an offshoot of the group \"Scotland, Cumbria and the North of Ireland\", but not so closely related to the other peoples of the UK.\nIn a 2022 study by Joscha Gretzinger et al., the population of North East England was found to be among the groups with the highest amount of Iron Age/Roman period British Isles-related ancestry, being on par with Cornish people in that regard.\nTeenage pregnancy.\nThe Office for National Statistics in April 2013 report that the estimated number of conceptions to women aged under 18 in England and Wales in 2011 is the lowest since records began in 1969. Conception statistics include pregnancies that result in either one or more live births or stillbirths or a legal abortion.\nA comparison of rates across regions in England shows that the North East had the highest of under 18 conception rates in 2011, with 38.4 per thousand women aged 15\u201317. The South East had the lowest rate for women aged under 18 in 2011 with 26.1 per thousand women aged 15\u201317.\nSocial deprivation.\nA study into social deprivation was published in 2010 to help the local partners developing a Regional Strategy for the North East better understand the factors influencing deprivation in the region. The study had two main aspects: Firstly to establish if there are different types of deprived neighbourhoods in the Northeast, and if so, how deprived neighbourhoods can be better recognised. Secondly to present a summary of \"what works\" in tackling deprivation in each of these types of area.\nThe report discusses the factors influencing deprivation and points out that it is a significant problem for the North East with 34% of the regions Lower Super Output Areas (LSOAs) are amongst England's 20% most deprived in the 2007 Indices of Deprivation (these indices have been updated in 2010). It takes many years for areas to become deprived, suggesting that the underlying causes of area-based deprivation are long-term such as:\nIndustrial restructuring has disproportionately affected some communities and groups. In particular:\nThe region's most deprived council districts, as measured by the LSOA data before County Durham and Northumberland became unitary authorities in 2007, are in descending order Easington (7th in England), Middlesbrough (9th), Hartlepool (23rd), Wear Valley (33rd), Sunderland (35th), Newcastle upon Tyne (37th), South Tyneside (38th), Wansbeck (46th), Redcar and Cleveland (50th), Gateshead (52nd), Sedgefield (54th), Derwentside (73rd), Blyth Valley (80th), and Stockton on Tees (98th). The least deprived council districts in 2007 were, in descending order, Tynedale, Castle Morpeth, Teesdale, then Alnwick. Since the April 2009 abolition of these four districts, Northumberland is the least deprived, followed by North Tyneside. Unemployment is a severe problem in the North East, where many children grow up in households where no adult works. in 2010 Easington had the highest rate in the country, as 40.3% of its households with children had no working adult, followed by Sedgefield with 34%.\nAs of April 2013, youth unemployment in the North East was 24.8%, with 51,000 out of work. In 2013, the Office for National Statistics report issued the statements highlighted in the table below:\nIn November 2017 the region's employment dropped to 5.5%, the joint highest unemployment rate in the UK.\nONS ITL.\nIn the ONS International Territorial Levels (ITL), North East England is a level-1 ITL region, coded \"UKC\", which is subdivided as follows:\nReligion.\nIn 2013, the region had the highest proportion of Christians in Great Britain. A number of the region's settlements expanded from around priories, abbeys and monasteries.\nEconomy.\nThe latest statistical report from the Office for National Statistics comparing the North East of England to other regions of the United Kingdom, dated May 2012, states:\nThe North East is the most affordable region in the UK. Figures from 2017 indicate it is the UK region with lowest cost of living per household. The 2023 data shows that for the first time since 2010 renting is now 11.3% cheaper than owning a mortgaged property in the North East.\nManufacturing.\n\u2022 Nissan Motor Manufacturing UK operates a major car manufacturing plant in Sunderland; currently producing the Nissan Qashqai and Nissan Juke. \n\u2022 Hitachi manufactures railway rolling stock in County Durham at its Newton Aycliffe site. \n\u2022 Cello Electronics produces electronics, including televisions and microwaves, at its site in Bishop Auckland, County Durham. Cello are currently the only manufacturer of LED televisions in the UK.\nSupport organisations.\nBusinesses in Northeast England are supported by the North East Chamber of Commerce. The North East Chamber of Commerce (NECC) is based in Durham and has active sub committees working in all sub regions.\nTo further encourage SMEs in the North East of England to Export, the Northeast Process Industry Cluster (NEPIC) has collaborated with the North East Chamber of Commerce (NECC) and RTC North Limited to create a jointly owned subsidiary company Go Global Limited to manage the contract they have to deliver the United Kingdom Trade &amp; Investment (UKTI), Government funded, support products and programme for all business sectors in their region. The UKTI business support products, to help grow international trade, are focused on supporting individual SMEs to grow their exports and they also support Trade Missions to new markets.\nThe Northern Business Forum is an organisation created in the region to share knowledge and best practice between membership based business support organisations in the Northeast of England. The Forum creates a single voice for business when this is needed. This business led forum also links its member organisations to wider business issues, both locally and nationally, through the local and national business membership organisations that are also represented. Members of the forum include NECC, NEPIC, the Federation of Small Businesses (FSB), Confederation of British Industry (CBI) North East, the Make UK Northern, The Institute of Directors (IOD) and RTC North.\nRTC North provide business expertise in specific growth areas such as product innovation, market research, technology transfer, commercialisation, business growth. North East Access to Finance (NEA2F) operates a business growth fund to help small and medium-sized businesses (SMES).\nEnterprise zones.\nBusinesses investing in the region are supported by the Local Enterprise Partnerships of Tees Valley (part of the TVCA) and the North East. Both these organisations manage enterprise zones (Invest North East England and Tees Valley Business) to encourage new business investors. There are also several Industry and Business led Cluster bodies in the region to network and engage companies on a sector basis and give local business-to-business advice and supply chain intelligence: the Northeast of England Process Industry Cluster (NEPIC) (chemicals-polymers-pharmaceuticals-biotech), the Northern Offshore Federation (NOF) (energy and offshore engineering), Service Network (accountants-finance-law firms-HR) and Make UK (defence related engineering), Design Network North (DNN) (design issues for all sectors.)\nThe Invest North East, was announced by the government in 2011. The zone focuses on technology for low carbon vehicle development, marine offshore and subsea engineering, petrochemicals and renewable energy. At the time of announcement the enterprise zone included two clusters of sites, an Ultra Low Carbon Vehicle zone in Sunderland and a zone on the River Tyne North Bank. The Sunderland cluster is close to the Nissan plant and includes Turbine Business Park. It hosts Gateshead College's Future Technology Centre. The cluster on the Tyne includes the Port of Tyne North Estate, Swan Hunter in North Tyneside, and Neptune Yard in Newcastle. The zone was launched in April 2012. In that year another cluster of sites, composing the Blyth Estuary Renewable Energy Zone at Port of Blyth, was added to the zone. The enterprise zone contains ten sites over the three clusters, covering in total.\nIndustrial heritage.\nAfter more than 2,000 years of industrial activity as a result of abundant minerals such as salt and coal, the chemical industry of the Northeast England is today spread across the whole of the region, with pharmaceuticals being primarily produced in the north of the region, speciality and fine chemicals spread across the middle of the region and commodity chemicals and petrochemicals on Teesside.\nThese companies are members of the Northeast of England Process Industry Cluster (NEPIC). The early chemical industry in this region, however, was primarily Tyneside based and associated with the manufacture of soap and glass. The most important chemical activity in the 18th and 19th centuries was the manufacture of alkali to make soap, which was when mixed with lime and sand and used to make glass. The effects of the industrial revolution could be seen through an economy dominated by iron and steel, coal mining and shipbuilding. Rationalisation of chemical firms in 1891 left only four works on Tyneside.\nAlkali manufacturing.\nBefore the Industrial Revolution alkali was mostly used to aid the bleaching process of cloth. As the Industrial Revolution took hold, increasing demand for alkali came from higher production of dyestuffs, and bleach. In 1798 John Losh and the Earl of Dundonald took out a lease for a rich supply of brine pumped from a nearby coal mine, the Walker pit, becoming the supplier of raw material for The Losh, Wilson &amp; Bell Alkali works. The works were established at Walker-on-Tyne in 1807 and bleaching powder manufacture began there in 1830, Losh Brothers soon manufactured half the soda in England. By 1814 the Leblanc process of making alkali from common salt was introduced to Britain. Alkali works using this process opened at Tyne Dock 1822, Felling shore Tyneside 1826, Friars Goose Gateshead 1828 and again on Felling Shore in 1834. Such works also produced soda, alum and Epsom salts.\nThe river frontage at South Shore of the River Tyne at Gateshead was one of the main locations for the chemical industry such that in the 19th century, which led to a cluster of iron, soap and alkali manufacturing.\nBy 1828 the alkali works had a large problem controlling emissions of hydrochloric acid fumes which devastated the neighbouring countryside. One solution was to build tall chimneys to drive the fumes further away and in 1833 the tallest chimney in England was built at the Friars Goose Alkali Works. The passing of the Alkali Act 1863 in the UK Parliament brought about a further reduced pollution from these processes and was the first industrial environmental legislation to come into practice globally.\nSalt making.\nSalt-making in and around Greatham (between Hartlepool and Billingham) had been important in Roman and medieval times, and salt was also produced on Wearside from the 1580s, but by the 16th century the industry had been eclipsed by South Shields on the Tyne. In 1894 the industry returned to Greatham with the establishment of the Greatham Salt and Brine Company by George Weddell. The works was later purchased by the famous salt-making company Cerebos in 1903. By the mid-20th century, Cerebos was owned by the food conglomerate Rank Hovis McDougall, and the factory closed in 2002.\nGlass.\nGlass manufacture has been an important industry in the Northeast of England since stained glass glaziers worked on the Wearmouth and Jarrow monasteries in 674\u00a0AD. Sunderland and Tyneside were noted for glass-making between the 17th and 19th centuries. In 1827 about two fifths of all English glass was made in the Tyneside area and in 1845 South Shields was making more plate glass than anywhere else in England. Sunderland was also rising to prominence as a glass-making centre, with James Hartley's Wear Glass Works opening in 1836, and by 1865 one third of the sheet glass in England was supplied by his Sunderland works.\nThe Candlish Glass Bottleworks was the largest in Europe, managed by John Candlish\nWilliam Beilby produced decorative glass items in Newcastle during the mid 1700s.\nCoal mining.\nCoal mining was one of the first industrial activities in Northeast England because the region was fortunate to have shallow seams of coal near the coast, which meant that material could be transported in and out by sea. This led to the growth of ports in Sunderland, Newcastle, Teesport Middlesbrough, Seaham, Hartlepool and Blyth. The energy from coal underpinned the development of many of the industries around these ports. As discussed in the classic historical review of \"Victorian Cities\" by Asa Briggs, Middlesbrough was developed as a port downstream of Yarm and Stockton to take bigger coal ships.\nThe Northumberland-Durham coalfield was one of the earliest coal mining areas to be worked in the country, with the Romans extracting coal here which caused the area to become an important source of coal in the 13th and 14th centuries. Many current towns and villages across the region were originally settlements set up for the coal miners. For example, Seaham is a port community that was developed to handle output of the coal mining interests of Charles William Vane-Tempest-Stewart the 3rd Marquis of Londonderry, a military leader and business man who became one of the UK's richest men due to his coal mining developments. The Marquis built his business interests using the inherited wealth of his wife Francis Anne. The Marquis also built Wynyard Hall, one of the country's finest country houses in the region as a palace for his family and his royal connections.\nLondon was one of the places which received coal from the area and there are references to shipments of coal being sent to the capital, for example 526 cauldrons of coal from Tyneside to London in 1376 for smiths involved in building Windsor Castle. Before the growth of mining companies, the coal from the North East was often sent to London using monks. The coal was often called sea coal because it often washed up from undersea outcrops on the Northumbrian coast. This could explain the name Se-coles Lane in London. It also led to the colloquial phrase \"taking coals to Newcastle\", meaning why take something to a place that already has an excess of it. The north east mine owners operated a cartel to keep up London prices; much studied by economic historians, it may have been the longest-lasting cartel that has ever existed.\nImprovements in technology meant equipment could be built to go deeper than ever before. One example was the High Main seam at Walker Colliery on Tyneside, which became one of the deepest coal mines in the world, thanks to large engine cylinders which helped drain the mine. Other mining developments from this region include water level and ventilation techniques introduced by John Buddle who also helped to introduce the miner's safety lamp which was invented here by Stephenson and Davy.\nSir Humphry Davy, after contemplating a communication he had received from Reverend Dr Robert Gray Rector of Bishopwearmouth (later Bishop of Bristol) regarding the problem of gas in mines, took up the challenge of solving the problem of providing light in \"fire-damp\" ridden collieries. He started the work with several days of discussions with John Buddle, the overseer at Wallsend Colliery, other colliery owners and finally the Reverend John Hodgson, Vicar of Jarrow. Davy also collected samples of \"fire-damp\" before returning to his laboratory in London. Two designs of his lamps emerged and were tested at the most hazardous pits in the country, then at Newcastle-upon- Tyne and Whitehaven in Cumberland, and were a resounding success. He later published his paper on \"The safety lamp for coal mines and some researches on flame\" in 1818, which made underground coal mines much more safe. George Stephenson a colliery engineer at Killingworth Main Colliery also invented a safety lamp which was successfully tested on 21 October 1815. This became known as the \"Geordie\" lamp. As a result, some in the Northeast then tried to challenge the delivery of some Ceremonial Plate to Davy but the Davy Lamper's won the day and on 25 September 1817 a dinner service as presented to Davy from the coal owners at the Queen's Head in Newcastle. Davy declined to take out a patent on his lamp design effectively giving it to the nation and the world's coal miners.\nThe moment when the new safety lamp was first tested was recorded by John Buddle in a report from the Select Committee on Accidents in Mines on 4 September 1835 \"I first tried the lamp in an explosive mixture on the surface; and then took it to the mine; it is impossible for me to express my feelings at the time when I first suspended the lamp in the mine and saw it red hot. I said to those around me: \"We have at last subdued this monster [fire-damp].\" With some describing it as one of the most significant moments in the industrialization of the world.\"\nAs an example of the many coal mines (colloquially known as pits) that were created in the Northeast's Monkwearmouth Colliery (or Wearmouth Colliery) was a large deep pit that went out under the North Sea. It was located on the north bank of the River Wear and was the largest pit in Sunderland and one of the most important in County Durham. The mine opened in 1835 and was the last to remain operating in the Durham Coalfield, with the last shift leaving the pit on 10 December 1993 and ending over 800 years of commercial underground coal mining in the region. The Colliery site has been cleared to make way for the Sunderland A.F.C's Stadium of Light which opened in July 1997. The mine is commemorated by a large sculpture of a miners lamp at the entrance to the stadium.\nThe Durham Coalfield remains a national resource for the UK economy today and for the future. Most of the mines in the region were closed during the years of UK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher (see UK miners' strike (1984\u20131985)) however several large open cast coal mines are still operational in the region.\nToday companies like Five-Quarter are investigating the use of the latest technology for underground coal gasification to access the Durham Coalfield reserves. Professor Paul Younger of Newcastle University in 2011 reported that \"Around 75 per cent of the coal in the North East is still underground, even though we have been mining it on an industrial scale longer than anyone else in the world. Previously a lot of this coal was too deep for conventional mining, or too far off shore. Even today this resource could never be exploited by conventional means, but the technology to harness that resource has now become cost effective.\" Accessing these reserves is of particular importance to the local chemical industry.\nShipbuilding.\nShipbuilding was once one of this region's largest industrial sectors. Ships were built on the River Wear at Sunderland from at least 1346 and on the River Tees at Stockton from at least 1470, with the Northeast of England more generally being the birthplace of some of the world's greatest vessels. This was recognised in 2013 with the regions shipbuilding heritage and global impact being recognized by UNESCO and placed on their Memory of the World Register, ranking the regions shipbuilding heritage alongside iconic items such as the Domesday Book in terms of historical importance.\nWood to iron and steel.\nThe early ships were built of wood, but in the 19th century there was a move towards building ships of iron then steel. Ships were built across the region, especially along Tyneside in Jarrow and Wearside in Sunderland and also in smaller ports like Blyth, Whitby and Hartlepool. Sunderland's early development was due to coal but it later transitioned to become the largest shipbuilding town in the world giving the town its fame. The first recorded shipbuilder was Thomas Menville at Hendon in 1346.\nBy 1790 Sunderland was building around nineteen ships per year making it the most important shipbuilding centre in the United Kingdom. By 1840 there were 65 shipyards such that over 150 wooden vessels were built at Sunderland in 1850. At this time 2,025 shipwrights worked in the town and some 2,000 others were employed in related industries. Sunderland's first iron ships were built from 1852 and wooden shipbuilding ceased here in 1876. Sunderland shipbuilders included Austin and Son, William Pickersgill and William Doxford.\nIt was between 1790 and 1805 that Thomas Haw of Stockton began building ships for the Napoleonic wars. Shipbuilding did not begin in Middlesbrough until 1833 when a wooden sailing ship called \"The Middlesbro\" was built. Teesside's first iron ship was built in Thornaby in 1854, it was a screw steamer called \"The Advance\", and Teesside's first steel ship was \"Little Lucy\" built in 1858. One famous Teesside-built ship was the long \"Talpore\", built by Pearse and Co of Stockton in 1860. It was a troop ship for the River Indus, and was the world's largest river steamer at the time. An archive of the ships built on Teesside has been created,\nIn Hartlepool Thomas Richardson of Castle Eden and John Parkin of Sunderland established a shipyard at Old Hartlepool in 1835 and built The Castle Eden ship. The shipbuilding company of William Gray was established here in 1862 and Gray became one of the most influential men in the town. He was the first mayor of West Hartlepool in 1887. William Gray shipbuilders won the Blue Ribband prize for maximum output in 1878, 1882, 1888, 1895, 1898 and 1900. The yard closed in 1961.\nOn Tyneside, Charles Mark Palmer, born in South Shields, established a yard at Jarrow in 1851 and built its first iron collier, \"The John Bowes\", in the following year. It was the first ever seagoing screw collier and was built for John Bowes of Barnard Castle for shipping coal to London. Palmer was also famed for building the first rolled armour plates for warships in 1854. William Smith and Co launched the 1,600-ton \"Blenheim\" in 1848.\nW. G. Armstrong, the northern engineer, acquired an interest in the Tyneside shipbuilding firm of Mitchells in 1882, and the company of W. G. Armstrong, Mitchell and Co was formed. The yard built battleships as well as a ship called \"Gluckauf\", which was arguably the world's first oil tanker. It was launched by the yard in 1886. Scotsman Charles Mitchell started building ships at Walker-on-Tyne in 1852 and purchased a site at Wallsend in 1873 to soak up excess orders from his Walker shipyard. The new yard failed financially and was handed to his brother-in-law Charles Swan. Charles and his brother Henry were directors of the Wallsend Slipway Company, a repair yard established by Mitchell in 1871. In 1878 Charles arranged a partnership with Sunderland shipbuilder George Hunter, but in 1879 Charles died after falling overboard from a channel steamer whilst returning from the Continent with his wife. Hunter went into temporary partnership with Swan's wife before becoming managing director in 1880. Swan Hunters built their first steel ship at Wallsend in 1884 and their first oil tanker in 1889.\nMost early ships built at the Swan Hunter yard were smaller, like colliers and barges, but in 1898 it built its first ocean liner, \"Ultonia,\" with a further 21 liners being built between 1898 and 1903. The most famous ship ever launched there was undoubtedly , a transatlantic ocean liner that launched on 20 September 1906. The ship was long, with a Beam (nautical) of 88\u00a0ft (27 m) and a gross register tonnage of 31,938 tons. It carried 2,000 passengers on its maiden voyage on 16 November 1907 and won the Blue Riband for the fastest crossing of the Atlantic, a record held for 22 years.\nMaritime innovation.\nA major pioneering innovation in marine engineering was the steam turbine, invented by Charles Algernon Parsons. He patented the first steam turbine on Tyneside in 1884. Parsons, born in Ireland in 1854, was the youngest son of the Earl of Rosse and a keen inventor, who was a junior partner in the Tyneside engineering firm of Clarke Chapman. In 1894 Parsons' Marine Turbine Company launched , the first ship to be powered by electric turbines. She can be still be seen (and boarded) at the Discovery Museum in Newcastle upon Tyne.\n20th-century decline.\nShipyard closures in the 20th century took place during economic slumps and occurred in two phases, between 1909\u20131933 and 1960\u20131993. Early closures included Smiths Dock at North Shields in 1909, which became a ship repair yard, Armstrongs of Elswick in 1921, Richardson Duck of Stockton (1925), Priestman's of Sunderland (1933) and Palmers of Jarrow and Hebburn (1933). There were 28 North East closures in this period of which 14 were on the Tyne, 7 on the Wear, 6 on the Tees and 1 at Hartlepool. Six shipyards closed in the 1960s including W.Gray of Hartlepool (1961), Short Brothers of Sunderland (1964) and The Blyth Shipbuilding Company (1966). There were five closures in the region in the 1970s including the Furness yard at Haverton Hill, near Stockton, in 1979.\nScience and engineering.\nThe coal and shipbuilding industry that once dominated the North East suffered a marked decline during the second half of the 20th century. Tyneside is now re-inventing itself as an international centre of art, culture and through The Centre For Life, scientific research, especially in healthcare and biotechnology. Newcastle University is now a leading institution in the development of stem cell technology being the first in the United Kingdom and the second institution in Europe to obtain a licence to do such work. As with the rest of the region, Sunderland suffered economic decline during the last century, but is now becoming an important area for quaternary industry, bioscience, computing and high tech industries. The economy of Sunderland is now dominated by the Nissan's European car manufacturing facility and supply chain which is also leading that company's development of electric vehicles.\nThe economy of Teesside continues to be largely based on the petrochemical, commodity chemical and steel industries that form a significant part of the Northeast of England Process Industry Cluster (NEPIC), but newer industries such as offshore engineering and digital computing, particularly in the field of Game design, have emerged from Teesside University. Northumberland, although largely rural and an important tourist location with its castles, beaches, and history has a nationally significant concentration of pharmaceutical manufacturing companies around Cramlington and Prudhoe. The county has also seen a huge investment into the creation of the UKs largest reservoir, Kielder Water, enabling the Northeast to attract more industry. Kielder forest around the reservoir is known to have the darkest night sky in England, making it an ideal location for both professional and amateur astronomers.\nThe City of Durham with its highly regarded University, Castle and Cathedral attracts many tourists and also a significant number of knowledge intensive businesses (KIBS) in architecture, engineering, technology and measurement science. At Sedgefield in County Durham, NETPark is home to the Centre for Process Innovation's Printable Electronics Technology Centre, a nationally important centre for the development of printed electronics and a number of other emerging electronics companies such as Kromek.\nToday, the members of the Northeast of England Process Industry Cluster (NEPIC) represent about one third of the regional industrial economy. The NEPIC is constituted by commodity chemical, petrochemical, speciality chemical, pharmaceutical, biotechnology, polymer, renewable material and renewable energy companies and the associated supply chains. The Teesside industry is located on three large chemical sites at Wilton, Billingham and Seal Sands at the mouth of the River Tees and Teesport, the third largest port in the UK and the tenth in Western Europe and is important logistical infrastructure supporting the commodity chemical and steel members of NEPIC. In the 21st century PD Ports, owners of Teesport, have been developing it as a Port Centric Logistical Centre. This strategy has seen a number of significant importing and distribution facilities for the north of the UK being built here, including distribution centres for the distribution operations of Asda/Walmart and Tesco supermarket chains.\nNEPIC has two offices in the region: one in the north in Sunderland, serving the pharmaceutical and speciality chemical industries on Tyneside and in south Northumberland, and one in the south at Wilton near Redcar, serving the commodity chemical and steel industry of Teesside and operating amongst several process sector and supply chain companies that work out of the process industry research centre, The Wilton Centre, one of Europe's largest technical development laboratory facilities. The head office of the Centre for Process Innovation, part of the UK's High Value Manufacturing Catapult, is based in this multi-occupancy technical development centre along with their pioneering National Industrial Biotechnology Facility.\nInnovations.\nThis region has a strong history in technological innovation:\nThe friction match was invented in Stockton-on-Tees in 1826 by John Walker.\nGeorge Stephenson (9 June 1781 \u2013 12 August 1848) was an English civil engineer and mechanical engineer who built the first public inter-city railway line in the world to use steam locomotives. Renowned as the father of railways, George Stephenson was born in Wylam, Northumberland, 9.3 miles (15.0\u00a0km) west of Newcastle upon Tyne.\nSir Joseph Wilson Swan (31 October 1828 \u2013 27 May 1914) was a British physicist and chemist from Sunderland, County Durham now the (City of Sunderland). He is most famous for inventing an incandescent light bulb before its invention by the American Thomas Edison. Swan first demonstrated the light bulb at a lecture the Literary and Philosophical Society and Miners Institute on Mosley Street, Newcastle upon Tyne on 18 December 1878. Mosley Street, Newcastle upon Tyne is reputed to be the first street in the world to be lit by electric light.\nCharles Algernon Parsons invented the steam turbine in 1884, and having foreseen its potential to power ships he set up the Parsons Marine Steam Turbine Company with five associates in 1893. To develop this he had the experimental vessel built in a light design of steel by the firm of Brown and Hood, based at Wallsend on Tyne. He also pioneered in the field of electricity generation, establishing the Newcastle and District Electric Lighting Company in 1889. The company opened the first power station in the world to generate electricity using turbo generators in 1890, at Forth Banks in Newcastle.\nWilliam George Armstrong, 1st Baron Armstrong, CB, FRS (26 November 1810 \u2013 27 December 1900) was an effective Tyneside industrialist who founded the Armstrong Whitworth manufacturing empire. He was responsible for the development of the hydraulic crane and many military armaments. His house at Cragside, Northumberland was the first in the world to be lit by hydro-electricity, using incandescent lamps provided by the inventor Joseph Swan.\nIn 1936 the first commercially viable production of acrylic safety glass, Perspex, began by ICI Acrylics and the material is still manufactured in the region by Lucite International now part of Mitsubishi Corporation. During the Second World War acrylic glass was used for submarine periscopes, windshields, canopies, and gun turrets for airplanes. Shortages in raw materials and price pressures have led to innovation by Lucite who developed their patented Alpha Technology in this region. This technology is now the leading technology used in the manufacture of acrylics around the world. It uses new feedstock's and has a cost advantage of 40% over conventional processing methods.\nNewcastle University was the first in the UK and the second in Europe to receive a licence to perform research on stem cells and is a leading centre for such research today. Dr Karim Nayernia was the first to isolate spermatogonial stem cells at this University. Many new healthcare developments have arisen from this stem cell expertise in the region.\nToday, the region has five universities with a number of research departments:\nDurham University, Newcastle University, Northumbria University, University of Sunderland and Teesside University, which have a portfolio of many innovative businesses that have spun out of their research and teaching departments.\nSport.\nFootball.\nA precursor of modern football is still seen in the region at some annual Shrove Tuesday games at Alnwick, Chester-le-Street and Sedgefield and many of such games have pre-Norman origins. In 1280 at Ulgham near Morpeth Northumberland, records show that Henry of Ellington was killed playing football when David Le Keu's knife went into Henry's belly and killed him. Organised football teams as we know today did not appear until the 1870s. Middlesbrough Football Club was formed by local cricket players in 1876, Sunderland Association Football Club in 1879 and Newcastle United Football Club was formed in 1892 by uniting Newcastle West End FC with Newcastle East End.\nDarlington formed in 1861 (re-formed 1883 and in 2012) and West Hartlepool of 1881 became Hartlepool United in 1908. In 1888 Sunderland and Middlesbrough were troubled by rival break-away teams called Sunderland Albion and Middlesbrough Ironopolis, both of which were lost before the 20th century began. Sunderland won the league championship three times in the 1890s and Newcastle United were first division champions three times in the early 1900s, reaching the FA Cup Final three times before winning it at the fourth attempt in 1910.\nToday top quality professional football remains in the northeast of England. In the 2025-2026 season, Newcastle United and Sunderland are Premier League teams, whilst Middlesbrough are in the Football League Championship, Hartlepool and Gateshead FC compete in the National League. St James' Park in Newcastle, the Stadium of Light in Sunderland and The Riverside Stadium in Middlesbrough are all first class football venues often used for international games at all levels. The region is represented in the 2023-24 Women's Championship by Durham W.F.C., who play home games on the campus of Durham University and Sunderland A.F.C., who call Hetton-le-Hole home; they currently have no representatives in the top-tier Women's Super League.\nFirst \"world cup\" winners and influential amateurs.\nAmateur and semi-professional football clubs like Bishop Auckland and Blyth Spartans A.F.C. have had success and public attention through Football Association Cup runs, but the most famous achievement was by West Auckland Town FC in 1910: they were invited to take part in a competition in Italy to compete for what was then labelled the soccer World Cup. West Auckland won the competition against some of Europe's biggest sides; they defeated Juventus 2\u20130 in the final. They successfully defended the title the following year. The first World Cup trophy played for in these tournaments, Sir Thomas Lipton Trophy, which was being held in West Auckland Working Men's Club, was stolen in 1994 and never recovered. An exact replica of the original trophy was commissioned and is now held by West Auckland FC. The story of West Auckland's success was made into a film called \"A Captain's Tale\", starring actor Dennis Waterman as club captain Jones.\nPlayers from some of the region's minor league teams have gone on to influence football on the world stage. Jack Greenwell (John Richard Greenwell), an ex-coal miner who played non-league football for Crook Town A.F.C. from 1901 to 1912, went to Spain and played 88 games for Barcelona before becoming their manager in 1917. Greenwell's achievements at Barcelona include winning five Catalan championships and two Copas del Rey. He also managed Espanyol, Mallorca and Valencia. On the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War, he moved to South America to manage the Peruvian and Colombian national teams; he died in 1942 in Bogot\u00e1.\nNotable associated footballers.\nThere are many notable footballers from the Northeast of England. Sunderland's Alf Common became the world's first \u00a31,000 player when he was signed by Middlesbrough in 1905. Other pre Second World War and immediate post war greats were Charles Buchan, who created and edited the iconic magazine \"Football Monthly\", George Camsell, Hughie Gallacher, Wilf Mannion, Raich Carter, Bob Gurney all of whom are described in a famous book by the \"Clown Prince of Football\" Len Shackleton. Mr Shackleton's book shot to immediate fame and caused a storm when first published because chapter 9, named \"The Average Director's Knowledge of Football\", was produced as a blank page. Local Heroes after the Second World War included Joe Harvey, Jackie Milburn, Brian Clough and Newcastle's Bobby Moncur who led his team to win the Inter City Fairs Cup in 1969. \nPerhaps the two most significant English players to come from this region are Bobby Charlton and Jackie Charlton who learnt their early football after being born and raised in the coal mining town of Ashington. They were incidentally related to Jackie Milburn who was their uncle. Bobby joined Manchester United and Jackie Leeds United both contributing much to the success and history of their respective clubs. They both became permanent fixtures in Alf Ramsey's 1966 England World Cup winning team.\nMalcolm Macdonald was a successful Newcastle player of the 1970s. Sunderland goalkeeper Jim Montgomery's double save, which helped Sunderland, which was then a Second Division club, beat Leeds United to win the 1973 FA Cup Final by an Ian Porterfield goal, is an incident that is frequently recalled. Great players of the 1980s and 1990s include local born internationals like Peter Beardsley, Paul Gascoigne, Chris Waddle and Alan Shearer. Shearer remains the highest scoring player in Premier League history with 260 goals in 441 appearances. In the early 2000s Middlesbrough also joined the top clubs in English Football and played for a number of years in the Premier League and winning the League Cup in 2004. The Brazilian Juninho Paulista was an influential player for Middlesbrough during their time in the top flight, a time when the Middlesbrough football academy became famous for producing a number of young top flight players such as Stewart Downing, James Morrison, Lee Cattermole, Adam Johnson and, more recently, Ben Gibson.\nIn recent times, the Northeast, especially Sunderland, has produced many notable female footballers. Of the 23 players in England's 2019 Women's World Cup squad, five players were born in the North East and had played for Sunderland A.F.C. Women at some point in their careers: Lucy Bronze (who would go on to win four Champions League titles with Lyon and Barcelona), Carly Telford, Demi Stokes, Jill Scott and Steph Houghton. Further, Lucy Staniforth, also a member of the 2019 World Cup squad, moved to Bronze's hometown of Alnwick at the age of 10 and played for Sunderland, whilst Jordan Nobbs, a regular Lioness who missed 2019 through injury but was a silver medalist in 2023 along with Bronze, hails from Stockton-on-Tees and came through the youth system in Sunderland, eventually graduating to the first team. Euro 2022 golden boot winner and Arsenal star Beth Mead is a native of Whitby, located just south of North East England, but plied her trade at Middlesbrough before moving to Sunderland A.F.C. in 2011, where she became the youngest WSL Golden Boot winner at the age of 20 in 2015.\nHorse racing.\nEarly races were mentioned in 1613 at Woodham near Aycliffe and were held at Newcastle's Killingworth Moor from 1632 before moving to the Town Moor. The 'Pitmen's Derby' or Northumberland Plate was held from 1833 and moved to Gosforth in 1882. Georgian races were held at places like Barnard Castle, Bishop Auckland, Blaydon, Chester-le-Street, Darlington, Durham, Gateshead, Hebburn, Heighington, Lanchester, Ryton, Sedgefield, South Shields, Stockton-on-Tees, Sunderland, Tanfield, Whickham and Witton Gilbert. A 1740 Act banned smaller meetings but some meetings like Durham survived into the late 19th or early 20th centuries. \nRacing at Blaydon, which ended in 1916, was commemorated in an 1862 music hall song \"Blaydon Races\".\nModern day horse racing is still popular and regular events still take place at Redcar, Newcastle and Sedgefield Race Courses.\nGolf.\nGolf is a Scottish import to many countries but it is said to have been played in this region by St Cuthbert on the dunes of the Northumberland coast. The oldest club in Northeast England was Alnmouth founded in 1869 \u2013 the fourth oldest in the country and is now Alnmouth Village Club and an interesting 9 hole links course. There are three fine old links courses in this region at Seaton Carew, Goswick and Redcar.\nThe first golf course appeared in County Durham in 1874 at Seaton Carew Golf Club near Hartlepool. It was to become the only course in the whole of the counties of Durham and Yorkshire and was originally called the Durham and Yorkshire Golf Club and reference to this today remains in the Club's badge. Seaton Carew is the 10th oldest Golf Club in England. The Club was set up by a newly qualified surgeon from Edinburgh, who played at Musselburgh, when he realised there was nowhere for him to continue to practice his passion for the game. This was Dr. Duncan McCuaig, who had moved down to Teesside shortly after qualifying at University of Edinburgh. His memory can be recalled when one plays the third hole, a challenging par 3, named \"The Doctor\". Over the years some of the finest golfers in the country have played the links at Seaton Carew, including the legendary \"Great Triumvirate\" of Golf Harry Vardon, John Henry \"J H\" Taylor and James Braid and several other Open Champions.\nAlister MacKenzie, the designer of Augusta National Golf Club in Augusta, Georgia, home of The Masters, and the Cypress Point golf course in California, lengthened the Seaton Carew Course in 1925 to 6,500 yards and designed new holes eastwards including the planting of over 2,000 buckthorn bushes. In 1937, Walter Hagen played an exhibition match at Seaton Carew during a tour of Europe and commented \"It is a splendid course, the links are well groomed. It is not an easy course and provides a good test of golf. It is one I would like to play quite often\". This club by varying the playing sequence of the 22 holes can create 5 different course layouts. In 2014, \"flyovers\" of all 5 Seaton Carew Golf Course layouts were created with commentaries by TV commentator Peter Alliss. Alliss comments: \"The tenth oldest in England and a true championship links to challenge all levels of players.\"\nSeaton Carew Golf Club is regular host to top amateur golf competitions. Golf England's Brabazon Trophy was held at this Club in 1985 and the winner, Peter Baker, went on to Ryder Cup and European Tour success after sharing this amateur title with the North East's Roger Roper (Roper turned professional at the age of 50 in 2007 to compete on the Seniors Professional Tour). In June 2014, the Brabazon Trophy tournament returned to Seaton Carew and in line with the illustrious outcomes for past winners on this course a bright future was predicted for the winner Ben Stow from Wiltshire. Stow equalled the course record on the final day with a \"birdie\" on the final hole to win the Barabzon Trophy by one shot. He subsequently competed internationally, winning the 2018 Prague Golf Challenge.\nGoswick near Berwick on Tweed is a James Braid design masterpiece which is widely acknowledged as a classic Northumberland links course so much so, that the Royal and Ancient Golf Club (R&amp;A) chose Goswick as a regional qualifier for the Open Championship for five years from 2008. At Redcar on Teesside, the http:// of 1887 is the oldest in Yorkshire. The Tyneside Golf Club at Ryton dates from 1880 but there may have been earlier courses in the region. During the English Civil War of 1642\u20131651, King Charles played 'Goff' in the Shield Fields of the suburb of Pandon near Newcastle during his imprisonment in the town.\nToday inland golf courses are abundant in the northeast of England, http:// and Brancepeth Golf Club being two excellent examples from many but those new courses created in the late 20th and early 21st centuries at Wynyard, Rockciffe Hall, Slalely Hall and Close House, have rapidly gained an international reputation and regularly hold professional events such as the Seve Trophy and the Seniors Tour.\nThe region has two professional golfers who are currently prominent in many professional golf tour events: Kenny Ferrie from Ashington and Graeme Storm from Hartlepool have both won events on the prestigious European Tour.\nThe largest corporate golf day in the United Kingdom is held annually each September by the members of the Northeast of England Process Industry Cluster (NEPIC) when 180 golfers play both the Slaley Hunting and Priestman courses simultaneously, after a shot gun start.\nCricket.\nCricket has long been a popular sport in the Northeast of England and is said to date back to Elizabethan times. Yorkshire County Cricket Club was formed in 1863 and Durham County Cricket Club in 1882. After many years of success in the Minor Counties Championship, Durham joined Yorkshire in the senior counties championship in 1992. The Riverside cricket stadium, the home of Durham County Cricket Club in Chester-le-Street, in full view of Lumley Castle, is now one of the most picturesque cricket venues in the UK. This venue now regularly hosts international cricket; its first \"Ashes\" Test Match between England and Australia was in August 2013. With 320 runs and 15 wickets on the last day of the match, the venue provided \"the most high-octane day of a thrilling Test match\", and England took an unassailable 3\u20130 lead against the Australians in the five-match Ashes Test series.\nAthletics.\nAthletics is a sport of rising popularity since the olympic and international success of Northeast athletes Brendan Foster in the 1970s and Steve Cram in the 1980s. Both won international medals and broke world records in middle and long-distance running. Brendan Foster established the annual Great North Run, one of the best known half marathons in which thousands of participants run from Newcastle to South Shields. Brendan Foster, a former school teacher in this region, is also recognised as the driving force behind the creation of the Gateshead International Athletics Stadium which now regularly hosts International Athletics meets and other sporting events.\nIn 2013 the 33rd Great North Run had 56,000 participants most of whom were raising money for charity. The elite races had Olympic gold medalists and world champion long-distance runners participating including in the men's race, Mo Farah, Kenenisa Bekele and a regular supporter of the event Haile Gebrselassie. Ethiopian Bekele won the men's event just ahead of Farah. Kenya's Priscah Jeptoo came first the women's race and multi Olympic gold medalist David Weir won the wheelchair event. The founder of the event, Brendan Foster was reported to be looking forward to 2014 when the Great North Run was scheduled to have its millionth finisher \u2013 becoming the first International Athletics Association Event (IAAF) event in the world to reach such a milestone.\nThe 2014 Great North Run made history with Mo Farah winning the men's race in a new personal best of just 1 hour. He was challenged all the way but he held off strong competition from Kenya's Mike Kigen. The millionth finisher of the race was 51-year-old Tracey Cramond of Darlington, who ran to raise funds for the local Teesside charity Butterwick Hospice.\nMedia.\nLocal media includes:\nRegional television is provided by the BBC North East and Cumbria, which broadcasts the regional evening \"Look North\" programme from Spital Tongues in Newcastle. Its commercial rival, ITV Tyne Tees &amp; Border, broadcasts the evening programme \"ITV News Tyne Tees\" from Gateshead.\nLocal BBC radio stations are BBC Newcastle and BBC Tees. Commercial radio stations include Hits Radio North East, Hits Radio Teesside, Heart North East, Capital North East, Smooth North East, Greatest Hits Radio Teesside, Greatest Hits Radio North East and Nation Radio North East. There are also Nova Radio North East, Radio Hartlepool and Spark FM community radio stations.\nRegional newspapers include the \"Evening Chronicle, \"Sunderland Echo\", The Journal,\" \"Evening Gazette\", \"Shields Gazette\", \"Hartlepool Mail\", \"The Northern Echo\" and the \"Darlington and Stockton Times\". There are also free publications such as \"The Ferryhill Chapter\", \"Bishop Press\", \"The Hartlepool Post\" and \"Shildon Town Crier\".\nTransport.\nRoad.\nThe North East's main arterial carriageway is the A1 road, which mirrors the East Coast Main Line's course. In County Durham this road is of motorway standard and is known as the A1(M), and in March 2018 a section of A1(M) was opened between Barton and Leeming Bar in North Yorkshire providing a continuous link to the motorway network in the rest of England. However, the A1 is still an all-purpose road in Tyne and Wear and Northumberland, and is controversially still single carriageway north of Morpeth, despite being the main trunk route connecting Edinburgh and Newcastle upon Tyne and having a terrible safety record.\nA second north\u2013south dual carriageway link is provided by the A19 which heads north from Thirsk (accessed via the A168 from the A1(M) at Dishforth), serving Teesside, Peterlee and Sunderland before heading through the Tyne Tunnel to meet the A1 at Seaton Burn. The Tyne Tunnel was opened as a single-carriageway in 1967, with a second tunnel opening in February 2011 for dual-ing.\nThe course of the A1 through Tyne and Wear has changed twice during the late 20th century. Originally passing through the centre of Newcastle upon Tyne then, in 1977, it was re-routed to the east of the city through the Tyne Tunnel. In 1993 a second rerouting occurred, along Newcastle Western Bypass, west of the city. Each of these resulted in standing roads to be renumbered, the A1 forms the boundary and roads between beginning with 1 and 6.\nThe A66 (Tees Valley) and A68 (often following the Roman road Dere Street) are cross-country roads over the North Pennines. The A69 heads west along the Tyne Valley to Carlisle in Cumbria.\nSea.\nThe ferry terminal at North Shields is accessed via the A187 from the Tyne Tunnel. DFDS operate two ferries a day to Amsterdam and, formerly, one a day on the Stavanger \u2013 Haugesund \u2013 Bergen route.\nAir.\nThe two main airports are Newcastle Airport, located north of the city near Ponteland, and Teesside International Airport, located east of Darlington.\nThe region's population is served by a charitable service known as the Great North Air Ambulance for those who need rapid transfer to a hospital or medical assistance in difficult or remote locations.\nTransport policy.\nLong term planning for transport in the region has involved the development of sub regional strategies. This planning also needs to take into account region wide transport schemes such as those carried out by the Highways Agency and Network Rail. These activities in the United Kingdom now fall into the remit of the Local Enterprise Partnerships (LEPs) which in the Northeast of England are https:// and the http://. Bodies such as the Northeast Chamber of Commerce (NECC) and the Institution of Civil Engineers (ICE) are providers of significant practical insights to policy makers.\nWithin the region the local transport authorities plan for the future by producing Local Transport Plans (LTP) which outline their strategies, policies and implementation programmes. The most recent LTP is that for the period 2006\u201311. In the North East region the following transport authorities have published their LTP online: the 5 Tees Valley authorities, Durham, Tyne and Wear and Northumberland.\nEducation.\nPrimary.\nThere are over 250 nursery/primary schools in the County Durham area of the north east, which range from schools with their own nursery, to schools that are either infant only or junior only. Areas such as Gosforth have first schools which have neither years 5 nor 6, and therefore educate children up to the age of 8 and 9.\nSecondary.\nThe North East education system consists largely of comprehensive schools, but a number of private and independent schools are found in Newcastle, Sunderland, Durham, Darlington, Stockton and in particular, Northumberland.\nin 2014 a number of the regions schools were in the top 20% of schools as measured by SSAT \u2014 the UK organisation for school improvement and collaboration \u2014 and have been awarded an SSAT Educational Outcomes Award recognising their successes. These schools are Burnside Business &amp; Enterprise College, in Newcastle, Castle View Enterprise Academy, in Sunderland, Emmanuel College, in Gateshead, Greenfield Community College, in Newton Aycliffe, Northumberland Church of England Academy, in Ashington and The North Durham Academy in Stanley. The awards, recognised high attainment and outstanding continuous improvement.\nThe schools in the top 20% for high attainment in GCSE exams were Burnside Business and Enterprise College and Northumberland Church of England Academy\nThe region's secondary school attendance is the lowest in England at around 125,000, with the next lowest in the East Midlands. Truancy at its schools is a mixed picture. It has the second highest overall rate for urban areas, after Yorkshire and the Humber, but the lowest rate in England in its rural areas. Middlesbrough has the region's highest rate with 7.2% persistent truants, which is the second highest rate in England after Manchester (7.3%). Next is Newcastle upon Tyne, with 6.4%, then the former district of Wansbeck, with 6.3%\nAt General Certificate of Secondary Education (GCSE) level, the region's performance is similar to that of other largely urban areas, although its results are generally below the national average. Middlesbrough tends to perform the worst, and to produce results well below the national average. Local education authorities (LEAs) in the North East have improved at GCSE in recent years. North Tyneside performed the best in 2011, followed by Gateshead, Northumberland, and Darlington. No LEA in the North-East was above the 2011 national GCSE average. South Tyneside was the lowest for the English Baccalaureate, followed by Middlesbrough and Hartlepool. Gateshead and North Tyneside were the highest, and Gateshead was the only LEA above the national average for this measure.\nThe region's parochial schools tend to perform better at GCSE: these include St Thomas More Catholic School, Blaydon; Emmanuel College, Gateshead; All Saints Academy, Ingleby Barwick; The English Martyrs School, Hartlepool; St Bede's Catholic School, Lanchester and the Carmel College, Darlington. Other regional schools that perform well include Whitley Bay High School, Marden High School in Cullercoats, the Macmillan Academy in Middlesbrough, Park View School in Chester-le Street and the Hurworth School near Darlington. Northumberland schools have a three-tier system, 12 year olds go into high school instead of 11 year olds going into a secondary school.\nDame Allan's Schools, Royal Grammar School (NRGS), Barnard Castle School and Durham School are all members of The Headmasters' and Headmistresses' Conference. The Central Newcastle High School and the Royal Grammar School were named as among the nation's top 100 independent schools in 2006. Durham School is considered to be one of the oldest schools in the UK, and its Old Boys were the founding members of the original Newcastle Falcons Rugby club. Mowden Hall School, a selective day and boarding prep school in Northumberland, is another independent school.\nCollege.\nThere are sixteen further education colleges in the region. The main such colleges are East Durham College, Newcastle College, New College Durham, Darlington College, Gateshead College, Bishop Auckland College, Stockton Riverside College, Queen Elizabeth Sixth Form College, Hartlepool College of Further Education, Middlesbrough College, Northern School of Art and Design and Sunderland College. \nNorth East LEAs at A-level are improving, but produce results below those of other areas of England. Sunderland performed the best in 2011, with consistently good results, followed by Hartlepool and Darlington, which are above the national average, and unrepresentative of most areas in the North East. Darlington's Queen Elizabeth Sixth Form College is one of the highest-rated colleges in England. The area's Catholic schools all do reasonably well at A level. Stockton-on-Tees, Redcar and Cleveland and Newcastle were also above England's average.\nMany of region's colleges provide higher education validated by a university.\nUniversity.\nThe North East has five universities; Durham University, Newcastle University (both in the Russell Group), Northumbria University in Newcastle, Teesside University (Middlesbrough and Darlington) and the University of Sunderland.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53131", "revid": "45451243", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53131", "title": "David Blaine", "text": "American illusionist and extreme performer\nDavid Blaine (born David Blaine White; April 4, 1973) is an American magician, mentalist, and endurance performer. Born in New York City, Blaine became interested in magic at a very young age. He gained prominence in 1997, when his first television special, \"David Blaine: Street Magic\", aired on ABC. That year, he also appeared in \"Magic Man\". He later starred in the television specials \"David Blaine: Real or Magic\" (2013), \"Beyond Magic\" (2016), and \"The Magic Way\" (2020).\nKnown for his dangerous stunts, in 2008 he attempted to break the Guinness World Record for breath holding. He succeeded in holding his breath for 17 minutes 4 seconds, setting a new world record for oxygen-assisted static apnea. He is the author of \"Mysterious Stranger: A Book of Magic\" (2002), an autobiography and armchair treasure hunt with instructions on performing magic tricks.\nEarly life.\nBlaine was born David Blaine White on April 4, 1973, in Brooklyn, the son of a single mother, Patrice White, a teacher who was of Russian Jewish ancestry, and father William Perez, who is a Vietnam War veteran of Puerto Rican and Italian descent. \nWhen Blaine was four years old, he saw a magician performing magic on the subway. This sparked a lifelong interest for him. He was raised by his mother and attended a Montessori school in Brooklyn. They later moved to Little Falls, New Jersey, where he attended Passaic Valley Regional High School.\nAccording to one account, his mother developed cancer when Blaine was 15 and died when he was 20. According to another, \"When Blaine was 21, his mother was stricken with cancer and passed away in 1994.\" When Blaine was 17 years old, he moved to Manhattan.\nStunts and specials.\n\"Street Magic\" (1997) and \"Magic Man\" (1998).\nOn May 19, 1997, Blaine's first television special, \"David Blaine: Street Magic\", aired on ABC. \"It really, really does break new ground,\" said Penn Jillette of Penn &amp; Teller. When asked about his performance style, Blaine explained, \"I'd like to bring magic back to the place it used to be 100 years ago.\" \"Time\" commented, \"His deceptively low-key, ultracool manner leaves spectators more amazed than if he'd razzle-dazzled.\"\nIn \"Magic Man\", aired January 16, 1998, Blaine is shown traveling across the country, entertaining unsuspecting pedestrians in Atlantic City, Compton, Dallas, the Mojave Desert, New York City, and San Francisco, recorded by a small crew with handheld cameras. Jon Racherbaumer commented: \"Make no mistake about it, the focus of this show, boys and girls, is not Blaine. It is really about theatrical proxemics; about the show-within-a-show and the spontaneous, visceral reactions of people being astonished.\" \"USA Today\" called Blaine the \"hottest name in magic right now\".\n\"Buried Alive\" (1999).\nOn April 5, 1999, Blaine was entombed in an underground plastic box underneath a 3-ton water-filled tank for seven days, across from Trump Place on 68th St. and Riverside Boulevard, as part of a stunt titled \"Buried Alive\".\nOn the final day of the stunt, April 12, hundreds of news teams were stationed at the site for the coffin opening. A team of construction workers removed a portion of the of gravel surrounding the deep coffin before a crane lifted the water tank. Blaine emerged and told the crowd, \"I saw something very prophetic ... a vision of every race, every religion, every age group banding together, and that made all this worthwhile.\" BBC News stated, \"The 26-year-old magician has outdone his hero, Harry Houdini, who had planned a similar feat but died in 1926 before he could perform it.\"\n\"Frozen in Time\" (2000).\nOn November 27, 2000, Blaine performed a stunt called \"Frozen in Time\", where he attempted and failed to stand in a large block of ice located in Times Square, New York City for 72 hours. It was covered on a TV special. He was lightly dressed and appeared to be shivering even before the blocks of ice were placed around him. A tube supplied him with air and water, while his urine was removed with another tube. He was encased in the box of ice for 63 hours, 42 minutes, and 15 seconds before being removed with chainsaws. The ice was transparent and resting on an elevated platform to show that he was actually inside the ice the entire time. He was removed from the ice and taken to a hospital due to fears he might be going into shock. \"The New York Times\" reported, \"The magician who emerged from the increasingly unstable ice box seemed a shadow of the confident, robust, shirtless fellow who entered two days before.\" Blaine later said it took a month to fully recover and that he had no plans to attempt a stunt of this difficulty in the future. In 2010, a magician from Israel named Hezi Dean broke Blaine's record when he was encased in a block of ice for 66 hours.\n\"Vertigo\" (2002).\nOn May 22, 2002, a crane lifted Blaine onto an high and wide pillar in Bryant Park, New York City. He was not harnessed to the pillar, although there were two retractable handles on either side of him to grasp in the event of harsh weather. He remained on the pillar for 35 hours. He ended the feat by jumping down onto a landing platform made out of a high pile of cardboard boxes and sustained a mild concussion. He later said in his 2009 TED Talk that he had had severe hallucinations in the final hours of this stunt, causing the buildings and structures around him to look like animal heads.\n\"Above the Below\" (2003).\nOn September 5, 2003, Blaine began an endurance stunt in which he was sealed inside a transparent Plexiglas box. The case was suspended in the air next to Potters Fields Park on the south bank of the River Thames in London, and measured by by . A webcam was installed inside the box so that viewers could observe his progress. The stunt lasted 44 days, during which Blaine drank of water per day and did not eat.\nThe stunt was the subject of public interest and media attention, \"The Times\" reported that \"1,614 articles in the British press have made reference to the exploit.\" Then-US president George W. Bush referred to Blaine's stunt in a speech at the Whitehall Palace in London, saying, \"The last noted American to visit London stayed in a glass box dangling over the Thames. A few might have been happy to provide similar arrangements for me.\" A number of spectators threw food and other items towards the box, including eggs, paint-filled balloons and golf balls, according to \"The Times\". A McDonald's hamburger was flown up to the box by a remote-controlled helicopter as a taunt. The \"Evening Standard\" reported that one man was arrested for attempting to cut the cable supplying water to Blaine's box.\nOn September 25, BBC News reported that \"if his endurance test is real rather than an elaborate illusion\", then Blaine's claim of tasting pear drops indicates he is advancing through the first stage of starvation. A medical doctor said that the taste is caused by ketones, which are produced when the body burns fat reserves.\nThe stunt ended on October 19, and Blaine emerged in tears saying \"I love you all!\" and was subsequently hospitalized. The \"New England Journal of Medicine\" published a paper that documented his 44-day fast and stated his re-feeding was perhaps the most dangerous part of the stunt. The study reported, \"He lost \u200d\u2014\u200c25 percent of his original body weight\u200d\u2014\u200cand his body mass index dropped from 29.0 to 21.6. His appearance and body-mass index after his fast would not by themselves have alerted us to the risks of refeeding. Despite cautious management, he had hypophosphatemia and fluid retention, important elements of the refeeding syndrome.\"\n\"Drowned Alive\" (2006).\nOn May 1, 2006, Blaine began his \"Drowned Alive\" stunt, which lasted seven days and involved a submersion in an diameter, water-filled sphere containing isotonic saline in front of the Lincoln Center in New York City. During the stunt, he sustained kidney and liver damage. At the end of the stunt, Blaine attempted to free himself from handcuffs and chains after exiting the sphere. After the stunt, Blaine entered into an agreement with researchers at Yale University to monitor him in order to study the human physiological reaction to prolonged submersion.\n\"Revolution\" (2006).\nOn November 21, 2006, Blaine began his \"Revolution\" stunt, where he was shackled to a rotating gyroscope without food or water, intending to escape within 16 hours. Blaine completed the stunt 52 hours later.\n\"Guinness World Records\" (2008).\nBlaine appeared on the April 30, 2008, episode of \"The Oprah Winfrey Show\" to attempt to break the Guinness World Record for oxygen-assisted static apnea, following his failure to break the then-current record of \"unassisted\" static apnea in his previous attempt \"Drowned Alive\". The previous record was set by Peter Colat of Switzerland on February 10, 2008.\nBefore entering the water tank, Blaine spent 23 minutes inhaling pure oxygen. Blaine held his breath for 17 minutes 4-1/2 seconds, surpassing Colat's previous mark of 16 minutes 32 seconds, setting a new Guinness World Record that stood until September 19, 2008, when it was surpassed by German diver Tom Sietas who during an episode of the American talk show \"Live with Regis and Kelly\", held his breath for 17 minutes, 19 seconds.\n\"Dive of Death\" (2008).\nOn September 18, 2008, Blaine announced his \"The Upside Down Man\" performance with Donald Trump. Blaine planned to hang upside down without a safety net for 60 hours. On September 22, Blaine began his stunt \"Dive of Death\", hanging over Wollman Rink in Central Park and interacting with fans by lowering himself upside down. He pulled himself up to drink fluid and restore normal circulation. Reportedly, Blaine risked blindness and other maladies in the stunt. He was criticized when, only hours into the endurance challenge, he was seen standing on a waiting crane platform, not upside down as expected. During the stunt, he came down once an hour for a medical check and to use the bathroom.\n\"What Is Magic?\" (2010).\nIn this 42-minute television special that aired on April 18, 2010, Blaine performed an illusion of catching a .22 caliber bullet fired from a rifle into a small metal cup in his mouth.\n\"Electrified: One Million Volts Always On\" (2012).\nOn October 5, 2012, Blaine began performing a 72-hour endurance stunt called \"Electrified: One Million Volts Always On\" atop a pillar on Pier 54 in New York City, which was streamed live on YouTube. During the stunt, Blaine stood on the pillar surrounded by seven Tesla coils producing an electric discharge of one million volts or more continuously. The coils were directed at Blaine for the entirety of the endurance stunt, during which he did not eat or sleep. He wore of gear, including a chainmail Faraday suit, designed to prevent electric current from traveling through the body. John Belcher, a physics professor from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, reportedly said, \"He has a conducting suit, all the current is going through the suit, nothing through his body. There is no danger in this that I see.\"\nAt night, Blaine shivered uncontrollably from the inclement weather. \"The New York Times\" published an article describing the science behind Blaine's stunt. Musicians Pharrell Williams and Andrew W.K. performed solos on a keyboard which controlled the electric discharge.\nThe event concluded on October 8, 2012, at 8:44 pm. Blaine was able to walk away with assistance and was transported to a hospital for a medical check. Blaine donated two of the Tesla coils to the Liberty Science Center in Jersey City, New Jersey, to be exhibited on permanent display.\n\"Real or Magic\" (2013).\nIn 2013, Blaine starred in a 90-minute ABC television special, \"David Blaine: Real or Magic\", on November 19, 2013. The special, directed by Matthew Akers, featured Blaine performing magic for celebrities and public figures. \"Real or Magic\" achieved a 2.5 rating in the 18\u201349 age bracket, and posted the best numbers in the 9:30\u201311:00 pm time slot for ABC's 2013 season.\n\"Beyond Magic\" (2016).\nOn November 15, 2016, ABC aired \"Beyond Magic\", a 42-minute television special in which Blaine performs magic for various public figures. Among the featured stunts is one in which Blaine seemingly catches a .22 caliber bullet in a small metal cup held between a gum shield in his mouth. The bullet catch trick was performed live on stage in front of 20,000 people in an August 2015 Las Vegas performance in which Blaine fired the gun himself. Blaine's mouthguard broke during the performance. Since then, Blaine has never performed the stunt again.\n\"The Magic Way\" (2020).\nOn April 1, 2020, Blaine starred in \"David Blaine: The Magic Way,\" which aired on ABC. The special consisted of various close-up magic acts, performing card tricks through video chat, and also performing in-person for many famous athletes, actors, and other celebrities as well as ordinary citizens. The special also includes performances by Blaine's daughter.\n\"Ascension\" (2020).\nIn 2020, Blaine performed the David Blaine Ascension stunt, which involved him floating while holding on to a cluster of 52 helium-filled balloons using a harness. The stunt took place on the morning of September 2, 2020, in Page, Arizona, and was streamed live on YouTube as a YouTube Original program. Blaine managed to get to an altitude of above sea level (more than above ground level), before letting go of his balloons and parachuting down towards a flat ravine close to the initially planned landing zone. He landed successfully and without harm.\n\"Do Not Attempt\" (2025).\nIn 2025, Blaine teamed with Hulu and Disney+ for the series entitled \"David Blaine: Do Not Attempt\", in which he trains under an array of people with death-defying skills and performs several feats around the world.\nLive tour.\nIn 2014, Blaine embarked on his first ever live tour, in which he took his tricks and stunts on the road to audiences in the Middle East and North America.\nIn June 2019, Blaine brought his 'Real or Magic' tour to the UK &amp; Ireland, in which he performed in Edinburgh, Manchester, Birmingham, Bournemouth and London, throughout June.\nBlaine had planned to take the bullet catch trick on tour, although, after the successful/unsuccessful live attempt, in the MGM Grand Arena, in 2015, he shelved this idea and went with the main stunt of the underwater breath hold for these shows. This was the stunt he carried out in his 2006 'Drowned Alive' TV special and of which he also performed again, in a live world record attempt, in 2009, on the Oprah Winfrey Show.\nLas Vegas residency.\nIn September 2022, Blaine began his first ever Las Vegas residency, with his 'David Blaine Live' show at the Resorts World hotel, which had an extended run through to June 2023. After the success of this stint on the strip, he then announced his 'Impossible' residency at The Encore theatre, Wynn, would begin in December 2023. This show is still running today, with Blaine performing an array of his favourite tricks and stunts over the course of three shows, on 3 days, of each month.\nOther work.\nWriting.\nOn October 29, 2002, Villard published \"Mysterious Stranger: A Book of Magic\", an autobiography and armchair treasure hunt with instructions on performing magic tricks. The treasure hunt was created by game designer Cliff Johnson and solved by Sherri Skanes on March 20, 2004.\nPhilanthropy and charity work.\nIn November 2006, Blaine performed a stunt in New York's Times Square in support of The Salvation Army. After 52 hours, Blaine escaped from the shackles that had held him in a spinning gyroscope suspended above the ground. Blaine said this stunt was particularly important to him since The Salvation Army had provided him with clothing while he was growing up.\nOn January 15, 2010, Blaine returned to Times Square to perform \"Magic for Haiti\", a performance lasting 72 hours which raised nearly US$100,000 for Haiti earthquake relief.\nBlaine also donated two $1 million Tesla coils to Liberty Science Center after performing a massive electricity stunt.\nPersonal life.\nBlaine and his former girlfriend, French model Aliz\u00e9e Guinochet, have a daughter born on January 27, 2011. He dated Fiona Apple. He also had relationships with Madonna, Bijou Phillips, Josie Maran, Daryl Hannah and Lonneke Engel.\nHe was a member of an informal group of male celebrities \u2013 most associated with Leonardo DiCaprio \u2013 dubbed the \"Pussy Posse\".\nOfficial investigations into reports of sexual misconduct.\nOctober 2017 report and investigation.\nAn October 2017 report published in \"The Daily Beast\" in the wake of the Me Too movement resulted in renewed scrutiny of alleged misconduct. Subsequently, British news outlets reported that London's Metropolitan Police had asked Blaine to travel to the UK for interview under caution regarding allegations by former model Natasha Prince that Blaine had raped her at a house in Chelsea, West London in 2004. Speaking through his lawyer, Blaine \"vehemently denies\" the allegations and confirmed that he would \"fully co-operate\" with a police inquiry. Detectives later declined to take further action after investigating her claim.\nApril 2019 investigation.\nIn April 2019, Blaine was investigated by the New York City Police Department over allegations that he sexually assaulted at least two women. No charges were made.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53132", "revid": "50793035", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53132", "title": "Humanities", "text": "Academic disciplines that study society and culture\nHumanities are important academic disciplines that study aspects of human society and culture, including certain fundamental questions asked by humans. During the Renaissance, the term \"humanities\" referred to the study of classical literature and language, as opposed to the study of religion, or \"divinity\". The study of the humanities was a key part of the secular curriculum in universities at the time. Today, the humanities are more frequently defined as any fields of study outside of natural sciences, social sciences, formal sciences (like mathematics), and applied sciences (or professional training). They use methods that are primarily critical, speculative, or interpretative and have a significant historical element\u2014as distinguished from the mainly empirical approaches of science.\nThe humanities include the academic study of philosophy, religion, history (sometimes considered part of the social sciences instead), language arts (literature, writing, oratory, rhetoric, poetry, etc.), the performing arts (theater, music, dance, etc.), and the visual arts (painting, sculpture, photography, filmmaking, etc.).\nThe word \"humanities\" comes from the Renaissance Latin phrase , which translates to the \"study of humanity\". The was a course of studies that consisted of grammar, literature, rhetoric, history, and moral philosophy, primarily derived from the study of Latin and Greek classics. The related Latin word \"humanitas\" inspired the Renaissance Italian neologism \"umanisti\", or \"humanists\" which referred to scholars dedicated to these fields and were instrumental in reviving classical learning, a hallmark of \"Renaissance humanism.\" (The term \"humanist\" can also describe the philosophical position of humanism, which antihumanist scholars in the humanities reject.)\nHistorically, the humanities have been distinguished from the social sciences by their methods and objectives. While both fields study human behavior and culture, the humanities adopt an idiographic approach (focusing on the unique and context-specific), emphasizing critical, interpretative, and speculative methods, often with an emphasis on historical context and subjective meaning. In contrast, the social sciences employ a nomothetic approach (seeking general laws and patterns) through empirical and quantitative analysis, a distinction first conceptualized by philosopher Wilhelm Windelband. This methodological distinction, however, is not absolute. Although sociology, anthropology, archaeology, linguistics, and psychology are commonly classified as social sciences, these fields include scholars who employ qualitative methods closely related to those employed by humanities scholars, such as narrative inquiry, textual analysis, or historical methods.\nThe humanities have also been justified as fostering self-reflection, civic responsibility, and cultural continuity. Though debates persist about the practical utility of the humanities, proponents argue that their unique focus on meaning, creativity, and critical inquiry contributes both to individual enrichment and the public sphere.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFields.\nClassics.\nClassics, in the Western academic tradition, refers to the studies of the cultures of classical antiquity, namely Ancient Greek and Latin and the Ancient Greek and Roman cultures. Classical studies is considered one of the cornerstones of the humanities; however, its popularity declined during the 20th century. Nevertheless, the influence of classical ideas on many humanities disciplines, such as philosophy and literature, remains strong.\nHistory.\nHistory is systematically collected information about the past. When used as the name of a field of study, \"history\" refers to the study and interpretation of the record of humans, societies, institutions, and any topic that has changed over time.\nTraditionally, the study of history has been considered a part of the humanities. In modern academia, history can occasionally be classified as a social science, though this definition is contested.\nLanguage.\nWhile the scientific study of language is known as linguistics and is generally considered a social science, a natural science or a cognitive science, the study of languages is also central to the humanities. A good deal of twentieth- and twenty-first-century philosophy has been devoted to the analysis of language and to the question of whether, as Wittgenstein claimed, many of our philosophical confusions derive from the vocabulary we use; literary theory has explored the rhetorical, associative, and ordering features of language; and historical linguists have studied the development of languages across time. Literature, covering a variety of uses of language including prose forms (such as the novel), poetry and drama, also lies at the heart of the modern humanities curriculum. College-level programs in a foreign language usually include study of important works of the literature in that language, as well as the language itself.\nLaw.\n In everyday language, law refers to a rule that is enforced by a governing institution, as opposed to a moral or ethical rule that is not subject to formal enforcement. The study of law can be seen as either a social science or a humanities discipline, depending on one's perspective. Some see it as a social science because of its objective and measurable nature, while others view it as a humanities discipline because of its focus on values and interpretation. Law is not always enforceable, especially in the international relations context. Law has been defined in various ways, such as \"a system of rules\", \"an interpretive concept\" for achieving justice, \"an authority\" to mediate between people's interests, or \"the command of a sovereign\" backed by the threat of punishment.\nHowever one likes to think of law, it is a completely central social institution. The practical application of ideas from many social science and humanities disciplines, including philosophy, history, political science, economics, anthropology, and sociology shapes legal policy. Law is politics, because politicians create it. Law is philosophy, because moral and ethical persuasions shape their ideas. Law tells many of history's stories, because statutes, case law, and codifications build up over time. Law is also economics, because any rule about contract, tort, property law, labour law, company law, and many more can have long-lasting effects on how productivity is organised and the distribution of wealth. The noun \"law\" derives from the Old English \"word lagu\", meaning something laid down or fixed, and the adjective \"legal\" comes from the Latin word \"LEX\".\nLiterature.\nLiterature is a term that does not have a universally accepted definition, but which has variably included all written work; writing that possesses literary merit; and language that emphasizes its own literary features, as opposed to ordinary language. Etymologically the term derives from the Latin word literatura\"/litteratura\" which means \"writing formed with letters\", although some definitions include spoken or sung texts. Literature can be classified as fiction or non-fiction; poetry or prose. It can be further distinguished according to major forms such as the novel, short story or drama; and works are often categorised according to historical periods, or according to their adherence to certain aesthetic features or expectations (genre).\nPhilosophy.\nPhilosophy\u2014etymologically, the \"love of wisdom\"\u2014is generally the study of problems concerning matters such as existence, knowledge, justification, truth, justice, right and wrong, beauty, validity, mind, and language. Philosophy is distinguished from other ways of addressing these issues by its critical, generally systematic approach and its reliance on reasoned argument, rather than experiments (experimental philosophy being an exception).\nPhilosophy used to be a very comprehensive term, including what have subsequently become separate disciplines, such as physics. (As Immanuel Kant noted, \"Ancient Greek philosophy was divided into three sciences: physics, ethics, and logic.\") Today, the main fields of philosophy are logic, ethics, metaphysics, and epistemology. Still, it continues to overlap with other disciplines. The field of semantics, for example, brings philosophy into contact with linguistics.\nSince the early twentieth century, philosophy in English-speaking universities has moved away from the humanities and closer to the formal sciences, becoming much more \"analytic.\" Analytic philosophy is marked by emphasis on the use of logic and formal methods of reasoning, conceptual analysis, and the use of symbolic and/or mathematical logic, as contrasted with the Continental style of philosophy. This method of inquiry is largely indebted to the work of philosophers such as Gottlob Frege, Bertrand Russell, G.E. Moore and Ludwig Wittgenstein.\nReligion.\n\"Religious Studies\" is commonly regarded as a social science. Based on current knowledge, it seems that all known cultures, both in the past and present, have some form of belief system or religious practice. While there may be isolated individuals or groups who do not practice any form of religion, it is not known if there has ever been a society that was entirely devoid of religious belief. The definition of religion is not universal, and different cultures may have different ideas about what constitutes religion. Religion may be characterized with a community since humans are social animals. Rituals are used to bound the community together. Social animals require rules. Ethics is a requirement of society, but not a requirement of religion. Shinto, Daoism, and other folk or natural religions do not have ethical codes. While some religions do include the concept of deities, others do not. Therefore, the supernatural does not necessarily require the existence of deities. Rather, it can be broadly defined as any phenomena that cannot be explained by science or reason. Magical thinking creates explanations not available for empirical verification. Stories or myths are narratives being both didactic and entertaining. They are necessary for understanding the human predicament. Some other possible characteristics of religion are pollutions and purification, the sacred and the profane, sacred texts, religious institutions and organizations, and sacrifice and prayer. Some of the major problems that religions confront, and attempts to answer are chaos, suffering, evil, and death.\nThe non-founder religions are Hinduism, Shinto, and native or folk religions. Founder religions are Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Confucianism, Daoism, Mormonism, Jainism, Zoroastrianism, Buddhism, Sikhism, and the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith. Religions must adapt and change through the generations because they must remain relevant to the adherents. When traditional religions fail to address new concerns, then new religions will emerge.\nPerforming arts.\nThe performing arts differ from the visual arts in that the former uses the artist's own body, face, and presence as a medium, and the latter uses materials such as clay, metal, or paint, which can be molded or transformed to create some art object. Performing arts include acrobatics, comedy, dance, magic, music, opera, juggling, marching arts, such as brass bands, and theatre.\nArtists who participate in these arts in front of an audience are called performers, including actors, comedians, dancers, musicians, and singers. Performing arts are also supported by workers in related fields, such as songwriting and stagecraft. Performers often adapt their appearance, such as with costumes and stage makeup, etc. There is also a specialized form of fine art in which the artists \"perform\" their work live to an audience. This is called Performance art. Most performance art also involves some form of plastic art, perhaps in the creation of props. Dance was often referred to as a \"plastic art\" during the Modern dance era.\nMusicology.\nMusicology as an academic discipline can take a number of different paths, including historical musicology, music literature, ethnomusicology and music theory. Undergraduate music majors generally take courses in all of these areas, while graduate students focus on a particular path. In the liberal arts tradition, musicology is also used to broaden skills of non-musicians by teaching skills, including concentration and listening.\nTheatre.\nTheatre (or theater) (Greek \"theatron\", \"\u03b8\u03ad\u03b1\u03c4\u03c1\u03bf\u03bd\") is the branch of the performing arts concerned with acting out stories in front of an audience using combinations of speech, gesture, music, dance, sound and spectacle \u2014 indeed any one or more elements of the other performing arts. In addition to the standard narrative dialogue style, theatre takes such forms as opera, ballet, mime, kabuki, classical Indian dance, Chinese opera, mummers' plays, and pantomime.\nDance.\nDance (from Old French \"dancier\", perhaps from Frankish) generally refers to human movement either used as a form of expression or presented in a social, spiritual or performance setting. Dance is also used to describe methods of non-verbal communication (see body language) between humans or animals (bee dance, mating dance), and motion in inanimate objects (\"the leaves danced in the wind\"). Choreography is the process of creating dances, and the people who create choreography are known as choreographers. Choreographers use movement, music, and other elements to create expressive and artistic dances. They may work alone or with other artists to create new works, and their work can be presented in a variety of settings, from small dance studios to large theaters.\nDefinitions of what constitutes dance are dependent on social, cultural, aesthetic, artistic, and moral constraints and range from functional movement (such as Folk dance) to codified, virtuoso techniques such as ballet.\nVisual art.\nHistory of visual arts.\nThe great traditions in art have a foundation in the art of one of the ancient civilizations, such as Ancient Japan, Greece and Rome, China, India, Greater Nepal, Mesopotamia and Mesoamerica.\nAncient Greek art saw a veneration of the human physical form and the development of equivalent skills to show musculature, poise, beauty and anatomically correct proportions. Ancient Roman art depicted gods as idealized humans, shown with characteristic distinguishing features (e.g., Zeus' thunderbolt).\nThe emphasis on spiritual and religious themes in Byzantine and Gothic art of the Middle Ages reflected the dominance of the church. However, in the Renaissance, a renewed focus on the physical world was reflected in art forms that depicted the human body and landscape in a more naturalistic and three-dimensional way.\nEastern art has generally worked in a style akin to Western medieval art, namely a concentration on surface patterning and local colour (meaning the plain colour of an object, such as basic red for a red robe, rather than the modulations of that colour brought about by light, shade and reflection). A characteristic of this style is that the local colour is often defined by an outline (a contemporary equivalent is the cartoon). This is evident in, for example, the art of India, Tibet and Japan.\nReligious Islamic art forbids iconography, and expresses religious ideas through geometry instead. The physical and rational certainties depicted by the 19th-century Enlightenment were shattered not only by new discoveries of relativity by Einstein and of unseen psychology by Freud, but also by unprecedented technological development. Increasing global interaction during this time saw an equivalent influence of other cultures into Western art.\nMedia types.\nDrawing.\nDrawing is a means of making a picture, using a wide variety of tools and techniques. It generally involves making marks on a surface by applying pressure from a tool, or moving a tool across a surface. Common tools are graphite pencils, pen and ink, inked brushes, wax color pencils, crayons, charcoals, pastels, and markers. Digital tools that simulate the effects of these are also used. The main techniques used in drawing are: line drawing, hatching, crosshatching, random hatching, scribbling, stippling, and blending. A computer aided designer who excels in technical drawing is referred to as a \"draftsman\" or \"draughtsman\".\nPainting.\nLiterally, painting is the practice of applying pigment suspended in a carrier (or medium) and a binding agent (a glue) to a surface (support) such as paper, canvas or a wall. However, when used in an artistic sense, it means the use of this activity in combination with drawing, composition and other aesthetic considerations in order to manifest the expressive and conceptual intention of the practitioner. Painting has been used throughout history to express spiritual and religious ideas, from mythological scenes on pottery to the frescoes of the Sistine Chapel, to body art.\nColour is highly subjective, but has observable psychological effects, although these can differ from one culture to the next. Black is associated with mourning in the West, but elsewhere white may be. Some painters, theoreticians, writers and scientists, including Goethe, Kandinsky, Isaac Newton, have written their own colour theories. Moreover, the use of language is only a generalization for a colour equivalent. The word \"red\", for example, can cover a wide range of variations on the pure red of the spectrum. Unlike music, where notes such as C or C# are universally accepted, there is no formalized register of colors. However, the Pantone system is widely used in the printing and design industry to standardize color reproduction.\nModern artists have extended the practice of painting considerably to include, for example, collage. This began with cubism and is not painting in strict sense. Some modern painters incorporate different materials such as sand, cement, straw or wood for their texture. Examples of these are the works of Jean Dubuffet or Anselm Kiefer. Modern and contemporary art has moved away from the historic value of craft in favour of concept (conceptual art); this has led some e.g. Joseph Kosuth to say that painting, as a serious art form, is dead, although this has not deterred the majority of artists from continuing to practise it either as whole or part of their work.\nSculpture involves creating three-dimensional forms out of various materials. These typically include malleable substances like clay and metal but may also extend to material that is cut or shaved down to the desired form, like stone and wood.\nHistory.\nIn the West, the history of the humanities can be traced to ancient Greece, as the basis of a broad education for citizens. During Roman times, the concept of the seven liberal arts evolved, involving grammar, rhetoric and logic (the trivium), along with arithmetic, geometry, astronomy and music (the quadrivium). These subjects formed the bulk of medieval education, with the emphasis being on the humanities as skills or \"ways of doing\".\nA major shift occurred with the Renaissance humanism of the fifteenth century, when the humanities began to be regarded as subjects to study rather than practice, with a corresponding shift away from traditional fields into areas such as literature and history (\"studia humaniora\"). In the 20th century, this view was in turn challenged by the postmodernist movement, which sought to redefine the humanities in more egalitarian terms suitable for a democratic society since the Greek and Roman societies in which the humanities originated were elitist and aristocratic.\nA distinction is usually drawn between the social sciences and the humanities. Classicist Allan Bloom writes in \"The Closing of the American Mind\" (1987):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Social science and humanities have a mutual contempt for one another, the former looking down on the latter as unscientific, the latter regarding the former as philistine. [\u2026] The difference comes down to the fact that social science really wants to be predictive, meaning that man is predictable, while the humanities say that he is not.\nToday.\nEducation and employment.\nFor many decades, there has been a growing public perception that a humanities education inadequately prepares graduates for employment. The common belief is that graduates from such programs face underemployment and that incomes are too low for a humanities education to be worth the investment.\nHumanities graduates find employment in a wide variety of management and professional occupations. In Britain, for example, over 11,000 humanities majors found employment in the following occupations:\nMany humanities graduates may find themselves with no specific career goals upon graduation, which can lead to lower incomes in the early stages of their career. On the other hand, graduates from more career-oriented programs often find jobs more quickly. However, the long-term career prospects of humanities graduates may be similar to those of other graduates, as research shows that by five years after graduation, they generally find a career path that appeals to them.\nThere is empirical evidence that graduates from humanities programs earn less than graduates from other university programs. However, the empirical evidence also shows that humanities graduates still earn notably higher incomes than workers with no postsecondary education, and have job satisfaction levels comparable to their peers from other fields. Humanities graduates also earn more as their careers progress; ten years after graduation, the income difference between humanities graduates and graduates from other university programs is no longer statistically significant. Humanities graduates can boost their incomes if they obtain advanced or professional degrees.\nHumanities majors are sought after in many areas of business, specifically for their critical thinking and problem-solving skills. Research has shown that humanities majors are especially adept at \"soft skills\" such as \"written and oral communication, creative problem-solving, teamwork, decision-making, self-management, and critical analysis\".\nIn the United States.\nThe Humanities Indicators.\nThe Humanities Indicators, unveiled in 2009 by the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, are the first comprehensive compilation of data about the humanities in the United States, providing scholars, policymakers and the public with detailed information on humanities education from primary to higher education, the humanities workforce, humanities funding and research, and public humanities activities. Modeled after the National Science Board's Science and Engineering Indicators, Humanities Indicators are a source of reliable benchmarks to guide analysis of the state of the humanities in the United States.\n\"The Humanities in American Life\".\nThe 1980 United States Rockefeller Commission on the Humanities described the humanities in its report \"The Humanities in American Life\":\nThrough the humanities we reflect on the fundamental question: What does it mean to be human? The humanities offer clues but never a complete answer. They reveal how people have tried to make moral, spiritual, and intellectual sense of a world where irrationality, despair, loneliness, and death are as conspicuous as birth, friendship, hope, and reason.\nIn liberal arts education.\nThe Commission on the Humanities and Social Sciences 2013 report \"The Heart of the Matter\" supports the notion of a broad \"liberal arts education\", which includes study in disciplines from the natural sciences to the arts as well as the humanities.\nMany colleges provide such an education; some require it. The University of Chicago and Columbia University were among the first schools to require an extensive core curriculum in philosophy, literature, and the arts for all students. Other colleges with nationally recognized, mandatory programs in the liberal arts are Fordham University, St.\u00a0John's College, Saint Anselm College and Providence College. Prominent proponents of liberal arts in the United States have included Mortimer J.\u00a0Adler and E. D. Hirsch, Jr.\nAs a major.\nIn 1950, 1.2% of Americans aged 22 had earned a degree in the humanities. By 2010, this figure had risen to 2.6%. This represents a doubling of the number of Americans with degrees in the humanities over a 60-year period. The increase in the number of Americans with humanities degrees is in part due to the overall rise in college enrollment in the United States. In 1940, 4.6% of Americans had a four-year degree, but by 2016, this figure had risen to 33.4%. This means that the total number of Americans with college degrees has increased significantly, resulting in a greater number of people with degrees in the humanities as well. The proportion of degrees awarded in the humanities has declined in recent decades, even as the overall number of people with humanities degrees has increased. In 1954, 36% of Harvard undergraduates majored in the humanities, but in 2012, only 20% took that course of study. As recently as 1993, the humanities accounted for 15% of the bachelor's degrees awarded by colleges and universities in the United States. As of 2022, they accounted for less than 9%.\nIn the digital age.\nResearchers in the humanities have developed numerous large- and small-scale digital corporations, such as digitized collections of historical texts, along with the digital tools and methods to analyze them. Their aim is both to uncover new knowledge about corpora and to visualize research data in new and revealing ways. Much of this activity occurs in a field called the digital humanities.\nSTEM.\nPoliticians in the United States currently espouse a need for increased funding of the STEM fields, science, technology, engineering, mathematics. Federal funding represents a much smaller fraction of funding for humanities than other fields such as STEM or medicine. The result was a decline of quality in both college and pre-college education in the humanities field.\nThree-term Louisiana Governor Edwin Edwards acknowledged the importance of the humanities in a 2014 video address to the academic conference \"Revolutions in Eighteenth-Century Sociability\", Edwards said:\nWithout the humanities to teach us how history has succeeded or failed in directing the fruits of technology and science to the betterment of our tribe of \"homo sapiens\", without the humanities to teach us how to frame the discussion and to properly debate the uses-and the costs-of technology, without the humanities to teach us how to safely debate how to create a more just society with our fellow man and woman, technology and science would eventually default to the ownership of\u2014and misuse by\u2014the most influential, the most powerful, the most feared among us.\nIn Europe.\nThe value of the humanities debate.\nThe contemporary debate in the field of critical university studies centers around the declining value of the humanities. As in America, there is a perceived decline in interest within higher education policy in research that is qualitative and does not produce marketable products. This threat can be seen in a variety of forms across Europe, but much critical attention has been given to the field of research assessment in particular. For example, the UK [Research Excellence Framework] has been subject to criticism due to its assessment criteria from across the humanities, and indeed, the social sciences. In particular, the notion of \"impact\" has generated significant debate.\nPhilosophical history.\nCitizenship and self-reflection.\nSince the late 19th century, a central justification for the humanities has been that it aids and encourages self-reflection\u2014a self-reflection that, in turn, helps develop personal consciousness or an active sense of civic duty.\nWilhelm Dilthey and Hans-Georg Gadamer centered the humanities' attempt to distinguish itself from the natural sciences in humankind's urge to understand its own experiences. This understanding, they claimed, ties like-minded people from similar cultural backgrounds together and provides a sense of cultural continuity with the philosophical past.\nScholars in the late 20th and early 21st centuries extended that \"narrative imagination\" to the ability to understand the records of lived experiences outside of one's own individual social and cultural context. Through that narrative imagination, it is claimed, humanities scholars and students develop a conscience more suited to the multicultural world we live in. That conscience might take the form of a passive one that allows more effective self-reflection or extend into active empathy that facilitates the dispensation of civic duties a responsible world citizen must engage in. There is disagreement, however, on the level of influence humanities study can have on an individual and whether or not the understanding produced in humanistic enterprise can guarantee an \"identifiable positive effect on people\".\nHumanistic theories and practices.\nThere are three major branches of knowledge: natural sciences, social sciences, and the humanities. Technology is the practical extension of the natural sciences, as politics is the extension of the social sciences. Similarly, the humanities have their own practical extension, sometimes called \"transformative humanities\" (transhumanities) or \"culturonics\" (Mikhail Epstein's term):\nTechnology, politics and culturonics are designed to transform what their respective disciplines study: nature, society, and culture. The field of transformative humanities includes various practicies and technologies, for example, language planning, the construction of new languages, like Esperanto, and invention of new artistic and literary genres and movements in the genre of manifesto, like Romanticism, Symbolism, or Surrealism.\nTruth and meaning.\nThe divide between humanistic study and natural sciences informs arguments of meaning in humanities as well. What distinguishes the humanities from the natural sciences is not a certain subject matter, but rather the mode of approach to any question. Humanities focuses on understanding meaning, purpose, and goals and furthers the appreciation of singular historical and social phenomena\u2014an interpretive method of finding \"truth\"\u2014rather than explaining the causality of events or uncovering the truth of the natural world. Apart from its societal application, narrative imagination is an important tool in the (re)production of understood meaning in history, culture and literature.\nImagination, as part of the tool kit of artists or scholars, helps create meaning that invokes a response from an audience. Since a humanities scholar is always within the nexus of lived experiences, no \"absolute\" knowledge is theoretically possible; knowledge is instead a ceaseless procedure of inventing and reinventing the context a text is read in. Poststructuralism has problematized an approach to the humanistic study based on questions of meaning, intentionality, and authorship. In the wake of the death of the author proclaimed by Roland Barthes, various theoretical currents such as deconstruction and discourse analysis seek to expose the ideologies and rhetoric operative in producing both the purportedly meaningful objects and the hermeneutic subjects of humanistic study. This exposure has opened up the interpretive structures of the humanities to criticism that humanities scholarship is \"unscientific\" and therefore unfit for inclusion in modern university curricula because of the very nature of its changing contextual meaning.\nPleasure, the pursuit of knowledge and scholarship.\nSome, like Stanley Fish, have claimed that the humanities can defend themselves best by refusing to make any claims of utility. (Fish may well be thinking primarily of literary study, rather than history and philosophy.) Any attempt to justify the humanities in terms of outside benefits such as social usefulness (say increased productivity) or in terms of ennobling effects on the individual (such as greater wisdom or diminished prejudice) is ungrounded, according to Fish, and simply places impossible demands on the relevant academic departments. Furthermore, critical thinking, while arguably a result of humanistic training, can be acquired in other contexts. And the humanities do not even provide any more the kind of social cachet (what sociologists sometimes call \"cultural capital\") that was helpful to succeed in Western society before the age of mass education following World War II.\nInstead, scholars like Fish suggest that the humanities offer a unique kind of pleasure, a pleasure based on the common pursuit of knowledge (even if it is only disciplinary knowledge). Such pleasure contrasts with the increasing privatization of leisure and instant gratification characteristic of Western culture; it thus meets J\u00fcrgen Habermas' requirements for the disregard of social status and rational problematization of previously unquestioned areas necessary for an endeavor which takes place in the bourgeois public sphere. In this argument, then, only the academic pursuit of pleasure can provide a link between the private and the public realm in modern Western consumer society and strengthen that public sphere that, according to many theorists, is the foundation for modern democracy.\nOthers, like Mark Bauerlein, argue that professors in the humanities have increasingly abandoned proven methods of epistemology (\"I care only about the quality of your arguments, not your conclusions.\") in favor of indoctrination (\"I care only about your conclusions, not the quality of your arguments.\"). The result is that professors and their students adhere rigidly to a limited set of viewpoints, and have little interest in, or understanding of, opposing viewpoints. Once they obtain this intellectual self-satisfaction, persistent lapses in learning, research, and evaluation are common.\nRomanticization and rejection.\nImplicit in many of these arguments supporting the humanities are the makings of arguments against public support of the humanities. Joseph Carroll asserts that we live in a changing world, a world where \"cultural capital\" is replaced with \"scientific literacy\", and in which the romantic notion of a Renaissance humanities scholar is obsolete. Such arguments appeal to judgments and anxieties about the essential uselessness of the humanities, especially in an age when it is seemingly vitally important for scholars of literature, history and the arts to engage in \"collaborative work with experimental scientists or even simply to make \"intelligent use of the findings from empirical science.\"\nDespite many humanities based arguments against the humanities some within the exact sciences have called for their return. In 2017, Science popularizer Bill Nye retracted previous claims about the supposed 'uselessness' of philosophy. As Bill Nye states, \"People allude to Socrates and Plato and Aristotle all the time, and I think many of us who make those references don't have a solid grounding,\" he said. \"It's good to know the history of philosophy.\" Scholars, such as biologist Scott F. Gilbert, make the claim that it is in fact the increasing predominance, leading to exclusivity, of scientific ways of thinking that need to be tempered by historical and social context. Gilbert worries that the commercialization that may be inherent in some ways of conceiving science (pursuit of funding, academic prestige etc.) need to be examined externally. Gilbert argues:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;First of all, there is a very successful alternative to science as a commercialized march to 'progress.' This is the approach taken by the liberal arts college, a model that takes pride in seeing science in context and in integrating science with the humanities and social sciences.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53133", "revid": "50306654", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53133", "title": "Children's Online Privacy Protection Act", "text": "2000 American federal cyber law\nThe Children's Online Privacy Protection Act of 1998 (COPPA) is a United States federal law. The act, effective April 21, 2000, applies to the online collection of personal information by persons or entities under U.S. jurisdiction about children under 13 years of age, including children outside the U.S. if the website or service is U.S.-based. It details what a website operator must include in a privacy policy, when and how to seek verifiable consent from a parent or guardian, and what responsibilities an operator has to protect children's privacy and safety online, including restrictions on the marketing of those under 13.\nAlthough children under 13 can legally give out personal information with their parents' permission, many websites\u2014particularly social media sites, but also other sites that collect most personal info\u2014disallow children under 13 from using their services altogether due to the cost and work involved in complying with the law.\nBackground.\nIn the 1990s, electronic commerce was on its rise of popularity, but various concerns were expressed about the data collection practices and the impact of Internet commerce on user privacy\u2014especially for children under 13, because very few websites had their own privacy policies. The Center for Media Education petitioned the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) to investigate the data collection and use practices of the KidsCom website, and take legal action since the data practices violated Section 5 of FTC Act concerning \"unfair/deceptive practices.\" With the passing of the Drivers Privacy Protection Act in 1997, new precedents had been set in regard to the ability of congress to regulate information held by state agencies. After the FTC completed its investigation, it issued the \"KidsCom Letter\" the report stated that the data collection and use practices were indeed subject to legal action. This resulted in the need to inform parents about the risks of children's online privacy, as well as to parental consent necessity. This ultimately resulted in the drafting of COPPA.\nCOPPA was passed in 1998 and took effect reportedly in April of 2000. The rule was issued by the Federal Trade Commission, and it is updated quite frequently to stay up to date with new technological advancements. The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) is a agency that works to protect people from illegal practices, scammers, create protection rules, and ensure they are helping people protect their data and information. COPPA was necessary because it has been reported that 89% of children websites were taking personal information, and many of those websites were not giving privacy notices. Parents were not very involved with their children's website uses or made aware of the dangers of their children's private information being taken without knowledge. \nThe new millennium ushered in an era of regulation that many were simply unaware of. The early years of the transition were fraught with confusion and a lot of animosity. One of the main concerns of the time was the eventual accessibility of child-based websites at the fear many were unwilling to change their business practices. Many were left with a series of loose guidelines that determined what was correct. The simplification of COPPA provided by the FTC was met with a follow-up of demands to law enforcement that the: \"... Commission should continue law enforcement efforts by targeting significant violations and seeking increasingly larger civil penalties, when appropriate, to deter unlawful conduct\". A mandatory review of the COPPA regulations were conducted in 2005 (resulting with no changes to the original guidelines), found that there were no adverse effects to the online landscape.\nThe Federal Trade Commission (FTC) has the authority to issue regulations and enforce COPPA. Also, under the terms of COPPA, the FTC-designated \"safe harbor\" provisioning is designed to encourage increased industrial self-regulation. Under this provision, industry groups and others may request Commission approval of self-regulatory guidelines to govern participants' compliance, such that website operators in Commission-approved programs would first be subject to the disciplinary procedures of the safe harbor program in lieu of FTC enforcement. As of June 2016,[ [update]] the FTC has approved seven safe harbor programs operated by TrustArc, ESRB, CARU, PRIVO, Aristotle, Inc., Samet Privacy (kidSAFE), and the Internet Keep Safe Coalition (iKeepSafe). In August 2021, Aristotle, Inc. withdrew from the safe harbor program after FTC staff expressed serious concerns about its enforcement of its safe harbor provisions and communicated their intent to recommend the revocation of Aristotle's approval to run a safe harbor program. The FTC also announced its intention to more closely scrutinize the practices of the other six present safe harbors.\nIn September 2011, the FTC announced proposed revisions to the COPPA rules, the first significant changes to the act since the issuance of the rules in 2000. The proposed rule changes expanded the definition of what it meant to \"collect\" data from children. The proposed rules presented a data retention and deletion requirement, which mandated that data obtained from children be retained only for the amount of time necessary to achieve the purpose that it was collected for. It also added the requirement that operators ensure that any third parties to whom a child's information is disclosed have reasonable procedures in place to protect the information.\nIn 2013, the COPPA rules were updated due to the increase in children's use of the internet and mobile devices. The 2013 revision expanded the types of online services and categories of personal information covered by the rules, and reinforced that verifiable parental consent was required for collecting personal information on child-directed platforms. The FTC reviews rules and regulations every ten years, but due to the constant evolution of technology, it opened for review again in 2019.\nThe act applies to websites and online services operated for commercial purposes that are either directed toward children under 13 or have actual knowledge that children under 13 are providing information online. Most recognized non-profit organizations are exempt from most of the requirements of COPPA. However, the Supreme Court ruled that non-profits operated for the benefit of their members' commercial activities are subject to FTC regulation and consequently COPPA as well. The type of \"verifiable parental consent\" that is required before collecting and using information provided by children under 13 is based upon a \"sliding scale\" set forth in a Federal Trade Commission regulation that takes into account the manner in which the information is being collected and the uses to which the information will be put.\nWith technological advancements children have become more accustomed to using online services in their everyday lives. Though COPPA tries to keep children's personal information and data safe, enforcement remains inconsistent. There are many apps and websites that are accessible by children that do not comply with COPPA rules. Furthermore, even if those apps do have terms and conditions that correlate with COPPA rules, many times the terms are vast and not legible by the young children. Many privacy policies do not disclose the extent of information they are sharing to a third-party. Many times developers are unaware of the target audience their app or website will reach making it more difficult to incorporate COPPA rules to protect children. This can expose children to privacy risk and lead to leaking sensitive information. Studies have shown that data taken from children has been provided to third party advertising, which leads to promoting content that leads to impulse spending or promoting unhealthy products.\nCOPPA 2.0 was introduced to expand the age range covered by COPPA to minors under 17. It was introduced in the Senate alongside the Kids Online Safety Act (KOSA). Both KOSA and COPPA 2.0 passed the Senate on a 91\u20133 vote on July 30, 2024. COPPA 2.0 would have required youth aged 13, 14, 15 or 16 to consent to the processing of their own data, but would not have required the parents of 13-16 year olds to consent to the data processing. COPPA 2.0, as well as KOSA, had not passed the House when the 118th US Congress expired on January 3, 2025.\nViolations.\nAccording to the FTC, courts may fine violators of COPPA up to $50,120 in civil penalties for each violation. The FTC has brought a number of actions against website operators for failing to comply with COPPA requirements, including actions against Google, TikTok, miHoYo, \"Girls' Life\", American Pop Corn Company, Lisa Frank, Inc., Mrs. Fields Cookies, and The Hershey Company.\nIn February 2004, UMG Recordings, Inc. was fined US$400,000 for COPPA violations in connection with a website that promoted the then 13-year-old rapper Lil' Romeo and hosted child-oriented games and activities, and Bonzi Software, which offered downloads of an animated figure \"BonziBuddy\" that provided shopping advice, jokes, and trivia was fined $75,000 for COPPA violations. Similarly, the owners of the Xanga website were fined US$1,000,000 in 2006 for COPPA violations of repeatedly allowing children under 13 to sign up for the service without getting their parent's consent.\nIn 2016, the mobile advertising network inMobi was fined US$950,000 for tracking the geo-location of all users (including those under 12) without their knowledge. The advertising software continuously tracked user location despite privacy preferences on the mobile device. Other websites that were directed towards children and fined due to COPPA include Imbee (2008), Kidswirl (2011) and Skid-e-Kids (2011).\nIn February 2019, the FTC issued a fine of $5.7 million to ByteDance for failing to comply with COPPA with their TikTok app (then called Musical.ly). ByteDance agreed to pay the largest COPPA fine since the bill's enactment and to add a kids-only mode to the TikTok app.\nThree dating apps by Wildec were pulled by Apple and Google from their respective app stores, after the FTC determined that the dating apps allowed users under 13 to register, that Wildec knew there were significant numbers of minor users, and that this allowed inappropriate contact with minors.\nOn September 4, 2019, the FTC issued a fine of $170 million to YouTube for COPPA violations, including tracking the viewing history of minors in order to facilitate targeted advertising. Many notable social media platforms were subjected to scrutiny from the FTC, especially groups like Facebook where the platform had users ignoring COPPA guidelines since inception. As a result, YouTube announced that as part of the settlement, in 2020 it would require channel operators to mark videos that are \"child-oriented\" as such, and would use machine learning to automatically mark those as clearly \"child-oriented\" if not marked already. In the settlement terms, channel operators that failed to mark videos as \"child-oriented\" could be fined by the FTC for up to $42,530 per video, which has raised criticism towards the settlement terms. The decision came in terms that, despite good faith, created many issues among the content creators on the site. Users such as Ryan's World, Philip DeFranco and TheOdd1sOut with vastly different content found themselves in conflict for their appealing content for children. The following guidelines were implemented on the basis set by the following rules:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn 2022, Epic Games settled a Federal Trade Commission complaint in part by agreeing to pay a $275 million penalty for COPPA violations. The FTC complaint alleged that Epic illegally collected personal information from children under the age of 13 and made it difficult for parents to get such information deleted. The full agreement included an additional $245 million to refund users who were manipulated into making unintended purchases.\nThe DOJ and FTC jointly filed a lawsuit against TikTok and its owner ByteDance for violations of COPPA in August 2024, asserting that the app collecting private information from minor users as well as to allow them to interact with adults and adult content.\nCompliance.\nIn December 2012, the Federal Trade Commission issued revisions effective July 1, 2013, which created additional parental notice and consent requirements, amended definitions, and added other obligations for organizations that (1) operate a website or online service that is \"directed to children\" under 12 and that collects \"personal information\" from users or (2) knowingly collects personal information from people under 13 through a website or online service. After July 1, 2013, operators must:\nAccording to a notice issued by the Federal Trade Commission, an operator has actual knowledge of a user's age if the site or service asks for\u2014and receives\u2014information from the user that allows it to determine the person's age. An example, cited by the FTC, includes an operator who asks for a date of birth on a site's registration page has actual knowledge as defined by COPPA if a user responds with a year that suggests they are under 13. Another example cited by the FTC is that an operator may have actual knowledge based on answers to \"age identifying\" questions like \"What grade are you in?\" or \"What type of school do you go to? (a) elementary; (b) middle; (c) high school; (d) college.\"\nA small fee was charged by Microsoft under COPPA as a way to verify parental consent. The fee was donated to the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children. Google, however, charges a small fee as a way to verify one's date of birth.\nIn the changes effective July 1, 2013, the definition of an operator was updated to make clear that COPPA covers a child-directed site or service that integrates outside services, such as plug-ins or advertising networks, that collect personal information from its visitors. The definition of a website or online service directed to children is expanded to include plug-ins or ad networks that have actual knowledge that they are collecting personal information through a child-directed website or online service. Websites and services that target children as a secondary audience may differentiate among users, and are required to provide notice and obtain parental consent only for those users who identify themselves as being younger than 13. The definition of personal information requiring parental notice and consent before collection now includes \"persistent identifiers\" that can be used to recognize users over time and across different websites or online services. However, no parental notice and consent are required when an operator collects a persistent identifier for the sole purpose of supporting the website or online service's internal operations. The definition of personal information after July 1, 2013, also includes geolocation information, as well as photos, videos, and audio files that contain a child's image or voice.\nOn November 19, 2015, the FTC announced it had approved an additional method for obtaining verifiable parental consent: \"face match to verified photo identification\" (FMVPI). The two-step process allows a parent to submit a government-sanctioned ID for authentication, then submit an impromptu photo via mobile device or web camera, which is then compared to the photo on the ID.\nInternational scope.\nThe FTC has asserted that COPPA applies to any online service that is directed to U.S. users or knowingly collects information from children in the U.S., regardless of its country of origin. Referring to their official website, the following embodies such views:\nThe FTC's Office of International Affairs directs the agency's international activities for competition and consumer protection, which include:\nHowever, the FTC rarely performs enforcement actions against foreign companies, and faces a number of practical challenges in doing so. The general assumption is that, despite the interconnected world of internet services, jurisdiction only applies to domestic operation. Nevertheless, it has successfully enforced COPPA against at least one foreign company with a significant US userbase, securing a $5.7 million settlement against the Chinese company ByteDance over their TikTok app.\nCriticisms.\nCOPPA is controversial and has been criticized as ineffective and potentially unconstitutional by legal experts and mass media since it was drafted. Complaints leveled against the legislation include website owners banning users 12 and under\u2014which only \"encourages age fraud and allows websites to bypass the burden of obtaining parental consent\"\u2014and the active suppression of children's rights to freedom of speech, self-expression, and other First Amendment rights due to necessity of registering accounts to do so.\nDelays in obtaining parental consent often result in children moving on to other activities that are less appropriate for their age or pose bigger privacy risks.\nIn addition, age restrictions and the \"parental consent\" process are easy for children to circumvent, and parents generally help them to lie about their age.\nAn Internet Safety Technical Task Force composed of experts from academia and commercial companies found in 2012 that mandatory age verification is not only a poor solution for privacy but also constitutes a violation of privacy. The law has also many safety flaws. For example, it does not protect kids from predatory advertising, it does not prevent kids from accessing pornography or lying about their age, and it does not ensure a totally safe environment online. Tech journalist Larry Magid, a long-time vocal opponent of the law, also notes that parents, not the government, hold the bulk of responsibility of protecting children online. COPPA has also been criticized for its potential chilling effect on children's apps, content, websites and online services. For example, Snapchat released a Snapkidz version of its app in June 2013, but unlike Snapchat, Snapkidz did not allow photo sharing at all due to COPPA regulations. Similarly, it has been pointed out that the COPPA Rule was not necessarily about privacy protection but more about \"enforcing the laws.\"\nCOPPA's penalties ($40,000 per violation) can be potentially catastrophic for small businesses, undermining their business model. By contrast, the FTC has been criticized, including by COPPA author Ed Markey, and FTC commissioner Rohit Chopra, for not fining major and big tech companies harshly enough for their COPPA violations, especially in comparison to their revenue. In contrast, violators of the European Union's General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) may be fined up to 4% of their annual global revenue.\nWith the rise of virtual education, COPPA may inadequately represent the role of administrators, teachers, and the school in protecting student privacy under the assumption of \"loco parentis\".\nMark Zuckerberg, co-founder and CEO of Facebook, expressed opposition to COPPA in 2011 and stated \"That will be a fight we take on at some point. My philosophy is that for education you need to start at a really, really young age.\" The next year, Jim Steyer, the CEO of Common Sense Media, called for updates to COPPA, calling the time of the act's creation \"the stone age of digital media\" and pointing out the lack of platforms such as Google, YouTube, Facebook and Twitter at the time.\nIn 2019, the Government of the State of New York sued YouTube for violating COPPA by illegally retaining information related to children under 13 years of age. YouTube responded by dividing its content strictly into \"for kids\" and \"not for kids\". This has met with extremely harsh criticism from the YouTube community, especially from gamers, with many alleging that the FTC of the United States intends to fine content creators $42,530 for \"each mislabeled video\", possibly putting all users at risk. However, some have expressed skepticism over this, feeling that the fines may actually be in reference to civil penalties, possibly intended for the site's operators and/or warranted by more serious of COPPA violations or specific cases of \"mislabeling videos\". As of December 2022, no YouTuber has been fined.\nSeveral bills have been proposed to amend COPPA. Markey and Josh Hawley introduced multiple bills (in the House in 2018 as the \"Do Not Track Kids Act\", and in 2019 as a Senate measure) proposing that COPPA ban the use of targeted advertising to users under 13, require personal consent before the collection of personal information from users ages 13\u201315, require connected devices and toys directed towards children to meet security standards and include a privacy policy disclosure on their packaging, and require services to offer an \"eraser button\" to \"permit users to eliminate publicly available personal information content submitted by the child, when technologically feasible\". In January 2020, Bobby Rush and Tim Walberg introduced a similar house bill known as the Preventing Real Online Threats Endangering Children Today (PROTECT Kids) Act, which would extend all existing COPPA consent requirements to users under the age of 16, and explicitly add mobile apps, \"precise geolocation\", and biometric data to its remit.\nEffects in the Mobile- APP and Ad-Tech Ecosystem.\nWhile the internet continues to advance children are now moving their attention of internet use from webpages to apps where applying COPPA rules is more complex to address. These advancements make it more difficult to keep up with the new kinds of risks that the original notice and rules do not comply with. Scholars have argued that the COPPA consent framework struggles to stay relevant with new features such as the third-party advertising, persistent identifiers, and real-time behavioral tracking that operate in ways that children along with parents are unaware of. Sandoval(2024) states that even if companies were able to follow direct COPPA rules, there is still a risk of being tracked due to lack of laws to fully protect individuals. Mobile apps such as app stores and networks are constantly collecting background data making individuals still vulnerable.\nSDKs also known as software development kits are tools that developers use to build applications. Many child-directed mobile apps use SDKs along with other third party trackers that create data collection pathways that users are unaware of. Researchers have states that these tracking tools transmit persistent identifiers, which are digital markers that track a device or user through time. Furthermore, they also track interaction patterns and device information creating a behavioral profile regardless of COPPA regulations. Research has found that there are blind sports in child-directed apps that track their information that is not disclosed of. Other researchers have explained that because many child-directed apps profit off advertisement they are more inclined and focused on collecting data for profit than children's privacy.\nAge verification is important in protecting children online but it remains a challenge in the mobile environment. Apps tailored for children are simple to ensure that they have simple and fast access to play or stream as they please. The minimal standard for set up is simply entering an age, but this system is easy to bypass because children are able to enter an age much older than theirs. Since children tend to use technology that is shared within the household it makes it more difficult for apps to determine the age of the user. Policies that also allow for age verification tend to be an in convince for users because they require addition steps such as email confirmation or credit card validation. With COPPA's regulations it has been argued that the cut off age of 13 does not regulate children interaction with digital platforms.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53135", "revid": "925588", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53135", "title": "Magnetic anomaly detector", "text": "Instrument for detecting variations in the Earth's magnetic field\nA magnetic anomaly detector (MAD) is an instrument used to detect minute variations in the Earth's magnetic field. The term typically refers to magnetometers used by military forces to detect submarines (a mass of ferromagnetic material creates a detectable disturbance in the magnetic field). Military MAD equipment is a descendant of geomagnetic survey or aeromagnetic survey instruments used to search for minerals by detecting their disturbance of the normal earth-field.\nHistory.\nGeoexploration by measuring and studying variations in the Earth's magnetic field has been conducted by scientists since 1843. The first uses of magnetometers were for the location of ore deposits. Thalen's \"The Examination of Iron Ore Deposits by Magnetic Measurements\", published in 1879, was the first scientific treatise describing this practical use.\nMagnetic anomaly detectors employed to detect submarines during World War II harnessed the fluxgate magnetometer, an inexpensive and easy to use technology developed in the 1930s by Victor Vacquier of Gulf Oil for finding ore deposits. MAD gear was used by both Japanese and U.S. anti-submarine forces, either towed by ship or mounted in aircraft to detect shallow submerged enemy submarines. The Japanese called the technology \"jikitanchiki\" (\u78c1\u6c17\u63a2\u77e5\u6a5f, \"Magnetic Detector\"). After the war, the U.S. Navy continued to develop MAD gear as a parallel development with sonar detection technologies.\nSatellite, near-surface and oceanic data from detectors was used to create the http:// published by the Commission for the Geological Map of the World (CGMW) in July 2007.\nOperation.\nThe magnetic anomaly from a submarine is usually very small. One source estimates that it is only about 0.2 nT at a distance of 600 m. Another source estimates that a 100\u202fm long and 10 m wide submarine would produce a magnetic flux of 13.33 nT at 500\u202fm, 1.65 nT at 1\u202fkm and 0.01 nT at 5\u202fkm. To reduce interference from electrical equipment or metal in the fuselage of the aircraft, the MAD sensor is placed at the end of a boom or on a towed aerodynamic device. Even so, the submarine must be very near the aircraft's position and close to the sea surface for detection of the anomaly, because magnetic fields decrease as the inverse cube of distance, one source gives a detection slant range of 500\u202fm. The size of the submarine, its hull composition and orientation, as well as the water depth and complexity of the natural magnetic field, determine the detection range. MAD devices are usually mounted on aircraft. For example, one study showed that a horizontal detection range of 450\u2013800\u202fm, when aircraft was 200\u202fm above a submarine, decreased to less than 150\u202fm when the aircraft was 400\u202fm above the submarine.\nIf the sea floor has sunken ships, then submarines may operate near them to confuse magnetic anomaly detectors.\nMAD has certain advantages over other detection methods. It is a passive detection method. Unlike sonar it is not impacted by meteorological conditions; indeed above sea state 5, MAD may be the only reliable method for submarine detection.\nOther uses.\nFor aeromagnetic survey applications the magnetic sensor can be mounted on an aircraft (typically on a long probe in front of or behind the aircraft to reduce the magnetic effects of the aircraft itself) or in a towed device. A chart is produced that geologists and geophysicists can study to determine the distribution and concentration of magnetic minerals which are related to geology and mineral deposits.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53136", "revid": "50595967", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53136", "title": "Weapon of mass destruction", "text": "Weapon that can kill many people or cause great damage\nA weapon of mass destruction (WMD) is a biological, chemical, radiological, nuclear, or any other weapon that can kill or significantly harm many people or cause great damage to artificial structures (e.g., buildings), natural structures (e.g., mountains), or the biosphere. The scope and usage of the term has evolved and been disputed, often signifying more politically than technically. Originally coined in reference to aerial bombing with chemical explosives during World War II, it has later come to refer to large-scale weaponry of warfare-related technologies, such as biological, chemical, radiological, or nuclear warfare.\nThe histories of biological and chemical warfare date from antiquity to the modern period, with toxic gases used on a vast scale in World War I. In the 20th century, nuclear weapons were first developed, and were used in war twice, in the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Biotechnology allowed for the enhancement of pathogens as weapons, and advanced chemical weapons such as nerve agents were developed. Radiological weapons have never been used or mass-produced.\nNuclear weapons were mass-produced in the Cold War's nuclear arms race, and as of 2025[ [update]] are possessed by nine countries, while 185 countries pledge not to acquire them via the 1968 Non-Proliferation Treaty. The 1975 Biological Weapons Convention and 1993 Chemical Weapons Convention seek complete elimination by all parties, but are challenged by a small number of non-signatory states, and by violations.\nEarly usage.\nThe first use of the term \"weapon of mass destruction\" on record is by Cosmo Gordon Lang, Archbishop of Canterbury, in 1937 in reference to the bombing of Guernica, Spain:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Who can think at this present time without a sickening of the heart of the appalling slaughter, the suffering, the manifold misery brought by war to Spain and to China? Who can think without horror of what another widespread war would mean, waged as it would be with all the new weapons of mass destruction?\nAt the time, nuclear weapons had not been developed fully. Japan conducted research on biological weapons, and chemical weapons had seen wide battlefield use in World War I. Their use was outlawed by the Geneva Protocol of 1925. Italy used mustard agent against civilians and soldiers in Ethiopia in 1935\u201336.\nFollowing the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki that ended World War II and during the Cold War, the term came to refer more to non-conventional weapons. The application of the term to specifically nuclear and radiological weapons is traced by William Safire to the Russian phrase \"\u041e\u0440\u0443\u0436\u0438\u0435 \u043c\u0430\u0441\u0441\u043e\u0432\u043e\u0433\u043e \u043f\u043e\u0440\u0430\u0436\u0435\u043d\u0438\u044f\" \u2013 \"oruzhiye massovogo porazheniya\" (weapon of mass destruction).\nWilliam Safire credits James Goodby (of the Brookings Institution) with tracing what he considers the earliest known English-language use soon after the nuclear bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki (although it is not quite verbatim): a communique from a 15 November 1945, meeting of Harry Truman, Clement Attlee and Mackenzie King (probably drafted by Vannevar Bush, as Bush claimed in 1970) referred to \"weapons adaptable to mass destruction.\"\nSafire says Bernard Baruch used that exact phrase in 1946 (in a speech at the United Nations probably written by Herbert Bayard Swope). The phrase found its way into the very first resolution the United Nations General assembly adopted in January 1946 in London, which used the wording \"the elimination from national armaments of atomic weapons and of all other weapons adaptable to mass destruction.\" The resolution also created the Atomic Energy Commission (predecessor of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)).\nAn exact use of this term was given in a lecture titled \"Atomic Energy as a Contemporary Problem\" by J. Robert Oppenheimer. He delivered the lecture to the Foreign Service and the State Department, on 17 September 1947.\nIt is a very far reaching control which would eliminate the rivalry between nations in this field, which would prevent the surreptitious arming of one nation against another, which would provide some cushion of time before atomic attack, and presumably therefore before any attack with weapons of mass destruction, and which would go a long way toward removing atomic energy at least as a source of conflict between the powers.\nThe term was also used in the introduction to the hugely influential U.S. government document known as NSC 68 written in 1950.\nDuring a speech at Rice University on 12 September 1962, President John F. Kennedy spoke of not filling space \"with weapons of mass destruction, but with instruments of knowledge and understanding.\" The following month, during a televised presentation about the Cuban Missile Crisis on 22 October 1962, Kennedy made reference to \"offensive weapons of sudden mass destruction.\"\nAn early use of the exact phrase in an international treaty is in the Outer Space Treaty of 1967, but the treaty provides no definition of the phrase, and the treaty also categorically prohibits the stationing of \"weapons\" and the testing of \"any type of weapon\" in outer space, in addition to its specific prohibition against placing in orbit, or installing on celestial bodies, \"any objects carrying nuclear weapons or any other kinds of weapons of mass destruction.\"\nEvolution.\nDuring the Cold War, the term \"weapons of mass destruction\" was primarily a reference to nuclear weapons. At the time, in the West the euphemism \"strategic weapons\" was used to refer to the American nuclear arsenal. However, there is no precise definition of the \"strategic\" category, neither considering range nor yield of the nuclear weapon.\nSubsequent to Operation Opera, the destruction of a pre-operational nuclear reactor inside Iraq by the Israeli Air Force in 1981, the Israeli prime minister, Menachem Begin, countered criticism by saying that \"on no account shall we permit an enemy to develop weapons of mass destruction against the people of Israel.\" This policy of pre-emptive action against real or perceived weapons of mass destruction became known as the Begin Doctrine.&lt;ref name=\"NTI/Isr\"&gt;http:// , Nuclear Threat Initiative (NTI), updated May, 2014&lt;/ref&gt;\nThe term \"weapons of mass destruction\" continued to see periodic use, usually in the context of nuclear arms control; Ronald Reagan used it during the 1986 Reykjav\u00edk Summit, when referring to the 1967 Outer Space Treaty. Reagan's successor, George H. W. Bush, used the term in a 1989 speech to the United Nations, primarily in reference to chemical arms.\nThe end of the Cold War reduced U.S. reliance on nuclear weapons as a deterrent, causing it to shift its focus to disarmament. With the 1990 invasion of Kuwait and 1991 Gulf War, Iraq's nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons programs became a particular concern of the first Bush Administration. Following the war, Bill Clinton and other western politicians and media continued to use the term, usually in reference to ongoing attempts to dismantle Iraq's weapons programs.\nAfter the 11 September 2001 attacks and the 2001 anthrax attacks in the United States, an increased fear of nonconventional weapons and asymmetric warfare took hold in many countries. The fear reached a crescendo with the 2002 Iraq disarmament crisis and the alleged existence of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq that became the primary justification for the 2003 invasion of Iraq; however, American forces found none in Iraq. They found old stockpiles of chemical munitions including sarin and mustard agents, but all were considered to be unusable because of corrosion or degradation. Iraq, however, declared a chemical weapons stockpile in 2009 which U.N. personnel had secured after the 1991 Gulf War. The stockpile contained mainly chemical precursors, but some munitions remained usable.\nBecause of its prolific use and (worldwide) public profile during this period, the American Dialect Society voted \"weapons of mass destruction\" (and its abbreviation, \"WMD\") the word of the year in 2002, and in 2003 Lake Superior State University added WMD to its list of terms banished for \"Mis-use, Over-use and General Uselessness\" (and \"as a card that trumps all forms of aggression\").\nIn its criminal complaint against the main suspect of the Boston Marathon bombing of 15 April 2013, the FBI refers to a pressure-cooker improvised bomb as a \"weapon of mass destruction.\"\nThere have been calls to classify at least some classes of cyber weapons as WMD, in particular those aimed to bring about large-scale (physical) destruction, such as by targeting critical infrastructure. However, some scholars have objected to classifying cyber weapons as WMD on the grounds that they \"cannot [currently] directly injure or kill human beings as efficiently as guns or bombs\" or clearly \"meet the legal and historical definitions\" of WMD.\nDefinitions of the term.\nUnited States.\nStrategic definition.\nThe most widely used definition of \"weapons of mass destruction\" is that of nuclear, biological, or chemical weapons (NBC) although there is no treaty or customary international law that contains an authoritative definition. Instead, international law has been used with respect to the specific categories of weapons within WMD, and not to WMD as a whole. While nuclear, chemical and biological weapons are regarded as the three major types of WMDs, some analysts have argued that radiological materials as well as missile technology and delivery systems such as aircraft and ballistic missiles could be labeled as WMDs as well.\nHowever, there is an argument that nuclear and biological weapons do not belong in the same category as chemical and \"dirty bomb\" radiological weapons, which have limited destructive potential (and close to none, as far as property is concerned), whereas nuclear and biological weapons have the unique ability to kill large numbers of people with very small amounts of material, and thus could be said to belong in a class by themselves.\nThe NBC definition has also been used in official U.S. documents, by the U.S. President, the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency, the U.S. Department of Defense, and the U.S. Government Accountability Office.\nOther documents expand the definition of WMD to also include radiological or conventional weapons. The U.S. military refers to WMD as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Chemical, biological, radiological, or nuclear weapons capable of a high order of destruction or causing mass casualties and exclude the means of transporting or propelling the weapon where such means is a separable and divisible part from the weapon. Also called WMD.\nThis may also refer to nuclear ICBMs (intercontinental ballistic missiles).\nThe significance of the words \"separable and divisible part of the weapon\" is that missiles such as the Pershing II and the SCUD are considered weapons of mass destruction, while aircraft capable of carrying bombloads are not.\nIn 2004, the United Kingdom's Butler Review recognized the \"considerable and long-standing academic debate about the proper interpretation of the phrase 'weapons of mass destruction'\". The committee set out to avoid the general term but when using it, employed the definition of United Nations Security Council Resolution 687, which defined the systems which Iraq was required to abandon:\nChemical weapons expert Gert G. Harigel considers only nuclear weapons true weapons of mass destruction, because \"only nuclear weapons are completely indiscriminate by their explosive power, heat radiation and radioactivity, and only they should therefore be called a weapon of mass destruction\". He prefers to call chemical and biological weapons \"weapons of terror\" when aimed against civilians and \"weapons of intimidation\" for soldiers.\nTestimony of one such soldier expresses the same viewpoint. For a period of several months in the winter of 2002\u20132003, U.S. Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz frequently used the term \"weapons of mass terror\", apparently also recognizing the distinction between the psychological and the physical effects of many things currently falling into the WMD category.\nGustavo Bell Lemus, the Vice President of Colombia, at 9 July 2001 United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, quoted the Millennium Report of the UN Secretary-General to the General Assembly, in which Kofi Annan said that small arms could be described as WMD because the fatalities they cause \"dwarf that of all other weapons systems \u2013 and in most years greatly exceed the toll of the atomic bombs that devastated Hiroshima and Nagasaki\".\nAn additional condition often implicitly applied to WMD is that the use of the weapons must be strategic. In other words, they would be designed to \"have consequences far outweighing the size and effectiveness of the weapons themselves\". The strategic nature of WMD also defines their function in the military doctrine of total war as targeting the means a country would use to support and supply its war effort, specifically its population, industry, and natural resources.\nWithin U.S. civil defense organizations, the category is now Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear, and Explosive (CBRNE), which defines WMD as:\n(1) Any explosive, incendiary, poison gas, bomb, grenade, or rocket having a propellant charge of more than four ounces [113 g], missile having an explosive or incendiary charge of more than one-quarter ounce [7 g], or mine or device similar to the above. (2) Poison gas. (3) Any weapon involving a disease organism. (4) Any weapon that is designed to release radiation at a level dangerous to human life.\nMilitary definition.\nFor the general purposes of national defense, the U.S. Code defines a weapon of mass destruction as:\nFor the purposes of the prevention of weapons proliferation, the U.S. Code defines weapons of mass destruction as \"chemical, biological, and nuclear weapons, and chemical, biological, and nuclear materials used in the manufacture of such weapons\".\nCriminal (civilian) definition.\nFor the purposes of U.S. criminal law concerning terrorism, weapons of mass destruction are defined as:\nThe Federal Bureau of Investigation's definition is similar to that presented above from the terrorism statute:\nIndictments and convictions for possession and use of WMD such as truck bombs, pipe bombs, shoe bombs, and cactus needles coated with a biological toxin have been obtained under 18 USC 2332a.\nAs defined by 18 USC \u00a72332 (a), a Weapon of Mass Destruction is:\nUnder the same statute, conspiring, attempting, threatening, or using a Weapon of Mass Destruction may be imprisoned for any term of years or for life, and if resulting in death, be punishable by death or by imprisonment for any terms of years or for life. They can also be asked to pay a maximum fine of $250,000.\n\"The Washington Post\" reported on 30 March 2006: \"Jurors asked the judge in the death penalty trial of Zacarias Moussaoui today to define the term 'weapons of mass destruction' and were told it includes airplanes used as missiles\". Moussaoui was indicted and tried for conspiracy to both destroy aircraft and use weapons of mass destruction, among others.\nThe surviving Boston Marathon bombing perpetrator, Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, was charged in June 2013 with the federal offense of \"use of a weapon of mass destruction\" after he and his brother Tamerlan Tsarnaev allegedly placed crude shrapnel bombs, made from pressure cookers packed with ball bearings and nails, near the finish line of the Boston Marathon. He was convicted in April 2015. The bombing resulted in three deaths and at least 264 injuries.\nInternational law.\nThe development and use of WMD is governed by several international conventions and treaties.\nUse, possession, and access.\nNuclear weapons.\nNuclear weapons use the energy inside of an atom's nucleus to create massive explosions. This goal is achieved through nuclear fission and fusion.\nNuclear fission is when the nucleus of an atom is split into smaller nuclei. This process can be induced by shooting a neutron at the nucleus of an atom. When the neutron is absorbed by the atom, it becomes unstable, causing it to split and release energy. Modern nuclear weapons start this process by detonating chemical explosives around a pit of either uranium-235 or plutonium-239 metal. The force from this detonation is directed inwards, causing the pit of uranium or plutonium to compress to a dense point. Once the uranium/plutonium is dense enough, neutrons are then injected. This starts a fission chain reaction also known as an atomic explosion.\nNuclear fusion is essentially the opposite of fission. It is the fusing together of nuclei, not the splitting of it. When exposed to extreme pressure and temperature, some lightweight nuclei can fuse together and form heavier nuclei, releasing energy in the process. Fusion weapons (also known as \u201cthermonuclear\u201d or \u201chydrogen\u201d weapons) use the fission process to initiate fusion. Fusion weapons use the energy released from a fission explosion to fuse hydrogen isotopes together. The energy released from these weapons creates a fireball, which reaches tens of million degrees. A temperature of this magnitude is similar to the temperature found at center of the sun; the sun runs on fusion as well.\nThe only country to have used a nuclear weapon in war is the United States, which dropped two atomic bombs on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki during World War II.\nAt the start of 2024, nine states\u2014the United States, Russia, the United Kingdom, France, China, India, Pakistan, the Democratic People\u2019s Republic of Korea (North Korea) and Israel\u2014together possessed approximately 12\u2008121 nuclear weapons, of which 9585 were considered to be potentially operationally available. An estimated 3904 of these warheads were deployed with operational forces, including about 2100 that were kept in a state of high operational alert\u2014about 100 more than the previous year.\nSouth Africa developed a small nuclear arsenal in the 1980s but disassembled them in the early 1990s, making it the only country to have fully given up an independently developed nuclear weapons arsenal. Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Ukraine inherited stockpiles of nuclear arms following the break-up of the Soviet Union, but relinquished them to the Russian Federation.\nCountries where nuclear weapons are deployed through nuclear sharing agreements include Belgium, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, and Turkey.\nBiological weapons.\nThe history of biological warfare goes back at least to the Mongol siege of Caffa in 1346 and possibly much farther back to antiquity. It is believed that the Ancient Greeks contaminated their adversaries' wells by placing animal corpses in them. However, only by the turn of the 20th century did advances in microbiology allow for the large-scale weaponization of pathogens. During the First World War, German military attempted to introduce anthrax into Allied livestock. In the Second World War, Japan conducted aerial attacks on China using fleas carrying the bubonic plague. During the 20th century, at least nine states have operated offensive biological weapons programs, including Canada (1946\u20131956), France (1921\u20131972), Iraq (1985\u20131990s), Japan (1930s\u20131945), Rhodesia, South Africa (1981\u20131993), the Soviet Union (1920s\u20131992), the United Kingdom (1934\u20131956), and the United States (1943\u20131969). The Japanese biological weapons program, which was run by the secret Imperial Japanese Army Unit 731 during the Sino-Japanese War (1937\u20131945), became infamous for conducting often fatal human experiments on prisoners and producing biological weapons for combat use. The Soviet Union covertly operated the world's largest, longest, and most sophisticated biological weapons program, in violation of its obligations under international law.\nInternational restrictions on biological warfare began with the 1925 Geneva Protocol, which prohibits the use but not the possession or development of biological and chemical weapons. Upon ratification of the Geneva Protocol, several countries made reservations regarding its applicability and use in retaliation. Due to these reservations, it was in practice a \"no-first-use\" agreement only. The 1972 Biological Weapons Convention (BWC) supplements the Geneva Protocol by prohibiting the development, production, acquisition, transfer, stockpiling, and use of biological weapons. Having entered into force on 26 March 1975, the BWC was the first multilateral disarmament treaty to ban the production of an entire category of weapons of mass destruction. As of March 2021, 183 states have become party to the treaty.\nChemical weapons.\nChemical weapons have been used around the world by various civilizations since ancient times. The oldest reported case of a chemical substance being used as a weapon was in 256 AD during the siege of Dura-Europos. A mixture of tar and sulfur was used to produce sulfur oxides, which helped take control of the city. In the industrial era, chemical weapons were used extensively by both sides during World War I, and by the Axis powers during World War II (both in battle and in extermination camp gas chambers) though Allied powers also stockpiled them. \nInternational restrictions on chemical warfare began with the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907, and was expanded significantly by the 1925 Geneva Protocol. These treaties prohibited the use of poisons or chemical agents in international warfare, but did not place restrictions on development or weapon stockpiles. Since 1997, the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) has expanded restrictions to prohibit any use and development of chemical weapons except for very limited purposes (research, medical, pharmaceutical or protective). As of 2018, a handful of countries have known inventories, and many are in the process of being safely destroyed. Nonetheless, proliferation and use in war zones remains an active concern, most recently the use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Civil War.\nEthics and international legal status.\nSome commentators classify some or all the uses of nuclear, chemical, or biological weapons during wartime as a war crime (or crime against humanity if widespread) because they kill civilians (who are protected by the laws of war) indiscriminately or are specifically prohibited by international treaties (which have become more comprehensive over time). Proponents of use say that specific uses of such weapons have been necessary for defense or to avoid more deaths in a protracted war. The tactic of terror bombing from aircraft, and generally targeting cities with area bombardment or saturation carpet bombing has also been criticized, defended, and prohibited by treaty in the same way; the destructive effect of conventional saturation bombing is similar to that of a nuclear weapon.\nUnited States politics.\nDue to the potentially indiscriminate effects of WMD, the fear of a WMD attack has shaped political policies and campaigns, fostered social movements, and has been the central theme of many films. Support for different levels of WMD development and control varies nationally and internationally. Yet understanding of the nature of the threats is not high, in part because of imprecise usage of the term by politicians and the media.\nFear of WMD, or of threats diminished by the possession of WMD, has long been used to catalyze public support for various WMD policies. They include mobilization of pro- and anti-WMD campaigners alike, and generation of popular political support. The term WMD may be used as a powerful buzzword or to generate a culture of fear. It is also used ambiguously, particularly by not distinguishing among the different types of WMD.\nA television commercial called \"Daisy\", promoting Democrat Lyndon Johnson's 1964 presidential candidacy, invoked the fear of a nuclear war and was an element in Johnson's subsequent election.\nLater, United States' President George W. Bush used the threat of potential WMD in Iraq as justification for the 2003 invasion of Iraq. Broad reference to Iraqi WMD in general was seen as an element of President Bush's arguments. The claim that Iraq possessed Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD) was a major factor that led to the invasion of Iraq in 2003 by Coalition forces.\nOver 500 munitions containing mustard agent and sarin were discovered throughout Iraq since 2003; they were made in the 1980s and are no longer usable as originally intended due to corrosion.\nThe \"American Heritage Dictionary\" defines a weapon of mass destruction as: \"a weapon that can cause widespread destruction or kill large numbers of people, especially a nuclear, chemical, or biological weapon.\" In other words, it does not have to be nuclear, biological or chemical (NBC). For example, Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, one of the perpetrators of the Boston Marathon bombing, was charged under United States law 18 U.S.C. 2332A for using a weapon of mass destruction and that was a pressure cooker bomb. In other words, it was a weapon that caused large-scale death and destruction, without being an NBC weapon.\nMedia coverage.\nIn March 2004, the Center for International and Security Studies at Maryland (CISSM) released a report examining the media's coverage of WMD issues during three separate periods: nuclear weapons tests by India and Pakistan in May 1998; the U.S. announcement of evidence of a North Korean nuclear weapons program in October 2002; and revelations about Iran's nuclear program in May 2003. The CISSM report argues that poor coverage resulted less from political bias among the media than from tired journalistic conventions. The report's major findings were that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;1. Most media outlets represented WMD as a monolithic menace, failing to adequately distinguish between weapons programs and actual weapons or to address the real differences among chemical, biological, nuclear, and radiological weapons.\n2. Most journalists accepted the Bush administration's formulation of the \"War on Terror\" as a campaign against WMD, in contrast to coverage during the Clinton era, when many journalists made careful distinctions between acts of terrorism and the acquisition and use of WMD.\n3. Many stories stenographically reported the incumbent administration's perspective on WMD, giving too little critical examination of the way officials framed the events, issues, threats, and policy options.\n4. Too few stories proffered alternative perspectives to official line, a problem exacerbated by the journalistic prioritizing of breaking-news stories and the \"inverted pyramid\" style of storytelling.\u2014\u200a\nIn a separate study published in 2005, a group of researchers assessed the effects reports and retractions in the media had on people's memory regarding the search for WMD in Iraq during the 2003 Iraq War. The study focused on populations in two coalition countries (Australia and the United States) and one opposed to the war (Germany). Results showed that U.S. citizens generally did not correct initial misconceptions regarding WMD, even following disconfirmation; Australian and German citizens were more responsive to retractions. Dependence on the initial source of information led to a substantial minority of Americans exhibiting false memory that WMD were indeed discovered, while they were not. This led to three conclusions:\nA poll conducted between June and September 2003 asked people whether they thought evidence of WMD had been discovered in Iraq since the war ended. They were also asked which media sources they relied upon. Those who obtained their news primarily from Fox News were three times as likely to believe that evidence of WMD had been discovered in Iraq than those who relied on PBS and NPR for their news, and one third more likely than those who primarily watched CBS.\nBased on a series of polls taken from June\u2013September 2003.\nIn 2006, Fox News reported the claims of two Republican lawmakers that WMDs had been found in Iraq, based upon unclassified portions of a report by the National Ground Intelligence Center. Quoting from the report, Senator Rick Santorum said \"Since 2003, coalition forces have recovered approximately 500 weapons munitions which contain degraded mustard or sarin nerve agent\". According to David Kay, who appeared before the U.S. House Armed Services Committee to discuss these badly corroded munitions, they were leftovers, many years old, improperly stored or destroyed by the Iraqis. Charles Duelfer agreed, stating on NPR's \"Talk of the Nation\": \"When I was running the ISG \u2013 the Iraq Survey Group \u2013 we had a couple of them that had been turned in to these IEDs, the improvised explosive devices. But they are local hazards. They are not a major, you know, weapon of mass destruction.\"\nLater, wikileaks would show that WMDs of these kinds continued to be found as the Iraqi occupation continued.\nMany news agencies, including Fox News, reported the conclusions of the CIA that, based upon the investigation of the Iraq Survey Group, WMDs are yet to be found in Iraq.\nPublic perceptions.\nAwareness and opinions of WMD have varied during the course of their history. Their threat is a source of unease, security, and pride to different people. The anti-WMD movement is embodied most in nuclear disarmament, and led to the formation of the British Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament in 1957.\nIn order to increase awareness of all kinds of WMD, in 2004 the nuclear physicist and Nobel Peace Prize winner Joseph Rotblat inspired the creation of The WMD Awareness Programme to provide trustworthy and up to date information on WMD worldwide.\nIn 1998, the University of New Mexico's Institute for Public Policy released their third report on U.S. perceptions \u2013 including the general public, politicians and scientists \u2013 of nuclear weapons since the breakup of the Soviet Union. Risks of nuclear conflict, proliferation, and terrorism were seen as substantial.\nWhile maintenance of the U.S. nuclear arsenal was considered above average in importance, there was widespread support for a reduction in the stockpile, and very little support for developing and testing new nuclear weapons.\nAlso in 1998, nuclear weapons became an issue in India's election of March, in relation to political tensions with neighboring Pakistan. Prior to the election the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) announced it would \"declare India a nuclear weapon state\" after coming to power.\nBJP won the elections, and on 14 May, three days after India tested nuclear weapons for the second time, a public opinion poll reported that a majority of Indians favored the country's nuclear build-up.\nOn 15 April 2004, the Program on International Policy Attitudes (PIPA) reported that U.S. citizens showed high levels of concern regarding WMD, and that preventing the spread of nuclear weapons should be \"a very important U.S. foreign policy goal\", accomplished through multilateral arms control rather than the use of military threats.\nA majority also believed the United States should be more forthcoming with its biological research and its Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty commitment of nuclear arms reduction.\nA Russian opinion poll conducted on 5 August 2005 indicated half the population believed new nuclear powers have the right to possess nuclear weapons. 39% believed the Russian stockpile should be reduced, though not eliminated.\nIn popular culture.\nWeapons of mass destruction and their related impacts have been a mainstay of popular culture since the beginning of the Cold War, as both political commentary and humorous outlet. The actual phrase \"weapons of mass destruction\" has been used similarly and as a way to characterise any powerful force or product since the Iraqi weapons crisis in the lead up to the Coalition invasion of Iraq in 2003. Science-fiction may introduce novel weapons of mass destruction with much greater yields or impact than anything in reality.\nThe term; \u201cWeapon of Mass Destruction\u201d, verbatim, is voiced in the American dubbed 1964 anime television show Gigantor. Season 1, episode 3 (Japan, 1963)\nCommon hazard symbols.\nRadioactive weaponry or hazard symbol.\nThe international radioactivity symbol (also known as trefoil) first appeared in 1946, at the University of California, Berkeley Radiation Laboratory. At the time, it was rendered as magenta, and was set on a blue background.\nIt is drawn with a central circle of radius \"R\", the blades having an internal radius of 1.5\"R\" and an external radius of 5\"R\", and separated from each other by 60\u00b0. It is meant to represent a radiating atom.\nThe International Atomic Energy Agency found that the trefoil radiation symbol is unintuitive and can be variously interpreted by those uneducated in its meaning; therefore, its role as a hazard warning was compromised as it did not clearly indicate \"danger\" to many non-Westerners and children who encountered it. As a result of research, a new radiation hazard symbol (ISO 21482) was developed in 2007 to be placed near the most dangerous parts of radiation sources featuring a skull, someone running away, and using a red rather than yellow background.\nThe red background is intended to convey urgent danger, and the sign is intended to be used on equipment where very strong ionizing radiation can be encountered if the device is dismantled or otherwise tampered with. The intended use of the sign is not in a place where the normal user will see it, but in a place where it will be seen by someone who has started to dismantle a radiation-emitting device or equipment. The aim of the sign is to warn people such as scrap metal workers to stop work and leave the area.\nBiological weaponry or hazard symbol.\nDeveloped by Dow Chemical company in the 1960s for their containment products.\nAccording to Charles Dullin, an environmental-health engineer who contributed to its development:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"We wanted something that was memorable but meaningless, so we could educate people as to what it means.\"\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53138", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53138", "title": "World War Two", "text": ""}
{"id": "53140", "revid": "575347", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53140", "title": "Nuclear utilization target selection", "text": "Hypothesis regarding the use of nuclear weapons\nNuclear utilization target selection (NUTS) is a hypothesis regarding the use of nuclear weapons often contrasted with mutually assured destruction (MAD). NUTS theory at its most basic level asserts that it is possible for a limited nuclear exchange to occur and that nuclear weapons are simply one more rung on the ladder of escalation pioneered by Herman Kahn. This leads to a number of other conclusions regarding the potential uses of and responses to nuclear weapons.\nCounterforce strikes.\nA counterforce strike consists of an attack on enemy nuclear weapons meant to destroy them before they can be used. A viable first strike capability would require the ability to launch a 100-percent-effective (or nearly so) counterforce attack. Such an attack is made more difficult by systems such as early warning radars which allow the possibility for rapid recognition and response to a nuclear attack and by systems such as submarine-launched ballistic missiles or road-mobile nuclear missiles (such as the Soviet SS-20) which make nuclear weapons harder to locate and target.\nSince a limited nuclear war is a viable option for a NUTS theorist, the power to unleash such attacks holds a great deal of appeal. However, establishing such a capability is very expensive. A counterforce weapon requires a much more accurate warhead than a countervalue weapon, as it must be guaranteed to detonate very close to its target, which drastically increases relative costs.\nLimited countervalue strikes.\nSome NUTS theorists hold that a mutually assured destruction-type deterrent is not credible in cases of a small attack, such as one carried out on a single city, as it is suicidal. In such a case, an overwhelming nuclear response would destroy every enemy city and thus every potential hostage that could be used to influence the attacker's behavior. This would free up the attacker to launch further attacks and remove any chance for the attacked nation to bargain. A country adhering to a NUTS-style war plan would likely respond to such an attack with a limited attack on one or several enemy cities.\nMissile defense.\nSince NUTS theory assumes the possibility of a winnable nuclear war, the contention of many MAD theorists that missile defense systems should be abandoned as a destabilizing influence is generally not accepted by NUTS theorists. For NUTS theorists, a missile defence system would be a positive force in that it would protect against a limited nuclear attack. Additionally, such a system would increase the odds of success for a counterforce attack by assuring that if some targets escaped the initial attack, the incoming missiles could be intercepted. But protection against a limited attack means that the opponent has incentive to launch a larger scale attack, against which the defence is likely to be ineffective. Additionally, increased possibility of success of counterforce attacks means that the opponent has the incentive to launch a preventive attack, which increases the risk of a large scale response to misinterpreted signals.\nNUTS and US nuclear strategy.\nNUTS theory can be seen in the US adoption of a number of first-strike weapons, such as the Trident II and Minuteman III nuclear missiles, which both have an extremely low circular error probable (CEP) of about 90 meters for the former and 120 meters for the latter. These weapons are accurate enough to almost certainly destroy a missile silo if it is targeted.\nAdditionally, the US has proceeded with a number of programs which improve its strategic situation in a nuclear confrontation. The Stealth bomber has the capacity to carry a large number of stealthy cruise missiles, which could be nuclear-tipped, and due to its low probability of detection and long range would be an excellent weapon with which to deliver a first strike.\nDuring the late 1970s and the 1980s, the Pentagon began to adopt strategies for limited nuclear options to make it possible to control escalation and reduce the risk of all-out nuclear war, hence accepting NUTS. In 1980, President Jimmy Carter signed Presidential Directive 59 which endorsed the NUTS strategic posture committed to fight and win a nuclear war, and accepted escalation dominance and flexible response. The Soviets, however, were skeptical of limited options or the possibility of controlling escalation. While Soviet deterrence doctrine posited massive responses to any nuclear use (\"all against any\"), military officials considered the possibility of proportionate responses to a limited US attack, although they \"doubted that nuclear war could remain limited for long.\"\nLike several other nuclear powers, but unlike China and India, the United States has never made a \"no first use\" pledge, maintaining that pledging not to use nuclear weapons before an opponent would undermine their deterrent. NATO plans for war with the USSR called for the use of tactical nuclear weapons in order to counter Soviet numerical superiority.\nRather than making extensive preparations for battlefield nuclear combat in Central Europe, the Soviet General Staff emphasized conventional military operations and believing that they had an advantage there. \"The Soviet military leadership believed that conventional superiority provided the Warsaw Pact with the means to approximate the effects of nuclear weapons and achieve victory in Europe without resort to those weapons.\"\nIn criticising US policy on nuclear weapons as contradictory, leftist philosopher Slavoj Zizek has suggested that NUTS is the policy of the US with respect to Iran and North Korea while its policy with respect to Russia and China is one of mutual assured destruction (MAD).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53141", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53141", "title": "Metempsychosis", "text": "Transmigration of the soul\nIn philosophy and theology, metempsychosis () is the transmigration of the soul, especially its reincarnation after death. The term is derived from ancient Greek philosophy, and has been recontextualized by modern philosophers such as Arthur Schopenhauer, Kurt G\u00f6del, Mircea Eliade, and Magdalena Villaba; otherwise, the word \"transmigration\" is more appropriate. The word plays a prominent role in James Joyce's \"Ulysses\" and is also associated with Nietzsche. Another term sometimes used synonymously is \"palingenesis\".\nOrphism.\nA belief in metempsychosis has been associated with Orphism, the name given to a religious movement said in antiquity to have been founded by the legendary poet Orpheus. Orphism is said to hold that soul and body are united by a contract unequally binding on either. The soul is divine but immortal and aspires to freedom, while the body holds it in fetters as a prisoner. Death dissolves that contract but only to reimprison the liberated soul after a short time, for the wheel of birth revolves inexorably. Thus, the soul continues its journey and alternates between a separate unrestrained existence and a fresh reincarnation around the wide circle of necessity, as the companion of many bodies of men and animals. To those unfortunate prisoners, Orpheus proclaims the message of liberation, that they stand in need of the grace of redeeming gods, Dionysus in particular, and calls them to turn to the gods by ascetic piety and self-purification: the purer their lives, the higher their next reincarnation will be, until the soul has completed the spiral ascent of destiny to live forever as a God from whom it comes.\nPre-Socratic philosophy.\nThe earliest Greek thinker with whom metempsychosis is connected is Pherecydes of Syros, but Pythagoras, who is said to have been his pupil, is its first famous philosophic exponent. Walter Burkert has argued that Pythagoras may have introduced metempsychosis to Orphism. He suggests that modern scholarship's tendency to separate Orphism from early Pythagoreanism is a retrojection, possibly of Nietzschean ideas about the opposition of the Apollonian (associated with Pythagoreanism) and the Dionysian (associated with Orphism), whereas for the Greeks, Apollo and Dionysus were brothers and not so clearly differentiated. Pythagoras offered as evidence for metempsychosis his own recollection of past lives, a superhuman form of wisdom that contributed to his reputation as a prophet. \nPlatonic philosophy.\nThe weight and importance of metempsychosis in the Western tradition are from its adoption by Plato. In the eschatological myth that closes the \"Republic\", he tells how Er, the son of Armenius, miraculously returned to life on the twelfth day after death and recounted the secrets of the other world. After death, he said, he went with others to the place of Judgment and saw the souls returning from heaven, and proceeded with them to a place where they chose new lives, human and animal. He saw the soul of Orpheus changing into a swan, Thamyras becoming a nightingale, musical birds choosing to be men, and Atalanta choosing the honours of an athlete. Men were seen passing into animals and wild and tame animals changing into each other. After their choice, the souls drank of Lethe and then shot away like stars to their birth. There are myths and theories to the same effect in other dialogues, including the \"Phaedrus\", \"Meno\", \"Phaedo\", \"Timaeus\", and \"Laws\". In Plato's view the number of souls was fixed; souls are never created or destroyed but only transmigrate from one body to another. Origen's doctrine of the preexistence of souls was close to Plato's idea of metempsychosis and was frequently attacked, including by Augustine of Hippo and Aeneas of Gaza.\nModern.\nScholars have debated the extent of Plato's belief in metempsychosis since at least the Renaissance. Marsilio Ficino argued that Plato's references to metempsychosis were intended to be allegorical. Modern scholars, including Chad Jorgensen and Gerard Naddaf, have tended to agree with Ficino. \n\"Metempsychosis\" is the title of a longer work by the metaphysical poet John Donne, written in 1601. The poem, also known as the \"Infinitati Sacrum\", consists of two parts, the \"Epistle\" and \"The Progress of the Soule\". In the first line of the latter part, Donne writes that he \"sing[s] of the progresse of a deathlesse soule\".\nMetempsychosis is a recurring theme in James Joyce's modernist novel \"Ulysses\" (1922). \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53142", "revid": "1319463215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53142", "title": "Fragile X syndrome", "text": "X-linked dominant genetic disorder\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nFragile X syndrome (FXS) is a genetic neurodevelopmental disorder. The average IQ in males with FXS is under 55, while affected females tend to be in the borderline to normal range, typically around 70\u201385. Physical features may include a long and narrow face, large ears, flexible fingers, and large testicles. About a third of those affected have features of autism such as problems with social interactions and delayed speech. Hyperactivity is common, and seizures occur in about 10%. Males are usually more affected than females.\nThis disorder and finding of fragile X syndrome has an X-linked dominant inheritance. It is typically caused by an expansion of the CGG triplet repeat within the \"FMR1\" (fragile X messenger ribonucleoprotein 1) gene on the X chromosome. This results in silencing (methylation) of this part of the gene and a deficiency of the resultant protein (FMRP), which is required for the normal development of connections between neurons. Diagnosis requires genetic testing to determine the number of CGG repeats in the \"FMR1\" gene. Normally, there are between 5 and 40 repeats; fragile X syndrome occurs with more than 200. A premutation is said to be present when the gene has between 55 and 200 repeats; females with a premutation have an increased risk of having an affected child. Testing for premutation carriers may allow for genetic counseling.\nThere is no cure or approved medications for treating the condition. Early intervention is recommended, as it provides the most opportunity for developing a full range of skills. These interventions may include special education, occupational therapy, speech therapy, physical therapy, or behavioral therapy. Medications may be used to treat associated anxiety, seizures, mood problems, aggressive behavior, or ADHD. Fragile X syndrome tends to show more symptoms on affected males since females have another X chromosome which can compensate for the damaged one.\nFragile X syndrome is the most common cause of inherited intellectual disability, affecting an estimated 1 per 4,000 people. It is also the most common single gene cause of autism.\nSigns and symptoms.\nMost young children do not show any physical signs of FXS. It is not until puberty that physical features of FXS begin to develop. Aside from intellectual disability, prominent characteristics of the syndrome may include an elongated face, large or protruding ears, flat feet, larger testes (macroorchidism), and low muscle tone. Recurrent otitis media (middle ear infection) and sinusitis is common during early childhood. Speech may be cluttered or nervous. Behavioral characteristics may include stereotypic movements (e.g., hand-flapping) and atypical social development, particularly shyness, limited eye contact, memory problems, and difficulty with face encoding. Some individuals with fragile X syndrome also meet the diagnostic criteria for autism.\nMales with a full mutation display virtually complete penetrance and will therefore almost always display symptoms of FXS, while females with a full mutation generally display a penetrance of about 50% as a result of having a second, normal X chromosome. Females with FXS may have symptoms ranging from mild to severe, although they are generally less affected than males due to variability in X-inactivation.\nIntellectual development.\nIndividuals with FXS may present anywhere on a continuum from learning disabilities in the context of a normal intelligence quotient (IQ) to severe intellectual disability, with an average IQ of 40 in males who have complete silencing of the \"FMR1\" gene. Females, who tend to be less affected, generally have an IQ which is normal or borderline with learning difficulties. The main difficulties in individuals with FXS are with working and short-term memory, executive function, visual memory, visual-spatial relationships, and mathematics, with verbal abilities being relatively unaffected.\nData on intellectual development in FXS are limited. However, there is some evidence that standardized IQ decreases over time in the majority of cases, apparently as a result of slowed intellectual development. A longitudinal study looking at pairs of siblings where one child was affected and the other was not found that affected children had an intellectual learning rate which was 55% slower than unaffected children.\nIndividuals with FXS often demonstrated language and communicative problems. This may be related to muscle function of the mouth and frontal-lobe deficits.\nAutism.\nFragile X syndrome is the most common genetic cause of autism. This finding has resulted in medical screening for FMR1 mutation in individuals who present with autism. Of those with fragile X syndrome, prevalence of concurrent autism spectrum disorder (ASD) has been estimated to be between 15 and 60%, with the variation due to differences in diagnostic methods and the high frequency of autistic features in individuals with fragile X syndrome not meeting the DSM criteria for an ASD.\nAlthough individuals with FXS have difficulties in forming friendships, those with FXS and ASD characteristically also have difficulties with reciprocal conversation with their peers. Social withdrawal behaviors, including avoidance and indifference, appear to be the best predictors of ASD in FXS, with avoidance appearing to be correlated more with social anxiety while indifference was more strongly correlated to ASD. When both autism and FXS are present, a greater language deficit and lower IQ is observed as compared to children with only FXS.\nGenetic mouse models of FXS have also been shown to have autistic-like behaviors.\nSocial interaction.\nFXS is characterized by social anxiety, including poor eye contact, gaze aversion, prolonged time to commence social interaction, and challenges forming peer relationships. Social anxiety is one of the most common features associated with FXS, with up to 75% of males in one series characterized as having excessive shyness and 50% having panic attacks. Social anxiety in individuals with FXS is related to challenges with face encoding, the ability to recognize a face that one has seen before.\nIt appears that individuals with FXS are interested in social interaction and display greater empathy than groups with other causes of intellectual disability, but display anxiety and withdrawal when placed in unfamiliar situations with unfamiliar people. This may range from mild social withdrawal, which is predominantly associated with shyness, to severe social withdrawal, which may be associated with co-existing autism spectrum disorder.\nFemales with FXS frequently display shyness, social anxiety and social avoidance or withdrawal. In addition, premutation in females has been found to be associated with social anxiety.\nIndividuals with FXS showed decreased ability to recruit more areas of the brain for more complex working memory or problem solvings tasks as seen on functional MRI.\nMental health.\nAttention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is found in the majority of males with FXS and 30% of females, making it the most common psychiatric diagnosis in those with FXS. Children with fragile X have very short attention spans, are hyperactive, and show hypersensitivity to visual, auditory, tactile, and olfactory stimuli. These children have difficulty in large crowds due to the loud noises and this can lead to tantrums due to hyperarousal. Hyperactivity and disruptive behavior peak in the preschool years and then gradually decline with age, although inattentive symptoms are generally lifelong.\nAside from the characteristic social phobia features, a range of other anxiety symptoms are very commonly associated with FXS, with symptoms typically spanning a number of psychiatric diagnoses but not fulfilling any of the criteria in full. Children with FXS pull away from light touch and can find textures of materials to be irritating. Transitions from one location to another can be difficult for children with FXS. Behavioral therapy can be used to decrease the child's sensitivity in some cases. Behaviors such as hand flapping and biting, as well as aggression, can be an expression of anxiety.\nPerseveration is a common communicative and behavioral characteristic in FXS. Children with FXS may repeat a certain ordinary activity over and over. In speech, the trend is not only in repeating the same phrase but also talking about the same subject continually. Cluttered speech and self-talk are commonly seen. Self-talk includes talking with oneself using different tones and pitches. Although only a minority of FXS cases will meet the criteria for obsessive\u2013compulsive disorder (OCD), a significant majority will have symptoms of obsession. However, as individuals with FXS generally find these behaviors pleasurable, unlike individuals with OCD, they are more frequently referred to as stereotypic behaviors.\nMood symptoms in individuals with FXS rarely meet diagnostic criteria for a major mood disorder as they are typically not of sustained duration. Instead, these are usually transient and related to stressors, and may involve labile (fluctuating) mood, irritability, self-injury and aggression.\nIndividuals with fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS) are likely to experience combinations of dementia, mood, and anxiety disorders. Males with the \"FMR1\" premutation and clinical evidence of FXTAS were found to have increased occurrence of somatization, obsessive\u2013compulsive disorder, interpersonal sensitivity, depression, phobic anxiety, and psychoticism.\nVision.\nOphthalmologic problems include strabismus. This requires early identification to avoid amblyopia. Surgery or patching are usually necessary to treat strabismus if diagnosed early. Refractive errors in patients with FXS are also common.\nNeurology.\nIndividuals with FXS are at a higher risk of developing seizures, with rates between 10% and 40% reported in the literature. In larger study populations the frequency varies between 13% and 18%, consistent with a recent survey of caregivers which found that 14% of males and 6% of females experienced seizures. The seizures tend to be partial, are generally not frequent, and are amenable to treatment with medication.\nIndividuals who are carriers of premutation alleles are at risk for developing fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS), a progressive neurodegenerative disease. It is seen in approximately half of male carriers over the age of 70, while penetrance in females is lower. Typically, onset of tremor occurs in the sixth decade of life, with subsequent progression to ataxia (loss of coordination) and gradual cognitive decline.\nWorking memory.\nFrom their 40s onward, males with FXS begin developing progressively more severe problems in performing tasks that require the central executive of working memory. Working memory involves the temporary storage of information 'in mind', while processing the same or other information. Phonological memory (or verbal working memory) deteriorates with age in males, while visual-spatial memory is not found to be directly related to age. Males often experience an impairment in the functioning of the phonological loop. The CGG length is significantly correlated with central executive and the visual\u2013spatial memory. However, in a premutation individual, CGG length is only significantly correlated with the central executive, not with either phonological memory or visual\u2013spatial memory.\nFertility.\nAbout 20% of women who are carriers for the fragile X premutation are affected by Fragile X-associated primary ovarian insufficiency (FXPOI), which is defined as primary ovarian insufficiency, which is menopause occurring before 40 years of age (average age at menopause is 51 years old in the US). The number of CGG repeats correlates with penetrance and age of onset, but it is not a linear relationship. However primary ovarian insufficiency is more common in premutation carriers than in women with the full mutation, and the highest risk for FXPOI is observed in women with between 70-100 repeats. FXPOI is one of three Fragile X-associated Disorders (FXD) caused by changes in the FMR1 gene. FXPOI affects female premutation carriers, of which is caused by the FMR1 gene, when their ovaries are not functioning properly. Women with FXPOI may exhibit changes in menstrual cycles and have changes in hormone levels but not be considered menopausal. Women with FXPOI still have the chance to get pregnant in about 10% of cases, because their ovaries occasionally release viable eggs through \"escape\" ovulation. FXPOI is the most common cause of hereditary primary ovarian insufficiency. There is not specific treatment for FXPOI, but hormonal therapy is recommended as a treatment, as for other women with primary ovarian insufficiency.\nIn women with infertility, and a family history of infertility, there is a 7% risk of FXPOI so genetic testing is recommended.\nFMRP is a chromatin-binding protein that functions in the DNA damage response. FMRP also occupies sites on meiotic chromosomes and regulates the dynamics of the DNA damage response machinery during spermatogenesis.\nCauses.\nFragile X syndrome is a genetic disorder which occurs as a result of a mutation of the \"Fragile X Messenger Ribonucleoprotein 1\" (\"FMR1\") gene on the X chromosome, most commonly an increase in the number of CGG trinucleotide repeats in the 5' untranslated region of \"FMR1\". Mutation at that site is found in 1 out of about every 2000 males and 1 out of about every 259 females. Incidence of the disorder itself is about 1 in every 3600 males and 1 in 4000\u20136000 females. Although this accounts for over 98% of cases, FXS can also occur as a result of point mutations affecting \"FMR1\".\nIn unaffected individuals, the \"FMR1\" gene contains 5\u201344 repeats of the sequence CGG, most commonly 29 or 30 repeats. Between 45 and 54 repeats is considered a \"grey zone\", with a premutation allele generally considered to be between 55 and 200 repeats in length. Individuals with fragile X syndrome have a full mutation of the \"FMR1\" allele, with over 200 CGG repeats. In these individuals with a repeat expansion greater than 200, there is methylation of the CGG repeat expansion and \"FMR1\" promoter, leading to the silencing of the \"FMR1\" gene and a lack of its product.\nThis methylation of \"FMR1\" in chromosome band Xq27.3 is believed to result in constriction of the X chromosome which appears 'fragile' under the microscope at that point, a phenomenon that gave the syndrome its name. One study found that FMR1 silencing is mediated by the FMR1 mRNA. The FMR1 mRNA contains the transcribed CGG-repeat tract as part of the 5' untranslated region, which hybridizes to the complementary CGG-repeat portion of the FMR1 gene to form an RNA\u00b7DNA duplex.\nA subset of people with intellectual disability and symptoms resembling fragile X syndrome are found to have point mutations in \"FMR1.\" This subset lacked the CGG repeat expansion in \"FMR1\" traditionally associated with fragile X syndrome. The first complete DNA sequence of the repeat expansion in someone with the full mutation was generated by scientists in 2012 using SMRT sequencing.\nInheritance.\nFragile X syndrome has traditionally been considered an X-linked recessive condition with variable expressivity and possibly reduced penetrance. The likelihood of transmission depends on the parent's sex, the X chromosome carrying the mutation, and the number of CGG repeats in the premutation.\nDue to genetic anticipation and X-inactivation in females, the inheritance of Fragile X syndrome does not follow the usual pattern of X-linked dominant inheritance, and some scholars have proposed discontinuing labeling X-linked disorders as dominant or recessive. Males with a full mutation are usually affected and infertile, while carrier females have a 50% chance of passing on the mutation.\nBefore the \"FMR1\" gene was discovered, analysis of pedigrees showed the presence of male carriers who were asymptomatic, with their grandchildren affected by the condition at a higher rate than their siblings suggesting that genetic anticipation was occurring. This tendency for future generations to be affected at a higher frequency became known as the Sherman paradox after its description in 1985. Due to this, male children often have a greater degree of symptoms than their mothers.\nThe explanation for this phenomenon is that male carriers pass on their premutation to all of their daughters, with the length of the \"FMR1\" CGG repeat typically not increasing during meiosis, the cell division that is required to produce sperm. Incidentally, males with a full mutation only pass on premutations to their daughters. However, females with a full mutation are able to pass this full mutation on, so theoretically there is a 50% chance that a child will be affected. In addition, the length of the CGG repeat frequently does increase during meiosis in female premutation carriers due to instability and so, depending on the length of their premutation, they may pass on a full mutation to their children who will then be affected. Repeat expansion is considered to be a consequence of strand slippage either during DNA replication or DNA repair synthesis.\nMosaicism.\nMosaicism refers to cases where individuals have both full mutation and premutation copies. Mosaicism can result from instability in the CGG repeats, and affected individuals may show classic symptoms, although some evidence suggests higher intellectual abilities compared to those with a full mutation.\nPathophysiology.\nFMRP is found throughout the body, but in highest concentrations within the brain and testes. It appears to be primarily responsible for selectively binding to around 4% of mRNA in mammalian brains and transporting it out of the cell nucleus and to the synapses of neurons. Most of these mRNA targets have been found to be located in the dendrites of neurons, and brain tissue from humans with FXS and mouse models shows abnormal dendritic spines, which are required to increase contact with other neurons. The subsequent abnormalities in the formation and function of synapses and development of neural circuits result in impaired neuroplasticity, an integral part of memory and learning. Connectome changes have long been suspected to be involved in the sensory pathophysiology and most recently a range of circuit alterations have been shown, involving structurally increased local connectivity and functionally decreased long-range connectivity.\nIn addition, FMRP has been implicated in several signalling pathways that are being targeted by a number of drugs undergoing clinical trials. The group 1 metabotropic glutamate receptor (mGluR) pathway, which includes mGluR1 and mGluR5, is involved in mGluR-dependent long term depression (LTD) and long term potentiation (LTP), both of which are important mechanisms in learning. The lack of FMRP, which represses mRNA production and thereby protein synthesis, leads to exaggerated LTD. FMRP also appears to affect dopamine pathways in the prefrontal cortex which is believed to result in the attention deficit, hyperactivity and impulse control problems associated with FXS. The downregulation of GABA pathways, which serve an inhibitory function and are involved in learning and memory, may be a factor in the anxiety symptoms which are commonly seen in FXS.\nResearch in a mouse model of FSX shows that cortical neurons receive reduced sensory information (hyposensitivity), contrary to the common assumption that these neurons are hypersensitive, accompanied by enhanced contextual information, accumulated from previous experiences. Therefore, these results suggest that the hypersensitive phenotype of affected individuals might arise from mismatched contextual input onto these neurons.\nDiagnosis.\nClinical diagnosis relies on identifying a variant of FMR1 associated with decreased function alongside moderate to severe intellectual impairment, particularly in males or moderate in females. Diagnostic tests include PCR to analyze the number of CGG repeats, Southern blot analysis, and examination of AGG trinucleotides in the FMR1 gene region.\nCytogenetic analysis for fragile X syndrome was first available in the late 1970s when diagnosis of the syndrome and carrier status could be determined by culturing cells in a folate deficient medium and then assessing for \"fragile sites\" (discontinuity of staining in the region of the trinucleotide repeat) on the long arm of the X chromosome. This technique proved unreliable, however, as the fragile site was often seen in less than 40% of an individual's cells. This was not as much of a problem in males, but in female carriers, where the fragile site could generally only be seen in 10% of cells, the mutation often could not be visualised.\nSince the 1990s, more sensitive molecular techniques have been used to determine carrier status. The fragile X abnormality is now directly determined by analysis of the number of CGG repeats using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and methylation status using Southern blot analysis. By determining the number of CGG repeats on the X chromosome, this method allows for more accurate assessment of risk for premutation carriers in terms of their own risk of fragile X associated syndromes, as well as their risk of having affected children. Because this method only tests for expansion of the CGG repeat, individuals with FXS due to missense mutations or deletions involving \"FMR1\" will not be diagnosed using this test and should therefore undergo sequencing of the FMR1 gene if there is clinical suspicion of FXS.\nPrenatal testing with chorionic villus sampling or amniocentesis allows diagnosis of FMR1 mutation while the fetus is in utero and appears to be reliable.\nEarly diagnosis of fragile X syndrome or carrier status is important for providing early intervention in children or fetuses with the syndrome, and allowing genetic counselling with regards to the potential for a couple's future children to be affected. Most parents notice delays in speech and language skills, difficulties in social and emotional domains as well as sensitivity levels in certain situations with their children.\nManagement.\nThere is no cure for the underlying defects of FXS. Management of FXS may include speech therapy, behavioral therapy, occupational therapy, special education, or individualised educational plans, and, when necessary, treatment of physical abnormalities. Persons with fragile X syndrome in their family histories are advised to seek genetic counseling to assess the likelihood of having children who are affected, and how severe any impairments may be in affected descendants.\nMedication.\nCurrent trends in treating the disorder include medications for symptom-based treatments that aim to minimize the secondary characteristics associated with the disorder. If an individual is diagnosed with FXS, genetic counseling for testing family members at risk for carrying the full mutation or premutation is a critical first-step. Due to a higher prevalence of FXS in boys, the most commonly used medications are stimulants that target hyperactivity, impulsivity, and attentional problems. For co-morbid disorders with FXS, antidepressants such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are utilized to treat the underlying anxiety, obsessive-compulsive behaviors, and mood disorders. Following antidepressants, antipsychotics such as risperidone and quetiapine are used to treat high rates of self-injurious, aggressive and aberrant behaviors in this population (Bailey Jr et al., 2012). Anticonvulsants are another set of pharmacological treatments used to control seizures as well as mood swings in 13%\u201318% of individuals with FXS. Drugs targeting the mGluR5 (metabotropic glutamate receptors) that are linked with synaptic plasticity are especially beneficial for targeted symptoms of FXS. Lithium is also currently being used in clinical trials with humans, showing significant improvements in behavioral functioning, adaptive behavior, and verbal memory. Few studies suggested using folic acid, but more researches are needed due to the low quality of that evidence. Alongside pharmacological treatments, environmental influences such as home environment and parental abilities as well as behavioral interventions such as speech therapy, sensory integration, etc. all factor in together to promote adaptive functioning for individuals with FXS. While metformin may reduce body weight in persons with fragile X syndrome, it is uncertain whether it improves neurological or psychiatric symptoms.\nCurrent pharmacological treatment centers on managing problem behaviors and psychiatric symptoms associated with FXS. However, as there has been very little research done in this specific population, the evidence to support the use of these medications in individuals with FXS is poor.\nADHD, which affects the majority of boys and 30% of girls with FXS, is frequently treated using stimulants. However, the use of stimulants in the fragile X population is associated with a greater frequency of adverse events including increased anxiety, irritability and mood lability. Anxiety, as well as mood and obsessive-compulsive symptoms, may be treated using SSRIs, although these can also aggravate hyperactivity and cause disinhibited behavior. Atypical antipsychotics can be used to stabilise mood and control aggression, especially in those with comorbid ASD. However, monitoring is required for metabolic side effects including weight gain and diabetes, as well as movement disorders related to extrapyramidal side effects such as tardive dyskinesia. Individuals with coexisting seizure disorder may require treatment with anticonvulsants.\nPrognosis.\nA 2013 review stated that life expectancy for FXS was 12 years lower than the general population and that the causes of death were similar to those found for the general population.\nPharmacological therapy.\nThere are no pharmacologic therapies approved specifically for fragile X syndrome. Medications are sometimes used to treat the co-morbidities that often accompany FXS, including seizures, anxiety, or disruptive behaviors.\nResearch into the etiology of FXS has given rise to many attempts at drug discovery. The increased understanding of the molecular mechanisms of disease in FXS has led to the development of therapies targeting the affected pathways. Evidence from mouse models shows that mGluR5 antagonists (blockers) can rescue dendritic spine abnormalities and seizures, as well as cognitive and behavioral problems, and may show promise in the treatment of FXS. Two new drugs, AFQ-056 (mavoglurant) and dipraglurant, as well as the repurposed drug fenobam are currently undergoing human trials for the treatment of FXS. There is also early evidence for the efficacy of arbaclofen, a GABAB agonist, in improving social withdrawal in individuals with FXS and ASD. In addition, there is evidence from mouse models that minocycline, an antibiotic used for the treatment of acne, rescues abnormalities of the dendrites. An open trial in humans has shown promising results, although there is currently no evidence from controlled trials to support its use. Zatolmilast, a phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitor works to inhibit cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) breakdown, with the resultant higher levels of cAMP in the brain thought to enhance neuronal connectivity. Zatolmilast has shown increased caregiver symptom ratings and increased cognitive scores in those with FXS in a small clinical trial.\nHistory.\nIn 1943, British neurologist James Purdon Martin and British geneticist Julia Bell described a pedigree of X-linked intellectual disability, without considering the macroorchidism (larger testicles). In 1969, Herbert Lubs first sighted an unusual \"marker X chromosome\" in association with intellectual disability. In 1970, Frederick Hecht coined the term \"fragile site\". And, in 1985, Felix F. de la Cruz outlined extensively the physical, psychological, and cytogenetic characteristics of those with the condition in addition to prospects for therapy. Continued advocacy later won him an honour through the FRAXA Research Foundation in December 1998.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53143", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53143", "title": "Anti-ballistic missile treaty", "text": ""}
{"id": "53144", "revid": "84951", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53144", "title": "Nuclear explosive", "text": "Explosive device not necessarily for military use\nA nuclear explosive is an explosive device that derives its energy from nuclear reactions. Almost all nuclear explosive devices that have been designed and produced are nuclear weapons intended for warfare.\nOther, non-warfare, applications for nuclear explosives have occasionally been proposed. For example, nuclear pulse propulsion is a form of spacecraft propulsion that would use nuclear explosives to provide impulse to a spacecraft. A similar application is the proposal to use nuclear explosives for asteroid deflection. From 1958 to 1965 the United States government ran a project to design a nuclear explosive powered nuclear pulse rocket called Project Orion. Never built, this vessel would use repeated nuclear explosions to propel itself and was considered surprisingly practical. It is thought to be a feasible design for interstellar travel.\nNuclear explosives were once considered for use in large-scale excavation. A nuclear explosion could be used to create a harbor, or a mountain pass, or possibly large underground cavities for use as storage space. It was thought that detonating a nuclear explosive in oil-rich rock could make it possible to extract more from the deposit, e.g. note the Canadian Project Oilsand. From 1958 to 1973 the U.S. government exploded 28 nuclear test-shots in a project called Operation Plowshare. The purpose of the operation was to use peaceful nuclear explosions for moving and lifting enormous amounts of earth and rock during construction projects such as building reservoirs. The Soviet Union conducted a much more vigorous program of 122 nuclear tests, some with multiple devices, between 1965 and 1989 under the auspices of Program No. 7 \u2013 Nuclear Explosions for the National Economy.\nAs controlled nuclear fusion has proven difficult to use as an energy source, an alternate proposal for producing fusion power has been to detonate nuclear fusion explosives inside very large underground chambers and then using the heat produced, which would be absorbed by a molten salt coolant which would also absorb neutrons. The 1970s PACER (fusion) project investigated fusion detonation as a power source.\nFailure to meet objectives, along with the realization of the dangers of nuclear fallout and other residual radioactivity, and with the enactment of various agreements such as the Partial Test Ban Treaty and the Outer Space Treaty, has led to the termination of most of these programs.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
