{"id": "47286", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47286", "title": "Dalmatia", "text": "Historical region in Croatia and Montenegro\nDalmatia (; ; ) is a historical region located in modern-day Croatia and Montenegro, on the eastern shore of the Adriatic Sea. It is a narrow land belt stretching from the island of Rab in the north to the Bay of Kotor in the south. The Dalmatian Hinterland ranges in width from 50 kilometres in the north, to just a few kilometres in the south; it is mostly covered by the rugged Dinaric Alps. Seventy-nine islands (and about 500 islets) run parallel to the coast, the largest (in Dalmatia) being Bra\u010d, Pag, and Hvar. The largest city is Split, followed by Zadar, \u0160ibenik, and Dubrovnik.\nThe name of the region stems from an Illyrian tribe called the Dalmatae, who lived in the area in classical antiquity. With the expansion of Rome, the province of Illyricum was established, and in the early 1st century it was reorganised into the province of Dalmatia, which stretched over a vast territory. Consequently, a Romance culture emerged, and the indigenous Illyrian population became romanised. Following the fall of the Western Roman Empire and the Migration Period, many different peoples passed through Dalmatia. While the local Illyro-Romans organized themselves around their city-states under Byzantine protection, the Croats arrived in the early 7th century and established the Duchy of Croatia, later becoming vassals of the Franks. With the Christianisation of the Croats, Slavic and Illyro-Roman elements began to intermingle in both language and culture. The Kingdom of Croatia was founded in 925, and it later incorporated the Theme of Dalmatia. \nAfter Croatia entered into a personal union with Hungary in 1102, Dalmatian cities were frequently conquered or shifted their allegiances during the Middle Ages. The Republic of Venice controlled parts of Dalmatia from 1000 to 1358 and from 1420 to 1797, while the Republic of Ragusa existed from 1358 to 1808. The Ottoman Empire conquered much of the Croatian-Hungarian kingdom between the late 15th and late 17th century, reducing the territory that had been considered Dalmatia until then. Venice subsequently reconquered the Dalmatian Hinterland, shaping the borders of what is today considered Dalmatia. These borders were further consolidated during Napoleon\u2019s Illyrian Provinces and the Austrian 19th-century Kingdom of Dalmatia. At the end of World War I in 1918, as a part of unified Triune Kingdom of Croatia, Slavonia and Dalmatia, Dalmatia became part of the State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs. Its official name use was abolished in 1922, until a resurgence as Split-Dalmatia County in 1993 following Croatia\u2019s independence. \nModern Dalmatia has inherited a layered historical and linguistic heritage, which has in turn shaped its distinct cultural identity, evident in the region\u2019s music, cuisine, traditions and lifestyle. The Shtokavian dialect of the Croatian language is mainly spoken on the mainland and in the hinterland, while Chakavian is spoken on the islands. While the number of native Italian and Venetian speakers has fallen over time, especially after the Istrian-Dalmatian exodus (1943\u20131960), these languages have left a deep and lasting impact on the vocabulary and prosody of modern Chakavian.\nDefinition.\nIn antiquity, the Roman province of Dalmatia was much larger than the present-day region of Dalmatia, stretching from Istria in the north to modern-day Albania in the south. Dalmatia signified not only a geographical unit, but was an entity based on common culture and settlement types, an eastern Adriatic coastal belt with a Mediterranean climate, sclerophyllous vegetation of the Illyrian province, and a carbonate platform.\nModern area.\nToday, Dalmatia is a historical region only, not formally instituted in Croatian law. Its exact extent is therefore uncertain and subject to public perception. According to Lena Miro\u0161evi\u0107 and Josip Fari\u010di\u0107 of the University of Zadar:\n...the modern perception of Dalmatia is mainly based on the territorial extent of the Austrian Kingdom of Dalmatia, with the exception of Rab, which is geographically related to the Kvarner area and functionally to the Littoral\u2013Gorski Kotar area, and with the exception of the Bay of Kotor, which was annexed to another state (Montenegro) after World War I. Simultaneously, the southern part of Lika and upper Pounje, which were not part of Austrian Dalmatia, became part of Zadar County. From the present-day administrative and territorial point of view, Dalmatia comprises the four Croatian littoral counties with seats in Zadar, \u0160ibenik, Split, and Dubrovnik.\n\"Dalmatia\" is therefore generally perceived to extend approximately to the borders of the Austrian-held Kingdom of Dalmatia, which inherited these borders from the preceding border treaties between the Republic of Venice and the Ottoman Empire, notably defined by the 'Linea Mocenigo' in the Treaty of Passarowitz (1718). However, due to territorial and administrative changes over the past century, the perception can be seen to have altered somewhat with regard to certain areas, and sources conflict as to their being part of the region in modern times:\nEtymology.\nThe regional name Dalmatia originates from Dalmatae, the name of the Illyrian tribe who were the original inhabitants of the region, and from which the later toponym, Delminium, is derived. It is considered by various academics to be connected to the Albanian \"dele\" and its variants which include the Gheg form \"delm\u00eb\", meaning \"sheep\", and to the Albanian term \"delmer\", \"shepherd\". Vladimir Orel argues that the Gheg form \"delm\u00eb\" hardly has anything in common with the name of \"Dalmatia\" because it represents a variant of \"dele\" with \"*-m\u0101\", which is ultimately from proto-Albanian \"*dail\u0101\". According to Danilo Savi\u0107, an argument against that connection is the lack of compelling evidence in ancient literary sources that Delmatae is derived from a word meaning \"sheep\". The ancient name \"Dalmana\", derived from the same root, testifies to the advance of the Illyrians into the middle Vardar, between the ancient towns of Bylazora and Stobi. The medieval Slavic toponym Ov\u010de Pole (\"plain of sheep\" in South Slavic) in the nearby region represents a related later development. According to Istv\u00e1n Sch\u00fctz, in Albania, Delvin\u00eb represents a toponym linked to the root \"*dele\". \nThe form of the regional name \"Dalmatia\" and the respective tribal name \"Dalmatae\" are later variants as was already noted by Appian (2nd century AD). His contemporary grammarian Velius Longus highlights in his treatise about orthography that the correct form of \"Dalmatia\" is \"Delmatia\", and notes that Marcus Terentius Varro who lived about two centuries prior to Appian and Velius Longius, used the form \"Delmatia\" as it corresponded to the chief settlement of the tribe, \"Delminium\". The toponym Duvno is a derivation from \"Delminium\" in Croatian via an intermediate form \"*Delminio\" in late antiquity. Its Latin form \"Dalmatia\" gave rise to its English name. In the Venetian language, once dominant in the area, it is spelled \"Dalm\u00e0ssia\", and in modern Italian \"Dalmazia\". The modern Croatian spelling is \"Dalmacija\", and the modern Serbian Cyrillic spelling is \u0414\u0430\u043b\u043c\u0430\u0446\u0438\u0458\u0430 ().\nHistory.\nAntiquity.\nDalmatia's name is derived from the name of an Illyrian tribe called the Dalmatae who lived in the area of the eastern Adriatic coast in the 1st millennium BC. It was part of the Illyrian kingdom between the 4th century BC and the Illyrian Wars (220, 168 BC) when the Roman Republic established its protectorate south of the river Neretva. The name \"Dalmatia\" was in use probably from the second half of the 2nd century BC and certainly from the first half of the 1st century BC, defining a coastal area of the eastern Adriatic between the Krka and Neretva rivers. It was slowly incorporated into Roman possessions until the Roman province of Illyricum was formally established around 32\u201327 BC. In 9 AD, the Dalmatians raised the last in a series of revolts together with the Pannonians, but it was finally crushed and, in 10 AD, Illyricum was split into two provinces, Pannonia and Dalmatia, which spread into larger area inland to cover all of the Dinaric Alps and most of the eastern Adriatic coast.\nThe historian Theodor Mommsen wrote in his book, \"The Provinces of the Roman Empire\", that all Dalmatia was fully romanized by the 4th century AD. However, analysis of archaeological material from that period has shown that the process of Romanization was rather selective. While urban centers, both coastal and inland, were almost completely romanized, the situation in the countryside was completely different. Despite the Illyrians being subject to a strong process of acculturation, they continued to speak their native language, worship their own gods and traditions, and follow their own social-political tribal organization which was adapted to Roman administration and political structure only in some necessities.\nThe fall of the Western Roman Empire, and the beginning of the Migration Period, left the region subject to Gothic rulers Odoacer and Theodoric the Great. They ruled Dalmatia from 480 to 535 AD, when it was restored to the Eastern Roman (Byzantine) Empire by Justinian I.\nMiddle Ages.\nIn the Early Middle Ages, the territory of the Byzantine province of Dalmatia reached in the north up to the river Sava, and was part of the Praetorian prefecture of Illyricum. In the middle of the 6th and the beginning of the 7th century began the Slavic migrations to the Balkans, which caused the Romance-speaking population, descendants of Romans and Illyrians (speaking Dalmatian), to flee to the coast and islands. The hinterland, semi-depopulated by the Barbarian Invasions, was settled by the Slavic tribes. The Slavs alongside Avars by 619 brought to ruin the capital Salona (an event that allowed for the settlement of the nearby Diocletian's Palace in Spalatum), Asseria, Varvaria, Burnum, Scardona, Epidaurum and Acruvium (resulting with the foundation of Kotor), and Epidaurum (resulting with the foundation of Ragusa). The newly-arrived tribes of Croats, Serbs and other Slavs founded S\"claviniae\" Croatia, Pagania, Zachlumia, Travunia and Konavle (also a small region of Bosnia, with Duklja and Serbia in nearby Praevalitana and Moesia).\nIn the early 9th century, the Eastern Adriatic coast including Dalmatia was the scene of the sphere of influence struggle between the Frankish and Byzantine Empire, but although the Byzantines have retained supremacy, Dalmatia became a meeting place between the West and the East. The meaning of the administrative-geographical term \"Dalmatia\" by 820 shrank to the coastal cities and their immediate hinterland \u2013 the Byzantine theme of Dalmatia. Its cities were the Romance-speaking Dalmatian city-states and remained influential as they were well fortified and maintained their connection with the Byzantine Empire. The original name of the cities was \"Jadera\" (Zadar; capital of the theme), \"Spalatum\" (Split), \"Crepsa\" (Cres), \"Arba\" (Rab), \"Tragurium\" (Trogir), \"Vecla\" (Krk), \"Ragusium\" (Dubrovnik) and \"Cattarum\" (Kotor). The language and the laws were initially Latin, but after a few centuries they developed their own neo-Latin language (the \"Dalmatico\"), that lasted until the late 19th century. The cities were maritime centres with a huge commerce mainly with the Italian peninsula and with the growing Republic of Venice. The Latin and Slavic communities were somewhat hostile at first, but as the Croats and Serbs became Christianized this tension increasingly subsided. A degree of cultural mingling soon took place, in some enclaves stronger, in others weaker, as Slavic influence and culture was more accentuated in Ragusa, Spalatum, and Tragurium.\nIn the mid-9th century, the Serbian principality gained prominence along a part of the eastern Adriatic coast. Contemporary sources, notably the Royal Frankish Annals, document that the Serbs controlled a part of Dalmatia, described as \"\"Sorabos, quae natio magnam Dalmatiae partem obtinere dicitur\".\" This early territorial expansion laid the foundation for subsequent political developments in the region.The emergence of organised political entities began with the consolidation of the first Serbian Vlastimirovi\u0107 dynasty from 610 to 960. During this period, two principal Serbian principalities emerged: Duklja (also known as Dioclea) in the southeast and Travunia in the northwest. These principalities were strategically positioned around the Bay of Kotor (Boka Kotorska), facilitating control over important maritime trade routes. \nIn the first half of the 10th century, Croatia was elevated to a kingdom by Duke Tomislav who also extended his influence further southwards to Zachlumia. As an ally of the Byzantine Empire, the King was given the status of Protector of Dalmatia, and became its \"de facto\" ruler. Chronicler Thomas the Archdeacon relates that Stephen Dr\u017eislav (r. 969 \u2013 997) took the title \"King of Dalmatia and Croatia\", and that all subsequent rulers styled themselves in such manner. In the year 1000, at the invitation of Dalmatian city-states, an expedition of Venetian ships in coastal Istria and Dalmatia led by Doge Pietro II Orseolo conquered the Dalmatian cities and islands without much resistance and secured Venetian suzerainty in the area. From then on, with short interruptions, Venice became the leading power in Dalmatia and the Adriatic until its dissolution nearly eight hundred years later. On this occasion Doge Orseolo named himself \"Duke of Dalmatia\", starting the colonial empire of Venice. Orseolo led the Venetian fleet into the eastern Adriatic and gradually took control of most of it; first the islands of the Gulf of Kvarner and the city of Zadar, then Trogir and Split, followed by a successful naval battle with the Narentines upon which he took control of Kor\u010dula and Lastovo. The Narentine pirates, which had been causing trouble to Venetian ships in the Adriatic, were finally suppressed permanently. The Venetians, to whom the Dalmatians were already bound by language and culture, could afford to concede liberal terms as its main goal was to prevent the development of any dangerous political or commercial competitor on the eastern Adriatic. The seafaring community in Dalmatia looked to Venice as the new \"queen\" of the Adriatic Sea. In return for protection, the Romance cities of Dalmatia often furnished a contingent to the army or navy of their suzerain, and sometimes paid tribute either in money or in kind. Arbe (now Rab), for example, annually paid ten pounds of silk or five pounds of gold to Venice. The Dalmatian cities might elect their own chief magistrate, bishop, and judges; their Roman law remained valid, and they were even permitted to conclude separate alliances. In these centuries, the Dalmatian language started to disappear, assimilated by the Venetian language. \nAt this time Venice had a firm control over the Adriatic Sea, strengthened by the expedition of Pietro's son Ottone in 1017. Kre\u0161imir III tried to restore the Dalmatian cities and had some success until 1018, when he was defeated by Venice allied with the Lombards. From the 1030s however, after the fall of Doge Otto Orseolo, Byzantium took control of most of the main coastal cities, while Croatian kings Stjepan I and his son Petar Kre\u0161imir IV succeeded in taking a substantial part of the coast back, so the latter also carried the title \"King of Croatia and Dalmatia\". In the subsequent period, the rulers of Croatia exerted some influence over Dalmatian cities and islands, occasionally taking control such as with the conquest of Zadar in the mid-11th century, though the ownership of this city changed intermittently between the Croats and the Venetians, who regained the city in the year 1050. Petar Kre\u0161imir IV expanded his rule to incorporate a number of Dalmatian cities and islands by 1069, attested by his gift of the island of Maun to the Monastery of St. Chrysogonus in that same year. Upon the death of King Demetrius Zvonimir of Croatia by the end of 1080s, the state entered a period of anarchy and would result in Hungarians under Coloman of Hungary taking control over former Dalmatian possessions along with the rest of the state by 1102.In the High Medieval period, the Byzantine Empire was no longer able to expand its power consistently in Dalmatia, and was finally rendered impotent so far west by the Fourth Crusade. During the reign of King Emeric, the Dalmatian cities separated from Hungary by a treaty. Soon after, in the year 1202, the Venetians led by Doge Enrico Dandolo directed the army of Crusaders to reconquer for Venice the city of Zadar, an event known in history as the Siege of Zara. The late 13th century was marked by a decline in external hostilities. The Dalmatian cities started accepting complete foreign sovereignty, mainly that of the Republic of Venice. Venice would go on to control Zadar as well as other Dalmatian cities and islands for the next century and a half, albeit with constant internal and external conflicts, before briefly losing them to Hungary again in the Treaty of Zadar of 1358. This period of Hungarian influence in Dalmatia was further impacted by the Mongol invasion of Hungary in 1241. The Mongols severely impaired the feudal state, so much so that that same year, King B\u00e9la IV had to take refuge in Dalmatia, as far south as the Fortress of Klis. The Mongols attacked the Dalmatian cities for the next few years but eventually withdrew without major success.\nAt the beginning of the 14th century and until 1322, some Dalmatian cities were under the control of the noble \u0160ubi\u0107 family which held them until they were defeated at the Battle of Bliska by a coalition of nobles, Dalmatian cities and royal troops loyal to Charles I of Hungary. In 1358, the people of Dubrovnik achieved independence from Venice, creating the Republic of Ragusa.\nIn the south, due to its protected location, Kotor became a major city and main port of the Serbian Kingdom and then of the Serbian Empire for the salt trade. The area was prosperous during the 14th century under the rule of Emperor of the Serbs Du\u0161an the Mighty, who encouraged law enforcement, which helped the Bay of Kotor to become a safe place for doing business. \nIn 1389, Tvrtko I, founder of the Kingdom of Bosnia, was able to control the Adriatic littoral between Kotor and \u0160ibenik, and even claimed control over the northern coast up to Rijeka, and his own independent ally, the Republic of Ragusa. This was only temporary, as Hungary and the Venetians continued their struggle over Dalmatia after Tvrtko's death in 1391. By this time, the whole of the Hungarian and Croatian Kingdom was facing increasing internal difficulties, as a 20-year civil war ensued between the Capetian House of Anjou from the Kingdom of Naples, and King Sigismund of the House of Luxembourg. During the war, the losing contender, Ladislaus of Naples, sold his \"rights\" to Dalmatia to the Republic of Venice in the year 1409 for a mere 100,000 ducats. The much more centralised Republic came to control the coast and near hinterland of Dalmatia by the year 1420, and it was to remain under Venetian rule for 377 years (1420\u20131797).\nEarly modern period.\nDalmatia was first and finally sold to the Republic of Venice in 1409 but Venetian Dalmatia was not fully consolidated until 1420. The Republic of Venice in 1420 controlled the coastal part of Dalmatia and the islands, with the southern enclave, the Bay of Kotor, being called Venetian Albania. Venetian was the commercial \"lingua franca\" in the Mediterranean at that time, and it heavily influenced Dalmatian and to a lesser degree coastal Croatian (Chakavian) and Albanian.\nThe southern city of Ragusa (Dubrovnik) became de facto independent in 1358 through the Treaty of Zadar when Venice relinquished its suzerainty over it to Louis I of Hungary. In 1481, Ragusa switched allegiance to the Ottoman Empire. This gave its tradesmen advantages such as access to the Black Sea, and the Republic of Ragusa was the fiercest competitor to Venice's merchants in the 15th and 16th centuries. Originally, Latin was used in official documents of the Republic. Italian came into use in the 1420s. Both languages were used in official correspondence by the Republic. The Republic was influenced by the Venetian language and the Tuscan dialect.\nIn the early 16th century, most of the Dalmatian hinterland which was controlled by the Hungarian-Croatian Kingdom was lost to the Ottoman Empire by the 1520s which formed the Croatian vilayet that became incorporated into the Sanjak of Klis after the Siege of Klis (1537), and decades later into the Bosnia Eyalet. With the fall of the Hungarian-Venetian border in Dalmatia, Venetian Dalmatia now directly bordered with Ottoman Dalmatia. Venetians still perceived this inner hinterland as once part of Croatia, calling it as \"Banadego\" (lands of Ban i.e. Banate). The Republic of Venice was also one of the powers most hostile to the Ottoman Empire's expansion, and participated in many wars against it, but also promoted peace negotiations and cultural and religious coexistence and tolerance.\nSince the 16th century Slavicized Vlachs, Serbs and other South Slavs arrived both as martolos in Ottoman service and refugees fleeing from Ottoman territory to the Military Frontier and Venetian Dalmatia. As the Ottomans took control of the hinterland, many Christians took refuge in the coastal cities of Dalmatia. In Ottoman Dalmatia a number of people converted to Islam to attain freedom and privileges. The border between the Dalmatian hinterland and the Ottoman Bosnia and Herzegovina greatly fluctuated until the Morean War, when the Venetian capture of Knin and Sinj set much of the borderline at its near-current position, defined by the 'Linea Grimani' in the Treaty of Karlowitz (1699).\nAfter the Great Turkish War and the Treaty of Passarowitz (1718), which further solidified the Venetian-Ottoman border defined by the 'Linea Mocenigo' (resembling the modern border between Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina), more peaceful times made Dalmatia experience a period of certain economic and cultural growth in the 18th century, with the re-establishment of trade and exchange with the hinterland. This period was abruptly interrupted with the fall of the Republic of Venice in 1797. Napoleon's troops stormed the region and ended the independence of the Republic of Ragusa as well, saving it from occupation by the Russian Empire and Montenegro.\nIn 1805, Napoleon created his Kingdom of Italy around the Adriatic Sea, annexing to it the former Venetian Dalmatia from Istria to Kotor. In 1808, he annexed the just conquered Republic of Ragusa to the Kingdom. A year later, in 1809, he removed Venetian Dalmatia from his Kingdom of Italy and created the Illyrian Provinces, which were annexed to France, and named Marshal General Jean-de-Dieu Soult the Duke of Dalmatia.\nNapoleon's rule in Dalmatia was marked with war and high taxation, which caused several rebellions. On the other hand, French rule greatly contributed to Illyrian movement (the first newspaper in Croatian was published then in Zadar, \"Il Regio Dalmata \u2013 Kraglski Dalmatin\"), the legal system and infrastructure were finally modernised somewhat in Dalmatia, and the educational system flourished. French rule brought a lot of improvements in infrastructure; many roads were built or reconstructed. Napoleon himself blamed Marshal of the Empire Auguste de Marmont, the governor of Dalmatia, that too much money was spent. However, in 1813, the Habsburgs once again declared war on France and, by the following year, had restored control over Dalmatia.\nFrom the Middle Ages to the 19th century, Italian and Slavic communities in Dalmatia had lived peacefully side by side, as they did not have a genuine national identification, given that they generically defined themselves as \"Dalmatians\", of \"Romance\" or \"Slavic\" culture.\n19th century.\nAt the Congress of Vienna in 1815, Dalmatia was granted as a province to the Emperor of Austria. It was officially known as the Kingdom of Dalmatia.\nIn 1848, the Croatian Parliament (\"Sabor\") published the People's Requests, in which they requested among other things the abolition of serfdom and the unification of Dalmatia and Croatia. The Dubrovnik municipality was the most outspoken of all the Dalmatian communes in its support for unification with Croatia. A letter was sent from Dubrovnik to Zagreb with pledges to work for this idea. In 1849, Dubrovnik continued to lead the Dalmatian cities in the struggle for unification. A large-scale campaign was launched in the Dubrovnik paper \"L'Avvenire\" (\"The Future\") based on a clearly formulated programme: the federal system for the Habsburg territories, the inclusion of Dalmatia into Croatia and the Slavic brotherhood. The President of the Council of Kingdom of Dalmatia was Baron Vlaho Getaldi\u0107.\nIn the same year, the first issue of the Dubrovnik almanac appeared, \"Flower of the National Literature\" (\"Dubrovnik, cvijet narodnog knji\u017eevstva\"), in which Petar Preradovi\u0107 published his noted poem \"Pjesma Dubrovniku\" (\"Poem to Dubrovnik\"). This and other literary and journalistic texts, which continued to be published, contributed to the awakening of the national consciousness reflected in efforts to introduce the Croatian language into schools and offices, and to promote Croatian books. The Emperor Franz Joseph brought the March Constitution which prohibited the unification of Dalmatia and Croatia and also any further political activity with this end in view. The political struggle of Dubrovnik to be united with Croatia, which was intense throughout 1848\u201349, did not succeed at that time.\nMany Dalmatian Italians looked with sympathy towards the Risorgimento movement that fought for the unification of Italy. However, after 1866, when the Veneto and Friuli regions were ceded by the Austrians to the newly formed Kingdom Italy, Dalmatia remained part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, together with other Italian-speaking areas on the eastern Adriatic. This triggered the gradual rise of Italian irredentism among many Italians in Dalmatia, who demanded the unification of the Austrian Littoral, Fiume and Dalmatia with Italy. The Italians in Dalmatia supported the Italian Risorgimento: as a consequence, the Austrians saw the Italians as enemies and favored the Slav communities of Dalmatia.\nDuring the meeting of the Council of Ministers of 12 November 1866, Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria outlined a wide-ranging project aimed at the Germanization or Slavization of the areas of the empire with an Italian presence:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;His Majesty expressed the precise order that action be taken decisively against the influence of the Italian elements still present in some regions of the Crown and, appropriately occupying the posts of public, judicial, masters employees as well as with the influence of the press, work in South Tyrol, Dalmatia and Littoral for the Germanization and Slavization of these territories according to the circumstances, with energy and without any regard. His Majesty calls the central offices to the strong duty to proceed in this way to what has been established.\u2014\u200a\nDalmatia, especially its maritime cities, once had a substantial Italian-speaking population (Dalmatian Italians). According to Austrian censuses, the Italian speakers in Dalmatia formed 12.5% of the population in 1865, but this was reduced to 2.8% in 1910. There was a constant decline in the Italian population, in a context of repression that also took on violent connotations. During this period, Austrians carried out an aggressive anti-Italian policy through a forced Slavization of Dalmatia. Before 1859, Italian was the language of administration, education, the press, and the Austrian navy; people who wished to acquire higher social standing and separate from the Slav peasantry became \"Italians\". In the years after 1866, Italians lost their privileges in Austria-Hungary, their assimilation of the Slavs came to an end, and they found themselves under growing pressure by other rising nations; with the \"rising Slav tide\" after 1890, italianized Slavs reverted to being Croats. Austrian rulers found use of the racial antagonism and financed Slav schools and promoted Croatian as the official language, and many Italians chose voluntary exile.\nThe Italian population in Dalmatia was concentrated in the major coastal cities. In the city of Split in 1890 there were 1,971 Dalmatian Italians (9% of the population), in Zadar 7,672 (27%), in \u0160ibenik 1,090 (5%), in Kotor 646 (12%) and in Dubrovnik 356 (3%). In other Dalmatian localities, according to Austrian censuses, Italians experienced a sudden decrease: in the twenty years 1890-1910, in Rab they went from 225 to 151, in Vis from 352 to 92, in Pag from 787 to 23, completely disappearing in almost all inland locations.\nWhile Slavic-speakers made up 80-95% of the Dalmatia populace, only Italian language schools existed until 1848, and due to restrictive voting laws, the Italian-speaking aristocratic minority retained political control of Dalmatia. Only after Austria liberalised elections in 1870, allowing more majority Slavs to vote, did Croatian parties gain control. Croatian finally became an official language in Dalmatia in 1883, along with Italian. Yet minority Italian-speakers continued to wield strong influence, since Austria favoured Italians for government work, thus in the Austrian capital of Dalmatia, Zara, the proportion of Italians continued to grow, making it the only Dalmatian city with an Italian majority.\nIn 1861 the meeting of the first Dalmatian Assembly took place, with representatives from Dubrovnik. Representatives of Kotor came to Dubrovnik to join the struggle for unification with Croatia. The citizens of Dubrovnik gave them a festive welcome, flying Croatian flags from the ramparts and exhibiting the slogan \"Ragusa with Kotor\". The Kotorans elected a delegation to go to Vienna; Dubrovnik nominated Niko Puci\u0107, who went to Vienna to demand not only the unification of Dalmatia with Croatia, but also the unification of all Croatian territories under one common \"Sabor\". During this period, the Habsburgs carried out an aggressive anti-Italian policy through a forced Slavisation of the region.\n20th century.\nIn 1905, a dispute arose in the Austrian Imperial Council over whether Austria should pay for Dalmatia. It has been argued that in the conclusion of the April Laws is written \"given by Banus Count Keglevich of Bu\u017eim\", which explained the historical affiliation of Dalmatia to Hungary. Two years later Dalmatia elected representatives to the Austrian Imperial Council.\nUntil 1909, both Italian and Croatian were recognized as official languages in Dalmatia. After 1909, Italian lost its official status, thus it could no longer be used in the public and administrative sphere. All but one of the 82 urban communities got Slav government majority by 1910. \nDalmatia was a strategic region during World War I that both Italy and Serbia intended to seize from Austria-Hungary. Italy joined the Triple Entente Allies in 1915 upon agreeing to the Treaty of London that guaranteed Italy the right to annex a large portion of Dalmatia in exchange for Italy's participation on the Allied side. From 5\u20136 November 1918, Italian forces were reported to have reached Vis, Lastovo, \u0160ibenik, and other localities on the Dalmatian coast. By the end of hostilities in November 1918, the Italian military had seized control of the entire portion of Dalmatia that had been guaranteed to Italy by the Treaty of London and by 17 November had seized Rijeka as well creating the first Governorate of Dalmatia. In 1918, Admiral Enrico Millo declared himself Italy's Governor of Dalmatia. Famous Italian nationalist Gabriele D'Annunzio supported the seizure of Dalmatia, and proceeded to Zadar in an Italian warship in December 1918. However, in spite of the guarantees of the Treaty of London to Italy of a large portion of Dalmatia and Italian military occupation of claimed territories of Dalmatia, during the peace settlement negotiations of 1919 to 1920, the Fourteen Points of Woodrow Wilson that advocated self-determination of nations took precedence, with Italy only being permitted to annex Zadar from Dalmatia, while the rest of Dalmatia was to be part of Yugoslavia.\nAt the end of World War I, the Austrian Empire disintegrated, and Dalmatia was again split between the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (later the Kingdom of Yugoslavia) which controlled most of it, and the Kingdom of Italy which held small portions of northern Dalmatia around Zadar and the islands of Cres, Lo\u0161inj, and Lastovo. Italy entered World War I in a territorial gamble, mostly to gain Dalmatia. But Italy got only a small part of its pretensions, so Dalmatia mostly stayed Yugoslav.\nDespite the fact that there were only a few thousand Italian-speakers in Dalmatia after the constant decrease that occurred in previous decades, Italian irredentists continued to lay claim to all of Dalmatia. In 1927 Italy signed an agreement with the Croatian fascist, terrorist Usta\u0161e organization. The Usta\u0161e agreed that once they gained power, they will cede to Italy additional territory in Dalmatia and the Bay of Kotor, while renouncing all Croatian claims to Istria, Rijeka, Zadar and the Adriatic Islands.\nIn 1922, the territory of the former Kingdom of Dalmatia was divided into two provinces, the Oblast of Split and the Oblast of Dubrovnik. In 1929, the Littoral Banovina, a province of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, was formed. Its capital was Split, and it included most of Dalmatia and parts of present-day Bosnia and Herzegovina. The southern parts of Dalmatia were in Zeta Banovina, from the Bay of Kotor to Pelje\u0161ac peninsula including Dubrovnik. In 1939, Littoral Banovina was joined with Sava Banovina (and with smaller parts of other banovinas) to form a new province named the Banovina of Croatia. The same year, the ethnic Croatian areas of the Zeta Banovina from the Bay of Kotor to Pelje\u0161ac, including Dubrovnik, were merged with a new Banovina of Croatia.\nDuring World War II, in 1941, Nazi Germany, Fascist Italy, Hungary, and Bulgaria occupied Yugoslavia, redrawing their borders to include former parts of the Yugoslavian state. A new Nazi puppet state, the Independent State of Croatia (NDH), was created. With the Treaties of Rome, the NDH agreed to cede to Italy Dalmatian territory, creating the second Governorate of Dalmatia, from north of Zadar to south of Split, with inland areas, plus nearly all the Adriatic islands and Gorski Kotar. Italy then annexed these territories, while all the remainder of southern Croatia, including the entire coast, were placed under Italian occupation. Italy also appointed an Italian, Prince Aimone, Duke of Aosta, as king of Croatia.Italy proceeded to Italianize the annexed areas of Dalmatia. Place names were Italianized, and Italian was made the official language in all schools, churches and government administration. All Croatian cultural societies were banned, while Italians took control of all key mineral, industrial and business establishments. Italian policies prompted resistance by Dalmatians, many joined the Partisans. This led to further Italian repressive measures - shooting of civilian hostages, burning of villages, confiscation of properties. Italians took many civilians to concentration camps - altogether, some 80,000 Dalmatians, 12% of the population, passed through Italian concentration camps.\nMany Croats moved from the Italian-occupied area and took refuge in the satellite state of Croatia, which became the battleground for a guerrilla war between the Axis and the Yugoslav Partisans. Following the surrender of Italy in 1943, much of Italian-controlled Dalmatia was liberated by the Partisans, then taken over by German forces in a brutal campaign, who then returned control to the puppet Independent State of Croatia. Vis Island remained in Partisan hands, while Zadar, Rijeka, Istria, Cres, Lo\u0161inj, Lastovo and Palagru\u017ea became part of the German \"Operationszone Adriatisches K\u00fcstenland.\" The Partisans took Dalmatia in 1944, and with that Zadar, Rijeka, Istria, Cres, Lo\u0161inj, Lastovo and Palagru\u017ea became reunited with Croatia. After 1945, most of the remaining Dalmatian Italians fled the region (350,000 Italians escaped from Istria and Dalmatia in the Istrian-Dalmatian exodus). After World War II, Dalmatia became part of the People's Republic of Croatia, part of the Federative People's Republic of Yugoslavia.\nThe territory of the former Kingdom of Dalmatia was divided between two federal republics of Yugoslavia and most of the territory went to Croatia, leaving only the Bay of Kotor to Montenegro. When Yugoslavia dissolved in 1991, those borders were retained and remain in force. During the Croatian War of Independence, most of Dalmatia was a battleground between the Government of Croatia and the Yugoslav People's Army (JNA), which aided the proto-state of Serbian Krajina, with much of the northern part of the region around Knin and the far south around, but not including, Dubrovnik being placed under the control of Serb forces. Croatia did regain the southern territories in 1992 but did not regain the north until Operation Storm in 1995. After the war, a number of towns and municipalities in the region were designated Areas of Special State Concern.\nGeography and climate.\nMost of the land area is covered by the Dinaric Alps mountain range running from north-west to south-east. The hills and mountains lie parallel to the coast, which gave rise to the geographic term Dalmatian concordant coastline. On the coasts the climate is Mediterranean, while further inland it is moderate Mediterranean. In the mountains, winters are frosty and snowy, while summers are hot and dry. To the south winters are milder. Over the centuries many forests have been cut down and replaced with bush and brush. There is evergreen vegetation on the coast. The soils are generally poor, except on the plains where areas with natural grass, fertile soils, and warm summers provide an opportunity for tillage. Elsewhere, land cultivation is mostly unsuccessful because of the mountains, hot summers, and poor soils, although olives, grapes, and other Mediterranean flora flourish. Electricity is mainly produced by hydropower stations. \nThe largest Dalmatian mountains are Dinara, Mosor, Svilaja, Biokovo, Mose\u0107, Veliki Kozjak, and Mali Kozjak. The regional geographical unit of Dalmatia\u2013the coastal region between Istria and the Bay of Kotor\u2013includes the Orjen mountains with the highest peak in Montenegro, 1894 m. In present-day Dalmatia, the highest peak is Dinara (1913 m), which is not a coastal mountain, while the highest coastal Dinaric mountains are on Biokovo (Sv. Jure, 1762 m) and Velebit (Vaganski vrh, 1757 m), although the Vaganski vrh itself is located in Lika-Senj County.\nThe largest Dalmatian islands are Bra\u010d, Kor\u010dula, Dugi Otok, Mljet, Vis, Hvar, Pag, Ugljan and Pa\u0161man. The major rivers are Zrmanja, Krka, Cetina, and Neretva.\nThe Adriatic Sea's high water quality, along with the immense number of coves, islands, and channels, makes Dalmatia an attractive place for nautical races, nautical tourism, and tourism in general. Dalmatia also includes several national parks that are tourist attractions: Paklenica karst river, Kornati archipelago, Krka river rapids, and the northwest of the island of Mljet.\nAdministrative division.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;The area of Dalmatia roughly corresponds to Croatia's four southernmost counties, listed here north to south:\nCities by population.\nOther large towns include Biograd, Ka\u0161tela, Sinj, Solin, Omi\u0161, Knin, Metkovi\u0107, Makarska, Trogir, Plo\u010de, and Imotski.\nCulture and ethnicity.\nThe inhabitants of Dalmatia are culturally subdivided into two groups. The urban families of the coastal cities, commonly known as \"Fetivi\", are culturally akin to the inhabitants of the Dalmatian islands (known derogatorily as \"Boduli\"). The two are together distinct, in the Mediterranean aspects of their culture, from the more numerous inhabitants of the Hinterland. Referred to (sometimes derogatorily) as the \"Vlaji\", their name originated from the Vlachs with whom they have no ethnic connection.\nThe former two groups (inhabitants of the islands and the cities) historically included many Venetian and Italian speakers, who are identificated as Dalmatian Italians. Their presence, relative to those identifying as Croats, decreased over the course of the 19th and the first half of the 20th century. \nDalmatian identity, or sometimes also Dalmatianism, Dalmatianness or Dalmatian nationalism', refers to the historical nationalism or patriotism of Dalmatians and Dalmatian culture. There were significant Dalmatian nationalists in the 19th century, but Dalmatian regional nationalism faded in significance over time in favour of ethnic nationalism.\nThe 17th-century Dalmatian poet Jerolim Kavanjin (\"Girolamo Cavagnini\") exhibited Dalmatianism, identifying himself as \"Dalmatian\" and calling Dalmatia his homeland, which John Fine interprets not to have been a nationalist notion.\nDuring Dalmatia's incorporation in Austrian Empire, with the Autonomist Party in Dalmatia refusing and opposed plans to incorporate Dalmatia into Croatia; instead it supported an autonomous Dalmatia based on a multicultural association of Dalmatia's ethnic communities: Croats, Serbs, and Italians, united as Dalmatians. The Autonomist Party has been accused of secretly having been a pro-Italian movement due to their defense of the rights of ethnic Italians in Dalmatia. Support for the autonomy of Dalmatia had deep historic roots in identifying Dalmatian culture as linking Western culture via Venetian and Italian influence and Eastern culture via South Slavic influence; such a view was supported by Dalmatian autonomist Stipan Ivi\u010devi\u0107. The Autonomist Party did not claim to be an Italian movement, and indicated that it sympathised with a sense of heterogeneity amongst Dalmatians in opposition to ethnic nationalism. In the 1861 elections, the Autonomists won twenty-seven seats in Dalmatia, while Dalmatia's Croatian nationalist movement, the People's Party, won only fourteen seats.\nThe issue of autonomy of Dalmatia was debated after the creation of Yugoslavia in 1918, due to divisions within Dalmatia over proposals of merging the region with the territories composing the former Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia. Proposals for the autonomy of Dalmatia within Yugoslavia were made by Dalmatians within the Yugoslav Partisans during World War II; however, these proposals were strongly opposed by Croatian Communists and the proposals were soon abandoned.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47287", "revid": "153314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47287", "title": "Urysohn lemma", "text": ""}
{"id": "47289", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47289", "title": "FastTrack", "text": "FastTrack is a peer-to-peer (P2P) protocol that was used by the Kazaa, Grokster, iMesh and Morpheus file sharing programs. FastTrack was the most popular file sharing network in 2003, and used mainly for the exchange of music MP3 files. The network had approximately 2.4 million concurrent users in 2003. It is estimated that the total number of users was greater than that of Napster at its peak.\nHistory.\nThe FastTrack protocol and Kazaa were created and developed by Estonian programmers of BlueMoon Interactive headed by Jaan Tallinn, the same team that later created Skype. After selling it to Niklas Zennstr\u00f6m from Sweden and Janus Friis from Denmark, it was introduced in March 2001 by their Dutch company Consumer Empowerment. It appeared during the end of the first generation of P2P networks \u2013 Napster shut down in July of that year. There are three FastTrack-based networks, and they use mutually incompatible versions of the protocol. The most popular clients on each are Kazaa (and its variations), Grokster, and iMesh. For more information about the various lawsuits surrounding Kazaa and Sharman Networks, see Kazaa.\nTechnology.\nFastTrack uses supernodes to improve scalability.\nTo allow downloading from multiple sources, FastTrack employs the UUHash hashing algorithm. While UUHash allows very large files to be checksummed in a short time, even on slow weak computers, it also allows for massive corruption of a file to go unnoticed. Many people, as well as the RIAA, have exploited this vulnerability to spread corrupt and fake files on the network.\nThe FastTrack protocol uses encryption and was not documented by its creators. The first clients were all closed source software. However, initialization data for the encryption algorithms is sent in the clear and no public key encryption is used, so reverse engineering was made comparatively easy. In 2003, open source programmers succeeded in reverse-engineering the portion of the protocol dealing with client-supernode communication, but the supernode-supernode communication protocol remains largely unknown.\nClients.\nThe following programs are or have been FastTrack clients:"}
{"id": "47290", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47290", "title": "Famicon", "text": ""}
{"id": "47291", "revid": "428690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47291", "title": "Budhism", "text": ""}
{"id": "47293", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47293", "title": "Master of Business Administration", "text": "Master's degree in business leadership\nA Master of Business Administration (MBA) is a professional degree focused on business administration. The core courses in an MBA program cover various areas of business administration; elective courses may allow further study in a particular area but an MBA is normally intended to be a general program. It originated in the United States in the early 20th century when the country industrialized and companies sought scientific management.\nMBA programs in the United States typically require completing about forty to sixty semester credit hours,\nmuch higher than the thirty semester credit hours typically required for other US master's degrees that cover some of the same material. The UK-based Association of MBAs accreditation requires \"the equivalent of at least 1,800 hours of learning effort\", equivalent to 45 US semester credit hours or 90 European ECTS credits, the same as a standard UK master's degree. Accreditation bodies for business schools and MBA programs ensure consistency and quality of education. Business schools in many countries offer programs tailored to full-time, part-time, executive (abridged coursework typically occurring on nights or weekends) and distance learning students, many with specialized concentrations.\nAn \"Executive MBA\", or EMBA, is a degree program similar to an MBA program that is specifically structured for and targeted towards corporate executives and senior managers who are already in the workforce.\nHistory.\nIn 1900, the Tuck School of Business was founded at Dartmouth College offering the first advanced degree in business: the Master of Science in Commerce, a predecessor of the MBA. The first MBA was launched eight years later, at the Harvard Graduate School of Business Administration, with 15 faculty members, 33 regular students and 47 special students. Its first-year curriculum was based on Frederick Winslow Taylor\u2019s theory of scientific management. The number of MBA students at Harvard increased quickly, from 80 in 1908, over 300 in 1920, and 1,070 in 1930. At this time, only American universities offered MBAs, although business schools offering other qualifications had existed in Europe since the 18th century.\nOther milestones include:\nAccreditation.\nGlobally, the three most important accreditations of MBA programs and business schools are the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business (AACSB), Association of MBAs (AMBA), and the EFMD Quality Improvement System (EQUIS), with holding all three of these being known as triple accreditation. Of these, AMBA offers programmatic accreditation for MBAs and other graduate degrees, while the others take a broader view, offering accreditation of the school rather than the MBA program (EFMD also offers programmatic accreditation, separately from EQUIS).\nUnited States.\nBusiness school or MBA program accreditation by external agencies provides students and employers with an independent view of the school or program's quality, as well as whether the curriculum meets specific quality standards. Currently the three major accrediting bodies in the United States are:\nAll of these groups also accredit schools outside the U.S. The ACBSP and the IACBE are themselves recognized in the United States by the Council for Higher Education Accreditation (CHEA). MBA programs with specializations for students pursuing careers in healthcare management also eligible for accreditation by the Commission on the Accreditation of Healthcare Management Education (CAHME).\nU.S. MBA programs may also be accredited at the institutional level. Bodies that accredit institutions as a whole include:\nUnited States.\nPrograms.\nFull-time MBA programs normally take place over two academic years (i.e. approximately 18 months of term time). For example, in the Northern Hemisphere, they often begin in late August or early September of year one and continue until May or June of year two, with a three to four-month summer break in between years one and two. Students enter with a reasonable amount of prior real-world work experience and take classes during weekdays like other university students. A typical full-time, accelerated, part-time, or modular MBA requires 60 credits (600 class hours) of graduate work.\nAccelerated MBA programs are a variation of the two-year programs. They involve a higher course load with more intense class and examination schedules and are usually condensed into one year. They usually have less downtime during the program and between semesters. For example, there is no three to four-month summer break, and between semesters there might be seven to ten days off rather than three to five weeks vacation. Accelerated programs typically have a lower cost than full-time two-year programs.\nPart-time MBA programs normally hold classes on weekday evenings after normal working hours, or on weekends. Part-time programs normally last three years or more. The students in these programs typically consist of working professionals, who take a light course load for a longer period of time until the graduation requirements are met.\nEvening (second shift) MBA programs are full-time programs that normally hold classes on weekday evenings, after normal working hours, or on weekends for a duration of two years. The students in these programs typically consist of working professionals, who can not leave their work to pursue a full-time regular shift MBA. Most second shift programs are offered at universities in India.\nModular MBA programs are similar to part-time programs, although typically employing a lock-step curriculum with classes packaged together in blocks lasting from one to three weeks.\nExecutive (part-time) MBA (EMBA) programs developed to meet the educational needs of managers and executives, allowing students to earn an MBA (or another business-related graduate degree) in two years or less while working full-time. Participants come from every type and size of organization \u2013 profit, nonprofit, government \u2013 representing a variety of industries. EMBA students typically have a higher level of work experience, often 10 years or more, compared to other MBA students. In response to the increasing number of EMBA programs offered, The Executive MBA Council was formed in 1981 to advance executive education.\nFull-time executive MBA programs are a new category of full-time one year MBA programs aimed at professionals with approximately five years or more. They are primarily offered in countries like India where the two-year MBA program is targeted at fresh graduates with no experience or minimal experience. These full-time executive MBA programs are similar to one year MBA programs offered by schools like Insead and IMD.\nDistance learning MBA programs hold classes off-campus. These programs can be offered in a number of different formats: correspondence courses by postal mail or email, non-interactive broadcast video, pre-recorded video, live teleconference or videoconference, offline or online computer courses. Many schools offer these programs.\nBlended learning programs combine distance learning with face-to-face instruction. These programs typically target working professionals who are unable to attend traditional part-time programs.\nMBA dual degree programs combine an MBA with others (such as an MS, MA, MEng, or a JD, etc.) to let students cut costs (dual programs usually cost less than pursuing two degrees separately), save time on education and to tailor the business education courses to their needs. This is generally achieved by allowing core courses of one program to count as electives in the other. Some business schools offer programs in which students can earn both a bachelor's degree in business administration and an MBA in five years.\nMini-MBA is a term used by many non-profit and for-profit institutions to describe a training regimen focused on the fundamentals of business. In the past, Mini-MBA programs have typically been offered as non-credit bearing courses that require less than 100 hours of total learning. However, due to the criticisms of these certificates, many schools have now shifted their programs to offer courses for full credit so that they may be applied towards a complete traditional MBA degree. This is to allow students to verify business-related coursework for employment purposes and still allow the option to complete a full-time MBA degree program at a later period if they elect to do so.\nAdmissions criteria.\nMany programs base their admission decisions on a combination of undergraduate grade point average, academic transcripts, entrance exam scores (for example, the GMAT or the GRE test score), a r\u00e9sum\u00e9 containing significant work experience, essays, letters of recommendation, group discussions, and personal interviews. Some schools are also interested in extracurricular activities, community service activities, or volunteer work and how the student can improve the school's diversity and contribute to the student body as a whole.\nThe Graduate Management Admission Test (GMAT) is the most prominently used entrance exam for admissions into MBA programs. The Graduate Record Examination (GRE) is also accepted by almost all MBA programs in order to fulfill any entrance exam requirement they may have. Some schools do not weigh entrance exam scores as heavily as other criteria, and some programs do not require entrance exam scores for admission. In order to achieve a diverse class, business schools also consider the target male-female ratio and local-international student ratios. In rare cases, some MBA degrees do not require students to have an undergraduate degree and will accept significant management experience in lieu of an undergraduate degree. In the UK, for example, a Higher National Diploma (HND) or even Higher National Certificate (HNC) is acceptable in some programs.\nDepending on the program, type and duration of work experience can be a critical admissions component for many MBA programs. Many top-tier programs require five or more years of work experience for admission.\nMBA admissions consulting services have been increasingly used by prospective MBA applicants to improve their chances of admission. They are most common in the U.S., with as many as one-quarter of applicants using these services in 2016, though they have been gaining popularity elsewhere, including India and Canada. Consultants can provide basic coaching including help with program selection, mock interviews, and essay proofreading, though some will provide other services like writing essays from scratch. The use of consulting services is frowned upon by many business schools' admissions committees, and applications can be hurt by looking like they were written with a consultant, such as by having a high level of writing compared to the candidate's speech or not appearing unique. Some also express concern that they give an unfair advantage to students who can afford the services' high costs.\nContent.\nIn general, MBA programs are structured around core courses \u2013 an essentially standard curriculum \u2013 and elective courses that may allow for a subject specialty or concentration. Thus, in the program's first year (or part), students acquire both a working knowledge of management functions and the analytical skills required for these, while in the second year (part), students pursue elective courses, which may count towards a specialization. (Topics in business ethics may be included at the generalist or specialist level.) After the first year, many full-time students seek internships. The degree culminates with coursework in business strategy, the program capstone. A dissertation or major project is usually a degree requirement after the completion of coursework. Many MBA programs end with a comprehensive exit examination; see below.\nFor Executive MBA programs, the core curriculum is generally similar, but may seek to leverage the strengths associated with the more seasoned and professional profile of the student body, emphasizing leadership, and drawing more from the specific experience of the individual students.\nPrograms are designed such that students gain exposure to theory and practice alike. Courses include lectures, case studies, and team projects; the mix though, will differ by school and by format. Theory is covered in the classroom setting by academic faculty, and is reinforced through the case method, placing the student in the role of the decision maker. Similar to real world business situations, cases include both constraints and incomplete information. Practical learning (field immersion) often comprises consulting projects with real clients, and is generally undertaken in teams (or \"syndicates\"). The practical elements (as well as the case studies) often involve external practitioners \u2013 sometimes business executives \u2013 supporting the teaching from academic faculty. (See and \u00a7 Other approaches; and, generally, .)\nAs outlined, courses begin with underlying topics and then progress to more advanced functional topics where these are applied; see aside.\nThe analytic skills required for management are usually covered initially. \nThe accounting course(s) may treat financial and management accounting separately or in one hybrid course. Financial accounting deals mainly in the interpretation (and preparation) of financial statements while management accounting deals mainly in the analysis of internal results. \nThe economics course covers managerial economics, a technical course that mainly focuses on product pricing as influenced by microeconomic theory, and aggregate-or macroeconomics, which deals with topics like the banking system, the money supply, and inflation. \nOperations Research and statistics are sometimes combined as \"Managerial Decision-Making\" or \"Quantitative Decision-Making\"; \norganizational behavior and human resource management may similarly be combined. \nIn many programs, applicants with appropriate background may be exempt from various analytical courses.\nWith these as underpin, the course then covers the core management functions, and, in turn, allows students to select from further advanced topics as appropriate.\nSome programs treat the curricula here in two parts: the first course provides an overview, while the second revisits the subject in-depth (perhaps as specializations); alternatively, the first addresses short-term, tactical problems, while the second addresses long-term, strategic problems (e.g., \"Financial Management I\" might cover working capital management, while part II covers capital investment decisions). An Information systems / technology course is increasingly included as a core functional course rather than an elective. Ethics training is often delivered with coursework in corporate social responsibility and corporate governance. Note that \u2013 generally \u2013 courses here, although technical in scope, are, ultimately, oriented toward corporate management. (For example, the principal finance course may cover the technicalities of financial instrument valuation and capital raising, but does so from the perspective of managerial finance, as opposed to investment banking.) Technically-oriented courses, if offered, will be via a specialization.\nPrograms may also include coursework-based training in the skills needed at senior levels of management: soft skills, such as (general) leadership and negotiation; hard skills, such as spreadsheets and project management; thinking skills such as innovation and creativity. Training in areas such as multiculturalism and corporate social responsibility is similarly included. Company visits (including overseas travel), and guest lectures or seminars with CEOs and management personalities may also be included. These, with the core subjects, provide the graduate with breadth, while the specialty courses provide depth.\nFor the business strategy component, the degree capstone, the focus is on finding competitive advantage and the long-term positioning and management of the entity as a whole. Here, the key functional areas are thus synthesized to an overall view; the strategy course depicts how the various sub-disciplines integrate to tell one continuous story, with each discipline complementing the others. Corresponding training in business leadership may also be scheduled and participation in a business simulation or game is also a common degree requirement. \"Strategy\" may be offered as a sequence of courses, beginning in the first part (formulation) and culminating in the second (execution), or as a single intensive course, offered during the second part. Some programs offer a specialization in \"strategy\", others in management consulting which substantially addresses the same issues.\nThe MBA dissertation (or thesis in some universities) will, in general, comprise the following in some combination: a discussion of the literature, providing a critical review and structuring of what is known on a given topic, to address a specific problem; a case study that goes beyond simple description, containing the analysis of hitherto unpublished material; a test of the application or limitations of some known principle or technique in a particular situation, and/or suggested modifications.\nAs an alternative to the dissertation, some programs instead allow for a major project. Here (part-time) students will address a problem current in their organization; particularly in programs with an action learning orientation, these may be practically oriented. Most MBA programs require additional course work in research methodology, preceding the dissertation or project. Some programs allow that the research component as a whole may be substituted with additional elective coursework.\nExit examination.\nMany MBA programs culminate in a comprehensive exit examination. The national standardized exam known as the Major Field Test for MBAs (MFT-MBA) has been administered in the MBA programs of over 300 U.S. universities. The MFT-MBA aims to assess skills, knowledge, and reasoning ability within the domain of standard MBA curriculum. It is administered by Educational Testing Service. Another prominent option for comprehensive exit exams is the Common Professional Component Comprehensive Exam for MBAs (CPC COMP Exam for MBAs) owned by Peregrine Academic Services. Many programs choose to administer their own in-house exam rather than a standardized test.\nHonor societies.\nHonor societies recognize individuals for high achievement in MBA programs. These honor societies include:\nCareers.\nAn MBA prepares individuals for many types of careers. According to a survey by the Graduate Management Admissions Council, 64% of year 2012 MBA graduates used their MBA to change careers. Some of the more common jobs an MBA prepares one for include:\nAfrica.\n\"Financial Times\", in its Executive Education Rankings for 2012, included five African business schools.\nNigeria.\nIn Nigeria, business schools administered as colleges within the traditional universities offer a variety of MBA programs. In addition, a few standalone business schools allied with foreign business schools exist in Nigeria.\nSouth Africa.\nIn South Africa, South Africa's Council on Higher Education (CHE) completed an extensive re-accreditation of MBA degrees offered in the country in 2004.\nGhana.\nIn Ghana, business schools of the traditional universities run a variety of MBA programs. Foreign accredited institutions offer MBA degrees by distance learning in Ghana.\nKenya.\nMBA programs in Kenya are offered in many public and private universities.\nStudents choose to specialize in one of the following areas: accounting, finance, entrepreneurship, insurance, and human resources. The course takes four semesters of about four months each.\nAsia.\nInternational MBA programs are acquiring brand value in Asia. For example, while a foreign MBA is still preferred in the Philippines, many students are now studying at one of many \"Global MBA\" English language programs being offered. English-only MBA programs are also offered in Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, and Thailand. For international students who want a different experience, many Asian programs offer scholarships and discounted tuition to encourage an international environment in the classroom.\nRankings have been published for Asia Pacific schools by \"Asia Inc.\", which is a regional business magazine with distribution worldwide. The importance of MBA education in China has risen, too.\nBangladesh.\nThere are now more than 50 business schools in Bangladesh offering the MBA, predominantly targeting graduates without any work experience. Most MBAs are two years full-time. Sensibly there is little use of GMAT. The Business Schools conduct their own admission tests instead although the rationale for this instead of providing introductory courses and certifications is unclear. Classes are taught in English.\nChina.\nIn 1990, the Academic Degrees Office of the State Council formally approved the establishment of MBA degrees and piloted MBA education. In 1991, the Academic Degrees Office of the State Council approved 9 domestic colleges and universities to carry out MBA education pilot work. Since then, mainland China has successively approved more institutions for MBA education training unit. At present, a total of 229 colleges and universities have opened MBA programs in the system, with a total of more than 500 programs.\nIndia.\nIn India, MBA degree is a 2-year postgraduate qualification designed to equip students with advanced business skills and knowledge. It typically covers a wide range of subjects including finance, marketing, human resources, operations, and strategy. One can get MBA degree online as well as offline.\nThere are many business schools and colleges in India offering two-year MBA or PGDM programs accredited by AICTE or UGC.\nThe Indian Institutes of Management is among the world's most selective schools according to \"Bloomberg\" magazine. They offer MBA degrees. There are 21 IIMs in total.\nJapan.\nIn Japan, two business schools offer an accredited MBA degree (AACSB, AMBA, or EQUIS). The concept of an MBA is still not considered mainstream as traditional companies still perceive that knowledge and learning with respect to business and management can only be effectively gained through experience and not within a classroom. In fact, some companies have been known to place recent MBA recipients in unrelated fields, or try to re-acclimate their Japanese employees who have spent years overseas earning the degree. As a consequence, academic institutions in Japan are attempting to reinvent the perception of the MBA degree, by taking into account the local corporate culture.\nMalaysia.\nIn Malaysia, the MBA degree is highly valued by employers for its emphasis on practical skills and strategic thinking. It is often seen as a pathway to career advancement and increased earning potential.\nAdmission requirements for MBA programs in Malaysia typically include a bachelor's degree from a recognized institution, relevant work experience, and sometimes, standardized test scores such as the GMAT or GRE.\nBoth public and private universities offer MBA and EMBA degrees. Most MBAs are in full-time and part-time modes. All MBA degrees are fully conducted in English.\nNepal.\nIn recent years, universities in Nepal are providing both general MBA for freshers and Executive MBA for working professionals. Apart from this, there is distance learning center that are providing online MBA course assosicated with abroad universities.\nPakistan.\nPakistan first offered an MBA program outside the United States in 1955 in collaboration with the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia. Now in Pakistan, there are 187 Universities/Institutes which are recognized by the Higher Education Commission of Pakistan, offering MBA programs to students and professionals.\nSingapore.\nSingapore has different MBA programs of high standing. The 3 national universities in Singapore have top MBA programs; Singapore Management University has triple accreditation, National University of Singapore is top 20 in the world according to the \"Financial Times\" MBA ranking and Nanyang Business School is ranked top 100 by \"The Economist\". In addition, many international institutions such as INSEAD, ESSEC, EDHEC and others have a campus in Singapore where MBA programs, among others, are offered.\nSouth Korea.\nKorean universities offer full-time and part-time MBA programs that usually consist of a two-year curriculum. The first MBA program was offered in 1963 by Korea University Business School (KUBS). In 2007, the Korean Government established \"BK21\", a project that supports Korean universities in order to develop their competitiveness in the global MBA market. Korea University Business School topped the evaluation of BK21 professional business graduate schools for six consecutive years. In the meantime, only two universities in Korea ranked in the \"2015 Global Top 100 Executive MBA (EMBA) Rankings\" conducted by UK \"Financial Times\". Korea University Business School and Yonsei University ranked 27th and 45th worldwide, respectively.\nEurope.\nHistory.\nIn 1957, INSEAD (, or European Institute of Business Administration) became the first European university to offer an MBA degree, and also pioneered the\none-year (12-month) degree that has become standard across Europe. This was followed by Antwerp Management School (postgraduate program in business management) in 1959 and by ESADE Business School, University Culture Dublin and Trinity College Dublin in 1964. Also in 1964, IESE Business School launched the first two-year MBA in Europe.\nFollowing the Franks Report in the UK in 1963, a number of British business schools were established in the 1960s offering MBA courses (initially called MSc courses at most institutions until rebranded in the 1970s), mostly at the new plate glass universities and former colleges of advanced technology that had become universities since 1960. The two major schools set up by the UK government as a direct result of the report were London Business School, which offered an MBA from 1966, and Manchester Business School, which opened in 1965 but did not offer an MBA until 1967. Both of these were two year courses, despite Franks' recommendation to pursue one-year master's degrees, and were initially called MScs rather than MBAs. The first course to actually bear the title of MBA was the 12-month course launched by the University of Strathclyde in 1966. Many other 12-month master's courses also started in the 1960s, including at Aston (as a diploma until 1975), Bradford (1968), City (1966), Cranfield (1968), Durham (1967) and Warwick (1968).\nElsewhere, MBAs were launched at the KU Leuven in 1968; and at the HEC School of Management in 1969.\nThe Association of MBAs was established in Britain in 1967 as the Business Graduates Association. It started accrediting British MBAs in 1983, expanding this to cover international schools and distance learning MBAs in 1990. Twelve UK business schools formed the Conference of University Management Schools (now the Chartered Association of Business Schools) in 1971.\nThe European Foundation for Management Development was founded in 1972 to promote management education in Europe, and had 193 members by 1973. It established the EFMD Quality Improvement System accreditation for business schools in 1997.\nAustria.\nIn Austria, MBA programs of private universities have to be accredited by the Austrian Accreditation Council (\"\u00d6sterreichischer Akkreditierungsrat\"). State-run universities have no accreditation requirements, however, some of them voluntarily undergo accreditation procedures by independent bodies. There are also MBA programs of non-academic business schools, who are entitled by the Austrian government to offer these programs until the end of 2012 (\"Lehrgang universit\u00e4ren Charakters\"). Some non-academic institutions cooperate with state-run universities to ensure the legality of their degrees.\nCzech Republic.\nIn the Czech Republic, the first meeting of the Association of the Czech MBA Schools (CAMBAS) was held in January 1999. The association is housed within the Centre for Doctoral and Managerial Studies of UEP, Prague. All of the founding members of the association to have their MBA programs accredited by partner institutions in the United Kingdom or the United States.\nFinland.\nIn Finland, Master of Business Administration degrees are awarded by business schools of Aalto University, Hanken, University of Turku, University of Vaasa and University of Oulu. In Finnish this degree is called \"kauppatieteiden maisteri\". Universities of applied sciences award degrees which in Finnish are called \"tradenomi (YAMK)\" but use the same English title \"Master of Business Administration\" as the ones awarded by business schools. Both degrees are recognized as higher education degrees in Finland, yet only the business school graduates are typically referred as \"masters\".\nFrance and French-speaking countries.\nIn France and the Francophone countries, including Belgium, Canada, Monaco, and Switzerland, the MBA degree programs at the public accredited schools are similar to those offered in the Anglo-Saxon countries. Most French Business Schools are accredited by the Conf\u00e9rence des Grandes \u00e9coles.\nGermany.\nGermany was one of the last Western countries to adopt an MBA degree. In 1998, the \"Hochschulrahmengesetz\" (Higher Education Framework Act), a German federal law regulating higher education including the types of degrees offered, was modified to permit German universities to offer master's degrees. The traditional German degree in business administration was the Diplom in \"Betriebswirtschaft\" (Diplom-Kaufmann/Diplom-Kauffrau), But since 1999, bachelor's and master's degrees have gradually replaced the traditional degrees due to the Bologna process. Most German business schools now offer an MBA.\nMost German states require that MBA degrees have to be accredited by one of the six agencies officially recognized by the German \"Akkreditierungsrat\" (accreditation council), the German counterpart to the American CHEA. The busiest of these six agencies (with respect to MBA degrees) is the Foundation for International Business Administration Accreditation (FIBAA). All universities themselves have to be institutionally accredited by the state ().\nItaly.\nIn Italy, MBA programs at public accredited schools are similar to those offered elsewhere in Europe. Italian Business Schools are accredited by EQUIS and by ASFOR.\nPoland.\nThere are several MBA programs offered in Poland. Some of these are run as partnerships with European, American, or Canadian Universities. Others rely on their own faculty and enrich their courses by inviting visiting lecturers. Several MBA programs in Poland are also offered in English.\nPortugal.\nSeveral business schools offer highly ranked MBA programs in Portugal. Portuguese MBA programs are increasingly internationally oriented, being taught in English.\nSpain.\nSpain has a long history in offering MBA programs with three MBA programs frequently being ranked in the Top 25 worldwide by several international rankings. Spanish MBAs are culturally diverse and taught in English.\nSwitzerland.\nSeveral schools in Switzerland offer an MBA as full-time, part-time, and executive education programs. Some business schools offer MBA programs with specializations such as Finance and Healthcare, technology management, and others. As a country with four different national languages (German, French, Italian, and Romansh), Switzerland offers most of its programs in English to attract international students to the country.\nTurkey.\nPostgraduate business education in Turkey began in 1954 with the one-year Executive Business Administration Program in collaboration with Harvard Business School, which followed the case study method. The first MBA program in Turkey was established in 1977. Today, six private and public business schools in Turkey hold accreditation from the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business (AACSB), and one of them has obtained triple accreditation. Turkish MBAs, offered in both English and Turkish, are also included in international rankings such as those by the \"Financial Times\", \"QS\", \"THE\", and \"Eduniversal\". Two business schools in Turkey host chapters of Beta Gamma Sigma Business Honor Society.\nUkraine.\nRecently MBA programs appeared in Ukraine, where there are now about twenty schools of business offering a variety of MBA programs. Three of these are subsidiaries of European schools of business, while the remaining institutions are independent. Ukrainian MBA programs are concentrated mainly on particulars of business and management in Ukraine.\nFor example, 2/3 of all case studies are based on real conditions of Ukrainian companies.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe United Kingdom-based Association of MBAs (AMBA) was established in 1967 and is an active advocate for MBA degrees. The association's accreditation service is internationally recognized for all MBA, DBA, and Masters in Business and Management (MBM) programs. AMBA also offers the only professional membership association for MBA students and graduates.\nUK MBA programs typically consist of a set number of taught courses plus a dissertation or project. AMBA accreditation requires \"the equivalent of at least 1,800 hours of learning effort\", the same as a standard UK master's degree.\nOceania.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, 42 Australian business schools offer the MBA degree (16 are AACSB, AMBA or EQUIS accredited). Universities differentiate themselves by gaining international accreditation and focusing on national and international rankings. Most MBAs are one to two years full-time. There is little use of GMAT, and instead, each educational institution specifies its own requirements, which normally entails several years of management-level work experience as well as proven academic skills.\nGraduate Management Association of Australia carries out ratings for Australian MBAs and annually publishes Australian MBA Star Ratings.\nThe Financial Review Boss carries out biennial rankings of Australian MBAs.\nNew Zealand.\nIn New Zealand, most universities offer MBA classes, typically through part-time arrangement or evening classes. Only two universities offer full-time programs to international students, the University of Otago (Otago MBA) and Auckland University of Technology (AUT). The Otago MBA is the longer established of the two, offering a 240 points program while AUT MBA is a 180-point program.\nProgram rankings.\nSince 1967, publications have ranked MBA programs using various methods. The \"Gourman Report\" (1967\u20131997) did not disclose criteria or ranking methods, and these reports were criticized for reporting statistically impossible data, such as no ties among schools, narrow gaps in scores with no variation in gap widths, and ranks of nonexistent departments. In 1977 \"The Carter Report\" ranked MBA programs based on the number of academic articles published by faculty, the \"Ladd &amp; Lipset Survey\" ranked business schools based on faculty surveys, and \"MBA Magazine\" ranked schools based on votes cast by business school deans.\nToday, publications by the Aspen Institute, \"Business Week\", \"The Economist\", \"Financial Times\", \"Forbes\", Quacquarelli Symonds, \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\", and the \"Wall Street Journal\" make their own rankings of MBA programs. Schools' ranks can vary across publications, as the methodologies for rankings differ among publications:\nThe ranking of MBA programs has been discussed in articles and on academic websites. Critics of ranking methodologies maintain that any published rankings should be viewed with caution for the following reasons:\nOne study found that ranking MBA programs by a combination of graduates' starting salaries and average student GMAT score can approximately duplicate the top 20 list of the national publications, and concluded that a truly objective ranking would use objective measures of program quality and be individualized to the needs of each prospective student. National publications have recognized the value of rankings against different criteria and now offer lists ranked different ways: by salary, GMAT score of students, selectivity, and so forth. While useful, these rankings have yet to meet the critique that rankings are not tailored to individual needs, that they use an incomplete population of schools, may fail to distinguish between the different MBA program types offered by each school, or rely on subjective interviews.\nCriticism.\nArticles have been written about public perceptions of the crisis, ranging from schools' acknowledgment of issues with the training students receive to criticisms of the MBA's role in society. After the Great Recession, the media raised questions about the value and content of business school programs. Prior to the 2008 financial crisis, graduates had reportedly tended to go into finance after receiving their degrees. As financial professionals are widely seen as responsible for the global economic meltdown, anecdotal evidence suggests new graduates are choosing different career paths. Deans at top business schools have also acknowledged that media and public perception of the MBA degree shifted as a result of the Great Recession.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47294", "revid": "30292728", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47294", "title": "MusicCity Morpheus", "text": ""}
{"id": "47295", "revid": "839494", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47295", "title": "Hapi (Son of Horus)", "text": ""}
{"id": "47299", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47299", "title": "Kinematograph", "text": ""}
{"id": "47300", "revid": "50970642", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47300", "title": "Movable type", "text": "Printing technology and system based on reconfigurable blocks of glyphs\nMovable type (US English; moveable type in British English) is the system and technology of printing and typography that uses movable components to reproduce the elements of a document (usually individual alphanumeric characters or punctuation marks) usually on the medium of paper.\nOverview.\nThe world's first movable type printing technology for paper books was made of porcelain materials and was invented around 1040\u00a0AD in China during the Northern Song dynasty by the inventor Bi Sheng (990\u20131051). The invention was recorded in the Dream Pool Essays by Chinese scholar-official and polymath Shen Kuo (1031\u20131095 CE). This extant book provides a detailed description of the technical details of Bi Sheng's invention of movable type printing. The first recorded use of (metal) copper movable type in the 12th century is from a legal and financial document of the Jin Dynasty. This printed paper document titled Jinchao Zhu Chao Gongyi \u300a\u91d1\u671d\u94f8\u949e\u5de5\u827a\u300b- \"Jin Dynasty Paper Money Printing Process\", is a technical specification or report related to the production of paper currency. The document is dated between 1137 and 1162 during the reign of Emperor Hailingwang (\u5b8c\u989c\u4eae), which places it firmly in the mid-12th century. The critical piece of evidence comes from a notation within this document. It states that the method used to print paper money with \"\u94dc\u7248\u9542\u82b1\" (tong ban lou hua), which translates to \"copper plate with engraved patterns/characters,\u201d using individual copper characters arranged on a plate for printing the identifying code of the money to be circulated. Another book in 1193 CE that describes the use of clay movable type is the Yutang Zaji \u300a\u7389\u5802\u6742\u8bb0\u300b \"Miscellaneous Records of the Jade Hall\" by Zhou Bida, a prominent statesman and scholar, who personally documented on the preface of his book, that he used the method of \"clay characters\" (\u6ce5\u5b57) to print his book. Yutang Zaji is a book, specifically a work of Chinese biji (miscellany notes) literature. Biji books are a genre of Chinese writing that feature an eclectic mix of anecdotes, observations, historical notes, and literary criticism, without a strict organizational structure. The Yutang zaji is part of this tradition. This is the oldest extant book that was printed using movable type. Since it\u2019s considered an important primary source for the study of Song Dynasty bureaucratic and cultural history, there are modern printed editions and digital versions of this text. The Yuan dynasty official Wang Zhen used wooden movable type for printing paper money, as evidenced by a preserved 1287 printing plate for a \"Yuan Dynasty banknote\". The earliest adoption of this practice was in Korea during the Goryeo Dynasty in the 14th century, with the later creation of the Jikji in 1377 - a book printed with movable type by Choe Yun-ui during Korea\u2019s Goryeo dynasty, using metal (bronze alloys) movable type.\nThe spread of both movable-type systems was, to some degree, limited to primarily East Asia. The creation of the printing press in Europe may have been influenced by various sporadic reports of movable type technology brought back to Europe by returning business people and missionaries to China. Some of these medieval European accounts are still preserved in the library archives of the Vatican and Oxford University among many others.\nAround 1450, German goldsmith Johannes Gutenberg invented the metal movable-type printing press, along with innovations in casting the type based on a matrix and hand mould. The small number of alphabetic characters needed for European languages was an important factor. Gutenberg was the first to create his type pieces from an alloy of lead, tin, and antimony\u2014and these materials remained standard for 550 years.\nFor alphabetic scripts, movable-type page setting was quicker than woodblock printing. The metal type pieces were more durable and the lettering was more uniform, leading to typography and fonts. The high quality and relatively low price of the Gutenberg Bible (1455) established the superiority of movable type in Europe and the use of printing presses spread rapidly. The printing press may be regarded as one of the key factors fostering the Renaissance and, due to its effectiveness, its use spread around the globe.\nThe 19th-century invention of hot metal typesetting and its successors caused movable type to decline in the 20th century.\nPrecursors to movable type.\nLetter punch and coins.\nThe technique of imprinting multiple copies of symbols or glyphs with a master \"type\" punch made of hard metal first developed around 3000 BC in ancient Sumer. These metal punch types can be seen as precursors of the letter punches adapted in later millennia to printing with movable metal type. Cylinder seals were used in Mesopotamia to create an impression on a surface by rolling the seal on wet clay.\nSeals and stamps.\nSeals and stamps may have been precursors to movable type. The uneven spacing of the impressions on brick stamps found in the Mesopotamian cities of Uruk and Larsa, dating from the 2nd millennium BC, has been conjectured by some archaeologists as evidence that the stamps were made using movable type. The enigmatic Minoan Phaistos Disc of c.\u20091800\u20131600 BC has been considered by one scholar as an early example of a body of text being reproduced with reusable characters: it may have been produced by pressing pre-formed hieroglyphic \"seals\" into the soft clay. A few authors even view the disc as technically meeting all definitional criteria to represent an early incidence of movable-type printing. In the West the practice of sealing documents with an impressed personal or official insignia, typically from a worn signet ring, became established under the Roman Empire, and continued through the Byzantine and Holy Roman empires, into the 19th century, when a wet signature became customary.\nSeals in China have been used since at least the Shang dynasty (2nd millennium BCE). In the Western Zhou, sets of seal stamps were encased in blocks of type and used on clay moulds for casting bronzes. By the end of the 3rd century BCE, seals were also used for printing on pottery. In the Northern dynasties textual sources contain references to wooden seals with up to 120 characters. The seals had a religious element to them. Daoists used seals as healing devices by impressing therapeutic characters onto the flesh of sick people. They were also used to stamp food, creating a talismanic character to ward off disease. The first evidence of these practices appeared under a Buddhist context in the mid 5th century CE. Centuries later, seals were used to create hundreds of Buddha images. According to Tsien Tsuen-hsuin, Chinese seals had greater potential to turn into movable type due to their square, rectangular, and flat shape suited to a printing surface, whereas seals in the west were cylindrical or scabaroid, round or oval, and mostly used for pictures rather than writing.\nWoodblock printing.\nBones, shells, bamboo slips, metal tablets, stone tablets, silk, as well as other materials were previously used for writing. However, following the invention of paper during the Chinese Han dynasty, writing materials became more portable and economical. Yet, copying books by hand was still labour-consuming. Not until the Xiping Era (172\u2013178 AD), towards the end of the Eastern Han dynasty, did sealing print and monotype appear. These were used to print designs on fabrics and to print texts.\nBy about the 8th century during the Tang dynasty, woodblock printing was invented and worked as follows. First, the neat hand-copied script was stuck on a relatively thick and smooth board, with the front of the paper sticking to the board, the paper being so thin it was transparent, the characters showing in reverse distinctly so that every stroke could be easily recognized. Then, carvers cut away the parts of the board that were not part of the character, so that the characters were cut in relief, completely differently from those cut intaglio. When printing, the bulging characters would have some ink spread on them and be covered by paper. With workers' hands moving on the back of paper gently, characters would be printed on the paper. By the Song dynasty, woodblock printing came to its heyday. Although woodblock printing played an influential role in spreading culture, there were some significant drawbacks. Carving the printing plate required considerable time, labour, and materials. It also was not convenient to store these plates and was difficult to correct mistakes.\nHistory.\nCeramic movable type.\nBi Sheng () (990\u20131051) developed the first known movable-type system for printing in China around 1040\u00a0AD during the Northern Song dynasty, using ceramic materials. As described by the Chinese scholar Shen Kuo (\u6c88\u62ec) (1031\u20131095):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAfter his death, ceramic movable type may have spread to the Tangut kingdom of Western Xia, where a Buddhist text known as the \"Vimalakirti Nirdesa Sutra\" was found in modern Wuwei, Gansu, dating to the reign of Emperor Renzong of Western Xia (r. 1125-1193). The text features traits that have been identified as hallmarks of ceramic movable type such as the hollowness of the character strokes and deformed and broken strokes. The ceramic movable-type also passed onto Bi Sheng's descendants. The next mention of movable type occurred in 1193 when a Southern Song chief counselor, Zhou Bida (), attributed the movable-type method of printing to Shen Kuo. However Shen Kuo did not invent the movable type but credited it to Bi Sheng in his \"Dream Pool Essays\". Zhou used ceramic type to print print the \"Yutang Zaji\" (Notes of the Jade Hall) in 1193. Further evidence of the spread of movable type appears in the \"Bingl\u00fc Xiansheng Wenji\" (Collected Works of Master Palm) by Deng Su (1091-1132), which references the use of metal frames in movable type printing to print poems. The ceramic movable type was mentioned by Kublai Khan's councilor Yao Shu, who convinced his pupil Yang Gu to print language primers using this method.\nThe claim that Bi Sheng's ceramic types were \"fragile\" and \"not practical for large-scale printing\" and \"short lived\" were refuted by later experiments. Bao Shicheng (1775\u20131885) wrote that fired clay moveable type was \"as hard and tough as horn\"; experiments show that clay type, after being fired in a kiln, becomes hard and difficult to break, such that it remains intact after being dropped from a height of two metres onto a marble floor. The length of ceramic movable types in China was 1 to 2 centimetres, not 2\u00a0mm, thus hard as horn. But similar to metal type, ceramic type did not hold the water-based Chinese calligraphic ink well, and had an added disadvantage of uneven matching of the type which could sometimes result from the uneven changes in size of the type during the firing process.\nCeramic movable type was used as late as 1844 in China from the Song dynasty through to the Qing dynasty.\nWooden movable type.\nBi Sheng (990\u20131051) of the Song dynasty also pioneered the use of wooden movable type around 1040\u00a0AD, as described by the Chinese scholar Shen Kuo (1031\u20131095). However, this technology was abandoned in favour of clay movable types due to the presence of wood grains and the unevenness of the wooden type after being soaked in ink.\nA number of books printed in Tangut script during the Western Xia (1038\u20131227) period are known, of which the \"Auspicious Tantra of All-Reaching Union\", which was discovered in the ruins of Baisigou Square Pagoda in 1991 is believed to have been printed sometime during the reign of Emperor Renzong of Western Xia (1139\u20131193). It is considered by many Chinese experts to be the earliest extant example of a book printed using wooden movable type.\nIn 1298, Wang Zhen (), a Yuan dynasty governmental official of Jingde County, Anhui Province, China, re-invented a method of making movable wooden types. He made more than 30,000 wooden movable types and printed 100 copies of \"Records of Jingde County\" (), a book of more than 60,000 Chinese characters. Soon afterwards, he summarized his invention in his book \"A method of making moveable wooden types for printing books\". Although the wooden type was more durable under the mechanical rigors of handling, repeated printing wore down the character faces, and the types could only be replaced by carving new pieces. This system was later enhanced by pressing wooden blocks into sand and casting metal types from the depression in copper, bronze, iron or tin. This new method overcame many of the shortcomings of woodblock printing. Rather than manually carving an individual block to print a single page, movable type printing allowed for the quick assembly of a page of text. Furthermore, these new, more compact type fonts could be reused and stored. Wang Zhen used two rotating circular tables as trays for laying out his type. The first table was separated into 24 trays in which each movable type was categorized based on a number corresponding with a rhyming pattern. The second table contained miscellaneous characters.\nThe set of wafer-like metal stamp types could be assembled to form pages, inked, and page impressions taken from rubbings on cloth or paper. In 1322, a Fenghua county officer Ma Chengde () in Zhejiang, made 100,000 wooden movable types and printed the 43-volume \"Daxue Yanyi\" (). Wooden movable types were used continually in China. Even as late as 1733, a 2300-volume \"Wuying Palace Collected Gems Edition\" () was printed with 253,500 wooden movable types on order of the Qianlong Emperor, and completed in one year.\nMetal movable type.\nChina.\nAt least 13 material finds in China indicate the invention of bronze movable type printing in China no later than the 12th century, with the country producing large-scale bronze-plate-printed paper money and formal official documents issued by the Jin (1115\u20131234) and Southern Song (1127\u20131279) dynasties with embedded bronze metal types for anti-counterfeit markers. Such paper-money printing might date back to the 11th-century \"jiaozi\" of Northern Song (960\u20131127).\nThe typical example of this kind of bronze movable type embedded copper-block printing is a printed \"check\" of the Jin dynasty with two square holes for embedding two bronze movable-type characters, each selected from 1,000 different characters, such that each printed paper note has a different combination of markers. A copper-block printed note dated between 1215 and 1216 in the collection of Luo Zhenyu's \"Pictorial Paper Money of the Four Dynasties\", 1914, shows two special characters\u2014one called \"Ziliao\", the other called \"Zihao\"\u2014for the purpose of preventing counterfeiting; over the \"Ziliao\" there is a small character (\u8f36) printed with movable copper type, while over the \"Zihao\" there is an empty square hole\u2014apparently the associated copper metal type was lost. Another sample of Song dynasty money of the same period in the collection of the Shanghai Museum has two empty square holes above \"Ziliao\" as well as \"Zihou\", due to the loss of the two copper movable types. Song dynasty bronze block embedded with bronze metal movable type printed paper money was issued on a large scale and remained in circulation for a long time.\nThe 1298 book \"Zao Huozi Yinshufa\" () by the Yuan dynasty (1271\u20131368) official Wang Zhen mentions tin movable type, used probably since the Southern Song dynasty (1127\u20131279), but this was largely experimental. It was unsatisfactory due to its incompatibility with the inking process. But by the late 15th century these concerns were resolved and bronze type was widely used in Chinese printing.\nDuring the Mongol Empire (1206\u20131405), printing using movable type spread from China to Central Asia. The Uyghurs of Central Asia used movable type, their script type adopted from the Mongol language, some with Chinese words printed between the pages\u2014strong evidence that the books were printed in China.\nDuring the Ming dynasty (1368\u20131644), Hua Sui in 1490 used bronze type in printing books. In 1574 the massive 1000-volume encyclopedia \"Imperial Readings of the Taiping Era\" () was printed with bronze movable type.\nIn 1725 the Qing dynasty government made 250,000 bronze movable-type characters and printed 64 sets of the encyclopedic \"Complete Classics Collection of Ancient China\" (). Each set consisted of 5,040 volumes, making a total of 322,560 volumes printed using movable type.\nKorea.\nIn 1234 the first books known to have been printed in metallic type set were published in Goryeo dynasty Korea. They form a set of ritual books, \"Sangjeong Gogeum Yemun\", compiled by Ch'oe Yun-\u016di.\nWhile these books have not survived, \"Jikji\", printed in Korea in 1377, is believed to be the world's oldest metallic movable type-printed book.\nHowever, 2022 research suggests that a copy of the Song of Enlightenment with Commentaries by Buddhist Monk \"Nammyeong Cheon,\" printed 138 years before \"Jikji\" in 1239\",\" may have been printed in metal type. The Asian Reading Room of the Library of Congress in Washington, D.C., displays examples of this metal type. Commenting on the invention of metallic types by Koreans, French scholar Henri-Jean Martin described this as \"[extremely similar] to Gutenberg's\". However, Korean movable metal type printing differed from European printing in the materials used for the type, punch, matrix, mould and in method of making an impression.\nThe techniques for bronze casting, used at the time for making coins (as well as bells and statues) were adapted to making metal type. The Joseon dynasty scholar Seong Hyeon (\uc131\ud604, \u6210\u4fd4, 1439\u20131504) records the following description of the Korean font-casting process:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA potential solution to the linguistic and cultural bottleneck that held back movable type in Korea for 200 years appeared in the early 15th century\u2014a generation before Gutenberg would begin working on his own movable-type invention in Europe\u2014when Sejong the Great devised a simplified alphabet of 24 characters (hangul) for use by the common people, which could have made the typecasting and compositing process more feasible. But Korea's cultural elite, \"appalled at the idea of losing hanja, the badge of their elitism\", stifled the adoption of the new alphabet.\nA \"Confucian prohibition on the commercialization of printing\" also obstructed the proliferation of movable type, restricting the distribution of books produced using the new method to the government. The technique was restricted to use by the royal foundry for official state publications only, where the focus was on reprinting Chinese classics lost in 1126 when Korea's libraries and palaces had perished in a conflict between dynasties.\nScholarly debate and speculation has occurred as to whether Eastern movable type spread to Europe between the late 14th century and early 15th centuries. For example, authoritative historians Frances Gies and Joseph Gies claimed that \"The Asian priority of invention movable type is now firmly established, and that Chinese-Korean technique, or a report of it traveled westward is almost certain.\" However, Joseph P. McDermott claimed that \"No text indicates the presence or knowledge of any kind of Asian movable type or movable type imprint in Europe before 1450. The material evidence is even more conclusive.\"\nEurope.\nJohannes Gutenberg of Mainz, Germany, invented the printing press, using a metal movable type system. Gutenberg, as a goldsmith, knew techniques of cutting punches for making coins from moulds. Between 1436 and 1450 he developed hardware and techniques for casting letters from matrices using a device called the hand mould. Gutenberg's key invention and contribution to movable-type printing in Europe, the hand mould, was the first practical means of making cheap copies of letterpunches in the vast quantities needed to print complete books, making the movable-type printing process a viable enterprise.\nBefore Gutenberg, scribes copied books by hand on scrolls and paper, or print-makers printed texts from hand-carved wooden blocks. Either process took a long time; even a small book could take months to complete. Because carved letters or blocks were flimsy and the wood susceptible to ink, the blocks had a limited lifespan.\nGutenberg and his associates developed oil-based inks ideally suited to printing with a press on paper, and the first Latin typefaces. His method of casting type may have differed from the hand-mould used in subsequent decades. Detailed analysis of the type used in his 42-line Bible has revealed irregularities in some of the characters that cannot be attributed to ink spread or type wear under the pressure of the press. Scholars conjecture that the type pieces may have been cast from a series of matrices made with a series of individual stroke punches, producing many different versions of the same glyph. It has also been suggested that the method used by Gutenberg involved using a single punch to make a mould, but the mould was such that the process of taking the type out disturbed the casting, causing variants and anomalies, and that the punch-matrix system came into use possibly around the 1470s.\nThis raises the possibility that the development of movable type in the West may have been progressive rather than a single innovation.\nGutenberg's movable-type printing system spread rapidly across Europe, from the single Mainz printing press in 1457 to 110 presses by 1480, with 50 of them in Italy. Venice quickly became the centre of typographic and printing activity. Significant contributions came from Nicolas Jenson, Francesco Griffo, Aldus Manutius, and other printers of late 15th-century Europe. Gutenberg's movable type printing system offered a number of advantages over previous movable type techniques. The lead-antimony-tin alloy used by Gutenberg had half the melting temperature of bronze, making it easier to cast the type and aided the use of reusable metal matrix moulds instead of the expendable sand and clay moulds. The use of antimony alloy increased hardness of the type compared to lead and tin for improved durability of the type. The reusable metal matrix allowed a single experienced worker to produce 4,000 to 5,000 individual types a day, while Wang Chen had artisans working two years to make 60,000 wooden types.\nType-founding.\nStages.\nType-founding as practised in Europe and the West consists of three stages:\nNational traditions.\nThe type-height varied in different countries. The Monotype Corporation Limited in London UK produced moulds in various heights:\nA Dutch printer's manual mentions a tiny difference between French and German Height:\nTiny differences in type-height can cause quite bold images of characters.\nAt the end of the 19th century there were only two typefoundries left in the Netherlands: Johan Ensched\u00e9 &amp; Zonen, at Haarlem, and Lettergieterij Amsterdam, voorheen Tetterode. They both had their own type-height: Ensched\u00e9: 65 23/24 points Didot, and Amsterdam: 66 1/24 points Didot\u2014enough difference to prevent a combined use of fonts from the two typefoundries: Enschede would be too light, or otherwise the Amsterdam-font would print rather bold. This was a way of keeping clients.\nIn 1905 the Dutch governmental , later: \"State-printery\" () decided during a reorganisation to use a standard type-height of 63 points Didot. , actually Belgium-height, but this fact was not widely known.\nTypesetting.\nModern, factory-produced movable type was available in the late 19th century. It was held in the printing shop in a \"job case\", a drawer about 2\u00a0inches high, a yard wide, and about two feet deep, with many small compartments for the various letters and ligatures. The most popular and accepted of the job case designs in America was the California Job Case, which took its name from the Pacific coast location of the foundries that made the case popular.\nTraditionally, the capital letters were stored in a separate drawer or case that was located above the case that held the other letters; this is why capital letters are called \"upper case\" characters while the non-capitals are \"lower case\".\nCompartments also held spacers, which are blocks of blank type used to separate words and fill out a line of type, such as \"em\" and \"en\" quads (\"quadrats\", or spaces. A \"quadrat\" is a block of type whose face is lower than the printing letters so that it does not itself print.). An em space was the width of a capital letter \"M\"\u2014as wide as it was high\u2014while an en space referred to a space half the width of its height (usually the dimensions for a capital \"N\").\nIndividual letters are assembled into words and lines of text with the aid of a composing stick, and the whole assembly is tightly bound together to make up a page image called a \"forme\", where all letter faces are exactly the same height to form a flat surface of type. The forme is mounted on a printing press, a thin coating of viscous ink is applied, and impressions are made on paper under great pressure in the press. \"Sorts\" is the term given to special characters not freely available in the typical type case, such as the \"@\" mark.\nMetal type combined with other methods.\nSometimes, it is erroneously stated that printing with metal type replaced the earlier methods. In the industrial era printing methods would be chosen to suit the purpose. For example, when printing large scale letters in posters etc. the metal type would have proved too heavy and economically unviable. Thus, large scale type was made as carved wood blocks as well as ceramics plates. Also in many cases where large scale text was required, it was simpler to hand the job to a sign painter than a printer. Images could be printed together with movable type if they were made as woodcuts or wood engravings as long as the blocks were made to the same type height. If intaglio methods, such as copper plates, were used for the images, then images and the text would have required separate print runs on different machines.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47302", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47302", "title": "Stock brokers", "text": ""}
{"id": "47304", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47304", "title": "Georges Melies", "text": ""}
{"id": "47305", "revid": "1285486593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47305", "title": "Closure", "text": "Closure may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "47306", "revid": "11090621", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47306", "title": "Regular open set", "text": "A subset formula_1 of a topological space formula_2 is called a regular open set if it is equal to the interior of its closure; expressed symbolically, if formula_3 or, equivalently, if formula_4 where formula_5 formula_6 and formula_7 denote, respectively, the interior, closure and boundary of formula_8\nA subset formula_1 of formula_2 is called a regular closed set if it is equal to the closure of its interior; expressed symbolically, if formula_11 or, equivalently, if formula_12\nExamples.\nIf formula_13 has its usual Euclidean topology then the open set formula_14 is not a regular open set, since formula_15 Every open interval in formula_16 is a regular open set and every non-degenerate closed interval (that is, a closed interval containing at least two distinct points) is a regular closed set. A singleton formula_17 is a closed subset of formula_16 but not a regular closed set because its interior is the empty set formula_19 so that formula_20\nProperties.\nA subset of formula_2 is a regular open set if and only if its complement in formula_2 is a regular closed set. Every regular open set is an open set and every regular closed set is a closed set.\nA subset formula_23 in a topological space formula_2 is a regular open set if and only if formula_25 for some formula_26. This is a consequence of the maximal and minimal properties of the interior and closure operators which when combined, they lead to\nformula_27\nformula_28\nEach clopen subset of formula_2 (which includes formula_30 and formula_2 itself) is simultaneously a regular open subset and regular closed subset.\nThe intersection (but not necessarily the union) of two regular open sets is a regular open set. Similarly, the union (but not necessarily the intersection) of two regular closed sets is a regular closed set.\nThe collection of all regular open sets in formula_2 forms a complete Boolean algebra; the join operation is given by formula_33 the meet is formula_34 and the complement is formula_35\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47307", "revid": "7279", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47307", "title": "Lumi\u00e8re brothers", "text": ""}
{"id": "47308", "revid": "12588", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47308", "title": "Topological base", "text": ""}
{"id": "47309", "revid": "12202748", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47309", "title": "Striptease", "text": "Erotic dance\nA striptease is an erotic or exotic dance in which the performer gradually undresses, either partly or completely, in a seductive and sexually suggestive manner. The person who performs a striptease is commonly known as a \"stripper\", \"exotic dancer\", or \"burlesque dancer\".\nThe origins of striptease as a performance art are disputed, and various dates and occasions have been given from ancient Babylonia to 20th-century America. The term \"striptease\" was first recorded in 1932. In Western countries, venues where stripteases are performed on a regular basis are now usually called strip clubs, but striptease may also be performed in venues such as pubs (especially in the United Kingdom), theaters and music halls. At times, a stripper may be hired to perform at a bachelor or bachelorette party. In addition to providing adult entertainment, stripping can be a form of sexual play between partners.\nStriptease involves a slow, sensuous undressing. The stripper may prolong the undressing by wearing additional items of clothing (thus having more to remove) or putting clothes or hands in front of just-undressed body parts such as the breasts or genitalia. The emphasis is on the act of undressing along with sexually suggestive movement, rather than the state of being undressed. In the past, the performance often finished as soon as the undressing was finished, though more recently strippers may continue dancing in the nude. The costume the stripper wears before disrobing can form part of the act. In some cases, audience interaction can form part of the act, with the audience urging the stripper to remove more clothing, or the stripper approaching the audience to interact with them. \nStriptease and public nudity have been subject to legal and cultural prohibitions and other aesthetic considerations and taboos. Restrictions on venues may be through venue licensing requirements and constraints and a wide variety of national and local laws. These laws vary considerably around the world, and even between different parts of the same country. H. L. Mencken is credited with coining the word \"ecdysiast\"\u00a0\u2013 from \"ecdysis\", meaning \"to molt\"\u00a0\u2013 in response to a request from striptease artist Georgia Sothern, for a \"more dignified\" way to refer to her profession. Gypsy Rose Lee, one of the most famous striptease artists of all time, approved of the term.\nHistory.\nThe origins of striptease as a performance art are disputed and various dates and occasions have been given from ancient Babylonia to 20th century America. The term \"striptease\" was first recorded in 1932.\nThere is a stripping aspect in the ancient Sumerian myth of the descent of the goddess Inanna into the Underworld (or Kur). At each of the seven gates, she removed an article of clothing or a piece of jewelry. As long as she remained in hell, the earth was barren. When she returned, fecundity abounded. Some believe this myth was embodied in the dance of the seven veils of Salome, who danced for King Herod, as mentioned in the New Testament in Matthew 14:6 and Mark 6:21-22. However, although the Bible records Salome's dance, the first mention of her removing seven veils occurs in Oscar Wilde's play \"Salome\", in 1893.\nIn ancient Greece, the lawgiver Solon established several classes of prostitutes in the late 6th century BC. Among these classes of prostitutes were the \"auletrides\": female dancers, acrobats, and musicians, noted for dancing naked in an alluring fashion in front of audiences of men. In ancient Rome, dance featuring stripping was part of the entertainments \"(ludi)\" at the Floralia, an April festival in honor of the goddess Flora. Empress Theodora, wife of 6th-century Byzantine emperor Justinian is reported by several ancient sources to have started in life as a courtesan and actress who performed in acts inspired from mythological themes and in which she disrobed \"as far as the laws of the day allowed\". She was famous for her striptease performance of Leda and the Swan. From these accounts, it appears that the practice was hardly exceptional nor new. It was, however, actively opposed by the Christian Church, which succeeded in obtaining statutes banning it in the following century. The degree to which these statutes were subsequently enforced is, of course, opened to question. What is certain is that no practice of the sort is reported in texts of the European Middle Ages.\nAn early version of striptease became popular in England at the time of the Restoration. A striptease was incorporated into the Restoration comedy \"The Rover\", written by Aphra Behn in 1677. The stripper is a man; an English country gentleman who sensually undresses and goes to bed in a love scene. (However, the scene is played for laughs; the prostitute he thinks is going to bed with him robs him, and he ends up having to crawl out of the sewer.) The concept of striptease was also widely known, as can be seen in the reference to it in Thomas Otway's comedy \"The Soldier's Fortune\" (1681), where a character says: \"Be sure they be lewd, drunken, \"stripping\" whores\".\nStriptease became standard fare in the brothels of 18th century London, where the women, called \"posture girls\", would strip naked on tables for popular entertainment.\nStriptease was also combined with music, as in the 1720 German translation of the French \"La Guerre D'Espagne\" (Cologne: Pierre Marteau, 1707), where a galant party of high aristocrats and opera singers entertain themselves with hunting, play and music in a three-day turn at a small ch\u00e2teau:\nThe dancers, to please their lovers the more, dropped their clothes and danced totally naked the nicest entr\u00e9es and ballets; one of the princes directed the delightful music, and only the lovers were allowed to watch the performances.\nAn Arabic custom, first noted by French colonialists and described by the French novelist Gustave Flaubert may have influenced the French striptease. The dances of the Ghawazee in North Africa and Egypt consisted of the erotic dance of the bee performed by a woman known as Kuchuk Hanem. In this dance, the performer disrobes as she searches for an imaginary bee trapped within her garments. It is likely that the women performing these dances did not do so in an indigenous context, but rather, in response to the demand for this type of entertainment. Middle Eastern belly dance, also known as oriental dancing, was popularized in the United States after its introduction on the Midway at the 1893 World's Fair in Chicago by a dancer known as Little Egypt.\nSome claim the origin of the modern striptease lies in Oscar Wilde's play \"Salome (play)\", in 1893. In the Dance of the Seven Veils, the female protagonist dances for King Herod and slowly removes her veils until she lies naked. After Wilde's play and Richard Strauss's operatic version of the same, first performed in 1905, the erotic \"dance of the seven veils\" became a standard routine for dancers in opera, vaudeville, film and burlesque. A famous early practitioner was Maud Allan, who in 1907 gave a private performance for King Edward VII.\nFrench tradition.\nIn the 1880s and 1890s, Parisian shows such as the Moulin Rouge and Folies Berg\u00e8re were featuring attractive scantily clad women dancing and \"tableaux vivants\". In this environment, an act in the 1890s featured a woman who slowly removed her clothes in a vain search for a flea crawling on her body. \"The People's Almanac\" credits the act as the origin of modern striptease.\nIn 1905, the notorious Dutch dancer Mata Hari, later shot as a spy by the French authorities during World War I, was an overnight success from the debut of her act at the Mus\u00e9e Guimet. The most celebrated segment of her act was her progressive shedding of clothing until she wore just a jeweled bra and some ornaments over her arms and head but exposing her pubic region. Another landmark performance was the appearance at the Moulin Rouge in 1907 of an actress called Germaine Aymos, who entered dressed only in three very small shells. In the 1920s and 1930s, Josephine Baker danced topless in the \"danse sauvage\" at the Folies, and other such performances were provided at the Tabarin. These shows were notable for their sophisticated choreography and often featuring the women in glitzy sequins and feathers. In his 1957 book \"Mythologies\", semiotician Roland Barthes interpreted this Parisian striptease as a \"mystifying spectacle\", a \"reassuring ritual\" where \"evil is advertised the better to impede and exorcise it\". By the 1960s \"fully nude\" shows were provided at such places as Le Crazy Horse Saloon.\nAmerican tradition.\nIn the United States, striptease started in traveling carnivals and burlesque theatres, and featured famous strippers such as Gypsy Rose Lee and Sally Rand. The 1893 \"World's Columbian Exposition\" in Chicago, Illinois would result in Sal Bloom making large sums of money off of \"hoochie-coochie\" exotic dance shows which bore resemblance to striptease acts. The vaudeville trapeze artist Charmion performed a \"disrobing\" act onstage as early as 1896, which was captured in the 1901 Edison film \"Trapeze Disrobing Act\". Another milestone for modern American striptease is the possibly legendary show at Minsky's Burlesque in April 1925 that inspired the novel and film \"The Night They Raided Minsky's\". Another performer, Hinda Wassau, claimed to have inadvertently invented the striptease in 1928 when her costume was shaken loose during a shimmy dance. Burlesque theatres in New York were prohibited from staging striptease performances in a legal ruling of 1937, leading to the decline of these \"grindhouses\" (named after the bump 'n grind entertainment on offer). However many striptease stars were able to work in other cities and, eventually, nightclubs.\nThe 1960s saw a revival of striptease in the form of topless go-go dancing. This eventually merged with the older tradition of burlesque dancing. Carol Doda of the Condor Night Club in the North Beach section of San Francisco is given the credit of being the first topless go-go dancer. The club opened in 1964 and Doda's premi\u00e8re topless dance occurred on the evening of June 19 of that year. The large lit sign in front of the club featured a picture of her with red lights on her breasts. The club went \"bottomless\" on September 3, 1969 and began the trend of explicit \"full nudity\" in American striptease dancing. which was picked up by other establishments such as Apartment A Go Go. San Francisco is also the location of the notorious Mitchell Brothers O'Farrell Theatre. Originally an X-rated movie theater this striptease club pioneered lap dancing in 1980, and was a major force in popularizing it in strip clubs on a nationwide and eventually worldwide basis.\nBritish tradition.\nIn Britain in the 1930s, when Laura Henderson began presenting nude shows at the Windmill Theatre, London, censorship regulations prohibited naked girls from moving while appearing on-stage. To get around the prohibition, the models appeared in stationary \"tableaux vivants\". The Windmill girls also toured other London and provincial theatres, sometimes using ingenious devices such as rotating ropes to move their bodies round, though strictly speaking, staying within the letter of the law by not moving of their own volition. Another example of the way the shows stayed within the law was the fan dance, in which a naked dancer's body was concealed by her fans and those of her attendants, until the end of her act in when she posed nude for a brief interval whilst standing still.\nIn 1942, Phyllis Dixey formed her own company of girls and rented the Whitehall Theatre in London to put on a review called The Whitehall Follies.\nBy the 1950s, touring striptease acts were used to attract audiences to the dying music halls. Arthur Fox started his touring shows in 1948 and Paul Raymond started his in 1951. Paul Raymond later leased the Doric Ballroom in Soho and opened his private members club, the Raymond Revuebar, in 1958. This was one of the first of the private striptease members clubs in Britain.\nIn the 1960s, changes in the law brought about a boom of strip clubs in Soho with \"fully nude\" dancing and audience participation. Pubs were also used as a venue, most particularly in the East End with a concentration of such venues in the district of Shoreditch. This pub striptease seems in the main to have evolved from topless go-go dancing. Though often a target of local authority harassment, some of these pubs survive to the present day. An interesting custom in these pubs is that the strippers walk round and collect money from the customers in a beer jug before each individual performance. This custom appears to have originated in the late 1970s when topless go-go dancers first started collecting money from the audience as the fee for going \"fully nude\". Private dances of a more raunchy nature are sometimes available in a separate area of the pub.\nJapan.\nStriptease became popular in Japan after the end of World War II. When entrepreneur Shigeo Ozaki saw the American stripper Gypsy Rose Lee perform, he started his own striptease revue in Tokyo's Shinjuku neighborhood. During the 1950s, Japanese \"strip shows\" became more sexually explicit and less dance-oriented, until they were eventually simply live sex shows.\nModernity.\nModern striptease acts typically follow the sequence established in Burlesque: commencing in a dress, baring the upper body first, and continuing to a final reveal of the pelvic region. The traditional performance ended at this point, but modern acts usually continue with a nude dance section. This last element forms the major part of the act in small strip clubs and bars, but performances in larger venues (such as those done by feature dancers) usually place as much weight on the dance in the earlier sections. Striptease dance routines are usually improvised, except for male strippers who generally choreograph their performances and focus as much on the earlier sections as the later.\nRecently pole dancing has come to dominate the world of striptease. In the late 20th century, pole dancing was practised in exotic dance clubs in Canada. These clubs grew up to become a thriving sector of the economy. Canadian style pole dancing, table dancing and lap dancing, organized by multi-national corporations such as Spearmint Rhino, was exported from North America to (among other countries) the United Kingdom, the nations of central Europe, Russia and Australia. In London, England a raft of such so-called \"lap dancing clubs\" grew up in the 1990s, featuring pole dancing on stage and private table dancing, though, despite media misrepresentation, lap-dancing in the sense of bodily contact was forbidden by law.\n\"Feature shows\" are used to generate interest from potential customers who otherwise would not visit the establishment but know the performer from other outlets. A headlining star of a striptease show is referred to as a \"feature dancer\", and is often a performer with credits such as contest titles or appearances in adult films or magazines. The decades-old practice continued through the late 2000s (decade) to the present day with high-profile adult film performers such as Jenna Haze and Teagan Presley scheduling feature shows through the US.\nIn December 2006, a Norwegian court ruled that striptease is an art form and made strip clubs exempt from value added tax.\nNew Burlesque.\nIn the latter 1990s, a number of solo performers and dance groups emerged to create Neo-burlesque, a revival of the classic American burlesque striptease of the early half of the 20th century. New Burlesque focuses on dancing, costumes and entertainment (which may include comedy and singing) and generally eschews full nudity or toplessness. Some burlesquers of the past have become instructors and mentors to New Burlesque performers such as and The World Famous Pontani Sisters. The pop group Pussycat Dolls began as a New Burlesque troupe.\nMale strippers.\nUntil the 1970s, strippers in Western cultures were almost invariably female, performing to male audiences. Since then, male strippers have also become common. Before the 1970s, dancers of both sexes appeared largely in underground clubs or as part of a theatre experience, but the practice eventually became common enough on its own. Well-known troupes of male strippers include Dreamboys in the UK and Chippendales in the US. Male strippers have become a popular option to have at a bachelorette party.\nPrivate dancing.\nA variation on striptease is private dancing, which often involves lap dancing or contact dancing. Here the performers, in addition to stripping for tips, also offer \"private dances\" which involve more attention for individual audience members. Variations include private dances like table dancing where the performer dances on or by customer's table rather than the customer being seated in a couch.\nStriptease and the law.\nFrom ancient times to the present day, striptease was considered a form of public nudity and subject to legal and cultural prohibitions on moral and decency grounds. Such restrictions have been embodied in venue licensing regulations, and national and local laws, including liquor licensing restrictions.\nUnited States.\nNumerous U.S. jurisdictions have enacted laws regulating the striptease. One of the more notorious local ordinances is San Diego Municipal Code 33.3610, specific and strict in response to allegations of corruption among local officials which included contacts in the nude entertainment industry. Among its provisions is the \"six-foot rule\", copied by other municipalities, that requires that dancers maintain a distance while performing.\nOther rules forbid \"full nudity\". In some parts of the U.S., laws forbid the exposure of female (though not male) nipples, which must be covered by pasties. In early 2010, the city of Detroit banned fully exposed breasts in its strip clubs, following the example of Houston, where a similar ordinance was implemented in 2008. The city council has since softened the rules, eliminating the requirement for pasties but keeping other restrictions. Both cities were reputed to have rampant occurrences of illicit activity linked to striptease establishments. For some jurisdictions, even certain postures can be considered \"indecent\" (such as spreading the legs).\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn Britain in the 1930s, when the Windmill Theatre, London, began to present nude shows, British law prohibited performers moving whilst in a state of nudity. To get around that rule, models appeared naked in stationary tableaux vivants. To keep within the law, sometimes devices were used which rotated the models without them moving themselves. Fan dances were another device used to keep performances within the law. These allowed a naked dancer's body to be concealed by her fans or those of her attendants, until the end of an act, when she posed naked for a brief interval whilst standing stock still, and the lights went out or the curtain dropped to allow her to leave the stage. Changes in the law in the 1960s brought about a boom of strip clubs in Soho, with \"fully nude\" dancing and audience participation. Following the introduction of the Policing and Crime Act 2009, a local authority licence is required for venues in England and Wales (and later Scotland) where live nude entertainment takes place more than 11 times a year.\nIceland.\nThe legal status of striptease in Iceland was changed in 2010, when Iceland outlawed striptease. J\u00f3hanna Sigur\u00f0ard\u00f3ttir, Iceland's prime minister said: \"The Nordic countries are leading the way on women's equality, recognizing women as equal citizens rather than commodities for sale.\" The politician behind the bill, Kolbr\u00fan Halld\u00f3rsd\u00f3ttir, said: \"It is not acceptable that women or people in general are a product to be sold.\"\nIn popular culture.\nFilm.\n1940s\u20131950s.\nMary Martin reprised her famous fur coat striptease of \"My Heart Belongs to Daddy\" in the 1940 movie \"Love Thy Neighbor\" and the 1946 Cole Porter biopic \"Night and Day\".\n\"Lady of Burlesque\" (known in the UK as \"Striptease Lady\") (1943) based on the novel \"The G-String Murders\" (1941), by famous striptease artist Gypsy Rose Lee, stars Barbara Stanwyck as a stripper who gets involved in the investigation of murders at a burlesque house. A play by Gypsy Rose Lee entitled \"The Naked Genius\" (1943) was the inspiration for \"Doll Face\" (1945), a musical about a burlesque star (Vivian Blaine) who wants to become a legitimate actress.\n\"Gilda\" (1946), showcases one of the most famous stripteases in cinematic history, performed by Rita Hayworth to \"Put the Blame on Mame\", though in the event she removes just her gloves, before the act is terminated by a jealous admirer. \"Murder at the Windmill\" (1949) (US title: \"Mystery at the Burlesque\"), directed by Val Guest is set at the Windmill Theatre, London and features Diana Decker, Jon Pertwee and Jimmy Edwards. \"Salome\" (1953) once again features Rita Hayworth doing a striptease act; this time as the famous biblical stripper Salome, performing the Dance of the Seven Veils. According to Hayworth's biographers this erotic dance routine was \"the most demanding of her entire career\", necessitating \"endless takes and retakes\". \"Expresso Bongo\" (1959) is a British film which features striptease at a club in Soho, London.\n1960s\u20131970s.\nIn 1960, the film \"Beat Girl\" cast Christopher Lee as a sleazy Soho strip club owner who gets stabbed to death by a stripper. \"Gypsy\" (1962), features Natalie Wood as the famous burlesque queen Gypsy Rose Lee in her memorable rendition of \"Let Me Entertain You\". It was re-made for TV in 1993 Starring Bette Midler as Mama Rose and Cynthia Gibb as Gypsy Rose Lee. \"The Stripper\" (1963) featured Gypsy Rose Lee, herself, giving a trademark performance in the title role. A documentary film, \"Dawn in Piccadilly\", was produced in 1962 at the Windmill Theatre. In 1964, \"We Never Closed\" (British Movietone) depicted the last night of the Windmill Theatre. In 1965, the feature film \"Viva Maria!\" starred Brigitte Bardot and Jeanne Moreau as two girls who perform a striptease act and get involved in revolutionary politics in South America.\nAlso produced in 1965 was \"Carousella\", a documentary about Soho striptease artistes, directed by John Irvin. Another documentary film, which looked at the unglamorous side of striptease, is the 1966 film called,\"Strip\", filmed at the Phoenix Club in Soho.\n\"Secrets of a Windmill Girl\" (1966) featured Pauline Collins and April Wilding and was directed by Arnold L. Miller. The film has some fan dancing scenes danced by an ex-Windmill Theatre artiste. \"The Night They Raided Minsky's\" (1968) gives a possibly legendary account of the birth of striptease at Minsky's Burlesque theatre in New York. In 1968, the sci-fi film \"Barbarella\" depicted Jane Fonda stripping in zero-gravity conditions whilst wearing her spacesuit. \"Marlowe\" (1969) stars Rita Moreno playing a stripper, in the finale of the movie simultaneously delivering dialogue with the title character and performing a vigorous dance on stage. The Beatles movie \"Magical Mystery Tour\" has a scene where all the men on the tour bus go to a gentleman's club and watch a woman strip on stage.\n\"Ichijo's Wet Lust\" (1972), Japanese director Tatsumi Kumashiro's award-winning \"Roman porno\" film featured the country's most famous stripper, Sayuri Ichij\u014d, starring as herself. A British film production of 1976 is the film \"Get 'Em Off\", produced by Harold Baim. Alain Bernardin the owner of the Crazy Horse in Paris directed the film,\"Crazy Horse de Paris\" [1977]. \"Paul Raymond's Erotica\" (1981) stars Brigitte Lahaie and Diana Cochran and was directed by Brian Smedley-Aston. The Dance routines were filmed at the Raymond Revuebar Theatre.\n1980s\u20131990s.\nIn addition to lesser-known videos such as \"A Night at the Revuebar\" (1983), the 1980s also featured mainstream films involving stripping. These included \"Flashdance\" (1983), which told the story of blue-collar worker Alexandra (Alex) Owens (Jennifer Beals), who works as an exotic dancer in a Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania bar at night and at a steel mill as a welder during the day. Stripping also was part of \"genre\" films, such as horror thriller \"Fear City\" (1984), by Abel Ferrara, about a mass-murderer who terrorizes dancers working at a seedy strip club in Times Square, New York City. The erotic drama \"9\u00bd Weeks\" (1986) depicted Kim Basinger stripping to the tune of \"You Can Leave Your Hat On\" by Joe Cocker. \"Stripped to Kill\" (1987) was an exploitation film from Roger Corman about a lady cop who poses as a stripper to catch a murderer; which was followed by a sequel of the same name. \"Ladykillers\" (1988), was a 'whodunnit' murder mystery involving the murders of male strippers by an unknown female assailant. \"Blaze\" (1989) features Lolita Davidovitch as notorious stripper Blaze Starr. Starr herself appears in the film in a cameo role.\n\"Massive Attack : Eleven Promos. \"Be Thankful For What You've Got\"\" (1992), directed by Baillie Walsh, includes one dance routine by Ritzy Sparkle at the Raymond Revuebar Theatre. \"Exotica\" (1994), directed by Atom Egoyan, is set in a Canadian lap-dance club, and portrays a man's (Bruce Greenwood) obsession with a schoolgirl stripper named Christina (Mia Kirshner). \"Showgirls\" (1995) was directed by Paul Verhoeven and starred Elizabeth Berkley and Gina Gershon. \"Striptease\" (1996), was an adaptation of the novel starring Demi Moore.\" Barb Wire\" (1996), starred Pamela Anderson (of \"Baywatch\" fame), who performs a wet striptease. \"The Full Monty\" (1997) is a story of British ex-steel workers who form a Chippendales-style dance revue and decide to strip naked to make an extra buck. It featured songs including an updated version of David Rose's big hit The Stripper and Tom Jones's version of \"You Can Leave Your Hat On\". \"The Players Club\" (1998) starred LisaRaye as a girl who becomes a stripper to earn enough money to enter college and study journalism.\n2000s\u2013present.\n\"Dancing at the Blue Iguana\" (2000) is a feature film starring Daryl Hannah. The female cast of the film researched the film by dancing at strip clubs and created their parts and their storylines to be as realistic as possible. \"The Raymond Revuebar the Art of Striptease\" (2002) is a documentary, directed by Simon Weitzman. \"Los Debutantes\" (2003) is a Chilean film set in a strip-club in Santiago. In the \"Cradle 2 the Grave\" a 2003 action film a woman named Daria, played by Gabrielle Union performs a striptease to distract a man named Odion, played by Michael Jace from the infiltration of a night club owned by a crime lord named Jump Chambers, played by Chi McBride. \"Portraits of a Naked Lady Dancer\" (2004) is a documentary, directed by Deborah Rowe. In \"Closer\" (2004), Natalie Portman plays Alice, a young stripper just arrived in London from America. \"Crazy Horse Le Show\" (2004) features dance routines from the Crazy Horse, Paris. \"Mrs Henderson Presents\" (2005) portrays the erotic dance routines and nude tableau-vivants which featured at the Windmill Theatre before and during World War II. The film \"Factotum\" (2005) (by Norwegian director Bent Hamer) concludes with Matt Dillon (in the role of Henry Chinaski - an alter ego of Charles Bukowski, who wrote the novel on which the film is based) having an artistic epiphany whilst watching a stripper in a strip club. \"I Know Who Killed Me\" (2007) stars Lindsay Lohan as Dakota Moss, an alluring stripper involved in the machinations of a serial killer, and features a long striptease sequence at a strip club. \"Planet Terror\" (2007) stars Rose McGowan as Cherry Darling, a beautiful go-go dancer who aspires to quit her job. In 2009 a DVD called, \"Crazy Horse Paris\" featuring Dita Von Teese was released. \"Magic Mike\" (2012) features a male stripper Mike Lane (Channing Tatum) guiding a younger male stripper in his first steps into stripping in clubs.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47311", "revid": "1302003205", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47311", "title": "Dog paddle", "text": "Swimming style\nThe dog paddle or doggy paddle is a simple swimming style. It is characterized by the swimmer lying on their chest and moving their hands and legs alternately in a manner reminiscent of how dogs and other quadrupedal mammals swim. It is effectively a \"trot\" in water, instead of land.\nIt was the first swimming stroke used by ancient humans, believed to have been learned by observing animals swim. Prehistoric cave paintings in Egypt show figures doing what appears to be the dog paddle.\nIt is often the first swimming stroke used by young children when they are learning to swim.\nThe dog paddle has also been taught as a military swimming stroke when a silent stroke is needed - since neither arms nor legs break the surface.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47313", "revid": "197953", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47313", "title": "Swimming/Side stroke", "text": ""}
{"id": "47315", "revid": "318807", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47315", "title": "Electric light bulb", "text": ""}
{"id": "47316", "revid": "39151475", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47316", "title": "Treading water", "text": "Swimming style\nTreading water or water treading is what a swimmer can do while in a vertical position to keep their head above the surface of the water, while not providing sufficient directional thrust to overcome inertia and propel the swimmer in any specific direction. As it expends less energy than traditional strokes, it is often used by swimmers to rest in between periods of exertion without having to leave the water.\nIn figurative language, the expression \"treading water\" has become a metaphor for an effort expected to create motion, but which actually results in merely staying in one, possibly barely sustainable, place.\nMethods.\nAny sort of movement that allows the swimmer to do this can be classified as treading water, but it is more efficient to move the arms and legs in a specific fashion.\nNon-swimmers often splash and kick in an effort to stay above the surface but their lack of technique along with shortness of breath and the panic factor make for a very ineffective method of treading water. They will usually tire quickly and not be able to stay above the surface very long.\nExperienced swimmers use a variety of techniques to stay above the surface. These techniques often involve sculling, flutter kick, and other unofficial techniques of staying above the surface.\nEggbeater kick.\nThe eggbeater kick is an efficient method of treading water. It involves the swimmer in a \"sitting position\" in the water. The swimmer's back must be straight, knees bent so that the thighs are parallel to the surface of the water, and lower legs perpendicular to the surface.\nThe left foot makes a clockwise motion while the right leg makes a counterclockwise motion towards the axis of the body, in a similar manner to operating the pedals on a bicycle. The legs should never meet as when one foot is on the inside of the motion, the other should be on the outside. The arms are not involved directly in this kick.\nThe most critical aspect to having an effective eggbeater kick is flexibility. A very good hip motion range is needed to achieve a good eggbeater kick.\nThe eggbeater kick can be used to move through the water if the body is angled. Because of the opposite motion of the legs, the eggbeater is a very smooth and steady way of treading water. Another thing worth mentioning is that it does not usually involve the use of the hands, leaving them to be used for other matters.\nBecause of its efficiency and simplicity, this method of treading water is one of the most commonly used methods by lifeguards and other aquatic rescue professionals. Since this method does not occupy the hands it is often used by these kinds of professionals as they sometimes have to perform first aid while swimming back to safety.\nThe eggbeater kick is also used in water polo because it lets the athletes use their arms to throw the ball. The eggbeater kick is the primary kick that enables the player to support themselves in the water while passing, shooting, defending, and resting \u2013 horizontally and vertically. It is also used for getting a quick, explosive start, when the player is beginning to swim. Greater elevation of the Polo player is created by a stronger eggbeater kick which results in a better rotation and stronger pass or shot. Overuse of the eggbeater kick has been a cause of knee injuries in water polo players.\nFurthermore, the eggbeater kick is also used in synchronized swimming since it grants stability and height above the water while leaving the hands free to perform strokes. Using the eggbeater, swimmers can also perform \"boosts\", where they use their legs to momentarily propel themselves out of the water to their hips or higher.\nDog paddle and others.\nThe dog paddle is a simple style often used instinctively by children. It involves waving both hands &amp; legs randomly while \"on all fours\".\nAnother popular style involves sculling water horizontally while using flutter kicks vertically.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47317", "revid": "190887", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47317", "title": "Side stroke", "text": ""}
{"id": "47319", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47319", "title": "Vault (gymnastics)", "text": "Artistic gymnastics apparatus which gymnasts perform on\nThe vault is an artistic gymnastics maneuver typically performed on a pommel horse or a vaulting table. Both male and female gymnasts perform the vault. The English abbreviation for the event in gymnastics scoring is VT.\nThe apparatus.\nGerman Friedrich Ludwig Jahn popularized the vault's early forms. The apparatus itself originated as a \"horse\", much like the pommel horse but without the handles; it was sometimes known as the vaulting horse. The horse was set up with its long dimension perpendicular to the run for women, and parallel for men. The vaulting horse was the apparatus used in the Olympics for over a century, beginning with the Men's vault in the first modern Olympics and ending with the Gymnastics at the 2000 Summer Olympics.\nFollowing an accident in 1988 and compounded by incidents in 1998 and 2000, International Gymnastics Federation (FIG) re-evaluated and changed the apparatus, citing both safety reasons and the desire to facilitate more impressive acrobatics. The 2001 World Artistic Gymnastics Championships were the first international competition to make use of the \"vaulting table\", an apparatus made by Dutch gymnastics equipment company Janssen-Fritsen since the mid-1990s. It features a flat, larger, and more cushioned surface almost parallel to the floor, which slopes downward at the end closest to the springboard; gymnasts nicknamed it the \"tongue\". It appears to be somewhat safer than the old apparatus.\nVault as gymnastic skill.\nTo perform a vault, the gymnast runs down a runway (the run), which is usually padded or carpeted. They hurdle onto a springboard and spring onto the vault with their hands (the preflight or first flight and block). For vaults in the Yurchenko family, the gymnast will put their hands onto a mat that is placed before the springboard, round-off onto the board, and do a back handspring onto the vault. The off-flight may be as simple as leaping over the apparatus or as complicated as executing several twists and turns in the air. The gymnast then lands on the mat on the other side of the apparatus.\nThe running speed is correlated with the difficulty of the vault performed, with a stronger correlation for women than men, who may not maximize their sprint speed to achieve even the most difficult vaults.\nIn competitions.\nEvent.\nGymnasts (both male and female) show one vault in Qualification, Team Final, and All Around Final. The gymnasts must perform a second vault during qualifications to qualify for vault apparatus finals. In the Apparatus Finals gymnasts must also show two vaults. For men, the two vaults must be from different element groups, while women must show two vaults with different repulsion and flight phase from the vault table.\nScoring.\nThe score combines the D-value, the difficulty, and the E-value, the execution.\nThe projected difficulty is increased with every skill included. Each skill has its own value; the harder the skill, the higher the start value. In 2009, FIG made some changes to put less emphasis on the difficulty and reduce the number of skills required, making the gymnasts focus harder on the perfect execution of the vault.\nThe execution score is out of 10.0, looking at the form, height, length, and landing. Judges look through four main phases: the preflight, support, after-flight, and landing. Gymnasts are expected to land cleanly, with no hops or steps, and within a set landing zone on the landing mat. Falling or stepping on landing incurs deduction, as will lack of height off the table, or distance from the table. \nVault families.\nVault styles are broken into various groups or families. To compete in a vault final, a gymnast must perform two vaults from different groups whose second flight phase is not identical.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nInjuries.\nThe horse has been blamed for several serious accidents over the years. In 1988, American Julissa Gomez was paralyzed in a vaulting accident; she died from complications from her injuries three years later. During warmups at the 1998 Goodwill Games, Chinese gymnast Sang Lan fell and suffered paralysis from a cervical-spine injury. In a series of crashes when the horse's height was set too low at the 2000 Olympics, gymnasts either rammed into the horse's front end, or had bad landings after having problems with their hand placements during push-off.\nIn 2007, Dutch junior gymnast Imke Glas was seriously injured after a fall on a vault.\nA 2021 study suggested that landing scoring criteria for vault in women's gymnastics increased the risk of injury compared to the criteria in men's gymnastics. Both this study and an earlier one from 2015 recommended allowing more flexion at the knees during landing to reduce impact-related injuries.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47321", "revid": "30992261", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47321", "title": "Horizontal bar", "text": "Apparatus used in men's artistic gymnastics\nThe horizontal bar, also known as the high bar, is an apparatus used by male gymnasts in artistic gymnastics. It traditionally consists of a cylindrical metal (typically steel) bar that is rigidly held above and parallel to the floor by a system of cables and stiff vertical supports. Gymnasts typically wear suede leather grips while performing on the bar. The current elite-level competition uses a stainless steel core rail. \nThe gymnastics elements performed on the horizontal bar are regulated by a Code of Points. A bar routine, which is a sequence of several bar skills, usually includes giants with various grips (overgrip, undergrip, dorsal grip, mixed grip), in-bar work, turns, release and regrasp skills, and a dismount. The horizontal bar is often considered one of the most exciting gymnastics events due to the power exhibited by gymnasts during giant swings and spectacular aerial releases and dismounts that frequently include multiple flips or twists and, in some cases, airborne travel over the bar.\nHistory.\nThe horizontal bar was used by acrobats in ancient Greece and Rome and on through the Middle Ages. It was introduced into gymnastics by Johann Christoph Friedrich GutsMuths in his 1793 book \"Gymnastik f\u00fcr die Jugend\", which in turn inspired further use and development by Friedrich Ludwig Jahn in 1811.\nDimensions.\nThe mechanical dimensions of the horizontal bar apparatus are specified in FIG's \"Apparatus Norms\" brochure:\nGrips.\nHow a gymnast grasps the horizontal bar is called the \"grip\" (not to be confused with the suede leather grips worn on the hands). Each grip is commonly used for a particular set of skills. When gymnasts compete on the horizontal bar, they are often required by the Code of Points to use specific grips.\nRoutines.\nUnder the FIG Code of Points for men's artistic gymnastics, horizontal bar routines are dynamic presentations demonstrating \"the full potential of the apparatus.\" They consist of the fluid connection of swinging, turning, and flight elements performed without pauses near to and far from the bar in a variety of hand grips.\nInternational level routines.\nA horizontal bar routine should contain at least one element from all element groups:\nScoring and rules.\nGymnasts receive deductions for lack of form and errors. Specific errors on the horizontal bar include bent or separated legs, pauses, low amplitude in flight elements, bent arms, regrips, elements not continuing in their intended direction, and deviations from the plane of movement.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47325", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47325", "title": "Perch", "text": "Genus of fishes\nPerch is a common name for freshwater fish from the genus Perca, which belongs to the family Percidae of the large order Perciformes. The name comes from , meaning the type species of this genus, the European perch (\"P. fluviatilis\").\nMany species of freshwater game fish more or less resemble perch, but belong to different genera. In fact, the exclusively saltwater-dwelling red drum (which belongs to a different order Acanthuriformes) is often referred to as a \"red perch\", though by definition perch are freshwater species. Though many fish are referred to as perch as a common name, to be considered a true perch, the fish must be of the family Percidae.\nSpecies.\nMost authorities recognize three species within the perch genus:\nAnatomy.\nExternal anatomy.\nPerch have a long and round body shape which allows for fast swimming in the water. True perch have \"rough\" or ctenoid scales. Perch have paired pectoral and pelvic fins, and two dorsal fins, the first one spiny and the second soft. These two fins can be separate or joined. The head consists of the skull (formed from loosely connected bones), eyes, mouth, operculum, gills, and a pair of nostrils (which has no connection to the oral cavity). They have small brush-like teeth across their jaws and on the roof of their mouth. The gills are located under the operculum on both sides of the head and are used to extract oxygen molecules from water and expel carbon dioxide; the gills have gill rakers inside the mouth.\nExternal anatomy can be used to determine the sex of perch in multiple ways. Perch have two posterior openings located on their abdomen, the anal and urogenital. In males, the shape of the urogenital opening is round and larger than the anal opening. In females, the urogenital opening is often a V- or U-shape which is a similar size to the anal opening. Also, males usually have a more brown-red colored urogenital opening compared to females.\nInternal anatomy.\nThe esophagus is a flexible tube that goes from the mouth to the stomach. The stomach is connected to the intestine via the pyloric sphincter. The intestines of perch consist of the small intestine and large intestine; the intestines have many pyloric caeca and a spiral value, the small intestine consists of a part called the duodenum. The spleen is located after the stomach and before the spiral value. The spleen is connected to the circulatory system, not part of the digestive tract. The liver is composed of three lobes: one small lobe (includes the gall bladder) and two large lobes. Perch have long and narrow kidneys that contain clusters of nephrons which empty into the mesonephric duct. They have a two-chambered heart consisting of four compartments: the sinus venous, one atrium, one ventricle, and conus. Perch have a swim bladder that helps control buoyancy or floating within the water, the swim bladder is only found in bony fish. In perch, the duct connecting the swim bladder to the pharynx is closed so air is unable to pass through from the mouth, these fish are called \"physoclists\". Specifically in perch, the gas bladder can vary from 12% to 25% of oxygen and 1.4% to 2.9% of carbon dioxide gas. Perch reproductive organs include either a pair of testes (sperm-producing) or a pair of ovaries (egg-producing). \nHabitats.\nPerch are classified as carnivores, choosing waters where smaller fish, shellfish, zooplankton, and insect larvae are abundant. The yellow perch can be found in the central parts of the United States in freshwater ponds, lakes, streams, or rivers. These fish can be found in freshwater all over the world, and are known to inhabit the Great Lake region, in particular Lake Erie. These fish inhabit bodies of water where vegetation and debris is readily accessible. In the spring when the perch chooses to spawn, they use vegetation to conceal their eggs from predators.\nFishing.\nPerch are a popular sport fish species. They are known to put up a fight, and to be good for eating. They can be caught with a variety of methods, including float fishing, lure fishing, and legering. Fly fishing for perch using patterns that imitate small fry or invertebrates can be successful. The record weight for this fish in Britain is , the Netherlands , and in America . The biggest recorded catch in Sweden is 3.15 kg (6lb 15oz) in 1985.\nPerch grow to around and or more, but the most common size caught are around and or less and anything over and is considered a prize catch.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47326", "revid": "42664955", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47326", "title": "Trout", "text": "Freshwater fish from subfamily Salmoninae\nTrout (pl.: trout) is a generic common name for numerous species of carnivorous freshwater fishes belonging to the genera \"Oncorhynchus\", \"Salmo,\" and \"Salvelinus\", all of which are members of the subfamily Salmoninae in the family Salmonidae. The word \"trout\" is also used for some similar-shaped but non-salmonid fish, such as the spotted seatrout/speckled trout (\"Cynoscion nebulosus\", which is actually a croaker).\nTrout are closely related to salmon and have similar migratory life cycles. Most trout are strictly potamodromous, spending their entire lives exclusively in freshwater lakes, rivers and wetlands and migrating upstream to spawn in the shallow gravel beds of smaller headwater creeks. The hatched fry and juvenile trout, known as \"alevin\" and \"parr\", will stay upstream growing for years before migrating down to larger waterbodies as maturing adults. There are some anadromous species of trout, such as the steelhead (a coastal subspecies of rainbow trout) and sea trout (the sea-run subspecies of brown trout), that can spend up to three years of their adult lives at sea before returning to freshwater streams for spawning, in the same fashion as a salmon run. Brook trout and three other extant species of North American trout, despite the names, are actually char (or charr), which are salmonids also closely related to trout and salmon.\nTrout are classified as oily fish and have been important food fish for humans. As mid-level predators, trout prey upon smaller aquatic animals including crustaceans, insects, worms, baitfish and tadpoles, and themselves in turn are also important staple prey items for many animals, including brown bears, otters, raccoons, birds of prey (e.g. sea eagles, ospreys, fish owls), gulls, cormorants and kingfishers, and other large aquatic predators. Discarded remains of trout also provide a source of nutrients for scavengers, detrivores and riparian florae, making trout keystone species across aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems.\nSpecies.\nThe name \"trout\" is commonly used for many (if not most) species in three of the seven genera in the subfamily Salmoninae: \"Salmo\" (Atlantic), \"Oncorhynchus\" (Pacific) and \"Salvelinus\" (circum-arctic). Fish species referred to as trout include:\nAnatomy.\nTrout that live in different environments can have dramatically different colorations and patterns. Mostly, these colors and patterns form as camouflage, based on the surroundings, and will change as the fish moves to different habitats. Trout in, or newly returned from the sea, can look very silvery, while the same fish living in a small stream or in an alpine lake could have pronounced markings and more vivid coloration; it is also possible that in some species, this signifies that they are ready to mate. In general, trout that are about to breed have extremely intense coloration and can look like an entirely different fish outside of spawning season. It is virtually impossible to define a particular color pattern as belonging to a specific breed; however, in general, wild fish are claimed to have more vivid colors and patterns.\nTrout have fins entirely without spines, and all of them have a small adipose fin along the back, near the tail. The pelvic fins sit well back on the body, on each side of the anus. The swim bladder is connected to the esophagus, allowing for gulping or rapid expulsion of air, a condition known as physostome. Unlike many other physostome fish, trout do not use their bladder as an auxiliary device for oxygen uptake, relying solely on their gills.\nThere are many species, and even more populations, that are isolated from each other and morphologically different. However, since many of these distinct populations show no significant genetic differences, what may appear to be a large number of species is considered a much smaller number of distinct species by most ichthyologists. The trout found in the eastern United States are a good example of this. The brook trout, the aurora trout, and the (extinct) silver trout all have physical characteristics and colorations that distinguish them, yet genetic analysis shows that they are one species, \"Salvelinus fontinalis\".\nLake trout (\"Salvelinus namaycush\"), like brook trout, belong to the char genus. Lake trout inhabit many of the larger lakes in North America, and live much longer than rainbow trout, which have an average maximum lifespan of seven years. Lake trout can live many decades, and can grow to more than .\nHabitat.\nAs salmonids, trout are coldwater fish that are usually found in cool (), clear streams, wetlands and lakes, although many of the species have anadromous populations as well. Juvenile trout are referred to as troutlet, troutling or parr. They are distributed naturally throughout North America, northern Asia and Europe. Several species of trout were introduced to Australia and New Zealand by amateur fishing enthusiasts in the 19th century, effectively displacing and endangering several upland native fish species. The introduced species included brown trout from England and rainbow trout from California. The rainbow trout has a steelhead subspecies, generally accepted as coming from Sonoma Creek. The rainbow trout of New Zealand still show the steelhead tendency to run up rivers in winter to spawn.\nIn Australia, the rainbow trout was introduced in 1894 from New Zealand and is an extremely popular gamefish in recreational angling.\nDespite severely impacting the distribution and abundance of native Australian fish, such as the climbing galaxias, millions of rainbow and other trout species are released annually from government and private hatcheries.\nThe closest resemblance of seema trout and other trout family can be found in the Himalayan Region of India, Nepal, Bhutan, Pakistan and in Tian Shan mountains of Kyrgyzstan.\nDiet.\nTrout generally feed on other fish, and soft-bodied aquatic invertebrates, such as flies, mayflies, caddisflies, stoneflies, mollusks and dragonflies. In lakes, various species of zooplankton often form a large part of the diet. In general, trout longer than about prey almost exclusively on fish, where they are available. Adult trout will devour smaller fish up to one-third of their length. Trout may feed on shrimp, mealworms, bloodworms, insects, small animal parts, and eel.\nTrout who swim the streams love to feed on land animals, aquatic life, and flies. Most of their diet comes from macroinvertebrates, or animals that do not have a backbone like snails, worms, or insects. They also eat flies, and most people who try to use lures to fish trout mimic flies because they are one of trout's most fed on meals. Trout enjoy certain land animals, including insects like grasshoppers. They also eat small animals like mice when they fall in. (Although only large trout have mouths capable of eating mice.) They consume a diet of aquatic life like minnows or crawfish as well. Trout have a diverse diet they follow; they have plenty of different options.\nTrout as food.\nCompared to other salmonids, trout are somewhat more bony, but the flesh is generally considered delicious, and the texture is often indistinguishable from that of salmon. The flavor of the flesh is heavily influenced by the diet of the fish. For example, trout that have been feeding on crustaceans tend to be more flavorful than those feeding primarily on insects and larvae. Because of their popularity, trout are often raised on fish farms and then stocked into heavily fished waters, in an effort to mask the effects of overfishing. Farmed trout are also sold commercially as seafood, although they are not saltwater fish. Trout meat is typically prepared the same way as salmon, often by smoking.\nIn Mainland China, farm-raised rainbow trout from Qinghai was officially sanctioned to be labeled and sold domestically as salmon, which caused much controversy regarding food safety and consumer rights violation, as raw fish dishes or \"yusheng\" using Atlantic salmon are gaining popularity in southern China. Farmed rainbow trout is much cheaper than the imported Atlantic salmon and the meat are indistinguishable to the untrained eyes, and the news of trout being sold as salmon triggered public scrutiny accusing seafood suppliers of bait-and-switch and unethical business practices. Also, many people believe freshwater trout are more prone to parasites than oceanic salmon (even though both live in freshwater for significant periods of their life cycles) and thus unsafe for raw eating.\nNutritional value.\nOne fillet of trout (about ) contains:\nTrout fishing.\nTrout are very popular freshwater game fish highly prized especially by creek fishermen, because they generally put up a good fight when caught with a hook and line. As trout are predatory fish, lure fishing (which use replica baits called lures to imitate live prey) is the predominant form of sport fishing involving trout, although traditional bait fishing techniques using floats and/or sinkers (particularly with moving live baits such as baitfish, crayfish or aquatic insects) are also successful, especially against stocked trout that are hatchery/farm-raised and thus more accustomed to artificial feeds.\nMany species of trout, most noticeably rainbow trout and brown trout, have been widely introduced into waterbodies outside of their native ranges purely for the sake of recreational fishing, and some of these introduced populations have even become invasive in the new habitats.\nRiver fishing.\nWhile trout can be caught with a normal rod and reel, fly fishing is a distinctive lure fishing method developed for trout, and now extended to other species. Due to the high proportion of insects and small crustaceans within the trout's diet, small lures made of hand-tied hairs and threads are often used to imitate these aquatic invertebrates that the trout prey upon. These ultralight fly lures cannot be cast adequately by conventional techniques, and a specialized heavy line (i.e. fly line) is needed to launch the lure.\nUnderstanding how moving water shapes the stream channel makes it easier to find trout. In most streams, the current creates a riffle-run-pool pattern that repeats itself over and over. A deep pool may hold a big brown trout, but rainbow trout and smaller brown trout are likely found in runs. Riffles are where fishers will find small trout, called troutlet, during the day and larger trout crowding in during morning and evening feeding periods.\nIce fishing.\nFishing for trout under the ice generally occurs in depths of . Because trout are cold water fish, during the winter they move from up-deep to the shallows, replacing the small fish that inhabit the area during the summer. Trout in winter constantly cruise in shallow depths looking for food, usually traveling in groups, although bigger fish may travel alone and in water that's somewhat deeper, around . Rainbow, Brown, and Brook trout are the most common trout species caught through the ice.\nTrout fishing records.\nBy information from International Game Fish Association (IGFA), the most outstanding records are:\nDeclines in native trout populations.\nSalmonid populations in general have been declining due to numerous factors, including invasive species, hybridization, wildfires, and climate change. Native salmonid fish in the western and southwestern United States are threatened by non-native species that were introduced decades ago. Non-native salmonids were introduced to enrich recreational fishing; however, they quickly started outcompeting and displacing native salmonids upon their arrival. \nNon-native, invasive species are quick to adapt to their new environment and learn to outcompete any native species, making them a force the native salmon and trout have to reckon with. Not only do the non-native fish drive the native fish to occupy new niches, but they also try to hybridize with them, contaminating the native gene construction. As more hybrids between native and non-native fish are formed, the lineage of the pure fish is continuously being contaminated by other species and soon may no longer represent the sole native species. The Rio Grande cutthroat trout (\"Oncorhynchus clarki virginalis\") are susceptible to hybridization with other salmonids such as rainbow trout (\"Oncorhynchus mykiss\") and yield a new \"cutbow\" trout, which is a contamination of both lineages\u2019 genes. One solution to this issue is implemented by New Mexico Department of Game and Fish hatcheries: stock only sterile fish in river streams. Hatcheries serve as a reservoir of fish for recreational activities but growing and stocking non-sterile fish would worsen the hybridization issue on a quicker, more magnified time scale. By stocking sterile fish, the native salmonids can't share genes with the non-native hatchery fish, thus, preventing further gene contamination of the native trout in New Mexico. Fire is also a factor in deteriorating Gila trout (\"Oncorhynchus gilae\") populations because of the ash and soot that can enter streams following fires. The ash lowers water quality, making it more difficult for the Gila trout to survive. In some New Mexico streams, the native Gila trout will be evacuated from streams that are threatened by nearby fires and be reintroduced after the threat is resolved.\nClimate change is also dwindling native salmonid populations. Global warming continually affects various cold-water fish such as trout, especially as inland waterbodies are more prone to warming than oceans. With an increase of temperature along with changes in spawning river flow, an abundance of trout species are affected negatively. In the past, a mere increase was predicted to eliminate half of the native brook trout in the Southern Appalachian Mountains. Trout generally prefer streams with colder water () to spawn and thrive, but raising water temperatures are altering this ecosystem and further deteriorate native populations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47327", "revid": "36942950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47327", "title": "Trolling (fishing)", "text": "Practice of fishing by drawing a baited line or lure behind a boat\nTrolling is a method of fishing where one or more fishing lines, baited with lures or bait fish, are drawn through the water at a consistent, low speed. This may be behind a moving boat, or by slowly winding the line in when fishing from a static position, or even sweeping the line from side-to-side, e.g. when fishing from a jetty. Trolling is used to catch pelagic fish such as salmon, mackerel and kingfish.\nIn American English, trolling can be phonetically confused with trawling, a different method of fishing where a net (trawl) is drawn through the water instead of lines. Trolling is used both for recreational and commercial fishing whereas trawling is used mainly for commercial fishing.\nTrolling from a moving boat involves moving quite slowly through the water. This can be accomplished with the use of a special trolling motor. Multiple lines are often used, and outriggers can be used to spread the lines more widely and reduce their chances of tangling. Downriggers can also be used to keep the lures or baits trailing at a desired depth.\nLine-spreading trolling devices.\nOutriggers.\nOutriggers are poles which allow a boat to troll several lines in the water without tangling. A boat which trolls enough lines can simulate a school of fish.\nDownrigger.\nDownrigger are devices used while trolling to keep a bait or lure at the desired depth. In practice, fish swim at different depths according to factors such as the temperature and amount of light in the water, and the speed and direction of water currents. A downrigger consists of a one or two metre horizontal pole which supports a weight, typically about of lead, on a steel cable. A clip called a \"line release\" attaches the fishing line to the weight, and the bait or lure is attached to the release. The fishing line is reeled in by a spool powered either by manual cranking or by an electric motor. Using a downrigger can be hazardous. For example, man-made reservoirs can contain submerged trees and other structures beneath the surface which downriggers can snag.\nParavanes.\n\"Paravanes\" (underwater kites) are sometimes used as depth controlling devices, particularly in commercial tuna fishing operations. These kites have various shapes, such as arrowhead paravanes, flexi-wing paravanes, and bi-wing paravanes. The devices can place the lure or bait at designated depths and positions; and in this way multiple devices can be towed at the same time without the devices and bait interfering with each other.\nSpreaders.\n\"Spreaders\" allow multiple baited hooks or lures to be trolled from a single line. There are many inventive spreader designs, such as devices which cause the baited hooks or lures to move in helical patterns, in a sophisticated emulation of the schooling behaviour of a group of fish.\nPlaner boards.\n\"Planer boards\" are trolled devices designed to spread fishing lures out away from the fishing vessel. They allow multiple lines to be trolled. They come in dual board and inline board designs. Dual board designs consist of two boards that are spaced apart and attached by a line to a mast near the front of the boat with a separate fishing line in a spring tension release clip that separates when the fishing line is set. Inline boards are attached directly to the fishing line and a spring tension clip that releases upon setting or tripping the planer board so it slides down the fishing line to a swivel tied several feet in front of the lure. Inlines are popular with walleye and wahoo fishermen. Once tripped they offer much less resistance when reeling in a fish.\nBaits and lures.\nTo be effective, trolling baits and lures must have the visual ability to attract fish and intrigue them with the way they move through the water. Most trolling lures are designed to look and behave like dying, injured, or fast moving fish. They include:\nTrolling baits and lures are either tied with a knot, such as the improved clinch knot, or connected with a tiny safety pin-like device called a \"snap\" onto the fishing line which is in turn connected to the reel. The reel is attached to a rod. The motion is of the lure is made by winding line back on to the reel, by sweeping the fishing rod, jigging movements with the fishing rod, or by trolling behind a moving boat. Lures can be contrasted with artificial flies, commonly called \"flies\" by fly fishers, which either float on the water surface, slowly sink or float underwater, in imitation some form of insect fish food. However some flies, such as the trolling tandem streamer fly, are designed for trolling behind a moving boat.\nAs an example, marlin lures are typically or more long with a shaped plastic or metal head and a plastic skirt. The design of the lure head, particularly its face, gives the lure its individual action when trolled through the water. Lure actions range from an active side-to-side swimming pattern to pushing water aggressively on the surface to, most commonly, tracking along in a straight line with a regular surface pop and bubble trail. Besides the shape, weight and size of the lure head, the length and thickness of skirting, the number and size of hooks and the length and size of the leader used in lure rigging all influence the action of the lure: how actively it will run and how it will respond to different sea conditions. Experienced anglers fine tune their lures to get the action they want. Specialized lures made specifically for trolling swordfish use plastic glow sticks.\nA pattern of four or more lures can be trolled at varying distances behind the boat. Lures may be fished either straight from the rod tip (\"flat lines\"), or from outriggers.\nIn addition to attaching a lure to the fishing line, an oval piece of metal (often hammered or curved for reflective purposes) called a dodger is often used to attract fish from greater distances. Lures designed for trolling with downriggers include metal \"spoons\" that are often decorated with colour tape, and plastic or rubber \"squids\" with various colours.\nA daisy chain is a chain of plastic lures which have no hooks. Their purpose is to function as teasers which attract a school of fish closer to the lures that do have hooks.\nTrolling speed.\nBaits and lures are typically trolled at speeds up to , though speeds up to can be used, particularly when boats are travelling to different fishing areas. The speed at which the lure is pulled through the water impacts on the fishing success. The optimum trolling speed varies with different species of fish, with weather conditions and the time of year, and other conditions. Chinook salmon can be successfully trolled at higher speeds than more docile lake trout. For these reasons fishermen use devices that accurately track speed. Trolling motors calibrate speed more accurately than large outboard motors. Trolling plates are also used with larger motors to slow the boat to the desired speed, although some anglers experience mixed results with plates.\nTrolling can be effective at surprisingly low speeds. Kayaks fitted with a deck-mounted bracket for holding a rod can be paddled to troll effectively for salmon.\nRecreational trolling.\nIn marine environments, trolling is used in big-game fishing to catch large offshore or open-water species such as tuna and marlin. Saltwater anglers also troll for inshore species such as bluefish, kingfish and various jacks.\nRock fishermen can use an umbrella rig as a method of trolling without using a boat. Typically, an umbrella rig consists of four plastic neon green lures with a lead dragging behind. An additional lure is attached to the lead. Only the lure behind the lead need have hooks attached because this lure can appear to a stalking fish as a wounded or sick laggard in a school, making it a more likely target.\nA pattern of multiple baits or lures can be trolled at varying distances behind a boat. Lures can be fished straight from the rod tip (flat line), or from outriggers. Purpose designed sinkers exist to control the trolling depth on freshwater lakes.\nFreshwater anglers can also find trolling effective. Recreational fishermen can successfully troll lakes and reservoirs for salmon and trout. It can be the method of choice for catching the elusive muskie, and a useful technique for catching walleye, black bass and striped bass. For light and medium freshwater gamefishing, any reasonably robust casting or spinning rod can be used as a trolling rod. Effective trolling rods should be fairly stiff with a relatively fast action, since \"whippy\" slow action rods are frustrating to troll with.\nCommercial trolling.\nCommercial trolling vessels catch fish by towing astern one or more trolling lines. The trolling lines are fishing lines with natural or artificial baited hooks trailed by a vessel near the surface or at a certain depth. Several lines can be towed at the same time using outriggers to keep the lines apart. The lines can be hauled in manually or by small winches. A length of rubber is often included in each line as a shock absorber. The trolling line is towed at a speed depending on the target species, from 2.3 knots up to at least 7 knots. Trollers range from small open boats to large refrigerated vessels 30 meters long. In many tropical artisanal fisheries, trolling is done with sailing canoes with outriggers for stability. With properly designed vessels, trolling is an economical and efficient way of catching tuna, mackerel and other pelagic fish swimming close to the surface. Purpose-built trollers are usually equipped with two or four trolling booms raised and lowered by topping lifts, held in position by adjustable stays. Electrically powered or hydraulic reels can be used to haul in the lines.\nCommercial trolling for tuna is more successful near offshore banks than in open water areas, and is also enhanced in the vicinity of a fish aggregation device (FAD).\nHistoric trolling.\nHistorically, in Alaska, hand hook and line trolling were used commercially to catch king and silver salmon in salt water. This method required minimal gear-boat, lines and hooks\u2014and was used to catch fish that were still feeding in open water before returning to spawn. Trolling was very successful in southeast Alaska and historically the catch was used by the fresh and mild-cured fish packing industries. Power boats located near feeding grounds conducted most of the trolling. Each boat had four to ten lines, extending from tall poles hung outboard when fishing; each line carried several hooks, with heavy lead sinkers and spoons or baits as lures. Trolling lengthened the fishing season, allowing fishermen to fish in early spring before spawning runs.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47328", "revid": "2302069", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47328", "title": "Abstinence until marriage", "text": ""}
{"id": "47332", "revid": "50132161", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47332", "title": "Mackerel", "text": "Pelagic fish\nMackerel is a common name applied to a number of different species of pelagic fish, mostly from the family Scombridae. They are found in both temperate and tropical seas, mostly living along the coast or offshore in the oceanic environment.\nMackerel species typically have deeply forked tails and vertical \"tiger-like\" stripes on their backs with an iridescent green-blue quality. Many are restricted in their distribution ranges and live in separate populations or fish stocks based on geography. Some stocks migrate in large schools along the coast to suitable spawning grounds, where they spawn in fairly shallow waters. After spawning they return the way they came in smaller schools to suitable feeding grounds, often near an area of upwelling. From there they may move offshore into deeper waters and spend the winter in relative inactivity. Other stocks migrate across oceans.\nSmaller mackerel are forage fish for larger predators, including larger mackerel and Atlantic cod. Flocks of seabirds, whales, dolphins, sharks, and schools of larger fish such as tuna and marlin follow mackerel schools and attack them in sophisticated and cooperative ways. Mackerel flesh is high in omega-3 oils and is intensively harvested by humans. In 2009, over 5 million tons were landed by commercial fishermen. Sport fishermen value the fighting abilities of the king mackerel.\nSpecies.\nOver 30 different species, principally belonging to the family Scombridae, are commonly referred to as mackerel. The term \"mackerel\" is derived from Old French and may have originally meant either \"marked, spotted\" or \"pimp, procurer\". The latter connection is not altogether clear, but mackerel spawn enthusiastically in shoals near the coast, and medieval ideas on animal procreation were creative.\nScombroid mackerels.\nAbout 21 species in the family Scombridae are commonly called mackerel. The type species for the scombroid mackerel is the Atlantic mackerel, \"Scomber scombrus\". Until recently, Atlantic chub mackerel and Indo-Pacific chub mackerel were thought to be subspecies of the same species. In 1999, Collette established, on molecular and morphological considerations, that these are separate species. Mackerel are smaller with shorter lifecycles than their close relatives, the tuna, which are also members of the same family.\nScombrini, the true mackerels.\nThe true mackerels belong to the tribe Scombrini. The tribe consists of seven species, each belonging to one of two genera: \"Scomber\" or \"Rastrelliger\".\nScomberomorini, the Spanish mackerels.\nThe Spanish mackerels belong to the tribe Scomberomorini, which is the \"cousin tribe\" of the true mackerels. This tribe consists of 21 species in all\u201418 of those are classified into the genus \"Scomberomorus\", two into \"Grammatorcynus\", and a single species into the monotypic genus \"Acanthocybium\".\nOther mackerel.\nIn addition, a number of species with mackerel-like characteristics in the families Carangidae, Hexagrammidae and Gempylidae are commonly referred to as mackerel. Some confusion had occurred between the Pacific jack mackerel (\"Trachurus symmetricus\") and the heavily harvested Chilean jack mackerel (\"T. murphyi\"). These have been thought at times to be the same species, but are now recognized as separate species.\nThe term \"mackerel\" is also used as a modifier in the common names of other fish, sometimes indicating the fish has vertical stripes similar to a scombroid mackerel:\nBy extension, the term is applied also to other species such as the mackerel tabby cat, and to inanimate objects such as the altocumulus mackerel sky cloud formation.\nCharacteristics (Scombridae).\nMost mackerel belong to the family Scombridae, which also includes tuna and bonito. Generally, mackerel are much smaller and slimmer than tuna, though in other respects, they share many common characteristics. Their scales, if present at all, are extremely small. Like tuna and bonito, mackerel are voracious feeders, and are swift and manoeuvrable swimmers, able to streamline themselves by retracting their fins into grooves on their bodies. Like other scombroids, they lack a swim bladder, and their bodies are cylindrical with numerous finlets on the dorsal and ventral sides behind the dorsal and anal fins, but unlike the deep-bodied tuna, they are slim.\nThe type species for scombroid mackerels is the Atlantic mackerel, \"Scomber scombrus\". These fish are iridescent blue-green above with a silvery underbelly and near-vertical wavy black stripes running along their upper bodies.\nThe prominent stripes on the back of mackerels seemingly are there to provide camouflage against broken backgrounds. That is not the case, though, because mackerel live in midwater pelagic environments which have no background. However, fish have an optokinetic reflex in their visual systems that can be sensitive to moving stripes. For fish to school efficiently, they need feedback mechanisms that help them align themselves with adjacent fish, and match their speed. The stripes on neighbouring fish provide \"schooling marks\", which signal changes in relative position. The lateral line also helps with orderly schooling.\nA layer of thin, reflecting platelets is seen on some of the mackerel stripes. In 1998, E J Denton and D M Rowe argued that these platelets transmit additional information to other fish about how a given fish moves. As the orientation of the fish changes relative to another fish, the amount of light reflected to the second fish by this layer also changes. This sensitivity to orientation gives the mackerel \"considerable advantages in being able to react quickly while schooling and feeding.\"\nMackerel range in size from small forage fish to larger game fish. Coastal mackerel tend to be small. The king mackerel is an example of a larger mackerel. Most fish are cold-blooded, but exceptions exist. Certain species of fish maintain elevated body temperatures. Endothermic bony fishes are all in the suborder Scombroidei and include the butterfly mackerel, a species of primitive mackerel.\nMackerel are strong swimmers. Known in the latin family as \"punctualis piscis\" which translates to \"punctual fish.\" This is due to its punctuality of migration during mating season as it moves from warm to cold waters. Atlantic mackerel can swim at a sustained speed of 0.98 m/sec with a burst speed of 5.5\u00a0m/sec, while chub mackerel can swim at a sustained speed of 0.92\u00a0m/sec with a burst speed of 2.25\u00a0m/sec. The Wahoo (\"Acanthocybium solandri\") has been known to reach speeds of up to .\nDistribution.\nMost mackerel species have restricted distribution ranges, while others, like the Wahoo, are found in all oceans between 59\u00b0N and 48\u00b0S.\nIn combination, these fish (Scombroids) can be found worldwide in all oceans of the world, excluding the Southern and Arctic Oceans. However, the Atlantic chub mackerel has been spotted near Greenland in the Arctic Ocean on rare occasions as global warming makes the Arctic more habitable for them.\nSome mackerel species, especially pelagic and filter feeding one such as chub mackerel, migrate vertically, staying at certain depths depending on the time of day and food availability.\nFor example, adult snake mackerel, conduct a diel vertical migration, staying in deeper water during the day and rising to the surface at night to feed. The young and juveniles also migrate vertically, but in the opposite direction, staying near the surface during the day and moving deeper at night. \nLifecycle and ecology (Scombroids).\nMackerel are prolific broadcast spawners, and must breed near the surface of the water because the eggs of the females float. Individual females lay between 300,000 and 1,500,000 eggs. Their eggs and larvae are pelagic, that is, they float free in the open sea. The larvae and juvenile mackerel feed on zooplankton. As adults, they have sharp teeth, and hunt small crustaceans such as copepods, forage fish, shrimp, and squid. In turn, they are hunted by larger pelagic animals such as tuna, billfish, sea lions, sharks, and pelicans.\nOff Madagascar, spinner sharks follow migrating schools of mackerel. Bryde's whales feed on mackerel when they can find them. They use several feeding methods, including skimming the surface, lunging, and bubble nets.\nFisheries.\nChub mackerel, \"Scomber japonicus\", are the most intensively fished scombroid mackerel. They account for about half the total capture production of scombroid mackerels. As a species, they are easily confused with Atlantic mackerel. Chub mackerel migrate long distances in oceans and across the Mediterranean. They can be caught with drift nets and suitable trawls, but are most usually caught with surround nets at night by attracting them with lampara lamps.\nThe remaining catch of scombroid mackerels is divided equally between the Atlantic mackerel and all other scombroid mackerels. \nJust these two species (Chub mackerel and Atlantic mackerel) account for about 75% of the total catch of scombroid mackerels.\nChilean jack mackerel are the most commonly fished non-scombroid mackerel, fished as heavily as chub mackerel. The species has been overfished, and its fishery may now be in danger of collapsing.\nSmaller mackerel behave like herrings, and are captured in similar ways. Fish species like these, which school near the surface, can be caught efficiently by purse seining. Huge purse-seine vessels use spotter planes to locate the schooling fish. Then they close in using sophisticated sonar to track the shape of the school, which is then encircled with fast auxiliary boats that deploy purse seines as they speed around the school.\nSuitably designed trollers can also catch mackerels effectively when they swim near the surface. Trollers typically have several long booms which they lift and drop with \"topping lifts\". They haul their lines with electric or hydraulic reels. Fish aggregating devices are also used to target mackerel.\nManagement and conservation.\nThe North Sea has been overfished to the point where the ecological balance has become disrupted and many jobs in the fishing industry have been lost.\nThe Southeast US region spans the Gulf of Mexico, the Caribbean Sea, and the US Southeast Atlantic. Overfishing of king and Spanish mackerel occurred in the 1980s. Regulations were introduced to restrict the size, fishing locations, and bag limits for recreational fishers and commercial fishers. Gillnets were banned in waters off Florida. By 2001, the mackerel stocks had recovered.\nAs food.\nMackerel is an important food fish that is consumed worldwide. As an oily fish, it is a rich source of omega-3 fatty acids. The flesh of mackerel spoils quickly, especially in the tropics, and can cause scombroid food poisoning. Accordingly, it should be eaten on the day of capture, unless properly refrigerated or cured.\nMackerel preservation is not simple. Before the 19th-century development of canning and the widespread availability of refrigeration, salting and smoking were the principal preservation methods available. Historically in England, this fish was not preserved, but was consumed only in its fresh form. However, spoilage was common, leading the authors of \"The Cambridge Economic History of Europe\" to remark: \"There are more references to stinking mackerel in English literature than to any other fish!\" In France, mackerel was traditionally pickled with large amounts of salt, which allowed it to be sold widely across the country.\nFor many years mackerel was regarded as 'unclean' in the UK and other places due to folklore which suggested that the fish fed on the corpses of dead sailors. A 1976 survey of housewives in Britain undertaken by the White Fish Authority indicated a reluctance to departing from buying the traditional staples of cod, haddock or salmon. Less than 10% of the survey's 1,931 respondents had ever bought mackerel, and only 3% did so regularly. As a result of this trend, many UK fishmongers during the 1970s did not display or even stock mackerel.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47333", "revid": "35508256", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47333", "title": "Bluefish", "text": "Species of marine pelagic fish (\"Pomatomus saltatrix\")\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe bluefish (Pomatomus saltatrix) is the only extant species of the family Pomatomidae. It is a marine pelagic fish found around the world in temperate and subtropical waters, except for the northern Pacific Ocean. Bluefish are known as tailor in Australia and New Zealand, elf and shad in South Africa. It is a popular gamefish and food fish.\nThe bluefish is a moderately proportioned fish, with a broad, forked tail. The spiny first dorsal fin is normally folded back in a groove, as are its pectoral fins. Coloration is a grayish blue-green dorsally, fading to white on the lower sides and belly. Its single row of teeth in each jaw is uniform in size, knife-edged, and sharp. Bluefish commonly range in size from \"snappers\" of to much larger, sometimes weighing as much as , though fish heavier than are exceptional.\nTaxonomy.\nThe bluefish is the only extant species now included in the family Pomatomidae. At one time, gnomefishes were included, but these are now grouped in a separate family, Scombropidae. Extinct relatives of the bluefish include \"Carangopsis\" from the Early Eocene of Italy and \"Lophar\" from the Late Miocene of Northern California. They are also found in South America.\nDistribution.\nBluefish are widely distributed around the world in tropical and subtropical waters. They are found in pelagic waters on much of the continental shelves along eastern America (though not between south Florida and northern South America), Africa, the Mediterranean and Black Seas (and during migration in between), Southeast Asia, and Australia. They are found in a variety of coastal habitats: above the continental shelf, in energetic waters near surf beaches, or by rock headlands. They also enter estuaries and inhabit brackish waters. Periodically, they leave the coasts and migrate in schools through open waters.\nAlong the U.S. East Coast, bluefish are found off Florida in the winter. By April, they have disappeared, heading north. By June, they may be found off Massachusetts; in years of high abundance, stragglers may be found as far north as Nova Scotia. By October, they leave the waters north of Cape Cod, heading south down the East Coast of the United States from Rhode Island south to Georgia, to the waters off Florida. Some bluefish, perhaps less migratory, are present in the Gulf of Mexico throughout the year. \nIn a similar pattern overall, the economically significant population that spawns in Europe's Black Sea migrates south through Istanbul (Bosphorus, Sea of Marmara, Dardanelles, Aegean Sea) and on toward Turkey's Mediterranean coast in the autumn for the cold season. A campaign was launched in Turkiye by Fikir Sahibi Damaklar (Intelligent Palates) to protect the Bluefish. This was reported on in 2013. More recently, it was reported that bluefish near Istanbul were abundant and that there is a fishing ban every year between April 15 - Sept. 1 to preserve fish eggs and ensure sustainable fish farming. Along the South African coast and environs, movement patterns are roughly in parallel.\nLife history.\nAdult bluefish are typically long, with a maximum reported size of and . They reproduce during spring and summer, and can live up to 9 years. Bluefish fry eat zooplankton, and are largely at the mercy of currents. Spent bluefish have been found off east-central Florida, migrating north. As with most marine fish, their spawning habits are not well known. In the western side of the North Atlantic, at least two populations occur, separated by Cape Hatteras in North Carolina. The Gulf Stream can carry fry spawned to the south of Cape Hatteras to the north, and eddies can spin off, carrying them into populations found off the coast of the mid-Atlantic, and the New England states.\nFeeding habits.\nAdult bluefish are strong and aggressive, and live in loose groups. They are fast swimmers that prey on schools of forage fish, and continue attacking them in feeding frenzies even after they appear to have eaten their fill. Depending on area and season, they favor menhaden and other sardine-like fish (Clupeidae), jacks (Scombridae), weakfish (Sciaenidae), grunts (Haemulidae), striped anchovies (Engraulidae), shrimp, and squid. They are cannibalistic and can destroy their own young. Bluefish sometimes chase bait through the surf zone, attacking schools in very shallow water, churning the water like a washing machine. This behavior is sometimes referred to as a \"bluefish blitz\".\nIn turn, bluefish are preyed upon by larger predators at all stages of their lifecycle. As juveniles, they fall victim to a wide variety of oceanic predators, including striped bass, larger bluefish, fluke (summer flounder), weakfish, tuna, sharks, rays, and dolphins. As adults, bluefish are taken by tuna, sharks, billfish, seals, sea lions, dolphins, porpoises, and many other species.\nBluefish are aggressive and have been known to inflict severe bites on fishermen. Wading or swimming among feeding bluefish schools can be dangerous. In July 2006, a seven-year-old girl was attacked on a beach, near the Spanish town of Alicante, allegedly by a bluefish. In New Jersey, the large beachfeeder schools are very common and lifeguards report never having seen bluefish bite bathers in their entire careers.\nParasites.\nLike other fish, bluefish host a number of parasites. One parasite is \"Philometra saltatrix\", a philometrid nematode in the ovaries. The females are brownish red and may be as long as 80\u00a0mm; the males are very small.\nRecreational fisheries.\nIn Australia, bluefish, called \"tailor\", are caught on the west coast from Exmouth to Albany, with the most productive fishing areas being in the west coast bioregion.\nThe IGFA All Tackle World Record for bluefish stands at landed by James Hussey near Hatteras, North Carolina. The unofficial record belongs to Captain Benjamin Dellacono who landed a 35 lb 6oz Blue Fish off the coast of Stonington, Connecticut.\nCommercial fisheries.\nIn the U.S., bluefish are landed primarily in recreational fisheries, but important commercial fisheries also exist in temperate and subtropical waters. Bluefish population abundance is typically cyclical, with abundance varying widely over a span of 10 years or more.\nManagement.\nBluefish is a popular sport and food fish, and has been widely overfished. Fisheries management has generally stabilized its population. In the middle Atlantic region of the U.S., bluefish were heavily overfished in the late 1990s, but active management rebuilt the stock by 2007. Elsewhere, public awareness efforts, such as bluefish festivals, combined with catch limits, may be having positive effects in reducing the stress on the regional stocks.\nCulinary use.\nBluefish may be baked or poached, or smoked. The smaller ones (\"snapper blues\") are generally fried, as they are not very oily.\nBecause of its fattiness, bluefish goes rancid rapidly, so it is generally not found far from its fisheries, but where it is available, it is often inexpensive. It must be refrigerated and consumed soon after purchase; some recipes call for keeping it in vinegar and wine before cooking, in \"vina d'alhos\" or \"en escabeche\". \nNutrition.\nBy the same token, it is high in omega-3 fatty acids, but also in mercury and PCBs, containing the high level of about 0.4 ppm of mercury on average, comparable to albacore tuna or Spanish mackerel. For that reason, the U.S. FDA recommends that young children and women of childbearing age consume no more than one serving per week (a serving size is about 4 ounces uncooked for an adult, 2 ounces for children ages 4\u20137 years, 3 ounces for children ages 8\u201310 years, and 4 ounces for children 11 years and older).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47335", "revid": "16138468", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47335", "title": "Catfish", "text": "Order of fish\nCatfish (or catfishes; order Siluriformes or Nematognathi) are a diverse group of ray-finned fish. Catfish are named for their prominent barbels, which resemble a cat's whiskers, though not all catfish have prominent barbels. All siluriformes lack scales, including both the armour-plated and naked species. This order of fish are defined by features of the skull and swimbladder. Catfish range in size and behavior from the three largest species alive, the Mekong giant catfish from Southeast Asia, the wels catfish of Eurasia, and the pira\u00edba of South America, to detritivorous and scavenging bottom feeders, down to the tiny ectoparasitic species known as the candiru. \nIn the Southern United States, catfish may be known by a variety of slang names, such as \"mud cat\", \"polliwogs\", or \"chuckleheads\". Such names are regional and unstandardized. For instance, \"chucklehead\" in one region may refer to a bullhead catfish but indicate blue catfish elsewhere.\nCatfish as a group are of considerable commercial importance; many of the larger species are farmed or fished for food, such as the \"Pangasius\" (a shark catfish) and \"Clarias\" (like the walking catfish). Many of the smaller species, such as members of the genus \"Corydoras\", are important in the aquarium hobby.\nDescription.\nMost catfish are bottom feeders. In general, they are negatively buoyant, which means that they usually sink rather than float due to a reduced gas bladder and a heavy, bony head. Catfish have a variety of body shapes, though most have a cylindrical body with a flattened ventrum to allow for benthic feeding. A flattened head allows for digging through the substrate, as well as perhaps serving as a hydrofoil. Some have a mouth that can expand to a large size and contains no incisiform teeth; catfish generally feed through suction or gulping rather than biting and cutting prey. Some families, though, notably the Loricariidae and Astroblepidae, have a suckermouth that allows them to fasten themselves to objects in fast-moving water.\nCatfish do not have scales; their bodies are often naked. In some species, their mucus-covered skin is used in cutaneous respiration, where the fish breathes through its skin. In some catfish, the skin is covered in bony plates called scutes; some form of body armor appears in various ways within the order. In loricarioids and in the Asian genus \"Sisor\", the armor is primarily made up of one or more rows of free dermal plates. Similar plates are found in large specimens of \"Lithodoras\". These plates may be supported by vertebral processes, as in scoloplacids and in \"Sisor\", but the processes never fuse to the plates or form any external armor. By contrast, in the subfamily Doumeinae (family Amphiliidae) and in hoplomyzontines (Aspredinidae), the armor is formed solely by expanded vertebral processes that form plates. Finally, the lateral armor of doradids, \"Sisor\", and hoplomyzontines consists of hypertrophied lateral line ossicles with dorsal and ventral lamina.\nJuvenile catfish, like other fish, have relatively large heads, eyes, and posterior median fins in comparison to larger, more mature individuals. These juveniles can be readily placed in their families, particularly those with highly derived fin or body shapes; in some cases, identification of the genus is possible. As far as known for most catfish, features that are often characteristic of species, such as mouth and fin positions, fin shapes, and barbel lengths, show little difference between juveniles and adults. For many species, pigmentation pattern is also similar in juveniles and adults. Thus, juvenile catfish generally resemble and develop smoothly into their adult form without distinct juvenile specializations. Exceptions to this are the ariid catfish, where the young retain yolk sacs late into juvenile stages, and many pimelodids, which may have elongated barbels and fin filaments or coloration patterns.\nSensory organs.\nThe maxilla is a tooth-bearing bone in vertebrates, and modified in neopterygian fish to facilitate the protrusion of the mouth and enable suction feeding. Catfish, despite being a group of neopterygians, reduced the maxilla into a support for the maxillary barbels; this means that they are unable to protrude their mouths as other fish such as carp. Catfish barbels typically occur in pairs, and up to four pairs of barbels may be present in some species; these being the nasal, maxillary (on each side of mouth), and two pairs of \"chin\" barbels termed the internal and external mandibular barbel, though the various families often have fewer pairs, some species may have branched or duplicated barbel pairs, and a number of families only have extremely reduced maxillary barbels. The palatine-maxillary system is responsible for moving the maxillary barbels; it is a system of ligaments and muscles centred on these two skeletal elements. If severed, the barbels grow back over time, but the maxillary barbels cannot regenerate if their basal element (the maxilla) is lost.\nMany larger catfish have chemoreceptors across their entire bodies (especially the barbels), which means they \"taste\" anything they touch, and \"smell\" any chemicals in the water. \"In catfish, gustation plays a primary role in the orientation and location of food\". Because barbels and chemoreception are more important in detecting food, their eyes are generally small, and many species lost them entirely as they adapted to underground environments, becoming cavefish. Like other ostariophysans, they are characterized by the presence of a Weberian apparatus. Their well-developed Weberian apparatus and reduced gas bladder allow for improved hearing and sound production.\nFin spines and toxins.\nAll catfish other than members of the Malapteruridae (electric catfish), possess a strong, hollow, bony, leading spine-like ray on their dorsal and pectoral fins. As a defense, these spines may be locked into place so that they stick outwards, enabling them to inflict severe wounds. In numerous catfish species, these fin rays can be used to deliver a stinging protein if the fish is irritated; as many as half of all catfish species may be venomous in this fashion, making the Siluriformes overwhelmingly the vertebrate order with the largest number of venomous species. This venom is produced by glandular cells in the epidermal tissue covering the spines. In members of the family Plotosidae and of the genus \"Heteropneustes\", this protein is so potent it may hospitalize humans who receive a sting; in \"Plotosus lineatus\", the stings can be lethal. The dorsal- and pectoral-fin spines are two of the most conspicuous features of siluriforms, and differ from those in other fish groups. Despite the widespread use of the spines for taxonomic and phylogenetic studies the fields have struggled to effectively use the information due to a lack of consistency in the nomenclature, with a general standard for the descriptive anatomy of catfish spines proposed in 2022 to try and resolve this problem.\nInternal anatomy.\nIn many catfish, the \"humeral process\" is a bony process extending backward from the pectoral girdle immediately above the base of the pectoral fin. It lies beneath the skin, where its outline may be determined by dissecting the skin or probing with a needle.\nThe retinae of catfish are composed of single cones and large rods. Many catfish have a tapetum lucidum, which may help enhance photon capture and increase low-light sensitivity. Double cones, though present in most teleosts, are absent from catfish.\nSexual characters.\nSexual dimorphism is reported in about half of all families of catfish. The modification of the anal fin into an intromittent organ (in internal fertilizers) as well as accessory structures of the reproductive apparatus (in both internal and external fertilizers) have been described in species belonging to 11 different families.\nThe anatomical organization of the testis in catfish is variable among the families of catfish, but the majority of them present fringed testis: Ictaluridae, Claridae, Auchenipteridae, Doradidae, Pimelodidae, and Pseudopimelodidae. In the testes of some species of Siluriformes, organs and structures such as a spermatogenic cranial region and a secretory caudal region are observed, in addition to the presence of seminal vesicles in the caudal region. The total number of fringes and their length are different in the caudal and cranial portions between species. Fringes of the caudal region may present tubules, in which the lumen is filled by secretion and spermatozoa. Spermatocysts are formed from cytoplasmic extensions of Sertoli cells; the release of spermatozoa is allowed by breaking of the cyst walls.\nThe occurrence of seminal vesicles, in spite of their interspecific variability in size, gross morphology, and function, has not been related to the mode of fertilization. They are typically paired, multichambered, and connected with the sperm duct, and have been reported to play glandular and storage functions. Seminal vesicle secretion may include steroids and steroid glucuronides, with hormonal and pheromonal functions, but it appears to be primarily constituted of mucoproteins, acid mucopolysaccharides, and phospholipids.\nFish ovaries may be of two types - gymnovarian or cystovarian. In the first type, the oocytes are released directly into the coelomic cavity and then eliminated (released outside the body). In the second type, the oocytes are conveyed to the exterior through the oviduct. Many catfish are cystovarian in type, including \"Pseudoplatystoma corruscans\", \"P. fasciatum\", \"Lophiosilurus alexandri\", and \"Loricaria lentiginosa\".\nSize.\nCatfish have one of the largest ranges in size within a single order of bony fish. Many catfish have a maximum length of under . Some of the smallest species of the Aspredinidae and Trichomycteridae reach sexual maturity at only .\nThe wels catfish, \"Silurus glanis\", and the much smaller related Aristotle's catfish, are the only catfish indigenous to Europe; the former ranges throughout Europe, and the latter is restricted to Greece. Mythology and literature record wels catfish of astounding proportions that have not been scientifically verified. The typical size of the species is about , and fish more than are rare. However, they are known to exceed in length and in weight. In July 2009, a catfish weighing was caught in the River Ebro, Spain, by an 11-year-old British schoolgirl.\nIn North America, the largest \"Ictalurus furcatus\" (blue catfish) caught in the Missouri River on 20 July 2010, weighed . The largest flathead catfish, \"Pylodictis olivaris\", ever caught was in Independence, Kansas, weighing . The biggest flathead catfish caught was by Ken Paulie in the Elk City Reservoir in Kansas, US on 19 May 1998 weighing , which was certified by the International Game Fish Association IGFA.\nA Mekong giant catfish caught in northern Thailand on 1 May 2005, and reported to the press almost 2 months later weighed . This is the largest giant Mekong catfish caught since Thai officials started keeping records in 1981. Also in Asia, Jeremy Wade caught a goonch following three fatal attacks on humans in the Kali River on the India-Nepal border. Wade was of the opinion that the offending fish must have been significantly larger than this to have taken an 18-year-old boy, as well as a water buffalo.\nPira\u00edba \"(Brachyplatystoma filamentosum)\", a goliath catfish, can grow exceptionally large and are native to the Amazon Basin. They can occasionally grow to , as evidenced by numerous catches. Deaths from being swallowed by these fish have been reported in the region.\nClassification.\nMolecular evidence suggests that in spite of the great morphological diversity in the order, all catfish form a monophyletic group, originating from a common ancestor. Catfish belong to a superorder called the Ostariophysi, which also includes the Cypriniformes (carps and minnows), Characiformes (characins and tetras), Gonorynchiformes (milkfish and beaked salmons) and Gymnotiformes (South American knifefish), a superorder characterized by the Weberian apparatus. Some place Gymnotiformes as a sub-order of Siluriformes; however, this is not as widely accepted. Currently, the Siluriformes are said to be the sister group to the Gymnotiformes, though this has been debated due to more recent molecular evidence. As of 2007[ [update]] there were about thirty-six extant catfish families, and about 3,093 extant species have been described. This makes the catfish order the second or third most diverse vertebrate order; in fact, one out of every twenty vertebrate species is a catfish. \nThe taxonomy of catfish is quickly changing. In a 2007 and 2008 paper, \"Horabagrus\", \"Phreatobius\", and \"Conorhynchos\" were not classified under any current catfish families. There is disagreement on the family status of certain groups; for example, Nelson (2006) lists Auchenoglanididae and Heteropneustidae as separate families, while the All Catfish Species Inventory (ACSI) includes them under other families. FishBase and the Integrated Taxonomic Information System lists Parakysidae as a separate family, while this group is included under Akysidae by both Nelson (2006) and ACSI. Many sources do not list the recently revised family Anchariidae. The family Horabagridae, including \"Horabagrus\", \"Pseudeutropius\", and \"Platytropius\", is not shown by some authors but presented by others as a true group. Thus, the actual number of families differs between authors. The species count is in constant flux due to taxonomic work as well as description of new species. Between 2003 and 2005, over one hundred species were named, a rate three times faster than that of the past century. In June 2005, researchers named the newest family of catfish, Lacantuniidae, only the third new family of fish distinguished in the last seventy years, the others being the coelacanth in 1938 and the megamouth shark in 1983. The new species in Lacantuniidae, \"Lacantunia enigmatica\", was found in the Lacantun river in the Mexican state of Chiapas.\nThe higher-level phylogeny of Siluriformes has gone through several recent changes, mainly due to molecular phylogenetic studies. While most studies, both morphological and molecular, agree that catfishes are arranged into three main lineages, the relationship among these lineages has been a contentious point in which these studies, performed for example by Rui Diogo, differ. The three main lineages in Siluriformes are the family Diplomystidae, the denticulate catfish suborder Loricarioidei (containing the Neotropical \"suckermouth\" catfishes), and the suborder Siluroidei, which contains the remaining families of the order. According to morphological data, Diplomystidae is usually considered to be the earliest branching catfish lineage and the sister group to the other two lineages, Loricarioidei and Siluroidei. Molecular evidence usually contrasts with this hypothesis, and shows the suborder Loricarioidei as the earliest branching catfish lineage, and sister to a clade that includes the Diplomystidae and Siluroidei; this phylogeny has been obtained in numerous studies based on genetic data. However, it has been suggested that these molecular results are errors as a result of long branch attraction, incorrectly placing Loricarioidei as the earliest-branching catfish lineage. When a data filtering method was used to reduce lineage rate heterogeneity (the potential source of bias) on their dataset, a final phylogeny was recovered which showed the Diplomystidae are the earliest-branching catfish, followed by Loricarioidei and Siluroidei as sister lineages, providing both morphological and molecular support for Diplomystidae being the earliest branching catfish.\nThe following classification is based on \"Eschmeyer's Catalog of Fishes\":\nPhylogeny.\nPhylogeny of living Siluriformes based on 2017 and extinct families based on Nelson, Grande &amp; Wilson 2016.\nEvolution.\nCatfish are believed to have a Gondwanan origin primarily centered around South America, as the most basal living catfish groups are known from there. The earliest known definitive members lived in the Americas from the Campanian to Maastrichtian stages of the Late Cretaceous, including the Andinichthyidae, \"Vorhisia vulpes\" and possibly \"Arius\". A potential fossil record is known from the earlier Coniacian-Santonian stages in Niger of West Africa, though this has been considered unreliable, and the putative earliest armored catfish known from the fossil record, \"Afrocascudo\", lived during the Cenomanian age of the Late Cretaceous in Morocco of North Africa (Kem Kem Group). The describers of \"Afrocascudo\" claimed that the presence of a derived loricariid so early on would indicate the extensive diversification of catfish, or at least loricarioids, prior to the beginning of the Late Cretaceous. As extant loricariids are only known from South America, much of this diversification must have occurred on the supercontinent of West Gondwana prior to its fragmentation into South America and Africa. Britz and colleagues suggested that \"Afrocascudo\" instead represents a juvenile obaichthyid lepisosteiform, possibly a junior synonym of \"Obaichthys\". The authors of the original study still stood by their original conclusion based on the absence of important holostean characters, and noted that it could not be a juvenile, since the bones were completely ossified.\nDistribution and habitat.\nCatfish live inland or in coastal waters of every continent except Antarctica. Catfish have inhabited all continents at one time or another. They are most diverse in tropical South America, Asia, and Africa, with one family native to North America and one family in Europe. More than half of all catfish species live in the Americas. They are the only ostariophysans that have entered freshwater habitats in Madagascar, Australia, and New Guinea.\nThey are found in fresh water/brackish water environments, with most inhabiting shallow, running water. Representatives of at least eight families are hypogean (live underground) with three families that are also troglobitic (inhabiting caves). One such species is \"Phreatobius cisternarum\", known to live underground in phreatic habitats. Numerous species from the families Ariidae and Plotosidae, and a few from Aspredinidae and Bagridae, are found in salt water.\nBehavior.\nMany catfish are nocturnal, but others (many Auchenipteridae) are crepuscular or diurnal (most Loricariidae or Callichthyidae, for example).\nCommunication.\nCatfish can produce different types of sounds and also have well-developed auditory reception used to discriminate between sounds with different pitches and velocities. They are also able to determine the distance of the sound's origin and from what direction it originated. This is a very important fish communication mechanism, especially during agonistic and distress behaviors. Catfish are able to produce a variety of sounds for communication that can be classified into two groups: drumming sounds and stridulation sounds. The variability in catfish sound signals differs due to a few factors: the mechanism by which the sound is produced, the function of the resulting sound, and physiological differences such as size, sex, and age. \nTo create a drumming sound, catfish use an indirect vibration mechanism using the swimbladder as a resonating chamber. In these fishes, special sound-producing muscles (sonic muscles) insert on the ramus Mulleri, also known as the elastic spring. The sonic muscles pull the elastic spring forward and extend the swimbladder. When the muscles relax, the tension in the spring quickly returns the swimbladder to its original position, which produces the sound.\nIn stridulators, the sound-generating mechanism is found in their pectoral fins; the first pectoral fin ray or spine can be moved by large abductor and adductor muscles. The base of the catfishes' spines has a sequence of ridges, and the spine normally slides within a groove on the fish's pelvic girdle during routine movement; but, pressing the ridges on the spine against the pelvic girdle groove creates a series of short pulses. The movement is analogous to a finger moving down the teeth of a comb, and consequently a series of sharp taps is produced.\nSound-generating mechanisms are often different between the sexes. In some catfish, pectoral fins are longer in males than in females of similar size, and differences in the characteristic of the sounds produced were also observed. Comparison between families of the same order of catfish demonstrated family and species-specific patterns of vocalization, according to a study by Maria Clara Amorim. During courtship behavior in three species of \"Corydoras\" catfish, all males actively produced stridulation sounds before egg fertilization, and the species' songs were different in pulse number and sound duration.\nSound production in catfish may also be correlated with fighting and alarm calls. According to a study by Kaatz, sounds for disturbance (e.g. alarm) and agonistic behavior were not significantly different, which suggests distress sounds can be used to sample variation in agonistic sound production. However, in a comparison of a few different species of tropical catfish, some fish put under distress conditions produced a higher intensity of stridulatory sounds than drumming sounds. Differences in the proportion of drumming versus stridulation sounds depend on morphological constraints, such as different sizes of drumming muscles and pectoral spines. Due to these constraints, some fish may not even be able to produce a specific sound. In several different species of catfish, aggressive sound production occurs during cover site defense or during threats from other fish. More specifically, in long-whiskered catfish, drumming sounds are used as a threatening signal and stridulations are used as a defense signal. Kaatz investigated 83 species from 14 families of catfish, and determined that catfish produce more stridulatory sounds in disturbance situations and more swimbladder sounds in intraspecific conflicts.\nRelation to humans.\nFood.\nCatfish are easy to farm in warm climates and are often sold cheaply by local grocers. About 60% of U.S. farm-raised catfish are grown within a 65-mile (100-km) radius of Belzoni, Mississippi. Channel catfish (\"Ictalurus punctatus\") support a $450 million/yr aquaculture industry. The largest producers are located in the Southern United States, including Mississippi, Alabama, and Arkansas.\nCatfish raised in inland tanks or channels are usually considered safe for the environment, since their waste and disease should be contained and not spread to the wild.\nIn Asia, many catfish species are important as food. Several airbreathing catfish (Clariidae) and shark catfish (Pangasiidae) species are heavily cultured in Africa and Asia. Exports of one particular shark catfish species from Vietnam, \"Pangasius bocourti\", have met with pressures from the U.S. catfish industry. In 2003, the United States Congress passed a law preventing the imported fish from being labeled as catfish, this being the conclusion of the so-called Catfish Dispute. As a result, the Vietnamese exporters of this fish now label their products sold in the U.S. as \"basa fish\". Trader Joe's has labeled frozen fillets of Vietnamese \"Pangasius hypophthalmus\" as \"striper.\"\nCatfish have widely been caught and farmed for food for thousands of years in Africa, Asia, Europe, and North America. Opinions of their quality and flavor vary, with some food critics considering catfish excellent and others dismissing them as watery and lacking in flavor. Catfish is high in vitamin D. Farm-raised catfish contains low levels of omega-3 fatty acids and a much higher proportion of omega-6 fatty acids.\nIn Central Europe, catfish were often viewed as a delicacy to be enjoyed on feast days and holidays. Migrants from Europe and Africa to the United States brought along this tradition, and in the Southern United States, catfish is extremely popular.\nThe most commonly eaten species in the United States are the channel catfish and the blue catfish, both common in the wild and increasingly widely farmed. Farm-raised catfish became such a staple of the U.S. diet that President Ronald Reagan proclaimed National Catfish Day on June 25, 1987, to recognize \"the value of farm-raised catfish.\"\nCatfish is prepared in a variety of ways. In Europe, it is often cooked in similar ways to carp, but in the United States it is popularly crumbed with cornmeal and fried.\nIn Indonesia, catfish is usually served fried or grilled in street stalls called \"warung\" and eaten with vegetables, sambal (a spicy relish or sauce), and usually \"nasi uduk\" (traditional coconut rice). The dish is called or . is the Indonesian word for catfish. The same dish can also be called as (squashed catfish) if the fish is lightly squashed along with sambal with a stone mortar-and-pestle. The or version presents the fish in a separate plate while the mortar is solely for sambal.\nIn Malaysia, catfish is called \"ikan keli\" and is fried with spices or grilled and eaten with tamarind and Thai chili gravy and is also often eaten with steamed rice.\nIn Bangladesh and the Indian states of Odisha, West Bengal and Assam, catfish (locally known as \"magur\") is eaten as a favored delicacy during the monsoons. In the Indian state of Kerala, the local catfish, known as \"thedu\"', \"etta\" or \"mushi\" in Malayalam, is also popular.\nIn Hungary, catfish is often cooked in paprika sauce (Harcsapaprik\u00e1s) typical of Hungarian cuisine. It is traditionally served with pasta smothered with curd cheese (t\u00far\u00f3s csusza).\nIn Myanmar (formerly Burma), catfish is usually used in \"mohinga\", a traditional noodle fish soup cooked with lemon grass, ginger, garlic, pepper, banana stem, onions, and other local ingredients.\nVietnamese catfish, of the genus \"Pangasius\", cannot be legally marketed as catfish in the United States, and so is referred to as \"swai\" or \"basa\". Only fish of the family \"Ictaluridae\" may be marketed as catfish in the United States. In the UK, Vietnamese catfish is sometimes sold as \"Vietnamese river cobbler\", although more commonly as basa.\nIn Nigeria, catfish is often cooked in a variety of stews. It is particularly cooked in a delicacy popularly known as \"catfish pepper soup\" which is enjoyed throughout the nation.\nIn Jewish dietary law, known as kashrut, fish must have fins and scales to be kosher. Since catfish lack scales, they are not kosher.\nMythology.\nIn the mythology of the Japanese Shinto religion natural phenomenon are caused by \"kami\". Earthquakes are caused by a giant catfish called Namazu. There are other \"kami\" associated with earthquakes. In Kyoto it's usually an eel, but after the 1855 Edo earthquake were printed giving more popularity to the catfish \"kami\" that has been known since the 16th century Otsu-e. In one catfish print the divine white horse of Amaterasu is depicted knocking down the earthquake-causing catfish.\nIn aquaria.\nThere is a large and growing ornamental fish trade, with hundreds of species of catfish, such as \"Corydoras\" and armored suckermouth catfish (often called plecos), being a popular component of many aquaria. Other catfish commonly found in the aquarium trade are banjo catfish, talking catfish, and long-whiskered catfish.\nAs invasive species.\nRepresentatives of the genus \"Ictalurus\" have been introduced into European waters in the hope of obtaining a sporting and food resource, but the European stock of American catfishes has not achieved the dimensions of these fish in their native waters and have only increased the ecological pressure on native European fauna. Walking catfish have also been introduced in the freshwater areas of Florida, with the voracious catfish becoming a major alien pest there. Flathead catfish, \"Pylodictis olivaris\", is also a North American pest on Atlantic slope drainages. \"Pterygoplichthys\" species, released by aquarium fishkeepers, have also established feral populations in many warm waters around the world.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47336", "revid": "613962127", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47336", "title": "Sucker-fish", "text": ""}
{"id": "47337", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47337", "title": "Fishing rod", "text": "Angling tool\nA fishing rod or fishing pole is a long, thin rod used by anglers to catch fish by manipulating a line ending in a hook (formerly known as an \"angle\", hence the term \"angling\"). At its most basic form, a fishing rod is a straight rigid stick/pole with a line fastened to one end (as seen in traditional bamboo rod fishing such as Tenkara fishing); however, modern rods are usually more elastic and generally have the line stored in a reel mounted at the rod handle, which is hand-cranked and controls the line retrieval, as well as numerous line-restricting rings (also known as \"line guides\") that distribute bending stress along the rod and help dampening down/prevent line whipping and entanglement. To better entice fish, baits or lures are dressed onto the hook attached to the line, and a bite indicator (e.g. a float) is typically used, some of which (e.g. quiver tip) might be incorporated as part of the rod itself.\nFishing rods act as an extended lever and allow the angler to amplify line movements while luring and pulling the fish. It also enhances casting distance by increasing the launch speed of the terminal tackles (the hook, bait/lure, and other accompanying attachments such as float and sinker/feeder), as a longer swing radius (compared to that of a human arm) corresponds to greater arc speed at the tip under the same angular velocity. The length of fishing rods usually vary between and depending on the style of angling, while the Guinness World Record is .\nTraditional fishing rods are made from a single piece of hardwood (such as ash and hickory) or bamboo; while contemporary rods are usually made from alloys (such as aluminium) or more often high-tensile synthetic composites (such as fibreglass or carbon fiber), and may come in multi-piece (joined via ferrules) or telescoping forms that are more portable and storage-friendly. Most fishing rods are tapered towards the tip to reduce the gravitational leverage front of the handle that an angler has to overcome when lifting the rod. Many modern rods are also constructed from hollow blanks to increase the specific strength of the design and reduce the overall weight.\nIn contrast with fishing nets and traps, which are usually used in subsistence and commercial fishing, angling with rods is a far less efficient method of catching fish, and is used more often in recreational fishing and competitive casting, which focus less on the yield and more on the experience. Fishing rods also come in many sizes, actions, hardness and configurations depending on whether they are to be used for small, medium or large fish, in fresh or saltwater situations, or the different angling styles. Various types of fishing rods are designed for specific subtypes of angling, for instance: spin fishing rods (both spinning and baitcasting rods) are optimized for frequent, repeated casting, and are usually lighter and have faster action; fly rods are designed to better sling heavy lines and ultralight artificial flies, and are usually much more flexible; surfcasting rods are designed to cast baits or lures out over far distances into the surf zone, and tends to be quite long; ice fishing rods are designed to fish through small drilled holes in ice covered lakes, and usually very short; and trolling rods are designed to drag heavy bait or lures through water while boat fishing, and usually have greater ultimate tensile strength due to the frequently large sizes of the target fish.\nHistory.\nFly fishing.\nThe art of fly fishing took a great leap forward after the English Civil War, where a newly found interest in the activity left its mark on the many books and treatises that were written on the subject at the time. The renowned officer in the Parliamentary army, Robert Venables, published in 1662 \"The Experienced Angler, or Angling improved, being a general discourse of angling, imparting many of the aptest ways and choicest experiments for the taking of most sorts of fish in pond or river\". \"Compleat Angler\" was written by Izaak Walton in 1653 (although Walton continued to add to it for a quarter of a century) and described the fishing in the Derbyshire Wye. It was a celebration of the art and spirit of fishing in prose and verse; six verses were quoted from John Dennys's earlier work. A second part to the book was added by Walton's friend Charles Cotton.\nThe 18th century was mainly an era of consolidation of the techniques developed in the previous century. Running rings began to appear along the fishing rods, which gave anglers greater control over the cast line. The rods themselves were also becoming increasingly sophisticated and specialized for different roles. Jointed rods became common from the middle of the century and bamboo came to be used for the top section of the rod, giving it a much greater strength and flexibility.\nThe industry also became commercialized \u2013 rods and tackle were sold at the haberdashers store. After the Great Fire of London in 1666, artisans moved to Redditch which became a centre of production of fishing related products from the 1730s. Onesimus Ustonson established his trading shop in 1761, and his establishment remained as a market leader for the next century. He received a Royal Warrant from three successive monarchs starting with King George IV.\nTechnological improvements.\nThe impact of the Industrial Revolution was first felt in the manufacture of fly lines. Instead of anglers twisting their own lines, a laborious and time-consuming process, the new textile spinning machines allowed for a variety of tapered lines to be easily manufactured and marketed.\nThe material used for the rod itself changed from the heavy woods native to England, to lighter and more elastic varieties imported from abroad, especially from South America and the West Indies. Bamboo rods became the generally favored option from the mid 19th century, and several strips of the material were cut from the cane, milled into shape, and then glued together to form light, strong, hexagonal rods with a solid core that were superior to anything that preceded them.\nOther materials used, were Tonkin bamboo Calcutta reed, ash wood, hickory, ironwood, maple, lancewood, or malacca cane. These products were light, tough, and pliable. Rods were generally made in three pieces called a butt, midsection, and tip. The butts were frequently made of maple, with bored bottom; this butt outlasted several tops. Midsections were generally made from ironwood because it was a thicker, strong wood. Tips were generally made from bamboo for its elasticity which could throw the bait further and more accurately. Handles and grips were generally of cork, wood, or wrapped cane. Many different types of glue held these sections together, most commonly Irish glue and bone glue. This was until hilton glue, or cement glue, was introduced because of its waterproof qualities. Even today, Tonkin split-bamboo rods are still popular in fly fishing.\nUntil the mid 19th century, rods were generally made in England. This changed in 1846 when American Samuel Phillippe introduced an imported fishing rod the first six strips of Calcutta cane made in Bavaria where Phillippe was importing Violins that he passed off as his own hand work. Split-cane rods were later independently produced after Phillippe started to sell the imported rods to a New York retailer and then copied by Americans Charles Orvis, Hiram Leonard and Englishman William Hardy in the 1870s and mass production methods made these rods accessible to the public. Horton Manufacturing Company first introduced an all steel rod in 1913. These rods were heavy and flexible and did not satisfy many customers. The next big occurrence in fishing rods was the introduction of the fiberglass rod in the 1940s and was developed by Robert Gayle and a Mr. Mcguire.\nBoron and Graphite rods came around in the 1960s and 1970s when the United States and United Kingdom invested considerable research into developing the new technologies. Hewitt and Howald were the first to come up with a way to lay the fibers into the shape of a fishing rod by wrapping them around a piece of balsa wood. However, by 1977, boron fibre technology had been muscled out by the cheaper material graphite and was no longer competitive in the market.\nRods for travelers were made with nickel-silver metal joints, or ferrules, that could be inserted into one another forming the rod. Some of them were made to be used as a walking cane until needed for sport. Since the 1980s, with the advent of flexible, yet stiff graphite ferrules, travel rod technology has greatly advanced, and multi-piece travel rods that can be transported in a suitcase or backpack constitute a large share of the market.\nModern design.\nIn theory, an ideal rod should gradually taper from butt to tip, be tight in all its joints (if any), and have a smooth, progressive taper, without 'dead spots'. Modern design and fabrication techniques, along with advanced materials such as graphite, boron, magnesium alloy and fiberglass composites as well as stainless steel (see Emmrod) \u2013 have allowed rod makers to tailor both the shape and action of fishing rods for greater casting distance, accuracy, and fish-fighting qualities. Today, fishing rods are identified by their weight (meaning the weight of line or lure required to flex a fully loaded rod) and action (describing the speed with which the rod returns to its neutral position).\nGenerally there are three types of rods used today graphite, fiberglass, and bamboo rods. Bamboo rods are the heaviest of the three, but people still use it for its feel. Fiberglass rods are the heaviest of the new chemically made material rods. They are mostly popular with the new and young anglers, as well as anglers who cannot afford the generally more expensive graphite rods. They are more commonly found among those anglers that fish in rugged areas such as on rocks or piers where knocking the rod on hard objects is a greater possibility. This may potentially cause breakage, making a fiberglass rod preferable for some anglers due to its higher durability and affordability compared to graphite rods. Today's most popular rod tends to be graphite for its light weight characteristics and its ability to allow for further and more accurate cast. Graphite rods tend to be more sensitive, allowing the user to feel bites from fish easier.\nModern fishing rods retain cork as a common material for grips. Cork is light, durable, and keeps warm. EVA foam and carbon fiber grips are also used. Reel seats are often of graphite-reinforced plastic, aluminium, or wood. Guides are available in steel and titanium with a wide variety of high-tech ceramic and metal alloy inserts replacing the classic agate inserts of earlier rods.\nBack- or butt-rests can also be used with modern fishing rods to make it easier to fight large game fish. These are fork-like supports that help keep the rod in position, providing leverage and counteracting tensions caused by a caught fish.\nRod making bench.\nAn old rod-making bench would generally consist of a bench, vice, a drawing knife, a jack, a fore plane, large coarse flat file, sand paper, and several strips of wood about long with different size grooves in them. Newer rod building benches are smaller versions of lathes powered by small motors that turn the rod as thread is applied to secure the guides. The motor is controlled by a foot operated rheostat, similar to that found on a sewing machine. A low rpm motor can be used to apply rod finish, typically a two-part resin, to protect the threads.\nSpecifications.\nThere are several specifications manufacturers use to delineate rod uses. These include power, action, line weight, lure weight, and number of pieces.\nPower value.\nAlso known as \"rod weight\", the power value of a fishing rod implies its stiffness by vaguely describing the force needed to produce a certain degree of flexure upon the rod, and may be classified as \"ultra-light\" (UL), \"light\" (L), \"medium-light\" (ML), \"medium\" (M), \"medium-heavy\" (MH), \"heavy\" (H), \"extra-heavy\" (XH), or other similar combinations. It is often an indicator of what styles of fishing, species of target fish, or size of fish a particular rod may be best suited for. The heavier the power of a rod, the more weight it can lift up easily without snapping. However, stiffer rods are also less sensitive, as light forces (such as vibrations from fish touching the hook) do not transmit well through a stiffer rod, but the bites from larger fish to heavy lures tend not to be hard to detect. Ultra-light rods are suitable for catching baitfish and small panfish, for situations where rod responsiveness is critical, or for casting very light tackles. Heavy/extra-heavy rods are used in deep-sea fishing, surf fishing, or big-game boat fishing.\nWhile manufacturers use various designations for a rod's power value, there is no consensus or industrial standard, hence application of a particular weight tag a manufacturer is somewhat subjective. Any fish can theoretically be caught with any rod, but catching panfish on a heavy rod offers no sport whatsoever, and successfully landing a large fish on an ultralight rod requires supreme rod handling skills but more frequently still ends in broken tackles and a lost fish. It is generally advised to \"pick the right tool for the job\" and choose rod weights that are best suited to the intended type of fishing.\nAction.\nThe action of a fishing rod refers to the speed with which it elastically returns to the neutral (straightened) position after a flexional load is removed (i.e. the \"recoil\" or \"rebound\" speed), and is generally described as being \"\"slow\", \"medium\", \"fast\", or anything in between (e.g. \"medium-fast\") or beyond (e.g. \"extra-fast\"\"). Contrary to how it is often colloquially described, action does \"not\" refer to the bending characteristics (shape of the \"curve\") of the rod \u2014 a fast-action rod can as easily have a more evenly progressive bending curve (from tip to butt) as opposed to a more tip-bending curve, although tip-bending rods do inherently tend to have faster action. The action can also be influenced by the length of a rod, the tapering profile, and the blank materials used. Typically a rod that uses a fiberglass composite blank has slower action than one that uses a carbon fiber composite blank.\nAction, however, is also often a subjective description of a manufacturer. Very often action is misused to note the bending curve instead of the speed. Some manufacturers list the power value of the rod as its action. A \"medium\" action bamboo rod may have a faster action than a \"fast\" fibreglass rod. Action is also subjectively used by anglers, as an angler might compare a given rod as \"faster\" or \"slower\" than a different rod.\nA rod's action and power may change when load is greater or lesser than the rod's specified casting weight. When the load used greatly exceeds a rod's specifications a rod may break during casting, if the line does not break first. When the load is significantly less than the rod's recommended range the casting distance is significantly reduced, as the rod's action cannot launch the load. It acts like a stiff pole. In fly rods, exceeding weight ratings may warp the blank or have casting difficulties when rods are improperly loaded.\nRods with a fast action combined with a full progressive bending curve allows the fisherman to make longer casts, given that the cast weight and line diameter is correct. When a cast weight exceeds the specifications lightly, a rod becomes slower, slightly reducing the distance. When a cast weight is slightly less than the specified casting weight the distance is slightly reduced as well, as the rod action is only used partially.\nRod sensitivity.\nA rods blank will determine the amount of sensitivity anglers feel. Fishing rods made of graphite are the most sensitive due to the fact they can transfer vibrations better than rods made of fiberglass. But the rod blank is not the only thing that translates into sensitivity. The rods design will impact how well an angler feels a fish's bite or the bottom of the lake, stream, reservoir, creek, or river. The more sensitivity a rod has the more likely you are to feel the bite and be able to get a good hookset to land the fish.\nBending curvature and tapering.\nA fishing rod's main function is to bend and deliver a certain resistance or power. While casting, the rod acts as a catapult: by moving the rod shaft forward, the inertia of the mass of the terminal tackles and the distal portion of rod itself will load (bend) the rod tip backwards, and the subsequent forward elastic rebound will sling out the lure/bait. When a hook bite is registered and the fisherman jerks the rod, the bending of the rod will realign the pull along the line and help setting the hook properly. When fighting a fish, the elasticity of the rod not only enables the fisherman to keep the line under tension, but also dampens the shock of the fish struggling and avoid line snapping, which helps to exhaust the fish and enable the fisherman to reel it in. The rod bending also lessens the torque the fisherman has to overcome when fighting the fish by shortening the practical leverage the line is pulling on the rod, as stiffer rods have more distance between the tip and the handle even when bent, which actually translates to less effective force being transmitted due to more mechanical advantage in favor of the fish. In comparison, a deeper bending rod will demand less power from the fisherman, but deliver more fighting power to the fish. In practice, this leverage effect often misleads fisherman. Often it is believed that a hard, stiff rod puts more control and power on the fish to fight, while it is actually the fish who is putting the power on the fisherman. In commercial fishing practice, large fish are often pulled in on the line itself without much effort, which is possible because the absence of the leverage effect.\nA rod can bend in different curves. Traditionally the bending curve is mainly determined by its tapering. In simplified terms, a fast taper will bend a lot more in the tip area and not much in the butt part, and a slow taper will tend to bend too much at the butt and delivers a weak rod. A progressive tapering which loads smooth from top to butt, adding in power the deeper the rod is bent. In practice, the tapers of quality rods often are curved or in steps to achieve the right action and bending curve for the type of fishing a rod is built. In today's practice, different fibres with different properties can be used in a single rod. In this practice, there is no straight relationship anymore between the actual tapering and the bending curve.\nThe bending curve is not easily described by terms. However, some rod and blank manufacturers try to simplify things towards their customers by describing the bending curve by associating them with their action. The term \"fast action\" is used for rods where only the tip is bending, and \"slow action\" for rods bending from tip to butt. In practice, this is misleading, as top-quality rods are very often fast-action rods, bending from tip to butt. While the so-called \"fast-action\" rods are stiff rods (with absence of any action) which end in a soft or slow tip section. The construction of a progressive bending, fast action rod is more difficult and more expensive to achieve. Common terms to describe the bending curve or properties which influence the bending curve are: progressive taper/loading/curve/bending/..., fast taper, heavy progressive (notes a bending curve close to progressive, tending to become fast-tapered), tip action (also referred to as \"umbrella\"-action), broom-action (which refers to the previously mentioned stiff \"fast action\"-rods with soft tip). A parabolic action is often used to note a progressive bending curve, in fact this term comes from a series of splitcane fly rods built by Pezon &amp; Michel in France since the late 1930s, which had a progressive bending curve. Sometimes the term parabolic is more specific used to note the specific type of progressive bending curve as was found in the Parabolic series.\nA common way today to describe a rod's bending properties is the Common Cents System, which is \"a system of objective and relative measurement for quantifying rod power, action and even this elusive thing ... fishermen like to call feel.\"\nThe bending curve determines the way a rod builds up and releases its power. This influences not only the casting and the fish-fighting properties, but also the sensitivity to strikes when fishing lures, the ability to set a hook (which is also related to the mass of the rod), the control over the lure or bait, the way the rod should be handled and how the power is distributed over the rod. On a full progressive rod, the power is distributed most evenly over the whole rod.\nLine weight.\nThe line weight of a fishing rod describes the optimal tension along the fishing line the rod is designed to handle, usually expressed in pounds or kilograms. A fishing line's \"breaking weight\" describes the maximum tensile force that can be exerted before the line breaks apart, while the line weight for a rod describes as the extent of bending force that the rod can support. Fly rod weights are typically expressed as a number from 1 to 12 written as \"N\"wt (e.g. 6wt), and each weight represents a standard weight in grains for the first of the fly line, established by the American Fishing Tackle Manufacturing Association. For example, the first of a 6wt fly line should weigh between , with the optimal weight being . In casting and spinning rods, designations such as \"8-15\u00a0lb line weight\" are typical.\nLure weight.\nThe lure weight of a fishing rod describes the optimal weight range of terminal tackle (mainly the bait and hook/lure, and any attached float, sinker, swivel and/or heavy leader), usually expressed in ounces or grams, that the rod is designed to handle in order to achieve good casting outcome. Casting lures heavier than the designated weights might result in the rod tip breaking, while lures that are too light might have trouble with casting distance and accuracy.\nNumber of sections.\nRods that are one piece from butt to tip are considered to have the most natural \"feel\" due to the theoretically uninterrupted transfer of vibrations to the angler's hand, and are preferred by many. However, the difficulty in transporting one-piece rod safely becomes an increasing problem with increasing rod length. Two-piece rods, joined by a ferrule, are very common, and if well engineered (especially with tubular glass or carbon fibre rods), sacrifice very little in the way of natural feel. Some fishermen do feel a difference in sensitivity with two-piece rods, but most do not.\nSome rods are joined through a metal \"bus\". These add mass to the rod which helps in setting the hook and help activating the rod from tip to butt when casting, resulting in a better casting experience. Some anglers experience this kind of fitting as superior to a one piece rod. They are found on specialized hand-built rods. Apart from adding the correct mass, depending on the kind of rod, this fitting also is the strongest known fitting, but also the most expensive one. For that reason they are almost never to be found on commercial fishing rods.\nTypes.\nFishing rods can be constructed out of a vast number of materials. Generally they are made with either fiberglass, graphite, or a new generation composite, also known as carbon fibre. Many times carbon fibre and graphite are used together in the rod making process.\nCarbon fibre rods.\nA carbon fibre rod is not necessarily better than a glass fibre rod; the two fibres have different properties, with their own tradeoffs. Carbon fibre is less flexible (stiffer) than glass fibre and more brittle and prone to breakage when misused, while carbon fibre allows for longer and faster rods. Carbon fibre also allows for a smaller diameter rod that is more sensitive than a glass fibre rod. A carbon fibre rod is also much lighter than a glass fibre rod allowing for longer days of fishing. Each has its purpose in the fishing industry and both improve an anglers chances of being successful when the blanks are used for the right purposes.\nFly rods.\nFly rods, thin, flexible fishing rods designed to cast an artificial fly, usually consisting of a hook tied with fur, feathers, foam, or other lightweight material. More modern flies are also tied with synthetic materials. Originally made of yew, green heart, and later split bamboo (Tonkin cane), most modern fly rods are constructed from man-made composite materials, including fibreglass, carbon/graphite, or graphite/boron composites. Split bamboo rods are generally considered the most beautiful, the most \"classic\", and are also generally the most fragile of the styles, and they require a great deal of care to last well. Instead of a weighted lure, a fly rod uses the weight of the fly line for casting, and lightweight rods are capable of casting the very smallest and lightest fly. Typically, a monofilament segment called a \"leader\" is tied to the fly line on one end and the fly on the other.\nEach rod is sized to the fish being sought, the wind and water conditions and also to a particular weight of line: larger and heavier line sizes will cast heavier, larger flies. Fly rods come in a wide variety of line sizes, from size #000 to #0 rods for the smallest freshwater trout and pan fish up to and including #16 rods for large saltwater game fish. Fly rods tend to have a single, large-diameter line guide (called a stripping guide), with a number of smaller looped guides (aka \"snake\" guides) spaced along the rod to help control the movement of the relatively thick fly line. To prevent interference with casting movements, most fly rods usually have little or no butt section (handle) extending below the fishing reel. However, the \"Spey\" rod, a fly rod with an elongated rear handle, is often used for fishing either large rivers for salmon and Steelhead or saltwater surf casting, using a two-handed casting technique.\nFly rods are, in modern manufacture, almost always built out of carbon graphite. The graphite fibres are laid down in increasingly sophisticated patterns to keep the rod from flattening when stressed (usually referred to as hoop strength). The rod tapers from one end to the other and the degree of taper determines how much of the rod flexes when stressed. The larger amount of the rod that flexes the \"slower\" the rod. Slower rods are easier to cast, create lighter presentations but create a wider loop on the forward cast that reduces casting distance and is subject to the effects of wind. Furthermore, the process of wrapping graphite fibre sheets to build a rod creates imperfections that result in rod twist during casting. Rod twist is minimized by orienting the rod guides along the side of the rod with the most \"give\". This is done by flexing the rod and feeling for the point of most give or by using computerized rod testing.\nCustom rod building is an active hobby among fly fishermen. See Fly rod building.\nTenkara rods.\nTenkara rods are a type of bamboo fly rod used for tenkara fishing in Japan. A mixture of the rods in the other categories, they are carbon rods, fly rods and telescopic rods all in one. These are ultra-light and very portable telescopic rods (read more about telescopic below). Their extended length normally ranges from , and they have a very soft action. The action of tenkara rods has been standardized as a ratio of \"how many parts are stiffer : how many tip parts bend more easily\". The standard actions are 5:5, 6:4, 7:3, and 8:2, with 5:5 being a softer/slower rod, and 8:2 being a stiffer rod. Similar to western fly-rods tenkara rods also have cork, and sometimes even wooden handles, with wooden handles (such as red-pine, and phoenix-tree wood) being the more prized rods due to their increased sensitivity to fish bites and the heavier feel that helps balance the rods. Tenkara rods have no guides. Tenkara is a fixed-line fishing method, where no reel is used, but rather the line is tied directly to the tip of the rod. Like the carbon rods mentioned above this allows for \"very precise positioning of the fly which in turn enables huge catches of fish with accurate feeding\". One of the most common flies used in tenkara fishing is the Sakasa Kebari. Tenkara fishing is very popular in Japan, where these rods can be found in every major tackle shop. In the US, tenkara is beginning to grow in popularity.\nSpin casting rods.\nSpin casting rods are rods designed to hold a spin casting reel, which are normally mounted above the handle. Spin casting rods also have small eyes and, frequently, a forefinger grip trigger. They are very similar to bait casting rods, to the point where either type of reel may be used on a particular rod. While rods were at one time offered as specific \"spin casting\" or \"bait casting\" rods, this has become uncommon, as the rod design is suited to either fishing style. Today they are simply called \"casting rods\", and are usually offered with no distinction as to which style they are best suited for in use. \nBaitcasting rods.\nWhile the easy to use spin casting rods are often used by novice anglers, baitcasting rods and reels are generally more difficult to use. Professional anglers, however, prefer baitcasting rod and reel combos because baitcasting reels grant anglers more accuracy in their casts. Casting rods are typically viewed as somewhat more powerful than their spinning rod counterparts \u2013 they can use heavier line and can handle heavier cover. Baitcasting rods low profile design along with a super silent high-speed 7.0:1-line retrieve.\nSpinning rods.\nSpinning rods are made from graphite or fiberglass with a cork or PVC foam handle, and tend to be between in length. Typically, spinning rods have anywhere from 5\u20138 guides arranged along the underside of the rod to help control the line. The eyes decrease in size from the handle to the tip, with the one nearest the handle usually much larger than the rest to allow less friction as the coiled line comes off the reel, and to gather the very large loops of line that come off the spinning reel's spool. Unlike bait casting and spin casting reels, the spinning reel hangs beneath the rod rather than sitting on top, and is held in place with a sliding or locking reel seat. The fisherman's second and third fingers straddle the \"leg\" of the reel where it is attached to the reel seat on the rod, and the weight of the reel hangs beneath the rod, which makes for a more comfortable way to fish for extended periods. This also allows the rod to be held in the fisherman's dominant hand (the handle on most modern spinning reels is reversible) which greatly increases control and nuance applied to the rod itself. Spinning rods and reels are widely used in fishing for popular North American sport fish including bass, trout, pike and walleye. Popular targets for spinning in the UK and European continent are pike, perch, eel and zander (walleye). Longer spinning rods with elongated grip handles for two-handed casting are frequently employed for saltwater or steelhead and salmon fishing. Spinning rods are also widely used for trolling and still fishing with live bait.\nUltra-light rods.\nThese rods are used to fish for smaller species, they provide more sport with larger fish, or to enable fishing with lighter line and smaller lures. Though the term is commonly used to refer to spinning or spin-cast rods and tackle, fly rods in smaller line weights (size #0\u2013#3) have also long been utilized for ultra-light fishing, as well as to protect the thin-diameter, lightweight end section of leader, or tippet, used in this type of angling.\nUltra-light spinning and casting rods are generally shorter ( is common) lighter, and more limber than normal rods. Tip actions vary from slow to fast, depending upon intended use. These rods usually carry test fishing line. Some ultra-light rods are capable of casting lures as light as \u2013 typically small spinners, wet flies, crappie jigs, tubes, or bait such as trout worms. Originally produced to bring more excitement to the sport, ultra-light spin fishing is now widely used for crappie, trout, bass, bluegill, roach, perch, bream, pumpkin-seed, tench and other types of pan fish.\nIce rods.\nModern ice rods are typically very short spinning rods, varying between in length. Classic ice rods \u2013 still widely used \u2013 are simply stiff rod-like pieces of wood, usually with a carved wooden handle, a couple of line guides, and two opposing hooks mounted ahead of the handle to hand-wind the line around. Ice rods are used to fish through holes in the cover ice of frozen lakes and ponds.\nSea rods.\nSea rods are designed for use with fish from the ocean. They are long, (around on average), extremely thick, and feature huge and heavy tips, eyes, and handles. The largest of sea rods are for use with sport fishing boats. Some of these are specialized rods, including shark rods, and marlin rods, and are for use with very heavy equipment.\nSurf rods.\nThe most common type of sea rods are for surf casting. Surf casting rods resemble oversized spinning or bait casting rods with long grip handles intended for two-handed casting techniques. Generally between in length, surf casting rods need to be longer in order for the user cast the lure or bait beyond the breaking surf where fish tend to congregate, and sturdy enough to cast heavy weighted lures or bait needed to hold the bottom in rough water. They are almost always used in shore fishing (sea fishing from the shoreline) from the beach, rocks or other shore feature. Some surfcasters use powerful rods to cast up to or more of lead weight, artificial lures, and/or bait over .\nTrolling rods.\nTrolling is a fishing method of casting the lure or bait to the side of, or behind, a moving boat, and letting the motion of the boat pull the bait through the water. In theory, for light and medium freshwater gamefishing, any casting or spinning rod (with the possible exception of ultralight rods) can be used for trolling. In the last 30 years, most manufacturers have developed a complete line of generally long, heavily built rods sold as \"Trolling Rods\", and aimed generally at ocean anglers and Great Lakes salmon and steelhead fishermen. A rod effective for trolling should have relatively fast action, as a very \"whippy\" slow action rod is extremely frustrating to troll with, and a fast action (fairly stiff) rod is generally much easier to work with when fishing by this method. Perhaps the extreme in this philosophy was reached during the 1940s and early 1950s, when the now-defunct True Temper corporation \u2013 a maker of garden tools \u2013 marketed a line of trolling rods of length made of tempered steel which were square in cross section. They acted as excellent trolling rods, though the action was much too stiff for sportsmanlike playing of fish once hooked. As Great Lakes sportfishing in particular becomes more popular with each passing year, all rod manufacturers continue to expand their lines of dedicated \"trolling\" rods, though as noted, for most inland lake and stream fishing, a good casting or spinning rod is perfectly adequate for trolling.\nTelescopic rods.\nTelescopic fishing rods are designed to collapse down to a short length and open to a long rod. rods can close to as little as . This makes the rods very easy to transport to remote areas or travel on buses, compact cars, and subways. Telescopic fishing rods are made from the same materials as conventional multi-piece rods. Graphite, carbon, and sometimes fibreglass, or composites of these materials, are designed to slip into each other so that they open and close. The eyes on the spinning rods are generally, but not always, a special design to aid in making the end of each section stronger. Various grade eyes available in conventional rods are also available in telescopic fishing rods. The eyeless Tenkara style rods are also of this type and are typically made from carbon and/or graphite.\nCare for telescopic fishing rods is much the same as other rods. The only difference being that one should not open the telescopic rod in manner that whips a closed rod into the open position rapidly. Whipping or flinging a telescopic fishing rod open may and likely will cause it to be difficult to close. When closing the rods make a slight twisting motion while pushing the sections together. Often the rods come with tip covers to protect the tip and guides. Additionally, extra care must be taken not to get dirt or sand in the joints; due to their design this can easily damage this style of rod.\nTelescopic rods are popular among surf fishermen. Carrying around a surf fishing rod, even in two pieces, is cumbersome. The shorter the sections the shorter they close, the more eyes they have, and the better the power curve is in them. More eyes means better weight and stress distribution throughout the parabolic arc. This translates to further casting, stronger fish fighting abilities, and less breaking of the rod.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47338", "revid": "1289273686", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47338", "title": "Fishing reel", "text": "Hand-cranked reel used in angling to stow fishing line\nA fishing reel is a hand-cranked reel used in angling to wind and stow fishing line, typically mounted onto a fishing rod, but may also be used on compound bows or crossbows to retrieve tethered arrows when bowfishing.\nModern recreational fishing reels usually have fittings aiding in casting for distance and accuracy, as well as controlling the speed and tension of line retrieval to avoid line snap and hook dislodgement. Fishing reels are traditionally used for bass fishing in angling and competitive casting. They are typically attached near the handle of a fishing rod, though some specialized reels with pressure sensors for immediate retrieval are equipped on downrigger systems which are mounted directly to an ocean-going sport boat's gunwales or transoms and are used for \"deep drop\" and trolling.\nThe earliest fishing reel was invented in China at least since the Song dynasty, as shown by detailed illustration of an angler fishing with reel from Chinese paintings and records beginning about 1195 AD, although sporadic textual descriptions of line wheels used for angling had existed since the 3rd century. These early fishing reel designs were likely derived from winches/windlasses and roughly resemble the modern centerpin reels.\nFishing reels first appeared in the Western Hemisphere in England around 1650 AD. An incident is disclosed in an excerpt from author Thomas Barker found in his book, \"The Art of Angling: wherein are discovered many rare secrets, very necessary to be knowne by all that delight in that recreation\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... The manner of his Trouling was, with a Hazell Rod of twelve foot long, with a Ring of Wyre in the top of his Rod, for his Line to runne thorow: within two foot of the bottome of the Rod there was a hole made, for to put in a winde, to turne with a barrell, to gather up his Line, and loose at his pleasure; this was his manner of Trouling...\nIn the 1760s, London tackle shops were advertising multiplying or gear-retrieved reels. The first popular American fishing reel appeared in the United States around 1820. During the second half of the 20th century, Japanese and Scandinavian reel makers such as Shimano, Daiwa and ABU Garcia, previously all precision engineering manufacturers for biking equipments and watchmaking, began rising to dominate the world market.\nHistory.\nOrigins in China.\nIn literary records, the earliest evidence of the fishing reel comes from a 3rd-century AD Chinese work entitled \"Lives of Famous Immortals\", where the term \"angling lathe\" (\u91e3\u8eca) was used. Tang dynasty poet Lu Guimeng (?\u2013881) and his friend Pi Rixiu (834\u2013883), both avid anglers, frequently mentioned \"angling lathe\" and \"angle-fishing wheel\" (\u91e3\u9b5a\u8f2a) in their fishing poems, with Pi even describing a gift reel he received as \"an angle-handled wheel [that] is smooth and light\" (\u89d2\u67c4\u5b64\u8f2a\u7d30\u81a9\u8f15). Song dynasty poets, such as Huang Tingjian (1045\u20131105) and Yang Wanli (1127\u20131206), also made reference to \"angling lathe\" in lyrics involving lakes and fishing boats. Northern Song scientist Shen Kuo (1031\u20131095) even once wrote in a travel book that \"angling uses wheeled rod, rod uses purple bamboo, the wheel is not to be large, the rod shouldn't be long, but [you] can angle if the line is long\" (\u91e3\u7528\u8f2a\u7aff\uff0c\u7aff\u7528\u7d2b\u7af9\uff0c\u8f2a\u4e0d\u6b32\u5927\uff0c\u7aff\u4e0d\u5b9c\u9577\uff0c\u4f46\u7d72\u9577\u5247\u53ef\u91e3\u8033).\nThe earliest known graphical depiction of a fishing reel, according to Joseph Needham, comes from a Southern Song (1127\u20131279) painting done in 1195 by Ma Yuan (c. 1160\u20131225) called \"Angler on a Wintry Lake\". The painting, currently in collection at Tokyo National Museum after the looting of the Old Summer Palace, showing a man sitting on a small sampan boat while casting out his fishing line. Another fishing reel was featured in a painting by Wu Zhen (1280\u20131354). The book \"Tianzhu lingqian\" (Holy Lections from Indian Sources), printed sometime between 1208 and 1224, features two different woodblock print illustrations of fishing reels being used. An Armenian parchment Gospel of the 13th century shows a reel (though not as clearly depicted as the Chinese ones). The \"Sancai Tuhui\", a Chinese encyclopedia published in 1609, features the next known picture of a fishing reel and vividly shows the windlass pulley of the device. These five pictures are the only ones which feature fishing reels before the year 1651.\nDevelopment in England.\nThe first English book on fishing is \"A Treatise of Fishing with an Angle\" in 1496 (its spelling respective to the manner of the date is \"The Treatyse of Fysshynge with an Angle\"'). However, the book did not mention a reel. A primitive reel was first cited in the book \"The Art of Angling\" by Thomas Barker (\"fl\".1591\u20131651), first published in 1651. Fishing reels first appeared in England around the 1650s, a time of growing interest in fly fishing.\nThe fishing industry became commercialized in the 18th century, with rods and tackle being sold at the haberdashers store. After the Great Fire of London in 1666, artisans moved to Redditch, a center of fishing-related products from the 1730s. Onesimus Ustonson established his trading shop in 1761, and his establishment remained a market leader for the next century. He received a Royal Warrant from three successive monarchs, starting with King George IV.\nSome have credited Onesimus with the invention of the fishing reel \u2013 he was undoubtedly the first to advertise its sale. Early multiplying reels were wide and had a small diameter, and their gears, made of brass, often wore down after extensive use. His earliest advertisement in the form of a trading card dates from 1768 and was entitled \"To all lovers of angling\". A full list of the tackles he sold included artificial flies and 'the best sort of multiplying brass winches both stop and plain.' The commercialization of the industry came at a time of expanded interest in fishing as a recreational hobby for members of the aristocracy.\nModern reel design began in England during the latter part of the 18th century, and the predominant model in use was known as the 'Nottingham reel'. The reel was a wide drum that spooled out freely, and was ideal for allowing the bait to drift along way out with the current.\nTackle design began to improve from the 1880s. The introduction of new woods to the manufacture of fly rods made it possible to cast flies into the wind on silk lines, instead of horse hair. These lines allowed for a much greater casting distance. A negative consequence of this, was that it became easy for the much longer line to get into a tangle. This problem spurred the invention of the regulator to evenly spool the line out and prevent tangling.\nAlbert Illingworth, 1st Baron Illingworth a textiles magnate, patented the modern form of fixed-spool spinning reel in 1905. When casting Illingworth's reel design, the line was drawn off the leading edge of the spool, but was restrained and rewound by a line pickup, a device which orbits around the stationary spool. Because the line did not have to pull against a rotating spool, much lighter lures could be cast than with conventional reels.\nDevelopment in the United States.\nGeared multiplying reels failed to gain traction in Britain but had more success in the United States, where English models were modified by George W. Snyder (c.1780\u20131841), a skillful watchmaker and silversmith in Paris, Kentucky, into his own bait-casting reel named the Kentucky Reel, the first American-made design in 1810. Snyder's first reel was made for his own angling use, but afterward, he made reels for members of his club. Without patent or trademark protection, Snyder's Kentucky Reel was quickly copied by many others, including Meek, Milam, Sage, Hardman and Gayle. These artisans were trained in jewelry fabrication and were experienced in cutting gears, constructing small parts, and doing precision work. In time, the Kentucky Reel was mass-produced by the emerging factories located in the Northeast, where they could be produced at a fraction of the cost and time required for hand-built construction. The availability of more affordable fly reels greatly stimulated the sales and popularity of fly fishing equipment. It was soon applied to bait casting reels, resulting in a surge in the popularity of fishing as a pastime among all levels of American society.\nThe American, Charles F. Orvis, designed and distributed a novel reel and fly design in 1874, described by reel historian Jim Brown as the \"benchmark of American reel design,\" and the first fully modern fly reel. The founding of The Orvis Company helped institutionalize fly fishing by supplying angling equipment via the circulation of his tackle catalogs, distributed to a small but devoted customer list.\nTypes.\nFishing reels can be classified into two design groups: rotary-spool and fixed-spool. Rotary-spool designs are essentially similar to a spinning wheel or windlass, where the spool actively rotates to wind the line around itself. Fixed-spool designs, on the other hand, behave like a spindle and have no rotating motion of the spool, instead using a separate spinning mechanism that revolves around the spool to drag and wrap the line around onto the spool.\nRotary-spool.\nRotary-spool reels can be further subdivided into two types: single-action and multiplier. Single-action reels have a synchronous rotating action between the crank handle and the spool (hence the name, \"single[-ratio] action\"), and quite often the handle is mounted directly on the spool frame (in which case, the spool frame itself becomes the crank). Multiplier reels, on the other hand, have an internal gear train design that amplifies the number of spool turns for every turn of the crank handle, allowing much faster line retrievals. The spool on multiplier reels also spins in the opposite direction to that of single-action spools.\nWith larger-capacity spools (typically in multiplier reels), there is usually a slider mechanism in front of the spool \u2013 known as the line guide \u2014 that pushes the line side-to-side in an oscillating motion, which allows the line winding to be more evenly distributed across the spool instead of bunching up at one section.\nCentrepin reel.\nThe centrepin reel (or centerpin, center pin, or float reel) is a single-action reel which runs freely enough on its axle (\"centrepin\"). The centrepin reel is the earliest fishing reel design invented by humans, and is historically and currently used for coarse fishing. Instead of a mechanical drag, the angler's thumb is typically used to control the fish. Fishing in the margins for carp or other heavy fish with relatively light tackle is very popular with a 'pin' and is often used for 'trotting' a method in which a float on the line suspends a bait a certain depth to flow with the current along the waterway. During the 1950s and 1960s, many anglers in England began fishing with a centrepin reel. Despite this, the centrepin is today mostly used by coarse anglers, who remain a small proportion of the general fishing population.\nA special class of centrepin reel known as the fly reel, used specifically for fly fishing, is normally operated by manually stripping the line off the reel with one hand, while casting the rod with the other hand. The main purpose of a fly reel is to help cast ultralight fly lures and provide smooth uninterrupted tension (drag) when a fish makes a long run, and counterbalance the weight of the fly rod when casting. When used in fly fishing, the fly reel or fly casting reel has traditionally been rather simple in terms of mechanical construction, and little has changed from the design patented by Charles F. Orvis of Vermont in 1874. Orvis first introduced the idea of using light metals with multiple perforated holes to construct the housing, resulting in a lighter reel that also allowed the spooled fly line to dry more quickly than a conventional, solid-sided design. Early fly reels placed the crank handle on the right side of the reel. Most had no drag mechanism, but were fitted with a click/pawl mechanism intended to keep the reel from overrunning when line was pulled from the spool. To slow a fish, the angler simply applied hand pressure to the rim of the revolving spool (known as \"palming the rim\"). Later, these click/pawl mechanisms were modified to provide a limited adjustable drag of sorts. Although adequate for smaller fish, these did not possess a wide adjustment range or the power to slow larger fish.\nAt one time, multiplier fly reels were widely available. These reels had a geared line retrieve of 2:1 or 3:1 that allowed faster retrieval of the fly line. However, their additional weight, complexity and expense did not justify the advantage of faster line retrieval in the eyes of many anglers. As a result, today they are rarely used, and have largely been replaced by large-arbor designs with large diameter spools for faster line retrieval.\nAutomatic fly reels use a coiled spring mechanism that pulls the line into the reel with the flick of a lever. Automatic reels tend to be heavy for their size, and have limited line capacity. Automatic fly reels peaked in popularity during the 1960s, and since that time they have been outsold many times over by manual fly reels.\nModern fly reels typically have more sophisticated disc-type drag systems made of composite materials that feature increased adjustment range, consistency, and resistance to high temperatures from drag friction. Most of these fly reels also feature large-arbor spools designed to reduce line memory, maintain consistent drag and assist the quick retrieval of slack line in the event a hooked fish makes a sudden run towards the angler. Most modern fly reels are ambidextrous, allowing the angler to place the crank handle of the reel on either the right or the left side as desired.\nSaltwater fly reels are designed specifically for use in an ocean environment. Saltwater fly reels are normally large-arbor designs, having a much larger diameter spool than most freshwater fly reels. These large arbor reels provide an improved retrieve ratio and considerably more line and backing capacity, optimizing the design for the long runs of powerful ocean game fish. To prevent corrosion, saltwater fly reels often use aerospace aluminum frames and spools, electroplated and/or stainless steel components, with sealed and waterproof bearing and drive mechanisms.\nFly reels are normally manual, single-action designs. Rotating a handle on the side of the reel rotates the spool which retrieves the line, usually at a 1:1 ratio (i.e., one complete revolution of the handle equals one revolution of the spool). Fly reels are one of the simplest reels and have far fewer parts than a spinning reel. The larger the fish the more important the reel becomes. On the outside of the reel there are two levels of knobs these are the spool release and the drag adjustment.\nFly-reel drag systems have two purposes. One, they prevent spool overrun when stripping line from the reel while casting, and two, to tire out running fish by exerting pressure on the line that runs in the opposite direction. There are four main drag systems that are used with the fly reel. These are the ratchet-and-pawl, caliper drags, disc drags, and center-line drags. The ratchet-and-pawl drag clicks automatically while the spool is spinning. The caliper drag causes the calipers to brush up against the reel spool. A disc drag is when pressure is applied on the plates which then applies pressure on the spool. Center-line drags also known as the best kind of drag because the pressure is directly on the spool close to the axis of rotation.\nSidecast reel.\nThe sidecast reel takes elements of the design of the centrepin reel, but adds a bracket that allows the reel to be rotated 90\u00b0 for casting and then returned to the original position to retrieve line. In the casting position, the spool face is perpendicular to the rod and the axle is parallel, and the line is free to slide off the side of the spool like on a spinning reel. The advantage of such design is that the reel is direct-driven, and during casting the line release is as smooth as that of a spinning reel, but it does require an extra hand movement to start reeling.\nSidecast reels are popular with anglers in Australia for all forms of freshwater and saltwater fishing. Most common is their use for surf fishing (beachcasting), or off the rocks, often with a larger diameter spool () and paired with a surfcasting rod. The most famous brand of sidecast reels is Alvey Reels, a Brisbane-based fishing tackle manufacturer established in 1920.\nConventional reel.\nThe conventional reel, also known as the trolling reel (due to its popularity in recreational boat trolling) or \"drum reel\" (due to its often drum-like cylindrical shape), is the most classical design of multiplier reels. It can be mounted (more often) above or below the rod handle, with the spool axis being perpendicular to the rod. In such a setup the line does not go over the end of the spool like it does with a spinning reel. Most modern conventional reels have a \"line guide\" that slides left and right when cranking to ensure a more even wrapping of the line onto the spool.\nThere are two types of trolling reels depending on the drag system design, namely the star drag reels and lever drag reels. Star drag reels are like most baitcasters, because they have a star-shaped drag control knob used to apply drag as well as a little lever to put them into free spool. The lever drag reel uses a drag lever to perform both functions as it can apply drag and put the reel into free spool. With either type, care must be taken to prevent backlash while they are in free spool. Keeping a thumb on the spool is one way to prevent a free spool backlash. Some smaller sizes of conventional reels can be cast, but large conventional reels are not meant for casting; the larger they are the more difficult they become to cast. Conventional reels are for really big fish and are usually used offshore. As a tool for Deep-sea fishing, they are mostly designed for trolling but can also be used for drift fishing, butterfly jigging and \"deep drop\" fishing. They are usually mounted on short, often very stiff rods called \"boat\" rods.\nBaitcasting reel.\nThe baitcasting reel or baitcaster is a multiplying reel like modified from the conventional reel, but with a lighter spool and a higher, more forwardly positioned line guide to facilitate farther and smoother casting, hence the name. The baitcasting reel is always mounted above the rod handle (of what is known as a \"casting rod\"), hence its other name given to it in New Zealand and Australia, the overhead reel. The line is stored on a bearing-supported, more freely revolving spool that is geared so that a single revolution of the crank handle results in multiple (usually 4\u00d7 or more) revolutions of the spool. The baitcasting reel design will operate well with a wide variety of fishing lines ranging from braided multifilament, heat-fused \"Superlines\", copolymer, fluorocarbon and nylon monofilaments (\"see\" Fishing line). Most baitcasting reels can also easily be palmed or thumbed to increase the drag, set the hook, or to accurately halt the lure at a given point in the cast.\nThe baitcasting reel dates from at least the mid-17th century, but came into wide use by amateur anglers during the 1870s. Early baitcasting reels were often constructed with brass or iron gears, with casings and spools made of brass, German silver or hard rubber. Featuring multiplying gears ranging from 2:1 to 4:1, these early reels had no drag mechanism, and anglers used their thumb on the spool to provide resistance to runs by a fish. As early as the 1870s, some models used bearings to mount the spool; as the free-spinning spool tended to cause backlash with strong pulls on the line, manufacturers soon incorporated a clicking pawl mechanism. This \"clicker\" mechanism was never intended as a drag, but used solely to keep the spool from overrunning, much like a fly reel. Baitcasting reel users soon discovered that the clicking noise of the pawls provided valuable audible warning that a fish had taken the live bait, allowing the rod and reel to be left in a rod holder while awaiting a strike by a fish.\nMost fishing reels are suspended from the bottom side of the rod, since this position doesn't require wrist strength to overcome gravity while enabling the angler to cast and retrieve without changing hands. The baitcasting reel's unusual mounting position atop the rod is an accident of history. Baitcasting reels were originally designed to be cast when positioned atop the rod, then rotated upside-down to operate the crank handle while playing a fish or retrieving line. However, in practice most anglers preferred to keep the reel atop the rod for both cast and retrieve by simply transferring the rod to the left hand for the retrieve, then reverse-winding the crank handle. Because of this preference, mounting the crank handle on the right side of a bait casting reel (with standard clockwise crank handle rotation) has become customary, though models with left-hand retrieve have gained in popularity in recent years thanks to user familiarity with the spinning reel.\nMany of today's baitcasting reels are constructed using aluminium alloy, stainless steel, synthetic composites such as fiberglass-reinforced plastic or carbon fiber, alone or in combination; newer but more expensive materials such as titanium and magnesium alloys can also be found occasionally. They call for a rod that has a trigger finger hook located in the handle area. They typically include a level-wind mechanism to prevent the line from being trapped under itself on the spool during rewind and interfering with subsequent casts. Many are also fitted with anti-reverse handles and drags designed to slow runs by large and powerful game fish. Because the baitcasting reel uses the weight and momentum of the lure to pull the line from the rotating spool, it normally requires lures weighing 1/4 oz. or more to cast a significant distance. Recent developments have seen baitcasting reels with gear ratios as high as 7.1/1. Higher gear ratios allow much faster retrieval of line, but sacrifice some amount of strength in exchange, since the additional gear teeth required reduces torque as well as the strength of the gear train. This could be a factor when fighting a large and powerful fish.\nTwo variations of the revolving spool bait casting reel are the conventional surf fishing reel and the big game reel. These are very large and robust fishing reels, designed and built for heavy saltwater species such as tuna, marlin, sailfish and sharks. Surf fishing reels are normally mounted to long, two-handed rods; these reels frequently omit level-wind and braking mechanisms to achieve extremely long casting distances. Big game reels are not designed for casting, but are instead used for trolling or fishing set baits and lures; they are ideal for fighting large and heavy fish off a pier or boat. These reels normally use sophisticated star or lever drags to play out huge saltwater gamefish.\nTo cast a baitcasting rod and reel, the reel is turned on its side, the \"free spool\" feature engaged, and the thumb placed on the spool to hold the lure in position. The cast is performed by snapping the rod backward to the 2 o'clock position, then casting it forward in a smooth motion, allowing the lure to pull the line from the reel. The thumb is used to contact the line, moderating the revolutions of the spool and braking the lure when it reaches the desired aiming point. Though modern centrifugal and/or magnetic braking systems help to control backlash, using a bait casting reel still requires practice and a certain amount of finesse on the part of the fisherman for best results.\nWhile spincasting and spinning reels are easier to operate because fishing line leaves the spool freely during a cast, baitcasting reels have the potential to overrun: a casting issue in which the reel's spool does not spin at a rate equal to the speed of fishing line leaving the reel. Professional fishermen, however, prefer baitcasters because baitcasting reels allow anglers more control over their casts. Since a baitcaster's spool spins along with the fishing line leaving the reel, a simple flick of the thumb can stop a cast early or slow a lure while it is still in the air. This grants anglers such as bass fishermen more accuracy in their casts. Furthermore, a baitcaster's design allows a fisherman to make casts at a faster rate, even with heavier baits.\nFixed-spool.\nFixed spool reels can have either an \"open\" design, where the spool is exposed to the outside; or an \"enclosed\" design, where the spool is concealed under an enclosure with a front hole that allows passage of the line. There is typically an internal axle that imparts a slight reciprocating motion to the spool, which allows the line to be wrapped in a more evenly distributed fashion.\nSpinning reel.\nSpinning reels, also called fixed spool reels or \"egg beaters\", are open-design fixed-spool reels that were in use in North America as early as the 1870s. They were originally developed to allow the use of artificial flies, or other lures for trout or salmon, that were too light in weight to be easily cast by conventional or baitcasting reels. Spinning reels are normally mounted below the rod; this positioning conforms to gravity, requiring no wrist strength to maintain the reel in position. For right-handed persons, the spinning rod is held and cast by the strong right hand, leaving the left hand free to operate the crank handle mounted on the left side of the reel. Invention of the spinning reel solved the problem of backlash, since the reel had no rotating spool capable of overrunning and tangling the line.\nThe name of Holden Illingworth, a textiles magnate, was first associated with the modern form of fixed-spool spinning reel. When casting the Illingworth reel, line was drawn off the leading edge of the spool, but was restrained and rewound by a line pickup, a device which orbits around the stationary spool. Because the line did not have to pull against a rotating spool, much lighter lures could be cast than with conventional reels.\nIn 1948, the Mitchell Reel Company of Cluses, France introduced the Mitchell 300, a spinning reel with a design that oriented the face of the fixed spool forward in a permanently fixed position below the fishing rod. The Mitchell reel was soon offered in a range of sizes for all fresh and saltwater fishing. A manual line pickup was used to retrieve the cast line, which eventually developed into a wire bail design that automatically recaptured the line upon cranking the retrieve handle. An anti-reverse lever prevented the crank handle from rotating while a fish was pulling line from the spool, and this pull can be altered with adjustable drag systems which allow the spool to rotate, but not the handle. With the use of light lines testing from two to six pounds, modern postwar spinning reels were capable of casting lures as light as , and sometimes lighter.\nWith all fixed-spool reels, the line is released in coils or loops from the leading edge of the non-rotating spool. To shorten or stop the outward cast of a lure or bait, the angler uses a finger or thumb placed in contact with the line and/or the leading edge of the spool to retard or stop the flight of the lure. Because of the design's tendency to twist and untwist the line as it is cast and retrieved, most spinning reels operate best with fairly limp and flexible fishing lines.\nThough spinning reels do not suffer from backlash, line can occasionally be trapped underneath itself on the spool or even detach from the reel in loose loops of line. Some of these issues can be traced to overfilling the spool with line, while others are due to the way in which the line is wound onto the spool by the rotating bail or pickup. Various oscillating spool mechanisms have been introduced over the years in an effort to solve this problem. Spinning reels also tend to have more issues with twisting of the fishing line. Line twist in spinning reels can occur from the spin of an attached lure, the action of the wire bail against the line when engaged by the crank handle, or even retrieval of line that is under load (spinning reel users normally pump the rod up and down, then retrieve the slack line to avoid line twist and stress on internal components). To minimize line twist, many anglers who use a spinning reel manually reposition the bail after each cast with the pickup nearest the rod to minimize line twist.\nFixed spool reels are cast by grasping the line with the forefinger against the rod handle, opening the bale arm and then using a backward swing of the rod followed by a forward cast while releasing the line with the forefinger. The point of release should be trialled to find optimum angle for your casting. The forefinger is then placed in contact with the departing line and the leading edge of the spool to slow or stop the outward cast. On the retrieve, one hand operates the crank handle, while the large rotating wire cage or bail (either manually or trigger-operated) serves as the line pickup, restoring the line to its original position on the spool.\nSpinning reels were originally developed to better cast light-weight lures and baits. Today, spinning reels continue to be an excellent alternative to baitcasters, reels which have difficulty casting lighter lures. Furthermore, because spinning reels do not suffer from backlash, spinning reels are easier and more convenient to use for some fishermen.\nSpincast reel.\nSpincast reels are fixed-spool reels with the spool and line pickup mechanisms enclosed within a cylindrical or cylindroconoidal cover, which has a hole at the front to transmit the line. The first commercial spincast reels were introduced by the Denison-Johnson Reel Company and the Zero Hour Bomb Company (ZEBCO) in 1949. Spincast reels avoid the problem of backlash found in baitcast designs, while reducing line twist and snare complaints sometimes encountered with traditional spinning reel designs. Just as with the spinning reel, the line is thrown from a fixed spool and can therefore be used with relatively light lures and baits. However, the spincast reel eliminates the large wire bail and line roller of the spinning reel in favor of one or two simple pickup pins and a metal cup to wind the line on the spool. Traditionally mounted above the rod, the spincast reel is also fitted with an external nose cone that encloses and protects the fixed spool. Spincast reels may also be described as \"closed face reels\".\nWith a fixed spool, spincast reels can cast lighter lures than bait cast reels, although friction of the nose cone guide and spool cup against the uncoiling line reduces casting distance compared to spinning reels. Spincast reel design requires the use of narrow spools with less line capacity than either baitcasting or spinning reels of equivalent size, and cannot be made significantly larger in diameter without making the reel too tall and unwieldy. These limitations severely restrict the use of spin cast reels in situations such as fishing at depth, when casting long distances, or where fish can be expected to make long runs. Like other types of reels, spin cast reels are frequently fitted with both anti-reverse mechanisms and friction drags, and some also have level-wind (oscillating spool) mechanisms. Most spin cast reels operate best with limp monofilament lines, though at least one spin cast reel manufacturer installs a thermally fused \"superline\" into one of its models as standard equipment. During the 1950s and into the mid-1960s, they were widely used and very popular, though the spinning reel has since eclipsed them in popularity in North America. They remain a favorite fishing tool for catfish fishing and also for young beginners in general.\nPressing a button on the rear of the reel disengages the line pickup, and the button is then released during the forward cast to allow the line to fly off the spool. The button is pressed again to stop the lure at the position desired. Upon cranking the handle, the pickup pin immediately re-engages the line and spools it onto the reel.\nUnderspin reel.\nUnderspin reels or triggerspin reels are variants of spincast reels that is designed for mounting underneath a standard spinning rod. The reel foot is now located on top of the reel (like a spinning reel), and the line release button is replaced by a front lever. With the reel's weight suspended beneath the rod, underspin reels are generally more comfortable to cast and hold for long periods, and the ability to use all standard spinning rods greatly increases its versatility compared to traditional spin cast reels.\nWhen the line release lever/trigger is lifted up by the forefinger (usually the index finger of the rod-holding hand), the line catch inside the reel disengages and retracts, and the line is free to slide off the fixed spool. In some modern designs (e.g. the Pflueger \"President\" reel), keeping the lever fully pulled up will however protrude the whole spool forward and pinch the line against the enclosure interior, thus halting the line release. During line retrieval, the mechanism inside the reel will engage the line catch again, which protrudes out to \"grab\" the line and wrap it around the spool. When necessary, the lever can be activated once again to stop the lure at a given point in the retrieval.\nMechanisms.\nReel mechanisms.\nDirect-drive reels have the spool and handle directly coupled. When the angler is reeling in a fish, there's user operation, but when the line is going out, and the fish is taking the bait and the reel handles are visible moving likewise to the line unwinding. With a fast-running fish, this may have consequences for the angler's knuckles. Traditional fly reels are direct-drive.\nIn anti-reverse reels, a mechanism allows line to pay out while the handle remains stationary. Depending on the drag setting, line may also pay out, as with a running fish, while the angler reels in. Baitcasting reels and many modern saltwater fly reels are examples of this design.\nThe mechanism works either with a 'dog' or 'pawl' design that engages into a cog wheel attached to the handle shaft. The latest design is Instant Anti-Reverse, or IAR. This system incorporates a one-way clutch bearing or centrifugal force fly wheel on the handle shaft to restrict handle movement to forward motion only.\nDrag mechanisms.\nDrag systems are a mechanical means of applying variable pressure to the line spool or drive mechanism to act as a friction brake against outgoing spool rotation. Under normal load, the friction holds the spool and the gears in synchrony, allowing the user to reel in the line; if the tension along the fishing line exceeds the drag setting, the braking friction is overcome and the spool will reverse-rotate with resistance until the line tension drops back below the drag setting. Some designs also have an internal spring clicker that generates warning noises to remind the user whenever the line tension exceeds the drag setting. Such mechanism serves to cap off the maximum line tension and prevents it from overloading and breaking when landing a strong or vigorously fighting fish. In combination with rod flexing and adequate angling techniques, the angler can catch fish much larger than the on-paper breaking strength of the line by \"walking\" and gradually tiring out the fish.\nThe mechanics of drag systems usually consist of a number of frictional discs (drag washers) arranged in a coaxial stack on the spool shaft, or in some cases, on the drive shaft. There is generally a screw or lever mechanism that presses perpendicularly against the washers, which creates friction especially when each washer slides against adjacent ones \u2013 the higher the pressure, the greater the resistance. Drag washers are commonly made of materials such as felt, Teflon, carbon fiber or other reinforced plastics, and usually have metallic (usually steel) washers stacked intermittently to help distribute shear stress more evenly. Since large fish can generate a lot of pulling power, reels with higher available drag forces for higher-test lines will generate greater heat, and therefore use stronger and more heat-resistant materials, often with coated with specialty oil or grease to prevent burning and unwanted locking between adjacent washers. A good drag system one that is durable and generates precise, consistent and smooth (with no jerkiness) resistance.\nSpinning reels.\nSpinning reels have two types of drag design: front or rear. All spinning reels come with front drag, but rear drag, also called \"bait runner\" or \"baitfeeder\", is an additional feature.\nFront drags are basically a screw knob mounted to the front end of the spool, which exerts direct graduated axial pressure on the drag washers on the main pinion. To adjust these, the user needs to reach around the front to turn and tighten/loosen the spool. Front drags are mechanically simpler and usually more consistent in performance and capable of higher drag forces.\nRear drags, on the other hand, have an adjustment screw on the back of the reel along with a separate lever to activate its use. It automatically flips off whenever the fisherman touches the spool-crank and the front drag then steps in at that moment and incorporates its setting into the fight. Manufacturers seldom issue over ten pounds of drag from the rear but are said to be more complicated mechanically and usually not as precise or smooth as front drags since the drag itself is often part of the drive shaft and not the spool. They are for the first moments of the encounter when the fish has the bait in its mouth and is running with it without the hook set yet. The rear drag stops when the fisherman turns his spool-crank to engage the culprit on the run, and sets the hook.\nCasting reels.\nConventional overhead, trolling or baitcasting type reels usually use one of two types of drags: star or lever. The most common and simplest mechanically is the so-called 'star drag' because the adjustor wheel looks like a star with rounded points. Star drags work by screw action to increase or decrease the pressure on the washer stack which is usually located on the main driving gear. Reels with star drags generally have a separate lever which allows the reel to go into \"freespool\" by disengaging the spool from the drive train completely and allowing it to spin freely with little resistance. The freespool position is used for casting, letting line out and/or allowing live bait to move freely.\nLever drags work through cam action to increase or decrease pressure on the drag washers located on the spool itself. Most lever drags offer preset drag positions for strike (reduced drag to avoid tearing the hook out of the fish), full (used once the hook is set) and freespool (see above). Lever drags are simpler and faster to adjust during the fight. And, since they use the spool for the washer stack rather than the drive gear, the washers can be larger, offering more resistance and smoother action. The disadvantage is that in freespool, there can be residual and unwanted resistance since the drag mechanism may not be completely out of the picture without resorting to more complex mechanics.\nSetting the drag.\nProper drag setting depends on fishing conditions, line test (break strength) and the size and type of fish being targeted. Often it is a matter of \"feel\" and knowing the setup to get the drag right.\nWith spinning reels, closed-face reels and conventional reels with star drags, a good starting point is to set the drag to about one-third to one-half the breaking strength of the line. For example, if the line is rated at test, a drag setting that requires of force on the line to move the spool would be appropriate. This is only a rule of thumb. For lever drag reels with a strike position, most anglers start by setting the drag at the strike position to one-third the break strength of the line. This usually allows the full position to still be safely under the line rating while providing flexibility during the fight. Depending on the conditions, some anglers may leave their reels in freespool then setting the anti-reverse or engaging the drag on hookup.\nBraking mechanisms.\nWhen casting, the terminal tackles flying through the air will decelerate due to air resistance, causing the line release out of the reel (which is mainly driven by the forward momentum of the terminal tackles) to slow down exponentially. This is particularly apparent when casting lightweight and/or poorly aerodynamic baits/lures, or when casting against the wind. If the angler is using a multiplier reel, its rotary spool often still has sufficient rotational momentum to keep itself spinning with a far more gradual deceleration. This deceleration mismatch between the line release and the spool rotation causes the lagging line to inertially \"float\" off the spool in loose loops before it can exit the reel. Some of these floating loops eventually get large enough to be pulled into the narrow spaces between the spool and the reel chassis \u2013 a phenomenon known as a \"spool overrun\" or a \"backlash\", which often snares the loops into a very messy tangle (colloquially called a \"bird's nest\" or \"birdie\") that is notoriously difficult to untangle. Such backlashing is unique to multiplier reels, particularly baitcasters, and is not present with fixed-spool reels such as a spinning reel.\nTo deal with backlashing, most modern baitcasting reels have a so-called \"cast control\" that serves to reduce the incidence of spool overrun at the cost of sacrificing casting distances. Each time a different lure weight is attached, the cast control must be adjusted to calibrate for the difference in lure momentum and deceleration. The users are also required to learn the skill of \"feathering the spool\" with their thumb to apply direct tactile friction on the spool surface to slow down or even stop it from spinning.\nSpool tension.\nSpool tension is an adjustable screw knob that is coaxial to the reel spool. When tightened, the knob exerts axial pressure on the spool gear and generates a consistent frictional resistance when the spool is free-spinning.\nCentrifugal braking.\nCentrifugal braking uses a series of spring-loaded \"blocks\" on the spool, which can move radially outwards under centrifugal force when the spool is spinning rapidly. These blocks each have a rubber piece that can rub against the reel chassis, creating additional friction that slows down the spool until the blocks retract back under spring tension. Some reels, such as the Shimano SVS Infinity, have designs that allow each centrifugal blocks to be locked and temporarily disabled.\nMagnetic braking.\nMagnetic braking incorporates the principles of Lenz's law to create a contactless resistance to the spool spinning. The reel chassis (usually on the side opposite to the crank handle) has a circularly arranged array of magnets creating a magnetic field. When the spool rotates, the metallic frame cuts through the field lines and experiences an electromagnetic resistance, which changes with the spool speed but persists as long as the spool is still moving.\nElectronic braking.\nElectronic braking uses an electronic circuit to monitor the speed of spool rotation and apply pre-calculated resistance via an internal actuator. The most famous is the Shimano Curado DC (\"Digital Control\") series, first introduced in 2003 and having remained the only electronically braked fishing reel in the world for two decades until early 2023, when two similar products, the Daiwa IMZ Limitbreaker and the KastKing iReel IFC (\"Intelligent Frequency Control\"), were announced respectively.\nLine guide mechanisms.\nLine guides are unique to multiplier reels, as more evenly wound lines on the spool would allow the reel to function more smoothly and prevent unwanted \"overspill\" of line at either end of the spool. The vast majority of line guides are a simple ring or short cylinder with a internal diameter, which slides horizontally along a spiral-groove shaft. The side-to-side motion of the line guide continuously pushes and realigns the line onto different section of the spool, thus allowing a more even distribution of winding.\nWhile line guides are crucial to reel operation during retrieval, during casting it becomes more of a hindrance because the line will have to go through its narrow internal channel to leave the reel. This creates additional drag from friction (especially when the line kinks against the back rim of the guide) or when loose line loops whips against the line guide. This exacerbates backlashing as the narrow line guide channel often limits how fast the line can leave the reel, and is particularly a problem when the line guide stops near the side of the reel when the reel gears are disengaged during casting. There are design modifications on line guides aimed to minimize resistance against line release, most of which involve having a conical or funnel-shaped line guide that reduce the kinking angle between the line and the guide frame, which only partially resolves the drag issue. Another less-successful modification involves having an open-and-shut \"gate\" as a line guide, which unfortunately can catch and trap the line between the gaps of the shutter.\nIn 2011, the famous Japanese fishing tackle brand Daiwa introduced its famous TWS (T-Wing System) design, which have a T-shaped/inverted trianguloid line guide that has a broad top section that presents a much wider channel for line exit, while during retrieval the top bar tilts back and down to push the line into the much narrower bottom section. The TWS has become a celebrated success for Daiwa, and remained a patented trademark that was largely unchallenged for years.\nAnother notable 21st century line guide design, patented by the Shenzhen/New York City-based Chinese-American brand KastKing in 2023, is named the \"Axis Eye\" or \"willowleaf guide\". It has a silicon nitride-coated, rounded rectangle frame with a slightly serpentine shaped top profile, which can horizontally rotate 90\u00b0 to alternate between a wide and a narrow cross-sectional width. During casting, the line guide is rotated to a transverse orientation, which presents a -wide line channel, allowing the line to exit with minimal drag; during retrieval, the line guide is rotated to a longitudinal orientation, which narrows the line channel down to less than 3\u00a0mm.\nNotable brands.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47339", "revid": "50368230", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47339", "title": "Fishing line", "text": "String or line intended for angling\nA fishing line is any flexible, high-tensile cord used in angling to tether and pull in fish, in conjunction with at least one hook. Fishing lines are usually pulled by and stored in a reel, but can also be retrieved by hand, with a fixed attachment to the end of a rod, or via a motorized trolling outrigger.\nFishing lines generally resemble a long, ultra-thin rope, with important attributes including length, thickness, material and build. Other factors relevant to certain fishing practice include breaking strength, knot strength, UV resistance, castability, limpness, stretch, memory, abrasion resistance and visibility. Traditional fishing lines are made of silk, while most modern lines are made from synthetic polymers such as nylon, polyethylene or polyvinylidene fluoride (\"fluorocarbon\") and may come in monofilament or braided (multifilament) forms.\nTerminology.\nFishing with a hook-and-line setup is called angling. Fish are caught when one is drawn by the bait/lure dressed on the hook into swallowing it in whole, causing in the hook (usually barbed) piercing the soft tissues and anchoring into the mouthparts, gullet or gill, resulting in the fish becoming firmly tethered to the line. Another more primitive method is to use a straight gorge, which is buried longitudinally in the bait such that it would be swallowed end first, and the tension along the line would fix it cross-wise in the fish's stomach or gullet and so the capture would be assured. Once the fish is hooked, the line can then pull it towards the angler and eventually fetch it out of the water (known as \"landing\" the fish). Heavier fish can be difficult to retrieve by only dragging the line (as it might overwhelm and snap the line) and might need to be landed via additionally using a hand net (a.k.a. landing net) or a hooked pole called a gaff.\nTrolling is a technique where one or more lines, each with at least one hooked fishing lure at the end, is dragged through the water, which mimick schooling forage fish. Trolling from a moving boat is used in both big-game and commercial fishing as a method of catching large open-water species such as tuna and marlin (which are instinctively drawn to schoolers), and can also be used when angling in freshwater as a way to catch salmon, northern pike, muskellunge and walleye. The technique allows anglers to cover a large body of water in a short time without having to cast and retrieve lures constantly.\nLongline fishing and trotlining are commercial fishing technique that uses many secondary lines with baited hooks hanging perpendicularly from a single main line.\nSnagging is a fishing technique where a large, sharp grappling hook is used to pierce the fish externally in the body instead of inside the fish's mouth, and is therefore \"not\" the same as angling. Generally, a large open-gaped treble hook with a heavy sinker is cast into a river containing a large amount of fish (such as salmon) and is quickly jerked and reeled in, which gives the snag hook a gaff-like \"clawing\" motion that can spear its sharp points past the scales and skin and deep into the body. Modern technologies such as underwater cameras are sometimes used to help improve the timing of snagging. Due to the mutilating nature of this technique (where the fish are typically too deeply injured to be released alive), snagging is frequently deemed an unethical and illegal method, and some snagging practitioners have added procedures to disguise the snagging practice, such as adding baits or jerking the line using a fishing rod, to make it look like angling.\nSections.\nTraditionally, only a single thread of line is used to connect the hook with the rod and reel. However, most modern angling setups use at least two sections of line (typically the mainline and the leader) joined with a bend knot (such as the famously named fisherman's knot). Occasionally a swivel might be used to join the lines and reduce the bait/lure spinning due to the inherent line twisting from a fixed-spool reel.\nA typical modern angling setup can include the following line sections:\nHistory.\nEarly lines.\nLeonard Mascall, in his book from 1596 titled \"A Booke of fishing with Hooke and Line, and of all other instruments thereunto belonging\". followed in many ways after Dame Juliana Berners, has an excerpt establishing silk worms in the area of England at that time:\nAnd another excerpt explaining compiling a silk leader-line for a catgut fly-line.\nSo back then there was silk and horse hair used for angling.\nAs written in 1667 by Samuel Pepys, the fishing lines in his time were made from catgut. Later, silk fishing lines were used around 1724.\nModern lines.\nModern fishing lines intended for spinning, spin cast, or bait casting reels are almost entirely made from artificial substances, including nylon (typically 610 or 612), polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF, also called fluorocarbon), polyethylene, Dacron and UHMWPE (Honeywell's Spectra or Dyneema). The most common type is \"monofilament\", made of a single strand. Fishermen often use monofilament because of its buoyant characteristics and its ability to stretch under load. The line stretch has advantages, such as damping the force when setting the hook and when fighting strong fish. On very far distances the damping may become a disadvantage. Recently, other alternatives to standard nylon monofilament lines have been introduced made of copolymers or fluorocarbon, or a combination of the two materials. Fluorocarbon fishing line is made of the fluoropolymer PVDF and it is valued for its refractive index, which is similar to that of water, making it less visible to fish. Fluorocarbon is also a denser material, and therefore, is not nearly as buoyant as monofilament. Anglers often utilize fluorocarbon when they need their baits to stay closer to the bottom without the use of heavy sinkers. There are also braided fishing lines, \"cofilament\" and \"thermally fused\" lines, also known as \"superlines\" for their small diameter, lack of stretch, and great strength relative to standard nylon monofilament lines. Braided, thermally fused, and chemically fused varieties of \"superlines\" are now readily available.\nSpecialty lines.\n\"Fly lines\" consist of a tough braided or monofilament core, wrapped in a thick waterproof plastic sheath, often of polyvinyl chloride (PVC). In the case of floating fly lines, the PVC sheath is usually embedded with many \"microballoons\", or air bubbles, and may also be impregnated with silicone or other lubricants to give buoyancy and reduce wear. In order to fill up the reel spool and ensure an adequate reserve in case of a run by a powerful fish, fly lines are usually attached to a secondary line at the butt section, called backing. Fly line backing is usually composed of braided dacron or gelspun monofilaments. All fly lines are equipped with a leader of monofilament or fluorocarbon fishing line, usually (but not always) tapered in diameter, and referred to by the \"X-size\" (0X, 2X, 4X, etc.) of its final tip section, or tippet. Tippet size is usually between 0X and 8X, where 0X is the thickest diameter, and 8X is the thinnest. There are exceptions to this, and tippet sizes do exist outside of the 0X\u20138X parameter.\n\"Tenkara lines\" are special lines used for the fixed-line fishing method of tenkara. Traditionally these are furled lines the same length as the tenkara rod. Although original to Japan, these lines are similar to the British tradition of furled leader. They consist of several strands being twisted together in decreasing numbers toward the tip of the line, thus creating a taper that allows the line to cast the fly. It serves the same purpose as the fly-line, to propel a fly forward. They may be tied of various materials, but most commonly are made of monofilament.\n\"Wire lines\" are frequently used as leaders to prevent the fishing line from being severed by toothy fish. Usually braided from several metal strands, wire lines may be made of stainless steel, titanium, or a combination of metal alloys coated with plastic.\nStainless-steel line leaders provide:\nTitanium fishing leaders are actually titanium\u2013nickel alloys that have several very important features:\nCopper, monel and lead-core fishing lines are used as heavy trolling main lines, usually followed with fluorocarbon line near the lure or bait with fishing swivel between the lines. Due to their high density, these fishing lines sink rapidly in water and require less line for achieving desired trolling depth. On the other hand, these lines are relatively thick for desired strength, especially when compared with braided fishing lines and often require reels with larger spools.\nEnvironmental impact.\nDiscarded monofilament fishing line takes up to 600 years to decompose. Abandoned lines can entangle fish, birds, turtles, and marine mammals, often leading to injury, starvation, or drowning. To address this problem, there have been several types of biodegradable fishing lines developed to minimize the impact on the environment. Additionally, to discourage anglers from discarding their fishing lines into the natural environment, there have been dedicated bins for old fishing lines, that have been installed on coastlines in various locations.\nIn Australia, TAngler is one of the organisations that installed more than 350 dedicated bins in key coastal locations in Victoria, NSW and Queensland since 2006, and more than 10 tonnes of discarded fishing line have been collected. Other bodies include Dolphin Marine Magic (DMM), with its \"Seal the Loop\" program, which originated in Melbourne Zoo in 2010. DMM has partnered with local councils to install dedicated bins in popular fishing locations, and by 2015, reached over 200 \"Seal the Loop\" bins across Australia.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47340", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47340", "title": "Fishing hook", "text": ""}
{"id": "47341", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47341", "title": "Date", "text": "Date or dates may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "47342", "revid": "3158216", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47342", "title": "Sinker", "text": "Sinker may refer to:\nPeople:\nOther uses:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "47343", "revid": "46081742", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47343", "title": "Sunfish", "text": "Sunfish or sun-fish may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "47344", "revid": "22753251", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47344", "title": "Bass (fish)", "text": "Name of various types of fish\nBass (; pl.: bass) is a common name shared by many species of ray-finned fish from the large clade Percomorpha, mainly belonging to the orders Perciformes and Moroniformes, encompassing both freshwater and marine species. The word \"bass\" comes from Middle English , meaning \"perch\", despite that none of the commonly referred bass species belong to the perch family Percidae.\nOther species known as bass.\nMany species are also known as basses, including:\nFishing.\nLargemouth, smallmouth, and spotted bass are the most popular game fish in North America.\nIt is also very popular in South Africa. In the continent, largemouth bass are often found in lakes, rivers, creeks, and dams.\nWhen fishing, lures (bass worms), live bait, spinner baits, jig bait, jerkbait and crank bait will work well. Lures that mimic baitfish, worms, crayfish, frogs, and mice are all effective. Fishing with a small mepps or rooster tail in-line spinner is very effective for creek fishing, when bass are scouting for small baitfish. In open water, lures that cover the water quickly such as spoons, spinners and lipless crankbaits. During the fall and winter months, bass will be less active and eat less. In this situation, one can fish with suspending lures or slow lures like ned rig, suspending jerkbaits. In the summertime, one can throw lures that float or sink 2\u20134ft since bass come to shallow areas and prefer faster lures.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47345", "revid": "1461430", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47345", "title": "Micropterus", "text": "Genus of fishes\nMicropterus is a genus of North American freshwater fish collectively known as the black bass, which belong to the sunfish family Centrarchidae of order Centrarchiformes. They are sometimes erroneously called \"black trout\", but the name trout more correctly refers to certain potamodromous members of the family Salmonidae (order Salmoniformes).\n\"Micropterus\" are widely distributed east of the Rocky Mountains, from the Hudson Bay basin in Canada to northeastern Mexico. Several species, notably the largemouth and smallmouth bass, have been very widely introduced throughout the world, and are now considered cosmopolitan. All black bass species are highly sought-after game fish and well known as strong fighters when hooked, and bass fishing is an extremely popular outdoor sport throughout their native range. Their meat is quite edible and firm, although they are not regarded as commercial food fish.\nAll black bass species have a dull-green base coloring with dark patterns on the sides. Most reach a maximum overall length of , but some strains of the largemouth bass have been reported to grow to almost in length. In spawning seasons, the male builds a \"nest\" (spawning ground) in the bed where a female is induced to deposit her eggs, then the male externally fertilizes them. The male continues to guard the eggs and fry until they disperse from the nest.\nVarious black bass species have been introduced into freshwater bodies outside North America, where they become invasive in many instances. In Japan, they have been declared nuisance fish and are subjected to numerous attempts at eradicating them from local ecosystems.\nSpecies.\nCurrently, 14 recognized species are placed in this genus:\nA 15th species, the Choctaw bass \"Micropterus haiaka\", has been proposed, but this does not yet appear to have been widely accepted. A further two species, the Altamaha bass and Bartram's bass, are as yet undescribed and have been included under the redeye bass.\nA genomic analysis in 2022 described new species and found that the binomials, \"M. salmoides\" and \"M. floridanus\" as used above are misapplied to the largemouth bass and the Florida bass, this study found that \"M. salmoides\" is the valid binomial for the Florida bass, while \"M. floridanus\", is its junior synonym. They also found that the oldest available binomial for the largemouth bass is \"M. nigricans\".\nA single fossil species, \u2020\"Micropterus relictus\" is known from the Late Pliocene or Early Pleistocene of Jalisco, Mexico, when it presumably inhabited the Lake Chapala basin. This is the southernmost species known to have existed, as \"Micropterus\" basses are no longer native to the region. Several indeterminate fossil \"Micropterus\" are known from the Miocene of Nebraska and Oklahoma, US, with the oldest dating to the Middle Miocene (16-15 mya).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47346", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47346", "title": "Spotted bass", "text": "Species of fish\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe spotted bass (Micropterus punctulatus), also called spotty, or spots in various fishing communities, is a species of North American freshwater fish belonging to the sunfish family (Centrarchidae) of the order Centrarchiformes. It is noted for the rows of dark spots below the lateral line, which give it its common name. One of the black basses, it is native to the Mississippi River basin and across the Gulf states, from central Texas through the Florida panhandle. Its native range extends into the western Mid-Atlantic states and it has been introduced into western North Carolina and Virginia. It has also been introduced to southern Africa, where it has become established in some isolated waters as an invasive species.\nSpotted bass can reach an overall length of almost , and can weigh up to . It can live to an age of at least seven years. Preferring cool and warm mountain streams and reservoirs with rocky bottoms, the spotted bass feeds on insects, crustaceans, frogs, annelid worms and smaller fish. It is often mistaken for the similar and more common largemouth bass. A convenient way to distinguish between a largemouth and a spotted bass is by the size of the mouth. A spotted bass will resemble a largemouth bass in coloration but will have a smaller mouth.\nIn 2010, the scientific community officially recognized a separate subspecies of spotted bass, native to the Tallapoosa and Coosa Rivers and their lakes. This species is commonly known as the Alabama spotted bass (\"M. henshalli\") and known locally as the \"Coosa spotted bass\", not to be confused with the redeye Coosa bass found in north Georgia. The Alabama spotted bass is highly prized as a gamefish and average size is much larger than the more common Kentucky spotted bass. The current record spotted bass, caught in Pine Flat Lake, California, weighed .\nEtymology.\n\"Micropterus\" means small fin, and \"punctulatus\" means dotted.\nDescription.\nMany anglers who catch a spotted bass mistake it for a largemouth bass due to the coloration, although there are subtle differences. The spotted bass, like all black basses except the largemouth, has scales on the base portion of the second dorsal fin, its first and second dorsal fin are clearly connected, and its upper jaw bone does not extend back to or beyond the rear edge of the eyes.\nThe spotted bass is also often confused with a smallmouth bass (or \"smally\" for short), but it lacks the vertical bars that are present on the sides of a smallmouth's body. The spotted bass also has small black spots below the lateral line unlike either the large or smallmouth bass. Juveniles often resemble the young smallmouth bass in having a broad band of orange at the base of the tail, followed by a broad black band and white edge. The spotted bass is known to hybridize with the smallmouth, which sometimes makes identification difficult. Spotted bass can be found in deeper water than smallmouth bass, at depths up to .\nDistribution and habitat.\nSpotted bass seem to be segregated by habitat type from closely related species such as the largemouth and smallmouth bass. They tend to be found in areas with more water current than the largemouth, and usually inhabit areas that are too warm, turbid and sluggish for smallmouth bass. They usually occur around aquatic vegetation, submerged logs, and rock or riprap walls in small to large flowing streams, rivers, and reservoirs. Spotted bass are distributed throughout the Ohio River basin as well as the central and lower Mississippi River basin. The species may be found in Gulf Coast states from Texas east to Florida. Spotted bass are native to portions of East Texas, particularly in the Sabine, Neches and Cypress Rivers.\nDiet.\nSpotted bass usually feed on small fishes, crayfish and aquatic insects. The young begin with copepods and other small crustaceans and soon begin to eat insects. The spotted bass' diet falls in between the largemouth and smallmouth bass. It isn't nearly as predatory as the largemouth and only consumes about half the amount of the fish. Like all bass the spotted bass feeds by opening its mouth and creating a negative pressure that sucks in the prey.\nReproduction and life cycle.\nThe spotted bass can live approximately six years. Spawning occurs from April to May in habitat similar to that used by smallmouth. The males build their nest in gravel or other substrate, then entices a female to deposit her eggs. The males guard the eggs until they disperse. Several spotted and smallmouth bass hybrids have been collected recently in area reservoirs suggesting there is occasionally competition between the two species for spawning habitat.\nImportance to humans.\nThe spotted bass is a popular game fish that is fished regularly. In this context spotted bass is a good food fish for human consumption.\nInvasive species.\nThe spotted bass was introduced to the Thee River, Olifants\u2010Doring River system, Western Cape Province, South Africa as game fish before 2007, and is now rated as an invasive species. The population was successfully eradicated in 2014, where gillnets and hand nets were used to remove the majority of the stock, while individuals were also caught by spearguns, seine nets and backpack electrofishing. The spotted bass was held responsible for a decline in abundance of native fiery redfin (\"Pseudobarbus phlegethon\" Barnard, 1938) and Cape galaxias (\"Galaxias zebratus\" Castelnau, 1861).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47349", "revid": "50620234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47349", "title": "Salmon trout", "text": ""}
{"id": "47351", "revid": "41849648", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47351", "title": "Troll (slang)", "text": ""}
{"id": "47353", "revid": "41877120", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47353", "title": "Subject and object (philosophy)", "text": "Philosophy terms referring to an observer versus the thing observed\nIn philosophy, a subject is a being that exercises agency, undergoes conscious experiences, and is situated in relation to other things that exist outside itself; thus, a subject is any individual, person, or observer. An object is any of the things observed or experienced by a subject, which may even include other beings (thus, from their own points of view: other subjects).\nA simple common differentiation for \"subject\" and \"object\" is: an observer versus a thing that is observed. In certain cases involving personhood, subjects and objects can be considered interchangeable where each label is applied only from one or the other point of view. Subjects and objects are related to the philosophical distinction between subjectivity and objectivity: the existence of knowledge, ideas, or information either dependent upon a subject (subjectivity) or independent from any subject (objectivity).\nEtymology.\nIn English the word \"object\" is derived from the Latin (p.p. of ) with the meaning \"to throw, or put before or against\", from , \"against\", and the root , \"to throw\". Some other related English words include \"objectify\" (to reify), \"objective\" (a future reference), and \"objection\" (an expression of protest). \"Subject\" uses the same root, but with the prefix \"sub-\", meaning \"under\".\nBroadly construed, the word \"object\" names a maximally general category, whose members are eligible for being referred to, quantified over and thought of. Terms similar to the broad notion of \"object\" include \"thing\", \"being\", \"entity\", \"item\", \"existent\", \"term\", \"unit\", and \"individual\".\nIn ordinary language, one is inclined to call only a material object \"object\". In certain contexts, it may be socially inappropriate to apply the word \"object\" to animate beings, especially to human beings, while the words \"entity\" and \"being\" are more acceptable.\nSome authors use \"object\" in contrast to \"property\"; that is to say, an object is an entity that is not a property. Objects differ from properties in that objects cannot be referred to by predicates. Some philosophers include abstract objects as counting as objects, while others do not. Terms similar to such usage of \"object\" include \"substance\", \"individual\", and \"particular\".\nThere are two definitions of \"object\". The first definition holds that an object is an entity that fails to experience and that is not conscious. The second definition holds that an object is an entity experienced. The second definition differs from the first one in that the second definition allows for a subject to be an object at the same time.\nOne approach to defining an object is in terms of its properties and relations. Descriptions of all bodies, minds, and persons must be in terms of their properties and relations. For example, it seems that the only way to describe an apple is by describing its properties and how it is related to other things, such as its shape, size, composition, color, temperature, etc., while its relations may include \"on the table\", \"in the room\" and \"being bigger than other apples\". Metaphysical frameworks also differ in whether they consider objects existing independently of their properties and, if so, in what way. The notion of an object must address two problems: the change problems and the problems of substances. Two leading theories about objecthood are substance theory, wherein substances (objects) are distinct from their properties, and bundle theory, wherein objects are no more than bundles of their properties.\nIn philosophy.\nMahayana Buddhism.\nIn the \"M\u016blamadhyamakak\u0101rik\u0101\", the Indian philosopher Nagarjuna seizes upon the dichotomy between objects as collections of properties or as separate from those properties to demonstrate that both assertions fall apart under analysis. By uncovering this paradox he then provides a solution (\"prat\u012btyasamutp\u0101da\" \u2013 \"dependent origination\") that lies at the very root of Buddhist \"praxis\". Although Prat\u012btyasamutp\u0101da is normally limited to caused objects, Nagarjuna extends his argument to objects in general by differentiating two distinct ideas \u2013 dependent designation and dependent origination. He proposes that all objects are dependent upon designation, and therefore any discussion regarding the nature of objects can only be made in light of the context. The validity of objects can only be established within those conventions that assert them.\nCartesian dualism.\nThe formal separation between subject and object in the Western world corresponds to the dualistic framework, in the early modern philosophy of Ren\u00e9 Descartes, between thought and extension (in common language, mind and matter). Descartes believed that thought (subjectivity) was the essence of the mind, and that extension (the occupation of space) was the essence of matter. For modern philosophers like Descartes, consciousness is a state of cognition experienced by the subject\u2014whose existence can never be doubted as its ability to doubt (and think) proves that it exists. On the other hand, he argues that the object(s) which a subject perceives may not have real or full existence or value, independent of that observing subject.\nSubstance theory.\nAn attribute of an object is called a property if it can be experienced (e.g. its color, size, weight, smell, taste, and location). Objects manifest themselves through their properties. These manifestations seem to change in a regular and unified way, suggesting that something underlies the properties. The change problem asks what that underlying thing is. According to substance theory, the answer is a substance, that which stands for the change.\nAccording to substance theory, because substances are only experienced through their properties a substance itself is never directly experienced. The problem of substance asks on what basis can one conclude the existence of a substance that cannot be seen or scientifically verified. According to David Hume's bundle theory, the answer is none; thus an object is merely its properties.\nGerman idealism.\n\"Subject\" as a key-term in thinking about human consciousness began its career with the German idealists, in response to David Hume's radical skepticism. The idealists' starting point is Hume's conclusion that there is nothing to the self over and above a big, fleeting bundle of perceptions. The next step was to ask how this undifferentiated bundle comes to be experienced as a unity\u00a0\u2013 as a single \"subject\". Hume had offered the following proposal:\n\"\"...the imagination must by long custom acquire the same method of thinking, and run along the parts of space and time in conceiving its objects.\"\nKant, Hegel and their successors sought to flesh out the process by which the subject is constituted out of the flow of sense impressions. Hegel, for example, stated in his Preface to the \"Phenomenology of Spirit\" that a subject is constituted by \"the process of reflectively mediating itself with itself.\"\nHegel begins his definition of the subject at a standpoint derived from Aristotelian physics: \"the unmoved which is also \"self-moving\"\" (Preface, para. 22). That is, what is not moved by an outside force, but which propels itself, has a \"prima facie\" case for subjectivity. Hegel's next step, however, is to identify this power to move, this unrest that is the subject, as \"pure negativity\". Subjective self-motion, for Hegel, comes not from any pure or simple kernel of authentic individuality, but rather, it is\n\"...the bifurcation of the simple; it is the doubling which sets up opposition, and then again the negation of this indifferent diversity and of its anti-thesis\" (Preface, para. 18).\nThe Hegelian subject's \"modus operandi\" is therefore cutting, splitting and introducing distinctions by injecting negation into the flow of sense-perceptions. Subjectivity is thus a kind of structural effect\u00a0\u2013 what happens when Nature is diffused, refracted around a field of negativity and the \"unity of the subject\" for Hegel, is in fact a second-order effect, a \"negation of negation\". The subject experiences itself as a unity only by purposively negating the very diversity it itself had produced. The Hegelian subject may therefore be characterized either as \"self-restoring sameness\" or else as \"reflection in otherness within itself\" (Preface, para. 18).\nAmerican pragmatism.\nCharles S. Peirce of the late-modern American philosophical school of pragmatism, defines the broad notion of an object as anything that we can think or talk about. In a general sense it is any entity: the pyramids, gods, Socrates, the nearest star system, the number seven, a disbelief in predestination, or the fear of cats.\n20th century onwards.\nContinental philosophy.\nThe thinking of Karl Marx and Sigmund Freud provided a point of departure for questioning the notion of a unitary, autonomous Subject, which for many thinkers in the Continental tradition is seen as the foundation of the liberal theory of the social contract. These thinkers opened up the way for the deconstruction of the subject as a core-concept of metaphysics.\nFreud's explorations of the unconscious mind added up to a wholesale indictment of Enlightenment notions of subjectivity.\nAmong the most radical re-thinkers of human self-consciousness was Martin Heidegger, whose concept of \"Dasein\" or \"Being-there\" displaces traditional notions of the personal subject altogether. With Heidegger, phenomenology tries to go beyond the classical dichotomy between subject and object, because they are linked by an inseparable and original relationship, in the sense that there can be no world without a subject, nor the subject without world.\nJacques Lacan, inspired by Heidegger and Ferdinand de Saussure, built on Freud's psychoanalytic model of the subject, in which the split subject is constituted by a double bind: alienated from jouissance when they leave the Real, enters into the Imaginary (during the mirror stage), and separates from the Other when they come into the realm of language, difference, and demand in the Symbolic or the Name of the Father.\nThinkers such as structural Marxist Louis Althusser and poststructuralist Michel Foucault theorize the subject as a social construction, the so-called \"poststructuralist subject\". According to Althusser, the \"subject\" is an ideological construction (more exactly, constructed by the \"Ideological State Apparatuses\"). One's subjectivity exists, \"always-already\" and is constituted through the process of interpellation. Ideology inaugurates one into being a subject, and every ideology is intended to maintain and glorify its idealized subject, as well as the metaphysical category of the subject itself (see antihumanism).\nAccording to Foucault, it is the \"effect\" of power and \"disciplines\" (see \"Discipline and Punish\": construction of the subject (subjectivation or subjectification, ) as student, soldier, \"criminal\", etc.)). Foucault believed it was possible to transform oneself; he used the word ethopoiein from the word \"ethos\" to describe the process. Subjectification was a central concept in Gilles Deleuze and F\u00e9lix Guattari's work as well.\nAnalytic philosophy.\nBertrand Russell updated the classical terminology with a term, the \"fact\"; \"Everything that there is in the world I call a fact.\" Russell uses the term \"fact\" in two distinct senses. In 1918, facts are distinct from objects. \"I want you to realize that when I speak of a fact I do not mean a particular existing thing, such as Socrates or the rain or the sun. Socrates himself does not render any statement true or false. You might be inclined to suppose that all by himself he would give truth to the statement \u2018Socrates existed\u2019, but as a matter of fact that is a mistake.\" But in 1919, he identified facts with objects. \"I mean by \u2018fact\u2019 anything complex. If the world contains no simples, then whatever it contains is a fact; if it contains any simples, then facts are whatever it contains except simples... That Socrates was Greek, that he married Xantippe [\"sic\"], that he died of drinking the hemlock, are facts that all have something in common, namely, that they are \u2018about\u2019 Socrates, who is accordingly said to be a constituent of each of them.\"\nFacts, or objects, are opposed to beliefs, which are \"subjective\" and may be errors on the part of the subject, the knower who is their source and who is certain of himself and little else. All doubt implies the possibility of error and therefore admits the distinction between subjectivity and objectivity. The knower is limited in ability to tell fact from belief, false from true objects and engages in reality testing, an activity that will result in more or less certainty regarding the reality of the object. According to Russell, \"we need a description of the fact which would make a given belief true\" where \"Truth is a property of beliefs.\" Knowledge is \"true beliefs\".\nIn contemporary analytic philosophy, the issue of subject\u2014and more specifically the \"point of view\" of the subject, or \"subjectivity\"\u2014has received attention as one of the major intractable problems in philosophy of mind (a related issue being the mind\u2013body problem). In the essay \"What Is It Like to Be a Bat?\", Thomas Nagel famously argued that explaining subjective experience\u2014the \"what it is like\" to be something\u2014is currently beyond the reach of scientific inquiry, because scientific understanding by definition requires an objective perspective, which, according to Nagel, is diametrically opposed to the subjective first-person point of view. Furthermore, one cannot have a definition of objectivity without being connected to subjectivity in the first place since they are mutual and interlocked.\nIn Nagel's book \"The View from Nowhere\", he asks: \"What kind of fact is it that I am Thomas Nagel?\". Subjects have a perspective but each subject has a unique perspective and this seems to be a fact in Nagel's view from nowhere (i.e. the birds-eye view of the objective description in the universe). The Indian view of \"Brahman\" suggests that the ultimate and fundamental subject is existence itself, through which each of us as it were \"looks out\" as an aspect of a frozen and timeless everything, experienced subjectively due to our separated sensory and memory apparatuses. These additional features of subjective experience are often referred to as \"qualia\" (see Frank Cameron Jackson and Mary's room).\nIn other disciplines.\nPhysics.\nLimiting discussions of objecthood to the realm of physical objects may simplify them. However, defining physical objects in terms of fundamental particles (e.g. quarks) leaves open the question of what is the nature of a fundamental particle and thus asks what categories of being can be used to explain physical objects.\nSemantics.\nSymbols represent objects; how they do so, the map\u2013territory relation, is the basic problem of semantics.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47356", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47356", "title": "Black trout", "text": ""}
{"id": "47357", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47357", "title": "Hake", "text": "Family of fishes\nHake () is the common name for fish in the Merlucciidae family of the northern and southern oceans and the Phycidae family of the northern oceans. Hake is a commercially important fish in the same taxonomic order, Gadiformes, as cod and haddock.\nDescription.\nHakes are medium-to-large fish averaging from in weight, with specimens as large as . The fish can grow up to in length with a lifespan of as long as 14 years.\nHake may be found in the Atlantic Ocean and Pacific Ocean in waters from deep. The fish stay in deep water during the day and come to shallower depths during the night. An undiscerning predator, hake feed on prey found near or on the bottom of the sea. Male and female hake are very similar in appearance.\nAfter spawning, the hake eggs float on the surface of the sea where the larvae develop. After a certain period of time, the baby hake then migrate to the bottom of the sea, preferring depths of less than .\n\"Merlucciidae\".\nA total of 13 hake species are known in the family \"Merlucciidae\":\nCommercial use.\nNot all hake species are viewed as commercially important, but the deep-water and shallow-water hakes are known to grow rapidly and make up the majority of harvested species. Indicators of quality in hake products for human consumption include white flesh free of signs of browning, dryness, or grayness, and with a fresh, seawater smell. Hake is sold as frozen, fillets or steaks, fresh, smoked, or salted.\nFisheries.\nThe main catching method of deep-water hake is primarily trawling, and shallow-water hake is mostly caught by inshore trawl and longlining. Hake are mostly found in the Southwest Atlantic (Argentina and Uruguay), Southeast Pacific (Chile and Peru), Southeast Atlantic (Namibia and South Africa), Southwest Pacific (New Zealand), and Mediterranean and Black Sea (Italy, Portugal, Spain, Greece and France).\nOver-exploitation.\nDue to overfishing, Argentine hake catches have declined drastically. About 80% of adult hake has apparently disappeared from Argentine waters. Argentine hake is not expected to disappear, but the stock may be so low that it is no longer economical for commercial fishing. In addition, this adversely affects Argentine employment, because of many jobs in the fishing industries. Conversely, Argentine hake prices rose due to hake scarcity, reducing exports and affecting the economy.\nIn Chile, seafood exports, especially Chilean hake, have decreased dramatically. Hake export has decreased by almost 19 percent. The main cause of this decline is the February 2010 Chile earthquake and tsunami. These disasters destroyed most processing plants, especially manufacturing companies that produce fish meal and frozen fillets.\nEuropean hake catches are well below historical levels because of hake depletion in the Mediterranean and Black Sea. Various factors might have caused this decline, including a too-high total allowable catch, unsustainable fishing, ecological problems, juvenile catches, or non-registered catches.\nNamibia is the only country that has increased its hake quota, from in 2009 to in 2010. Furthermore, the Namibian Ministry of Fisheries adheres to strict rules regarding the catch of hake. For example, the closed seasons for hake lasts approximately two months, in September and October, depending on the level of stock. This rule has been applied to ensure the regrowth of the hake population. Supplemental restrictions forbid trawling for Hake in waters less than deep (to avoid damaging non-target species habitat) and to minimize by-catch.\nHuman introduction to non-native areas.\nFrank Forrester's \"Fishermens' Guide\" in 1885 mentions a hake that was transplanted from the coast of Ireland to Cape Cod on the coast of Massachusetts in the United States. It is uncertain which species it was, but the \"Fishermens' Guide\" stated:This is an Irish salt water fish, similar in appearance to the tom cod. In Galway bay, and other sea inlets of Ireland, the hake is exceedingly abundant, and is taken in great numbers. It is also found in England and France. Since the Irish immigration to America, the hake has followed in the wake of their masters, as it is now found in New York bay, in the waters around Boston, and off Cape Cod. Here it is called the stock fish, and the Bostonians call them poor Johns. [...] It is a singular fact that until within a few years this fish was never seen in America. It does not grow as large here as in Europe, though here they are from ten to eighteen inches [250 to 460 mm] in length.[...] The general color of this fish is a reddish brown, with some golden tints\u2014the sides being of a pink silvery luster.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47358", "revid": "22753251", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47358", "title": "Sea bass", "text": "Index of marine fish with the same common name\nSea bass is a common name for a variety of species of marine fish. Many fish species of various families have been called sea bass.\nIn Ireland and the United Kingdom, the fish sold and consumed as sea bass is exclusively the European bass, \"Dicentrarchus labrax\".\nSometimes referred to as sea bass include the following:\nFamily Serranidae.\nFamily Serranidae\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Index of animals with the same common nameThis page is an index of articles on animal species (or higher taxonomic groups) with the same common name (vernacular name). If an led you here, you may wish to edit the linking article so that it links directly to the intended article."}
{"id": "47359", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47359", "title": "White bass", "text": "Species of fish\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe white bass, silver bass, or sand bass (Morone chrysops) is a freshwater fish of the temperate bass family Moronidae, and is commonly around 12\u201315 inches long. The species' main color is silver-white to pale green. Its back is dark, with white sides and belly, and with narrow dark stripes running lengthwise on its sides. It has large, rough scales and two dorsal fins. They are widely distributed across North America, inhabiting large reservoirs and rivers. When mating in the spring, they are more often found in shallow rivers, creeks, and streams. They have been introduced in some places as sport fish and also to predate on nuisance fish, such as gizzard shad. It is the state fish of Oklahoma.\nRange.\nWhite bass are distributed widely across the United States, especially in the Midwest. They are very abundant in Pennsylvania and the area around Lake Erie. Some native ranges of the white bass are the Arkansas River, western Lake Erie, the Detroit River, and Lake Poinsett in South Dakota; they are abundant in the Winnebago lakes system of Wisconsin; and they are also very abundant in Oklahoma. White bass have also been found in rivers that flow to the Mississippi. Native to many northern habitats, they have been introduced in many different waters around the United States, particularly in southern locations. They were also successfully introduced to Manitoba starting in the 1960s, where they have gained importance as a sport fish.\nDescription.\nThe species' main color is silver-white to pale green. Its back is dark, with white sides and belly, and with narrow dark stripes running lengthwise on its sides. It has large, rough scales and two dorsal fins. The more anterior dorsal fin is much harder and appears to have spines on it. Although these are not true spines, this type of fin is called a spinous ray. The more posterior of the two dorsal fins is much softer, and is thus called a soft-ray. White bass can be distinguished from white perch (\"Morone americana\") by having separated anterior and posterior dorsal fins; the spinous-ray and soft-ray portions of the dorsal fin of white perch are united and both are erected together when the spinous portion is extended. Because the vertebrae do not extend into the tail, the white bass has what is called a homocercal tail. The body is deep and compressed laterally. Most grow to a length between , though they can reach or more. Because the dorsal and ventral portions of its tail angle inward toward a point to create a clear angle, the tail is said to be notched.\nThe record size for white bass caught on fishing tackle, per The International Game Fish Association, is shared by fish caught in 1989 in Orange Lake, Orange, Virginia, and in 2010 in Amite River, Louisiana.\nDiet.\nWhite bass are carnivores. They have four main taxa in their diet: calanoid copepods, cyclopoid copepods, daphnia, and leptodora. They are visual feeders. When not frightened, they will bite readily at live bait such as worms and minnows. Only the largest fish will feed on other fish, and as the summer season progresses, there is an overall trend towards eating fewer fish. Fish that are able to accumulate lipids over the summer are better able to survive cold winters. When looking at midwestern white bass, particularly in South Dakota, diet overlap occurs between the bass and the walleye. As seasons progress through the summer and fall, the amount of diet overlap decreases as a result of both fish increasing in length.\nHabitat.\nWhite bass are found in high densities in the upstream segment of rivers. This portion of the river becomes the most degraded, as a number of different kinds of fish live in this segment, as well.\nReproduction.\nThe spawning season for the white bass is mid-March to late May. The optimal water temperatures are . They are known to find their home spawning ground even if it is moved to a different part of the same lake. They often spawn in moving water in a tributary stream, but they will spawn in windswept lake shores. They spawn during daylight. Females release 242,000 to 933,000 eggs which stick to the surface of objects. Eggs are laid in clear, relatively shallow water on plants, submerged logs, gravel, or rocks. The parents move to deeper water and do not care for the young fish. The young fish live in shallow water for a while until they move to deeper water.\nWhen trying to find a female with whom to mate, males will bump against a female's abdominal area. The female will then rise closer to the surface and begin spinning and releasing eggs. Several males that have stayed in the area will be able to fertilize the eggs the female releases.\nHybrids with other bass.\nWhite bass have also been hybridized with striped bass (\"Morone saxatilis\") to produce hybrid striped bass also known as wiper, whiterock bass, sunshine bass, palmetto bass, and Cherokee bass. These hybrids have been stocked in many freshwater areas across the US. White bass have one tooth patch on the back of their tongue, unlike hybrid striped bass and striped bass, which both have two patches there.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47360", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47360", "title": "White perch", "text": "Species of fish\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe white perch (Morone americana) is not a true perch but is a fish of the temperate bass family, Moronidae, notable as a food and game fish in eastern North America. In some places it is referred to as \"Silver Bass\".\nThe common name \"white perch\" is sometimes applied to the white crappie (\"Pomoxis annularis\").\nDescription.\nGenerally silvery-white in color, hence the name, depending upon habitat and size specimens have begun to develop a darker shade near the dorsal fin and along the top of the fish. This sometimes earns them the nickname \"black-back\". White perch have been reported up to in length and weighing .\nEcology.\nAlthough favoring brackish waters, it is also found in fresh water and coastal areas from the St. Lawrence River and Lake Ontario south to the Pee Dee River in South Carolina, and as far east as Nova Scotia. They are also found in the lower Great Lakes, Finger Lakes, Long Island Sound and nearby coastal areas, Hudson and Mohawk River system, Delaware Bay and Chesapeake Bay. It is also found occasionally in small landlocked lakes and ponds.\nDiet.\nWhite perch are known to eat the eggs of many species native to the Great Lakes, such as walleye and other true perches. At times, fish eggs are 100% of their diet. They prefer to eat small minnows like mudminnows and fathead minnows.\nIn the Chesapeake Bay, white perch commonly prey upon grass shrimp, razor clams, and bloodworms which are all common to the region.\nReproduction.\nWhite perch are a prolific species. The female can deposit over 150,000 eggs in a spawning session, lasting just over a week. Several males will often attend a spawning female, and each may fertilize a portion of her eggs. The young hatch within one to six days of fertilization.\nAt times, a parasite known as \"Lironeca ovalis\" is located in the gills. Its presence is believed to reduce the growth rate of white perch.\nThe white perch is currently recovering from a loss of population in the Hudson River.\nAquatic nuisance species.\nSome states consider the white perch to be a nuisance species due to its ability to destroy fisheries. They have been associated with the declines in both walleye and white bass populations because they feed heavily on baitfish used by those species and outcompete them for food and space. Many states have enacted laws forbidding possession of live white perch. Additionally, these states recommend not releasing captured white perch back into the water to help control its spread.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47361", "revid": "50992706", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47361", "title": "Dow Jones Industrial Average", "text": "American stock market index composed of 30 industry leaders\nThe Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA), Dow Jones, or simply the Dow (), is a stock market index of 30 prominent companies listed on stock exchanges in the United States. \nThe DJIA is one of the oldest and most commonly followed equity indices. It is price-weighted, unlike other common indices such as the Nasdaq Composite or S&amp;P 500, which use market capitalization. The primary pitfall of this approach is that a stock's price\u2014not the size of the company\u2014determines its relative importance in the index. For example, as of March 2025, Goldman Sachs represented the largest component of the index with a market capitalization of ~$167B. In contrast, Apple's market capitalization was ~$3.3T at the time, but it fell outside the top 10 components in the index.\nThe DJIA also contains fewer stocks than many other major indices, which could heighten risk due to stock concentration. However, some investors believe it could be less volatile when the market is rapidly rising or falling due to its components being well-established large-cap companies.\nThe value of the index can also be calculated as the sum of the stock prices of the companies included in the index, divided by a factor, which is approximately 0.162 as of \u00a02025[ [update]]. The factor is changed whenever a constituent company undergoes a stock split so that the value of the index is unaffected by the stock split.\nFirst calculated on May 26, 1896, the index is the second-oldest among U.S. market indices, after the Dow Jones Transportation Average. It was created by Charles Dow, co-founder of \"The Wall Street Journal\" and Dow Jones &amp; Company, and named after him and his business associate, statistician Edward Jones. \nThe index is maintained by S&amp;P Dow Jones Indices, an entity majority-owned by S&amp;P Global. Its components are selected by a committee that includes three representatives from S&amp;P Dow Jones Indices and two representatives from the \"Wall Street Journal\". The ten components with the largest dividend yields are commonly referred to as the Dogs of the Dow. As with all stock prices, the prices of the constituent stocks and consequently the value of the index itself are affected by the performance of the respective companies as well as macroeconomic factors.\nComponents.\nAs of May\u00a029, 2025,[ [update]] the Dow Jones Industrial Average consists of the following companies, with a weighting as shown:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFormer components.\nAs of November 8, 2024, the components of the DJIA have changed 59 times since its beginning on May 26, 1896. General Electric had the longest presence on the index, beginning in the original index in 1896 and ending in 2018, but was dropped and re-added twice between 1898 and 1907. Changes to the index since 1991 are as follows:\nInvestment methods.\nInvesting in the DJIA is possible via index funds as well as via derivatives such as option contracts and futures contracts.\nMutual and exchange-traded funds.\nIndex funds, including mutual funds and exchange-traded funds (ETF) can replicate, before fees and expenses, the performance of the index by holding the same stocks as the index in the same proportions. An ETF that replicates the performance of the index is issued by State Street Corporation (NYSE\u00a0Arca:\u00a0[ DIA]).\nProShares offers leveraged ETFs that attempt to produce three times the daily result of either investing in (NYSE\u00a0Arca:\u00a0[ UDOW]) or shorting (NYSE\u00a0Arca:\u00a0[ SDOW]) the Dow Jones Industrial Average.\nFutures contracts.\nIn the derivatives market, the CME Group through its subsidiaries the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) and the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT), issues Futures Contracts; the http://, which track the average and trade on their exchange floors respectively. Trading is typically carried out in an open outcry auction, or over an electronic network such as CME's Globex platform.\nOptions contracts.\nThe Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE) issues option contracts on the Dow through the root symbol DJX. Options on various Dow-underlying ETFs are also available for trading.\nAnnual returns.\nThe following table shows the annual development of the Dow Jones Index, which was calculated back to 1896.\nHistory.\nPrecursor.\nIn 1884, Charles Dow composed his first stock average, which contained nine railroads and two industrial companies that appeared in the \"Customer's Afternoon Letter\", a daily two-page financial news bulletin which was the precursor to \"The Wall Street Journal\". On January 2, 1886, the number of stocks represented in what is now the \"Dow Jones Transportation Average\" dropped from 14 to 12, as the Central Pacific Railroad and Central Railroad of New Jersey were removed. Though comprising the same number of stocks, this index contained only one of the original twelve industrials that would eventually form Dow's most famous index.\nInitial components.\nDow calculated his first average purely of industrial stocks on May 26, 1896, creating what is now known as the \"Dow Jones Industrial Average\". None of the original 12 industrials still remain part of the index.\nEarly years.\nWhen it was first published in the mid-1880s, the index stood at a level of 62.76. It reached a peak of 78.38 during the summer of 1890, but reached its all-time low of 28.48 in the summer of 1896 during the Panic of 1896. Many of the biggest percentage price moves in the Dow occurred early in its history, as the nascent industrial economy matured. In the 1900s, the Dow halted its momentum as it worked its way through two financial crises: the Panic of 1901 and the Panic of 1907. The Dow remained stuck in a range between 53 and 103 until late 1914. The negativity surrounding the 1906 San Francisco earthquake did little to improve the economic climate; the index broke 100 for the first time in 1906.\nAt the start of the 1910s, the Panic of 1910\u20131911 stifled economic growth. On July 30, 1914, as the average stood at a level of 71.42, a decision was made to close the New York Stock Exchange, and suspend trading for a span of four and a half months. Some historians believe the exchange was closed because of a concern that markets would plunge as a result of panic over the onset of World War I. An alternative explanation is that the United States Secretary of the Treasury, William Gibbs McAdoo, closed the exchange to conserve the U.S. gold stock in order to launch the Federal Reserve System later that year, with enough gold to keep the United States on par with the gold standard. When the markets reopened on December 12, 1914, the index closed at 74.56, a gain of 4.4%. This is frequently reported as a large drop, due to using a later redefinition. Reports from the time say that the day was positive. Following World War I, the United States experienced another economic downturn, the Post\u2013World War I recession. The Dow's performance remained unchanged from the closing value of the previous decade, adding only 8.26%, from 99.05 at the beginning of 1910, to a level of 107.23 at the end of 1919.\nThe Dow experienced a long bull run from 1920 to late 1929 when it rose from 73 to 381 points. In 1928, the components of the Dow were increased to 30 stocks near the economic height of that decade, which was nicknamed the Roaring Twenties. This period downplayed the influence of the Depression of 1920\u20131921 and certain international conflicts such as the Polish\u2013Soviet War, the Irish Civil War, the Turkish War of Independence and the initial phase of the Chinese Civil War. After a peak of 381.17 on September 3, 1929, the bottom of the 1929 crash came just 2 months later on November 13, 1929, at 195.35 intraday, closing slightly higher at 198.69. The Wall Street Crash of 1929 and the ensuing Great Depression over the next several years saw the Dow continue to fall until July 8, 1932, when it closed at 41.22, roughly two-thirds of its mid-1880s starting point and almost 90% below its peak. Overall for the 1920s decade, the Dow still ended with a healthy 131.7% gain, from 107.23 to 248.48 at the end of 1929. In inflation-adjusted numbers, the high of 381.17 on September 3, 1929, was not surpassed until 1954.\nMarked by global instability and the Great Depression, the 1930s contended with several consequential European and Asian outbreaks of war, leading to the catastrophic World War II in 1939. Other conflicts during the decade which affected the stock market included the 1936\u20131939 Spanish Civil War, the 1935\u20131936 Second Italo-Abyssinian War, the Soviet-Japanese Border War of 1939, and the Second Sino-Japanese War of 1937. The United States experienced the Recession of 1937\u20131938, which temporarily brought economic recovery to a halt. The largest one-day percentage gain in the index happened in the depths of the 1930s bear market on March 15, 1933, when the Dow gained 15.34% to close at 62.10. However, as a whole throughout the Great Depression, the Dow posted some of its worst performances, for a negative return during most of the 1930s for new and old stock market investors. For the decade, the Dow Jones average was down from 248.48 at the beginning of 1930, to a stable level of 150.24 at the end of 1939, a loss of about 40%.\n1940s.\nPost-war reconstruction during the 1940s, along with renewed optimism of peace and prosperity, brought about a 33% surge in the Dow from 150.24 to 200.13. The strength in the Dow occurred despite the Recession of 1949 and various global conflicts.\n1950s.\nDuring the 1950s, the Korean War and the Cold War did not stop the Dow's climb higher. A nearly 240% increase in the average from 200.13 to 679.36 ensued over the course of that decade.\n1960s.\nThe Dow began to stall during the 1960s as the markets trudged through the Kennedy Slide of 1962, but still managed an 18% gain from 679.36 to 800.36.\n1970s.\nThe 1970s marked a time of economic uncertainty and troubled relations between the U.S. and certain Middle-Eastern countries. The 1970s energy crisis was a prelude to a disastrous economic climate along with stagflation, the combination of high unemployment and high inflation. However, on November 14, 1972, the average closed at 1,003.16, above the 1,000 mark for the first time, during a brief relief rally in the midst of a lengthy bear market. Between January 1973 and December 1974, the average lost 48% of its value in what became known as the 1973\u20131974 stock market crash, closing at 577.60 on December 6, 1974. The nadir came after prices dropped more than 45% over two years since the NYSE's high point of 1,003.16 on November 4, 1972. In 1976, the index reached 1,000 several times and it closed the year at 1,004.75. Although the Vietnam War ended in 1975, new tensions arose towards Iran surrounding the Iranian Revolution in 1979. Performance-wise for the 1970s, the index remained virtually flat, rising 4.8% from 800.36 to 838.74.\n1980s.\nThe 1980s began with the early 1980s recession. In early 1981, the index broke above 1,000 several times, but then retreated. After closing above 2,000 in January 1987, the largest one-day percentage drop occurred on Black Monday, October 19, 1987, when the average fell 22.61%. There were no clear reasons given to explain the crash.\nOn October 13, 1989, the Friday the 13th mini-crash, which initiated the collapse of the junk bond market, resulted in a loss of almost 7% of the index in a single day.\nDuring the 1980s, the Dow increased 228% from 838.74 to 2,753.20; despite the market crashes, Silver Thursday, an early 1980s recession, the 1980s oil glut, the Japanese asset price bubble, and other political distractions. The index had only two negative years in the 1980s: in 1981 and 1984.\n1990s.\nThe 1990s brought on rapid advances in technology along with the introduction of the dot-com era. The markets contended with the 1990 oil price shock compounded with the effects of the early 1990s recession and a brief European situation surrounding Black Wednesday. Certain influential foreign conflicts such as the 1991 Soviet coup d'\u00e9tat attempt which took place as part of the initial stages of the Dissolution of the Soviet Union and the Revolutions of 1989; the First Chechen War and the Second Chechen War, the Gulf War, and the Yugoslav Wars failed to dampen economic enthusiasm surrounding the ongoing Information Age and the \"irrational exuberance\" (a phrase coined by Alan Greenspan) of the dot-com bubble. Between late 1992 and early 1993, the Dow staggered through the 3,000 level making only modest gains as the biotechnology sector suffered through the downfall of the Biotech Bubble; as many biotech companies saw their share prices rapidly rise to record levels and then subsequently fall to new all-time lows.\nThe Dow soared from 2,753 to 8,000 between January 1990 to July 1997. In October 1997, the events surrounding the 1997 Asian financial crisis plunged the Dow into a 554-point loss to a close of 7,161.15; a retrenchment of 7.18% in what became known as the October 27, 1997 mini-crash.\nHowever, the Dow continued climbing past 9,000 despite negativity surrounding the 1998 Russian financial crisis along with the subsequent fallout from the 1998 collapse of Long-Term Capital Management due to bad bets placed on the movement of the Russian ruble.\nOn March 29, 1999, the average closed at 10,006.78, its first close above 10,000. This prompted a celebration on the New York Stock Exchange trading floor, complete with party hats. Total gains for the decade exceeded 315%; from 2,753.20 to 11,497.12, which equates to 12.3% annually.\nThe Dow averaged a 5.3% return compounded annually for the 20th century, a record Warren Buffett called \"a wonderful century\"; when he calculated that to achieve that return again, the index would need to close at about 2,000,000 by December 2099.\n2000s.\nOn September 17, 2001, the first day of trading after the September 11 attacks on the United States, the Dow fell 7.1%. However, the Dow began an upward trend shortly after the attacks, and regained all lost ground to close above 10,000 for the year. In 2002, the Dow dropped to a four-year low of 7,286 on September 24, 2002, due to the stock market downturn of 2002 and lingering effects of the dot-com bubble. Overall, while the NASDAQ index fell roughly 75% and the S&amp;P 500 index fell roughly 50% between 2000 and 2002, the Dow only fell 27% during the same period. In 2003, the Dow held steady within the 7,000 to 9,000-point level and recovered to the 10,000 mark by year end.\nThe Dow continued climbing and reached a record high of 14,198.10 on October 11, 2007, a mark which was not matched until March 2013. It then dropped over the next year due to the 2008 financial crisis.\nOn September 15, 2008, a wider financial crisis became evident after the Bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers along with the economic effect of record high oil prices which had reached almost $150 per barrel two months earlier. The Dow lost more than 500 points for the day, returning to its mid-July lows below 11,000. A series of bailout packages, including the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008, proposed and implemented by the Federal Reserve and United States Department of the Treasury did not prevent further losses. After nearly six months of extreme volatility during which the Dow experienced its largest one-day point loss, largest daily point gain, and largest intraday range (of more than 1,000 points) at the time, the index closed at a new 12-year low of 6,547.05 on March 9, 2009, its lowest close since April 1997. The Dow had lost 20% of its value in only six weeks.\nTowards the latter half of 2009, the average rallied towards the 10,000 level amid optimism that the Great Recession, the United States housing bubble and the 2008 financial crisis, were easing and possibly coming to an end. For the decade, the Dow saw a rather substantial pullback for a negative return from 11,497.12 to 10,428.05, a loss of a 9.3%.\n2010s.\nDuring the first half of the 2010s decade, aided by the Federal Reserve's loose monetary policy including quantitative easing, the Dow made a notable rally attempt. This was despite significant volatility due to growing global concerns such as the European debt crisis, the Dubai World 2009 debt standstill, and the 2011 United States debt-ceiling crisis.\nOn May 6, 2010, the Dow lost 9.2% intra-day and regained nearly all of it within a single hour. This event, which became known as the 2010 Flash Crash, sparked new regulations to prevent future incidents.\nSix years after its previous high in 2007, the Dow finally closed at a new record high on March 5, 2013. It continued rising for the next several years past 17,000 points until a brief 2015\u20132016 stock market selloff in the second half of 2015. It then picked up again in early 2016 and climbed past 25,000 points on January 4, 2018.\nOn November 9, 2016, the day after Donald Trump's victory over Hillary Clinton in the U.S. presidential election, the index soared, coming within roughly 25 points of its all-time intraday high to that point.\nVolatility returned in 2018 when the Dow fell nearly 20%. By early January 2019, the index had quickly rallied more than 10% from its Christmas Eve low.\nOverall in the 2010s decade, the Dow increased from 10,428.05 to 28,538.44 for a substantial gain of 174%.\n2020s.\nDespite the emerging COVID-19 pandemic, the Dow continued its bull run from the previous decade before peaking at 29,551.42 on February 12, 2020 (29,568.57 intraday on the same day). The index slowly retreated for the remainder of the week and into the next week, before coronavirus fears and an oil price war between Saudi Arabia and Russia sent the index into a tailspin, recording several days of losses (and gains) of at least 1,000 points, a typical symptom of a bear market as previously seen in October 2008 during the 2008 financial crisis. Volatility rose high enough to trigger multiple 15-minute trading halts. In the first quarter of 2020, the DJIA fell 23%, its worst quarter since 1987. The market recovered in the third quarter, returning to 28,837.52 on October 12, 2020, and peaked momentarily at a new all-time high of 29,675.25 on November 9, 2020, at 14:00 ET, following that day's announcement of the success of the Pfizer\u2013BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine in Phase III clinical trials. The Dow (as reported by the United Press International) closed over 30,000 on December 31, 2020, at a record 30,606.48. On November 24, following news that the presidential transition of Joe Biden was approved, the Dow increased by more than 500 points, closing at 30,046.24. On January 22, 2024, the Dow Jones crossed 38,000 points for the first time; a month later it surpassed 39,000; and in May, it surpassed 40,000 points.\nComputation.\nThe DJIA is computed as the sum of the prices of all thirty stocks divided by a divisor, the Dow Divisor. The divisor is adjusted in case of stock splits, spinoffs or similar structural changes, to ensure that such events do not in themselves alter the numerical value of the DJIA. Early on, the initial divisor was composed of the original number of component companies; this initially made the DJIA a simple arithmetic average. The present divisor, after many adjustments, is less than one, making the index larger than the sum of the prices of the components. That is:\nformula_1\nwhere p are the prices of the component stocks and d is the \"Dow Divisor\".\nEvents such as stock splits or changes in the list of the companies composing the index alter the sum of the component prices. In these cases, in order to avoid discontinuity in the index, the Dow Divisor is updated so that the quotations right before and after the event coincide:\nformula_2\nSince \u00a030, 2025,[ [update]] the Dow Divisor is 0.16242563904928 and every $1 change in price in a particular stock within the average equates to a 6.156663 (or 1 \u00f7 0.16242563904928) point movement.\nAssessment.\nQuality as a proxy of the stock market.\nDespite its unusual weighting by price rather than market capitalization, the Dow Jones Industrial Average is highly correlated with other proxies of the US equities market, particularly the S&amp;P 500 Index. Between (1980--) (2023--)January 1980 \u2013 November 2023, the DJIA returned an annualized 8.90%, with the S&amp;P 500 returning a nearly identical 8.91%.\nIssues with market representation.\nWith the inclusion of only 30 stocks, critics such as Ric Edelman argue that the DJIA is an inaccurate representation of overall market performance compared to more comprehensive indices such as the S&amp;P 500 Index or the Russell 3000 Index. Additionally, the DJIA is criticized for being a price-weighted index, which gives higher-priced stocks more influence over the average than their lower-priced counterparts, but takes no account of the relative industry size or market capitalization of the components. For example, a $1 increase in a lower-priced stock can be negated by a $1 decrease in a much higher-priced stock, even though the lower-priced stock experienced a larger percentage change. In addition, a $1 move in the smallest component of the DJIA has the same effect as a $1 move in the largest component of the average. For example, during September\u2013October 2008, former component AIG's reverse split-adjusted stock price collapsed from $22.76 on September 8 to $1.35 on October 27; contributing to a roughly 3,000-point drop in the index.\nAs of \u00a02021,[ [update]] Goldman Sachs and UnitedHealth Group are among the highest-priced stocks in the average and therefore have the greatest influence on it. Alternately, Cisco Systems and Coca-Cola are among the lowest-priced stocks in the average and have the least sway in the price movement. Critics of the DJIA and most securities professionals recommend the market-capitalization weighted S&amp;P 500 Index or the Wilshire 5000, the latter of which includes most publicly listed U.S. stocks, as better indicators of the U.S. stock market.\nCorrelation among components.\nA study between the correlation of components of the Dow Jones Industrial Average compared with the movement of the index finds that the correlation is higher when the stocks are declining. The correlation is lowest in a time when the average is flat or rises a modest amount.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47363", "revid": "5522834", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47363", "title": "Council of Ephesus", "text": "Ecumenical council in Ephesus in 431, convened by Emperor Theodosius II\nThe Council of Ephesus was a council of Christian bishops convened in Ephesus (near present-day Sel\u00e7uk in Turkey) in AD 431 by the Roman Emperor Theodosius II. This third ecumenical council, an effort to attain consensus in the church through an assembly representing all of Christendom, confirmed the original Nicene Creed, and condemned the teachings of Nestorius, Patriarch of Constantinople, who preferred that the Virgin Mary be called \"Christotokos\", \"Christ-bearer\" over \"Theotokos\", \"God-bearer\"; in contrast to Cyril of Alexandria who deemed that \"Theotokos\" is enough on its own. It met from 22 June to 31 July 431 at the Church of Mary in Ephesus in Anatolia.\nBackground.\nNestorius' doctrine, Nestorianism, which emphasized the distinction between Christ's human and divine natures and argued that Mary should preferably be called \"Christotokos\" (Christ-bearer) over \"Theotokos\" (God-bearer), had brought him into conflict with other church leaders, most notably Cyril, Patriarch of Alexandria. Nestorius himself had requested the Emperor to convene the council, hoping that it would prove his orthodoxy; the council in fact condemned his teachings as heresy. The council declared Mary as \"Theotokos\" (Mother of God).\nNestorius' dispute with Cyril had led the latter to seek validation from Pope Celestine I, who offered his support for Cyril to request that Nestorius recant his position or face excommunication. Nestorius pleaded with the Eastern Roman Emperor Theodosius II to call a council in which all grievances could be aired, hoping that he would be vindicated and Cyril condemned.\nApproximately 250 bishops were present. The proceedings were conducted in a heated atmosphere of confrontation and recriminations and created severe tensions between Cyril and Theodosius II. Nestorius was decisively outplayed by Cyril and removed from his see, and his teachings were officially anathematized. This precipitated the Nestorian Schism, by which churches supportive of Nestorius, especially in the Persian Empire of the Sassanids, were severed from the rest of Christendom and became known as Nestorian Christianity, or the Church of the East, whose present-day representatives are the Assyrian Church of the East, the Ancient Church of the East, the Chaldean Syrian Church, and the Chaldean Catholic Church (which restored communion with Rome). \nHistory.\nPolitical context.\nJohn McGuckin cites the \"innate rivalry\" between Alexandria and Constantinople as an important factor in the controversy between Cyril of Alexandria and Nestorius. However, he emphasizes that, as much as political competition contributed to an \"overall climate of dissent\", the controversy cannot be reduced merely to the level of \"personality clashes\" or \"political antagonisms\". According to McGuckin, Cyril viewed the \"elevated intellectual argument about Christology\" as ultimately one and the same as the \"validity and security of the simple Christian life\".\nEven within Constantinople, some supported the Roman-Alexandrian, and others supported the Nestorian factions. For example, Pulcheria supported the Roman-Alexandrian popes while the emperor and his wife supported Nestorius.\nTheological context.\nContention over Nestorius' teachings, which he developed during his studies at the School of Antioch, largely revolved around his rejection of the long-used title \"Theotokos\" (\"Carrier of God\") for the Virgin Mary. Shortly after his arrival in Constantinople, Nestorius became involved in the disputes of two theological factions, which differed in their Christology.\nMcGuckin ascribes Nestorius' importance to his being the representative of the Antiochene (an adjectival form of the word 'Antioch') tradition and characterizes him as a \"consistent, if none too clear, exponent of the longstanding Antiochene dogmatic tradition\". Nestorius was greatly surprised that what he had always taught in Antioch without any controversy whatsoever should prove to be so objectionable to the Christians of Constantinople. Nestorius emphasized the dual natures of Christ, trying to find a middle ground between those who emphasized the fact that in Christ God had been born as a man, and who insisted on calling the Virgin Mary \"Theotokos\" (Greek: \u0398\u03b5\u03bf\u03c4\u03cc\u03ba\u03bf\u03c2, \"God-bearer\"), and those that rejected that title because God as an eternal being could not have been born. Nestorius suggested the title \"Christotokos\" (\"\u03a7\u03c1\u03b9\u03c3\u03c4\u03bf\u03c4\u03cc\u03ba\u03bf\u03c2\", \"Christ-bearer\"), but this proposal did not gain acceptance on either side.\nNestorius tried to answer a question considered unsolved: \"How can Jesus Christ, being part man, not be partially a sinner as well, since man is by definition a sinner since the Fall?\" To solve that he taught that Mary, the mother of Jesus gave birth to the incarnate Christ, not the divine Logos who existed before Mary and indeed before time itself. The Logos occupied the part of the human soul (the part of man that was stained by the Fall). But wouldn't the absence of a human soul make Jesus less human? Nestorius rejected this proposition, answering that, because the human soul was based on the archetype of the Logos, only to become polluted by the Fall, Jesus was \"more\" human for having the Logos and not \"less\". Consequently, Nestorius argued that the Virgin Mary should be called \"Christotokos\", Greek for \"Carrier of Christ\", and not only \"Theotokos\", Greek for \"Carrier of God\".\nNestorius believed that no union between the human and divine was possible. If such a union of human and divine occurred, Nestorius believed that Christ could not truly be consubstantial with God and consubstantial with us because he would grow, mature, suffer and die (which Nestorius argued God cannot do) and also would possess the power of God that would separate him from being equal to humans.\nAccording to McGuckin, several mid-twentieth-century accounts have tended to \"romanticise\" Nestorius; in opposition to this view, he asserts that Nestorius was no less dogmatic and uncompromising than Cyril, and that he was clearly just as prepared to use his political and canonical powers as Cyril or any of the other hierarchs of the period.\nNestorius's opponents charged him with detaching Christ's divinity and humanity into two persons existing in one body, thereby denying the reality of the Incarnation. Eusebius, a layman who later became the bishop of the neighbouring Dorylaeum, was the first to accuse Nestorius of heresy, but his most forceful opponent was Patriarch Cyril of Alexandria. Cyril argued that Nestorius's two-nature formula necessarily leads to two Sons.\nCyril appealed to Pope Celestine I of Rome, charging Nestorius with heresy. The Pope agreed and gave Cyril his authority to serve a notice to Nestorius to recant his views within ten days or else be excommunicated. Before acting on the Pope's commission, Cyril convened a synod of Egyptian bishops, which condemned Nestorius as well. Cyril then sent four suffragan bishops to deliver both the Pope's commission as well as the synodal letter of the Egyptian bishops. Cyril sent a letter to Nestorius known as the \"Third Epistle of Saint Cyril to Nestorius\". This epistle drew heavily on the established Patristic Constitutions and contained the most famous article of Alexandrian Orthodoxy: \"The Twelve Anathemas of Saint Cyril\". In these anathemas, Cyril excommunicated anyone who followed the teachings of Nestorius. For example, \"Anyone who dares to deny the Holy Virgin the title \"Theotokos\" is Anathema!\" Nestorius, however, still would not repent. McGuckin points out that other representatives of the Antiochene tradition such as John of Antioch, Theodoret and Andrew of Samosata were able to recognize \"the point of the argument for Christ's integrity\" and concede the \"ill-advised nature of Nestorius' immoveability\". Concerned at the potential for a negative result at a council, they urged Nestorius to yield and accept the use of the title \"Theotokos\" when referring to the Virgin Mary.\nFor example, John of Antioch wrote to Nestorius urging him to submit to the Pope's judgment and cease stirring up controversy over a word that he disliked (Theotokos) but which could be interpreted as having an orthodox meaning especially in light of the fact that many saints and doctors of the church had sanctioned the word by using it themselves. John wrote to Nestorius, \"Don't lose your head. Ten days! It will not take you twenty-four hours to give the needed answer... Ask advice of men you can trust. Ask them to tell you the facts, not just what they think will please you... You have the whole of the East against you, as well as Egypt.\" Despite this advice from his colleagues, Nestorius persisted in maintaining the rightness of his position.\nConvocation.\nOn 19 November, Nestorius, anticipating the ultimatum decision which was about to be delivered, convinced Emperor Theodosius II to summon a general council through which Nestorius hoped to convict Cyril of heresy and thereby vindicate his own teachings. Theodosius issued a Sacra calling for the metropolitan bishops to assemble in the city of Ephesus, which was a special seat for the veneration of Mary, where the \"theotokos\" formula was popular. Each bishop was to bring only his more eminent suffragans. The date set by the Emperor for the opening of the council was Pentecost (7 June) 431.\nMcGuckin notes that the vagueness of the Sacra resulted in wide variations of interpretation by different bishops. In particular, the vastness of John of Antioch's ecclesiastical territory required a lengthy period to notify and gather his delegates. Because the overland trip from Antioch to Ephesus was long and arduous, John composed his delegation of his metropolitan bishops, who were restricted to bring no more than two suffragans each. By doing so, he minimized the number who would have to travel to Ephesus. Neither of the emperors attended the council. Theodosius appointed Count Candidian as the head of the imperial palace guard to represent him, to supervise the proceedings of the Council, and to keep good order in the city of Ephesus. Despite Nestorius' agenda of prosecuting Cyril, Theodosius intended for the council to focus strictly on the christological controversy. He thus gave Candidianus strict directions to remain neutral and not to interfere in the theological proceedings. It is generally assumed that Candidian initially maintained his neutrality as instructed by the emperor and only gradually became more biased towards Nestorius. McGuckin, however, suggests that Candidian may have favored Nestorius from the start.\nAssembly.\nCelestine sent Arcadius and Projectus to represent himself and his Roman council; in addition, he sent the Roman priest, Philip, as his personal representative. Cyril, Patriarch of Alexandria, was president of the council. Celestine had directed the papal legates not to take part in the discussions but to give judgment on them.\nBishops arrived in Ephesus over a period of several weeks. While waiting for the other bishops to arrive, they engaged in informal discussions characterized as tending to \"exasperate rather than heal their differences\" The metropolitan of Ephesus, Memnon, was already present with his 52 bishops. Nestorius and his 16 bishops were the first to arrive shortly after Easter. As archbishop of the imperial city of Constantinople, he travelled with a detachment of troops who were under the command of Count Candidian. McGuckin notes that the troops were not there to serve as Nestorius' bodyguard but to support Candidian in his role as the emperor's representative. However, McGuckin theorizes that Candidian's progressive abandonment of neutrality in favor of Nestorius may have created the perception that Candidian's troops were, in fact, there to support Nestorius. Candidian ordered all monks and lay strangers to leave the city; he further instructed the bishops not to leave on any pretext until the council was concluded. Several sources comment that the purpose of this injunction was to prevent bishops from leaving the council to appeal to the emperor directly.\nAccording to McGuckin, Memnon, as bishop of Ephesus, commanded the \"fervent and unquestioned loyalty\" of the local populace and thus could count on the support of local factions to counterbalance the military might of Candidian's troops. In view of the verdict of Rome against Nestorius, Memnon refused to have communion with Nestorius, closing the churches of Ephesus to him.\nCyril brought with him 50 bishops, arriving only a few days before Pentecost. There were very few bishops representing the West, as the papal representatives would not arrive until July. The Palestinian delegation of 16 bishops and Metropolitan Flavian of Philippi arrived 5 days after the date that had been set for opening the council and aligned themselves with Cyril.\nAt this point, Cyril announced his intention to open the council; however, Candidian enjoined him from doing so on the grounds that the Roman and Antiochean delegations had not arrived yet. Cyril initially acceded to Candidian's injunction knowing that he could not legally convene a council without the official reading of the Emperor's Sacra.\nA number of bishops, who were undecided between Nestorius and Cyril, did not want to give Cyril, as one party in the dispute, the right to chair the meeting and decide the agenda; however, they began to take Cyril's side for various reasons.\nVarious circumstances, including a detour necessitated by flooding as well as sickness and death of some of the delegates, seriously delayed John of Antioch and his bishops. It was rumored that John might be delaying his arrival in order to avoid participating in a council which was likely to condemn Nestorius as a heretic.\nFirst session \u2013 22 June 431.\nTwo weeks after the date set for the council, John and the bulk of his Syrian group (42 members) had not yet appeared. At this point, Cyril formally opened the council on Monday, 22 June by enthroning the Gospels in the center of the church as a symbol of Christ's presence among the assembled bishops.\nDespite three separate summons, Nestorius refused to acknowledge Cyril's authority to stand in judgment of him and considered the opening of the council before the arrival of the Antiochene contingent as a \"flagrant injustice\". The 68 bishops who opposed opening the council entered the church in protest, arriving with Count Candidian who declared that the assembly was illegal and must disperse. He urged Cyril to wait four more days for the Syrian delegation to arrive. However, since even the bishops opposed to opening the council were now present, Cyril maneuvered Candidian by means of a ruse to read out the text of the Emperor's decree of convocation, which the assembly then acclaimed as recognition of its own legality.\nArrival of the Antiochene delegation.\nWhen John of Antioch and his Syrian bishops finally reached Ephesus five days after the council, they met with Candidian who informed them that Cyril had begun a council without them and had ratified Celestine's conviction of Nestorius as a heretic. Angered at having undertaken such a long and arduous journey only to have been pre-empted by actions taken by Cyril's council, John and the Syrian bishops held their own Council with Candidian presiding. This council condemned Cyril for espousing the Arian, Apollinarian and Eunomian heresies and condemned Memnon for inciting violence. The bishops at this council deposed both Cyril and Memnon. Initially, the emperor concurred with the actions of John's council but eventually withdrew his concurrence.\nSecond Session \u2013 10 July 431.\nThe second session was held in Memnon's episcopal residence. Philip, as papal legate, opened the proceedings by commenting that the present question regarding Nestorius had already been decided by Pope Celestine as evidenced by his letter, which had been read to the assembled bishops in the first session. He indicated that he had a second letter from Celestine, which was read to the bishops now in attendance. The letter contained a general exhortation to the council, and concluded by saying that the legates had instructions to carry out what the pope had decided on the question and expressed Celestine's confidence that the council would agree. The bishops indicated their approval by acclaiming Celestine and Cyril. Projectus indicated that the papal letter enjoined the council to put into effect the sentence pronounced by Celestine. Firmus, the Exarch of Caesarea in Cappadocia, responded that the pope's sentence had already been carried out in the first session. The session closed with the reading of the pope's letter to the emperor.\nThird Session \u2013 11 July 431.\nHaving read the Acts of the first session, the papal legates indicated that all that was required was that the council's condemnation of Nestorius be formally read in their presence. When this had been done, the three legates each confirmed the council's actions, signing the Acts of all three sessions. The council sent a letter to Theodosius indicating that the condemnation of Nestorius had been agreed upon not only by the bishops of the East meeting in Ephesus but also of the bishops of the West who had convened at a synod in Rome convened by Celestine. The bishops asked Theodosius to allow them to go home since so many of them suffered from their presence at Ephesus.\nFourth Session \u2013 16 July 431.\nAt the fourth session, Cyril and Memnon presented a formal protest against John of Antioch for convening a separate conciliabulum. The council issued a summons for him to appear before them, but he would not even receive the envoys who were sent to serve him the summons.\nFifth Session \u2013 17 July 431.\nThe next day, the fifth session was held in the same church. John had set up a placard in the city accusing the synod of the Apollinarian heresy. He was again cited, and this was counted as the third canonical summons. He paid no attention. In consequence, the council suspended and excommunicated him, together with thirty-four bishops of his party, but refrained from deposing them. Some of John's party had already deserted him, and he had gained only a few. In the letters to the emperor and the pope, which were then dispatched, the synod described itself as now consisting of 210 bishops. The long letter to Celestine gave a full account of the council and mentioned that the pope's decrees against the Pelagians had been read and confirmed.\nSixth Session \u2013 22 July 431.\nAt this session, the bishops approved Canon 7, which condemned any departure from the creed established by the First Council of Nicaea, in particular an exposition by the priest Charisius. According to a report from Cyril to Celestine, Juvenal of Jerusalem tried and failed to create for himself a patriarchate from the territory of the Antiochene patriarchate in which his see lay. He ultimately succeeded in this goal twenty years later at the Council of Chalcedon.\nSeventh Session \u2013 31 August 431.\nAt this session, the council approved the claim of the bishops of Cyprus that their see had been anciently and rightly exempt from the jurisdiction of Antioch. The council also passed five canons condemning Nestorius and Caelestius and their followers as heretics and a sixth one decreeing deposition from clerical office or excommunication for those who did not accept the Council's decrees.\nCanons and declarations.\nEight canons were passed:\nThe Council denounced Nestorius' teaching as erroneous and decreed that Jesus was one person (hypostasis), and not two separate persons, yet possessing both a human and divine nature. The Virgin Mary was to be called Theotokos, a Greek word that means \"God-bearer\" (the one who gave birth to God).\nThe Council declared it \"unlawful for any man to bring forward, or to write, or to compose a different (\u1f11\u03c4\u03ad\u03c1\u03b1\u03bd) Faith as a rival to that established by the holy Fathers assembled with the Holy Ghost in Nic\u00e6a\". It quoted the Nicene Creed as adopted by the First Council of Nicaea in 325, not as added to and modified by the First Council of Constantinople in 381.\nAlthough some scholars, such as Norman Cohn and Peter Toon, have suggested that the Council of Ephesus rejected premillennialism, this is a misconception, and there is no evidence of the Council making any such declaration.\nConfirmation of the Council's acts.\nThe bishops at Cyril's council outnumbered those at John of Antioch's council by nearly four to one. In addition, they had the agreement of the papal legates and the support of the population of Ephesus who supported their bishop, Memnon.\nHowever, Count Candidian and his troops supported Nestorius as did Count Irenaeus. The emperor had always been a firm supporter of Nestorius but had been somewhat shaken by the reports of the council. Cyril's group was unable to communicate with the emperor because of interference from supporters of Nestorius both at Constantinople and at Ephesus. Ultimately, a messenger disguised as a beggar was able to carry a letter to Constantinople by hiding it in a hollow cane.\nAlthough Emperor Theodosius had long been a staunch supporter of Nestorius, his loyalty seems to have been shaken by the reports from Cyril's council and caused him to arrive at the extraordinary decision to ratify the depositions decreed by both councils. Thus, he declared that Cyril, Memnon, and John were all deposed. Memnon and Cyril were kept in close confinement. But in spite of all the efforts of the Antiochene party, the representatives of the envoys whom the council was eventually allowed to send, with the legate Philip, to the Court, persuaded the emperor to accept Cyril's council as the true one. \nSeeing the writing on the wall and anticipating his fate, Nestorius requested permission to retire to his former monastery. The synod was dissolved in the beginning of October, and Cyril arrived back to Alexandria amid much joy on 30 October 431. Pope Celestine had died on 27 July 431, but his successor, Sixtus III, gave papal confirmation to the council's actions.\nAftermath.\nThe events created a major schism between the followers of the different versions of the council, which was only mended by difficult negotiations. The factions that supported John of Antioch acquiesced in the condemnation of Nestorius and, after additional clarifications, accepted the decisions of Cyril's council. However, the rift would open again during the debates leading up to the Council of Chalcedon.\nPersia had long been home to a Christian community that had been persecuted by the Zoroastrian majority, which had accused it of Roman leanings. In 424, the Persian Church declared itself independent of the Byzantine and all other churches, in order to ward off allegations of foreign allegiance. Following the Nestorian Schism, the Persian Church increasingly aligned itself with the Nestorians, a measure encouraged by the Zoroastrian ruling class. The Persian Church became increasingly Nestorian in doctrine over the next decades, furthering the divide between Christianity in Persia and in the Roman Empire. In 486 the Metropolitan of Nisibis, Barsauma, publicly accepted Nestorius' mentor, Theodore of Mopsuestia, as a spiritual authority. In 489 when the School of Edessa in Mesopotamia was closed by Byzantine Emperor Zeno for its Nestorian teachings, the school relocated to its original home of Nisibis, becoming again the School of Nisibis, leading to a wave of Nestorian immigration into Persia. The Persian patriarch Mar Babai I (497\u2013502) reiterated and expanded upon the church's esteem for Theodore, solidifying the church's adoption of Nestorianism.\nConciliation.\nIn 1994, the Common Christological Declaration Between the Catholic Church and the Assyrian Church of the East marked the resolution of a dispute between those two churches that had existed since the Council of Ephesus. They expressed their common understanding of doctrine concerning the divinity and humanity of Christ, and recognized the legitimacy and rightness of their respective descriptions of Mary as, on the Assyrian side, \"the Mother of Christ our God and Saviour\", and, on the Catholic side, as \"the Mother of God\" and also as \"the Mother of Christ\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47364", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47364", "title": "Third Ecumenical Council", "text": ""}
{"id": "47367", "revid": "2340490", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47367", "title": "\u00c6thelred I of Wessex", "text": "King of Wessex from 865 to 871\n\u00c6thelred I (alt. Aethelred, Ethelred; ; 845/848 to 871) was King of Wessex from 865 until his death in 871. He was the fourth of five sons of King \u00c6thelwulf of Wessex, four of whom in turn became king. \u00c6thelred succeeded his elder brother \u00c6thelberht and was followed by his youngest brother, Alfred the Great. \u00c6thelred had two sons, \u00c6thelhelm and \u00c6thelwold, who were passed over for the kingship on their father's death because they were still infants. Alfred was succeeded by his son, Edward the Elder, and \u00c6thelwold unsuccessfully disputed the throne with him.\n\u00c6thelred's accession coincided with the arrival of the Viking Great Heathen Army in England. Over the next five years the Vikings conquered Northumbria and East Anglia, and at the end of 870 they launched a full-scale attack on Wessex. In early January 871, \u00c6thelred was defeated at the Battle of Reading. Four days later, he scored a victory in the Battle of Ashdown, but this was followed by two defeats at Basing and Meretun. He died shortly after Easter. Alfred was forced to pay off the Vikings, but he scored a decisive victory over them seven years later at the Battle of Edington.\n\u00c6thelred's reign was important numismatically. Wessex and Mercia were close allies when he became king, and he carried the alliance further by adopting the Mercian Lunettes design, thus creating a unified coinage design for southern England for the first time. The common design foreshadowed the unification of England over the next sixty years and the reform coinage of King Edgar a century later.\nBackground.\n\u00c6thelred's grandfather, Ecgberht, became king of Wessex in 802, and in the view of the historian Richard Abels, it must have seemed very unlikely to contemporaries that he would establish a lasting dynasty. For two hundred years, three families had fought for the West Saxon throne, and no son had followed his father as king. No ancestor of Ecgberht had been a king of Wessex since Ceawlin in the late sixth century, but he was believed to be a paternal descendant of Cerdic, the founder of the West Saxon dynasty. This made Ecgberht an \u00e6theling \u2013 a prince eligible for the throne. But after Ecgberht's reign, descent from Cerdic was no longer sufficient to make a man an \u00e6theling. When Ecgberht died in 839 he was succeeded by his son \u00c6thelwulf; all subsequent West Saxon kings were Ecgberht's descendants and were also sons of kings. \nAt the beginning of the ninth century, England was almost wholly under the control of the Anglo-Saxons. The Midland kingdom of Mercia dominated southern England, but its supremacy came to an end in 825 when it was decisively defeated by Ecgberht at the Battle of Ellendun. The two kingdoms became allies, which was important in the resistance to Viking attacks. In 853, King Burgred of Mercia requested West Saxon help to suppress a Welsh rebellion, and \u00c6thelwulf led a West Saxon contingent in a successful joint campaign. In the same year Burgred married \u00c6thelwulf's daughter, \u00c6thelswith.\nIn 825, Ecgberht sent \u00c6thelwulf to invade the Mercian sub-kingdom of Kent, and its underking, Baldred, was driven out shortly afterwards. By 830, Essex, Surrey and Sussex had also submitted to Ecgberht, and he had appointed \u00c6thelwulf to rule the south-eastern territories as King of Kent. The Vikings ravaged the Isle of Sheppey in 835, and the following year they defeated Ecgberht at Carhampton in Somerset, but in 838 he was victorious over an alliance of Cornishmen and Vikings at the Battle of Hingston Down, reducing Cornwall to the status of a client kingdom. When \u00c6thelwulf succeeded, he appointed his eldest son \u00c6thelstan (who died in the early 850s) as sub-king of Kent. Ecgberht and \u00c6thelwulf might not have intended a permanent union between Wessex and Kent as they both appointed sons as underkings and charters in Wessex were attested (witnessed) by West Saxon magnates, while Kentish charters were witnessed by the Kentish elite; both kings kept overall control and the underkings were not allowed to issue their own coinage.\nViking raids increased in the early 840s on both sides of the English Channel, and in 843 \u00c6thelwulf was defeated at Carhampton. In 850, \u00c6thelstan defeated a Danish fleet off Sandwich in the first recorded naval battle in English history. In 851 \u00c6thelwulf and his second son \u00c6thelbald defeated the Vikings at the Battle of Aclea and, according to the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\", \"there made the greatest slaughter of a heathen raiding-army that we have heard tell of up to this present day, and there took the victory\". \u00c6thelwulf died in 858 and was succeeded by his oldest surviving son, \u00c6thelbald, as king of Wessex and by his next oldest son, \u00c6thelberht, as king of Kent. \u00c6thelbald only survived his father by two years and \u00c6thelberht then for the first time united Wessex and Kent into a single kingdom.\nEarly life.\n\u00c6thelred was the fourth of five sons of King \u00c6thelwulf. His mother, Osburh, was of West Saxon royal descent. According to the historian Sean Miller, \u00c6thelred was probably a year or so older than his younger brother, the future Alfred the Great, who was born 848\u20139, but Richard Abels says that \u00c6thelred was around eight years old in 853, which would mean he was born about 845. Manuscript A of the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\", which was written in the 890s, states that in 853 Alfred was sent by his father to Rome and was consecrated by the Pope as king. Historians do not believe that he was consecrated king at this young age and the real nature of the ceremony is explained in an extract from a letter of Pope Leo IV to \u00c6thelwulf, which records that he decorated Alfred \"as a spiritual son, with the dignity of the belt and the vestments of the consulate, as is customary with Roman consuls\". The contemporary \"Liber Vitae\" (confraternity book) of San Salvatore, Brescia, records the names of both \u00c6thelred and Alfred, indicating that both brothers went to Rome. It is likely that \u00c6thelred was also decorated by the pope, but the ceremony was later regarded as foreshadowing Alfred's greatness and neither the chronicler nor the eleventh-century extractor from the Pope's letters were interested in recording the presence of his lesser known elder brother.\n\u00c6thelred first witnessed his father's charters as \"filius regis\" (king's son) in 854, and he witnessed with this title until he succeeded to the throne in 865. He may have acted as an underking before his accession, as in 862 and 863 he issued his own charters as King of the West Saxons. This must have been as deputy or in the absence of his elder brother, King \u00c6thelberht, as there is no record of conflict between them and he continued to witness his brother's charters as a king's son in 864.\nReign.\nCivilian rule.\n\u00c6thelred succeeded to the throne on \u00c6thelberht's death in 865, and he married Wulfthryth at an unknown date. West Saxon kings' wives had a low status in the ninth century and very little is known about them. They were not usually given the title of \"regina\" (queen), an omission which Alfred the Great justified on the ground of the misconduct of a queen at the beginning of the ninth century. The name of \u00c6thelred's wife is only known because she was recorded as a witness to one charter, S 340 of 868, where she is shown as \"Wulfthryth regina\", suggesting that she had a higher status than other kings' wives. The only other ninth century king's wife known to have been given the title was \u00c6thelwulf's second wife, Judith of Flanders, a great-granddaughter of Charlemagne. Wulfthryth and \u00c6thelred had two known sons, \u00c6thelhelm and \u00c6thelwold. She might have been Mercian or a daughter of Wulfhere, Ealdorman of Wiltshire, who forfeited his lands after being charged with deserting King Alfred for the Danes in about 878, perhaps because he attempted to secure Viking support for his elder grandson \u00c6thelhelm's claim to the throne against Alfred.\nAlfred records in the preamble to his will that \u00c6thelwulf had left property jointly to three of his sons, \u00c6thelbald, \u00c6thelred and Alfred, with the proviso that the brother who lived longest would succeed to all of it. When \u00c6thelbald died in 860, \u00c6thelred and Alfred, who were still young, agreed to entrust their share to the new king, \u00c6thelberht, on a promise that he would return it to them intact. When \u00c6thelred succeeded to the throne, Alfred asked him at a meeting of the witan (assembly of leading men) to give him his share of the property. However, \u00c6thelred said that he had attempted many times to divide it but had found it too difficult, and he would instead leave the whole to Alfred on his death. Some historians see the bequest as including the whole of \u00c6thelwulf's bookland, his personal property which he could leave in his will (as opposed to the folkland which passed according to customary law and property earmarked for the support of the crown); it is further argued that it was considered desirable that the bookland would be kept by the king, so \u00c6thelwulf's provision implies that the throne would pass to each brother in turn. However, other historians assert that the bequest had nothing to do with the kingship, and Alfred Smyth argues that the bequest was provision for \u00c6thelwulf's young sons when they reached adulthood, with \u00c6thelbald as trustee and residuary beneficiary if they died young. When Alfred succeeded, the supporters of \u00c6thelred's infant sons complained that Alfred should have shared the property with them, and Alfred had his father's will read to a meeting of the witan to prove his right to keep the whole of the property. Alfred rarely witnessed \u00c6thelred's charters, and this together with the argument over their father's will suggests that they were not on good terms. The historian Pauline Stafford suggests that \u00c6thelred chose to highlight his wife's status as queen in a charter to assert his own sons' claims to the succession.\nIn 868, \u00c6thelred issued a charter which was attested by a Mercian \u00e6theling and himself attested a charter issued by his sister, \u00c6thelswith, as queen of Mercia. \u00c6thelred used several different titles in his charters. He is called by his father's usual title, \"Rex Occidentalium Saxonum\" (King of the West Saxons) in the charter of Ealhswith which he witnessed, and in five of his own. He is \"King of the West Saxons and the Men of Kent\" in two, and \"King\" and \"King of the Saxons\" in one each. The West Saxon charters of \u00c6thelred and his elder brothers followed a uniform style, suggesting that they were produced by a single agency which operated over a number of years.\nThe Viking invasions.\nThe character of Viking attacks on England decisively changed in the year that \u00c6thelred succeeded to the throne. Previously the country had suffered from sporadic raids, but now it faced an invasion aiming at conquest and settlement. A large force of Vikings, called by contemporaries the Great Heathen Army, arrived in East Anglia. King Edmund purchased peace by paying tribute and the Vikings stayed a year building up their strength. They then marched on York and conquered Northumbria, installing a puppet king. In late 867, they took Nottingham in Mercia and spent the winter there. \u00c6thelred's brother-in-law, King Burgred, appealed to him for help. \u00c6thelred and Alfred led a large West Saxon army to Nottingham and besieged the Vikings, but they refused to leave the safety of the town's defences. The combined Mercian and West Saxon armies were unable to breach the earth ramparts and ditch, and eventually Burgred bought them off. The Vikings then went back to York.\nIn 869, the Vikings returned to East Anglia and conquered the kingdom, killing King Edmund. In December 870, they launched an attempt to conquer Wessex led by Kings Bagsecg and Halfdan. They occupied Reading on around 28 December. The town is between the Thames and Kennet rivers, and they set about building a ditch and rampart on the southern side between the two rivers. Three days after their arrival they sent out a large foraging party, which was defeated by an army of local levies under the command of \u00c6thelwulf, Ealdorman of Berkshire, at the Battle of Englefield. After another four days, on about 4 January 871, \u00c6thelred and Alfred brought up the main West Saxon army and joined \u00c6thelwulf's forces for an attack on the Danes in the Battle of Reading. The West Saxons fought their way to the town, slaughtering all the Danes they found outside, but when they reached the town gate the Vikings burst out and defeated the West Saxons with a successful counter-attack. Among the dead was \u00c6thelwulf, whose body was secretly carried off to be buried in his native Derby. According to the twelfth-century chronicler Gaimar, \u00c6thelred and Alfred only escaped due to their better knowledge of the local terrain, which allowed them to lose their pursuers by fording the River Loddon at Twyford and going on to Whistley Green, which is around east of Reading.\nFour days later, on about 8 January, the armies met again in the Battle of Ashdown. The location of the battle is unknown, but may be Kingstanding Hill, north-west of Reading. According to Asser's account, the Vikings arrived first at the battle ground and deployed along the top of the ridge, giving them the advantage. They divided their forces into two contingents, one under their two kings and the other under their earls. When the West Saxons saw this, they decided to copy the formation, with \u00c6thelred facing the kings and Alfred the earls. The king then retired to his tent to hear Mass, while Alfred led his forces to the battlefield. Both sides formed their forces into shield walls. \u00c6thelred would not cut short his devotions and Alfred risked being outflanked and overwhelmed by the whole Danish army. He decided to attack and led his men in a charge. Battle then raged around a small thorn tree and finally the West Saxons were victorious. Although Asser emphasises Alfred's role in the victory and implies that \u00c6thelred was dilatory, in the view of the military historian John Peddie, \u00c6thelred was militarily correct to delay joining the battle until the situation was in his favour. The Vikings suffered heavy losses, including King Bagsecg and five earls, Sidroc the Old, Sidroc the Younger, Osbern, Fr\u00e6na and Harold. The West Saxons followed the Viking flight until nightfall, cutting them down. The historian Barbara Yorke, who sees Asser's biography as intended to portray Alfred as an ideal king, comments that \"Asser is particularly careful to give much credit to Alfred\".\nHowever, the victory was short-lived. Two weeks later, \u00c6thelred and Alfred were defeated at the royal estate of Basing in the Battle of Basing. There was then a lull of two months until the West Saxons and the Vikings met at an unknown location called Meretun. In the battle on 22 March the Vikings again divided into two divisions and the West Saxons had the advantage for much of the day, putting both divisions to flight, but the Vikings regrouped and finally held control of the battlefield. The West Saxons lost many important men, including Heahmund, the Bishop of Sherborne.\nCoinage.\nIn the late eighth and ninth centuries, the only denomination of coin produced in southern England was the silver penny. As of 2007, 152 coins of \u00c6thelred struck by 32 different moneyers have been recorded. His reign is described by the numismatists Adrian Lyons and William Mackay as \"a critical point in the development of the English coinage\". His first Four Line issue was stylistically similar to the Floriate Cross penny of his predecessor, \u00c6thelberht, but he soon abandoned this and adopted the design of his Mercian brother-in-law, Burgred, resulting in a common coinage design across southern England for the first time. The historian and numismatist Rory Naismith comments that \u00c6thelred:\ntook the important step of adopting a new coin-type based not on local tradition, but on the Lunettes-type current in contemporary Mercia. The year 865 thus saw not only the arrival of the Viking great army that would dismantle most of the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms, but also the beginning of the end for separate coinages in separate kingdoms.\nLyons and Mackay see the change as even more crucial:\nThe developments of the late 860s can thus be viewed as an essential precursor that eventually led to the unified reform coinage of Edgar. This convergence of the coinage is also tangible evidence for a growing collaboration between Mercia and Wessex which foreshadowed the eventual creation of a unified England.\nThe single coinage design created a form of monetary union in southern England, reinforcing the mingling of economic interests between the two kingdoms and the military alliance against the Vikings. Coin hoards in Wessex dating to the earlier period of separate coinage designs have few non-Wessex coins, but after the adoption of the common Lunettes design, coins of Wessex and Mercia were used in both kingdoms, and even in Wessex hoards coins of \u00c6thelred I form a minor proportion of the total. Between one and one and a half million \u00c6thelred I Regular Lunette coins were produced, but this seems to have been significantly less than in Mercia. It is not known why the Mercian design was adopted, but it probably reflects the fact that the Lunette type had already been used for more than twelve years, the simplicity of the design, which could easily be copied, and the greater strength of the Mercian economy. The bulk of surviving \u00c6thelred I coins are of the Regular Lunettes design, with 118 coins struck by 21 moneyers, six of whom are known to have also worked for Burgred; the coins are notable for consistency in design and good quality of execution, and they were mainly produced by Canterbury moneyers, with a few in the Mercian town of London. Only one coin is known which was produced in Wessex itself. There were also Irregular Lunettes issues, one of which was a degraded and crude variant, perhaps a result of a breakdown in controls at the end of \u00c6thelred's reign, when Wessex was under the pressure of Viking attacks. Alfred kept the Lunettes design for a short period following his accession in 871, but the design disappears from hoards deposited after around 875.\nDeath and aftermath.\nShortly after Easter 871, which fell on 15 April in that year, \u00c6thelred died. According to Asser, he \"went the way of all flesh, having vigorously and honourably ruled the kingdom in good repute, amid many difficulties, for five years\". He was buried at the royal minster at Wimborne in Dorset, which had been founded by Saint Cuthburh, a sister of his ancestor, Ingild. While Alfred was attending his funeral, the West Saxons suffered another defeat at Reading, and Alfred himself was then defeated at Wilton. He was forced to buy off the Vikings, who then withdrew to London. In 876, the Vikings returned, and Alfred fought a guerrilla war until he won a decisive victory at the Battle of Edington in 878.\n\u00c6thelred had two sons, and if he had lived until they were adults it is unlikely that Alfred would ever have become king, but as they were still young children, Alfred succeeded. \u00c6thelhelm died before Alfred, and \u00c6thelwold unsuccessfully disputed the throne with Edward the Elder after Alfred's death in 899. One of the two places where \u00c6thelwold launched his rebellion was Wimborne, which was symbolically important as his father's burial place. \u00c6thelred's descendants played an important role in governing the country in the late tenth and early eleventh centuries. They include Ealdorman \u00c6thelweard, who recorded in his Latin version of the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" that he was \u00c6thelred's great-great-grandson. King Eadwig was forced to accept annulment of his marriage to \u00c6lfgifu due to consanguinity; she may have been \u00c6thelweard's sister, which would make her Eadwig's third cousin once removed due to her descent from \u00c6thelred, and thus within the forbidden degrees of relationship according to the church. \u00c6thelweard and his son \u00c6thelm\u00e6r were leading magnates who governed west Wessex as ealdormen of the western provinces. The family lost their positions and property after Cnut conquered England in 1016, and one of \u00c6thelm\u00e6r's sons was executed by Cnut in 1017, while a son-in-law was banished in 1020. Another son, \u00c6thelnoth, was Archbishop of Canterbury, and he lived until 1038.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47369", "revid": "144968", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47369", "title": "Fionn mac Cumhaill", "text": "Irish mythical hero\nFionn mac Cumhaill, - alternatively spelled Finn mac Cumhaill - sometimes anglicised Finn McCool or MacCool, is a hero in Irish mythology, as well as in later Scottish and Manx folklore. He is the leader of the \"Fianna\" bands of young roving hunter-warriors, as well as being a seer and poet. He is said to have a magic thumb that bestows him with great wisdom. He is often depicted hunting with his hounds Bran and Sce\u00f3lang, and fighting with his spear and sword. The tales of Fionn and his \"fiann\" form the Fianna Cycle or Fenian Cycle (\"an Fhianna\u00edocht\"), much of it narrated by Fionn's son, the poet Ois\u00edn.\nEtymology.\nIn Old Irish, finn/find means \"white, bright, lustrous; fair, light-hued (of complexion, hair, etc.); fair, handsome, bright, blessed; in moral sense, fair, just, true\". It is cognate with Primitive Irish \"VENDO-\" (found in names from Ogam inscriptions), Welsh \"gwyn\" (cf. Gwyn ap Nudd), Cornish \"gwen\", Breton \"gwenn\", Continental Celtic and Common Brittonic \"*uindo-\" (a common element in personal and place names), and comes from the Proto-Celtic adjective masculine singular \"*windos\".\nIrish legend.\nFionn's birth and early adventures are recounted in the narrative \"The Boyhood Deeds of Fionn\" and other sources. Fionn was the posthumous son of Cumhall, leader of the Fianna, by Muirne.\nFionn and his father Cumhall mac Tr\u00e9nmhoir (\"son of Tr\u00e9nm\u00f3r\") stem from Leinster, rooted in the tribe of U\u00ed Thairsig (\"the Descendants of Tairsiu\") There is mention of the U\u00ed Thairsig in the \"Lebor Gab\u00e1la \u00c9renn\" as one of the three tribes descended from the Fir Bolg.\nHis mother was called Muirne Muinch\u00e1em \"of the Fair Neck\" (or \"of the Lovely Neck\", or \"Muiren smooth-neck\"), the daughter of Tadg mac Nuadat (in \"Fotha Catha Chnucha\") and granddaughter of Nuadat the druid serving Cathair M\u00f3r who was high-king at the time, though she is described as granddaughter of N\u00faadu of the Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann according to another source (\"Acallam na Sen\u00f3rach\"). Cumhall served Conn C\u00e9tchathach \"of the Hundred Battles\" who was still a regional king at Cenandos (Kells, Co. Meath).\nCumhall abducted Muirne after her father refused him her hand, so Tadg appealed to the high king Conn, who outlawed Cumhall. The Battle of Cnucha was fought between Conn and Cumhall, and Cumhall was killed by Goll mac Morna, who took over leadership of the Fianna.\nThe feud.\nThe Fianna were a band of warriors also known as a military order composed mainly of the members of two rival clans, \"Clan Bascna\" (to which Fionn and Cumall belonged) and \"Clan Morna\" (where Goll mac Morna belonged). The Fenians were supposed to be devoted to the service of the High King and to the repelling of foreign invaders. After the fall of Cumall, Goll mac Morna replaced him as the leader of the Fianna, holding the position for 10 years.\nBirth.\nMuirne was already pregnant; her father rejected her and ordered his people to burn her, but Conn would not allow it and put her under the protection of Fiacal mac Conchinn, whose wife, Bodhmall the druid, was Cumhall's sister. In Fiacal's house Muirne gave birth to a son, whom she called Deimne ( , ), literally \"sureness\" or \"certainty\", also a name that means a young male deer; several legends tell how he gained the name Fionn when his hair turned prematurely white.\nBoyhood.\nFionn and his brother Tulcha mac Cumhal were being hunted down by Goll, the sons of Morna, and other men. Consequently, Finn was separated from his mother Muirne, and placed in the care of Bodhmall and the woman Liath Luachra (\"Grey of Luachra\"), and they brought him up in secret in the forest of Sliabh Bladma, teaching him the arts of war and hunting. After the age of six, Finn learned to hunt, but still had cause to flee from the sons of Morna.\nAs he grew older he entered the service \u2013 incognito \u2013 of a number of local kings, but each one, when he recognised Fionn as Cumhal's son, told him to leave, fearing they would be unable to protect him from his enemies.\nThumb of Knowledge.\nFionn was a keen hunter and often hunted with Na Fianna on the hill of Allen in County Kildare, it is believed by many in the area that Fionn originally caught the Salmon of Knowledge in the River Slate that flows through Ballyteague. The secret to his success thereafter when catching \"fish of knowledge\" was to always cast from the Ballyteague side of a river. He gained what commentators have called the \"Thumb of Knowledge\" after eating a certain salmon, thought to be the Salmon of Knowledge. The account of this is given in \"The Boyhood Deeds of Fionn\".\nYoung Fionn, still known by his boyhood name Demne, met the poet Finn \u00c9ces (Finnegas), near the river Boyne and studied under him. Finnegas had spent seven years trying to catch the salmon that lived in Fec's Pool () of the Boyne, for it was prophesied the poet would eat this salmon, and \"nothing would remain unknown to him\". Although this salmon is not specifically called the \"Salmon of Knowledge\", etc., in the text, it is presumed to be so, i.e., the salmon that fed on the nut[s] of knowledge at the well of Segais. Eventually the poet caught it, and told the boy to cook it for him. While he was cooking it, Demne burned his thumb, and instinctively put his thumb in his mouth. This imbued him with the salmon's wisdom, and when \u00c9ces saw that he had gained wisdom, he gave the youngster the whole salmon to eat, and gave Demne the new name, Fionn.\nThereafter, whenever he recited the \"teinm l\u00e1ida\" with his thumb in his mouth, the knowledge he wished to gain was revealed to him.\nIn subsequent events in his life, Fionn was able to call on ability of the \"Thumb of Knowledge\", and Fionn then knew how to gain revenge against Goll. In the \"Acallam na S\u00e9norach\", the ability is referred to as \"The Tooth of Wisdom\" or \"Tooth of Knowledge\" ().\nFionn's acquisition of the Thumb of Knowledge has been likened to the Welsh Gwion Bach tasting the Cauldron of Knowledge, and Sigur\u00f0r F\u00e1fnisbani tasting F\u00e1fnir's heart.\nFire-breather of the Tuatha de Danann.\nOne feat of Fionn performed at 10 years of age according to the \"Acallam na Sen\u00f3rach\" was to slay \u00c1illen (or), the fire-breathing man of the Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann, who had come to wreak destruction on the Irish capital of Tara every year on the festival of Samhain for the past 23 years, lulling the city's men to sleep with his music then burning down the city and its treasures.\nWhen the King of Ireland asked what men would guard Tara against \u00c1illen's invasion, Fionn volunteered. Fionn obtained a special spear (the \"Birga\") from Fiacha mac Congha (\"son of Conga\"), which warded against the sleep-inducing music of \u00c1illen's \"dulcimer\" () when it was unsheathed and the bare steel blade was touched against the forehead or some other part of the body. This Fiacha used to be one of Cumall's men, but was now serving the high-king.\nAfter Fionn defeated \u00c1illen and saved Tara, his heritage was recognised and he was given command of the Fianna: Goll stepped aside, and became a loyal follower of Fionn, although a dispute later broke out between the clans over the pig of Slanga.\nAlmu as eric.\nBefore Fionn completed the feat of defeating the firebrand of the fairy mound and defending Tara, he is described as a ten-year-old \"marauder and an outlaw\". It is also stated elsewhere that when Fionn grew up to become \"capable of committing plunder on everyone who was an enemy\", he went to his maternal grandfather Tadg to demand compensation (\u00e9ric) for his father's death, on pain of single combat, and Tadg acceded by relinquishing the estate of Almu (the present-day Hill of Allen). Fionn was also paid \u00e9ric by Goll mac Morna.\nAdulthood.\nFionn's sword was called \"Mac an Luinn\".\nLove life.\nFionn met his most famous wife, Sadhbh, when he was out hunting. She had been turned into a deer by a druid, Fear Doirich, whom she had refused to marry. Fionn's hounds, Bran and Sce\u00f3lang, born of a human enchanted into the form of a hound, recognised her as human, and Fionn brought her home. She transformed back into a woman the moment she set foot on Fionn's land, as this was the one place she could regain her true form. She and Fionn married and she was soon pregnant. When Fionn was away defending his country, Fear Doirich (literally meaning Dark Man) returned and turned her back into a deer, whereupon she vanished. Fionn spent years searching for her, but to no avail. Bran and Sce\u00f3lang, again hunting, found her son, Ois\u00edn, in the form of a fawn; he transformed into a child, and went on to be one of the greatest of the Fianna.\nIn \"The Pursuit of Diarmuid and Gr\u00e1inne\" the High King Cormac mac Airt promises the aging Fionn his daughter Gr\u00e1inne, but at the wedding feast Gr\u00e1inne falls for one of the Fianna, Diarmuid Ua Duibhne, noted for his beauty. She forces him to run away with her and Fionn pursues them. The lovers are helped by the Fianna, and by Diarmuid's foster-father, the god Aengus. Eventually Fionn makes his peace with the couple. Years later, however, Fionn invites Diarmuid on a boar hunt, and Diarmuid is gored. Water drunk from Fionn's hands has the power of healing, but each time Fionn gathers water he lets it run through his fingers before he gets back to Diarmuid. His grandson Oscar shames Fionn, but when he finally returns with water it is too late; Diarmuid has died.\nDeath.\nAccording to the most popular account of Fionn's death, he is not dead at all, rather, he sleeps in a cave, surrounded by the Fianna. One day he will awake and defend Ireland in the hour of her greatest need. In one account, it is said that he will arise when the Dord Fiann, the hunting horn of the Fianna, is sounded three times, and he will be as strong and as well as he ever was.\nPopular folklore.\nMany geographical features in Ireland are attributed to Fionn. Legend has it he built the Giant's Causeway as stepping-stones to Scotland, so as not to get his feet wet; he also once scooped up part of Ireland to fling it at a rival, but it missed and landed in the Irish Sea \u2013 the clump became the Isle of Man, a pebble that flew off became Rockall, and the void became Lough Neagh. In Ayrshire, Scotland a common myth is that Ailsa Craig, a small islet just off coast of the said county, is another rock thrown at the fleeing Benandonner. The islet is sometimes referred to as \"paddys' mile stone\" in Ayrshire. Fingal's Cave in Scotland is also named after him, and shares the feature of hexagonal basalt columns with the nearby Giant's Causeway in Northern Ireland.\nIn both Irish and Manx popular folklore, Fionn mac Cumhail (known as \"Finn McCool\" or \"Finn MacCooill\" respectively) is portrayed as a magical, benevolent giant. The most famous story attached to this version of Fionn tells of how one day, while making a pathway in the sea towards Scotland \u2013 The Giant's Causeway \u2013 Fionn is told that the giant Benandonner (or, in the Manx version, a buggane) is coming to fight him. Knowing he cannot withstand the colossal Benandonner, Fionn asks his wife Oona to help him. She dresses her husband as a baby, and he hides in a cradle; then she makes a batch of griddle-cakes, hiding griddle-irons in some. When Benandonner arrives, Oona tells him Fionn is out but will be back shortly. As Benandonner waits, he tries to intimidate Oona with his immense power, breaking rocks with his little finger. Oona then offers Benandonner a griddle-cake, but when he bites into the iron he chips his teeth. Oona scolds him for being weak (saying her husband eats such cakes easily), and feeds one without an iron to the 'baby', who eats it without trouble.\nIn the Irish version, Benandonner is so awed by the power of the baby's teeth and the size of the baby that, at Oona's prompting, he puts his fingers in Fionn's mouth to feel how sharp his teeth are. Fionn bites Benandonner's little finger, and scared of the prospect of meeting his father considering the baby's size, Benandonner runs back towards Scotland across the Causeway smashing the causeway so Fionn can't follow him.\nThe Manx Gaelic version contains a further tale of how Fionn and the buggane fought at Kirk Christ Rushen. One of Fionn's feet carved out the channel between the Calf of Man and Kitterland, the other carved out the channel between Kitterland and the Isle of Man, and the buggane's feet opened up Port Erin. The buggane injured Fionn, who fled over the sea (where the buggane could not follow), however, the buggane tore out one of his own teeth and struck Fionn as he ran away. The tooth fell into the sea, becoming the Chicken Rock, and Fionn cursed the tooth, explaining why it is a hazard to sailors.\nIn Newfoundland, and some parts of Nova Scotia, \"Fingal's Rising\" is spoken of in a distinct nationalistic sense. Made popular in songs and bars alike, to speak of \"Fingle,\" as his name is pronounced in English versus \"Fion MaCool\" in Newfoundland Irish, is sometimes used as a stand-in for Newfoundland or its culture.\nFolktales involving hero Fin MacCool are considered to be classified in Aarne-Thompson-Uther Index as ATU 369, \"The Youth on a Quest for his lost Father\", a tale type that, however, some see as exclusive to South Asian tradition, namely India.\nHistorical hypothesis.\nThe 17th-century historian Geoffrey Keating, and some Irish scholars of the 19th century, believed that Fionn was based on a historical figure.\nThe 19th century scholar Heinrich Zimmer suggested that Fionn and the Fenian Cycle came from the heritage of the Norse-Gaels. He suggested the name \"Fianna\" was an Irish rendering of Old Norse \"fiandr\" \"enemies\" &gt; \"brave enemies\" &gt; \"brave warriors\". He also noted the tale of Fionn's Thumb of Knowledge is similar to the Norse tale of Sigur\u00f0r and F\u00e1fnir, although similar tales are found in other cultures. Zimmer proposed that Fionn might be based on Caittil Find (d. 856) a Norseman based in Munster, who had a Norse forename (\"Ketill\") and an Irish nickname (\"Find\", \"the Fair\" or \"the White\"). But Ketill's father must have had some Norse name also, certainly not Cumall, and the proposal was thus rejected by George Henderson.\nRetellings.\nT. W. Rolleston compiled both Fenian and Ultonian cycle literature in his retelling, \"The High Deeds of Finn and other Bardic Romances of Ancient Ireland\" (1910).\nJames Stephens published \"Irish Fairy Tales\" (1920), which is a retelling of a few of the Fianna\u00edocht.\nModern literature.\nMacpherson's Ossian.\nFionn MacCumhail was transformed into the character \"Fingal\" in James Macpherson's poem cycle \"Ossian\" (1760), which Macpherson claimed was translated out of discovered Ossianic poetry written in the Scottish Gaelic language. \"Fingal\", derived from the Gaelic \"Fionnghall\", was possibly Macpherson's rendering Fionn's name as \"Fingal\" based on a misapprehension of the various forms of \"Fionn\". His poems had widespread influence on writers, from the young Walter Scott to Goethe, but there was controversy from the outset about Macpherson's claims to have translated the works from ancient sources. The authenticity of the poems is now generally doubted, though they may have been based on fragments of Gaelic legend, \nTwentieth century literature.\nFionn mac Cumhaill features heavily in modern Irish literature. Most notably he makes several appearances in James Joyce's \"Finnegans Wake\" (1939) and some have posited that the title, taken from the street ballad \"Finnegan's Wake\", may also be a blend of \"Finn again is awake\", referring to his eventual awakening to defend Ireland.\nFionn also appears as a character in Flann O'Brien's comic novel, \"At Swim-Two-Birds\" (1939), in passages that parody the style of Irish myths. Morgan Llywelyn's book \"Finn Mac Cool\" (1994) tells of Fionn's rise to leader of the Fianna and the love stories that ensue in his life. That character is celebrated in \"The Legend of Finn MacCumhail\", a song by the Boston-based band Dropkick Murphys featured on their album \"Sing Loud Sing Proud!\".\n\"Glencoe: The Story of the Massacre\" by John Prebble (Secker &amp; Warburg, 1966), has an account of a legendary battle between Fionn mac Cumhaill, who supposedly lived for a time in Glencoe (in Scotland), and a Viking host in forty longships which sailed up the narrows by Ballachulish into Loch Leven. The Norsemen were defeated by the Feinn of the valley of Glencoe, and their chief Earragan was slain by Goll MacMorna.\n\"The High Deeds of Finn MacCool\", an evocative children's novel by Rosemary Sutcliffe, was published in 1969.\n\"Finn Mac Cool\" written by American author, Morgan Llywelyn, was released in 1994. The fictional novel vividly recounts Finn's historical adventures saturated with myth and magic. A childhood spent in exile, the love and loss of his beloved wife and child, and his legendary rise from a low class slave to leader of the invincible Fianna.\nFinn McCool is a character in Terry Pratchett's and Steve Baxter's \"The Long War\".\nThe adventures of Fion Mac Cumhail after death is explored by the novella \"The Final Fighting of Fion Mac Cumhail\" by Randall Garrett (Fantasy and Science Fiction \u2013 September 1975).\nFinn's early childhood and education is explored in \" 'Tis Himself: The Tale of Finn MacCool\" by Maggie Brace.\nOther stories featuring Fionn Mac Cumhail are two of three of the stories in The Corliss Chronicles the story of Prudence Corliss. In the stories, he is featured in The Wraith of Bedlam and The Silver Wheel. He is a close confidant to Prudence and allies himself with her to defeat the evil fictional king Tarcarrius.\nPlays and shows.\nIn 1987 Harvey Holton (1949\u20132010) published \"Finn\" with the Three Tygers Press, Cambridge. This was a dramatic cycle of poems in Scots for the stage and with music by Hamish Moore, based on the legends of Finn McCool and first performed at The Edinburgh Festival in 1986 before going on tour around Scotland.\nIn the 1999 Irish dance show Dancing on Dangerous Ground, conceived and choreographed by former Riverdance leads, Jean Butler and Colin Dunne, Tony Kemp portrayed Fionn in a modernised version of \"The Pursuit of Diarmuid and Gr\u00e1inne\". In this, Diarmuid, played by Colin Dunne, dies at the hands of the Fianna after he and Gr\u00e1inne, played by Jean Butler, run away together into the forests of Ireland, immediately after Fionn and Gr\u00e1inne's wedding. When she sees Diarmuid's body, Gr\u00e1inne dies of a broken heart.\nIn 2010, Washington DC's Dizzie Miss Lizzie's Roadside Revue debuted their rock musical \"Finn McCool\" at the Capitol Fringe Festival. The show retells the legend of Fionn mac Cumhaill through punk-inspired rock and was performed at the Woolly Mammoth Theater in March 2011.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47370", "revid": "167164", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47370", "title": "Finn mac Cumhail", "text": ""}
{"id": "47371", "revid": "167164", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47371", "title": "Finn MacCool", "text": ""}
{"id": "47372", "revid": "11630810", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47372", "title": "Charles the Bald", "text": "King of West Francia from 843 to 877 and Carolingian Emperor from 875 to 877\nCharles the Bald (; 13 June 823 \u2013 6 October 877), also known as CharlesII of West Francia, was a 9th-century king of West Francia (843\u201377), King of Italy (875\u201377) and emperor of the Carolingian Empire (875\u201377). After a series of civil wars during the reign of his father, Louis the Pious, Charles succeeded, by the Treaty of Verdun (843), in acquiring the western third of the empire. He was a grandson of Charlemagne and the youngest son of Louis the Pious by his second wife, Judith.\nStruggle against his brothers.\nHe was born on 13 June 823 in Frankfurt, when his elder brothers were already adults and had been assigned their own \"regna\", or subkingdoms, by their father. The attempts made by Louis the Pious to assign Charles a subkingdom, first Alemannia and then the country between the Meuse and the Pyrenees (in 832, after the rising of PepinI of Aquitaine) were unsuccessful. The numerous reconciliations with the rebellious Lothair and Pepin, as well as their brother Louis the German, King of Bavaria, made Charles's share in Aquitaine and Italy only temporary, but his father did not give up and made Charles the heir of the entire land which was once Gaul. At a diet in Aachen in 837, Louis the Pious bade the nobles do homage to Charles as his heir. Pepin of Aquitaine died in 838, whereupon Charles at last received that kingdom, which angered Pepin's heirs and the Aquitainian nobles.\nThe death of the emperor in 840 led to the outbreak of war between his sons. Charles allied himself with his brother Louis the German to resist the pretensions of the new Emperor LothairI, and the two allies defeated Lothair at the Battle of Fontenoy-en-Puisaye on 25 June 841. In the following year, the two brothers confirmed their alliance by the celebrated Oaths of Strasbourg. The war was brought to an end by the Treaty of Verdun in August 843. The settlement gave Charles the Bald the kingdom of the West Franks, which he had been governing until then, and which practically corresponded with what is now France, as far as the Meuse, the Sa\u00f4ne, and the Rh\u00f4ne, with the addition of the Spanish March as far as the Ebro. Louis received the eastern part of the Carolingian Empire, known then as East Francia and later as Germany. Lothair retained the imperial title and the Kingdom of Italy. He also received the central regions from Flanders through the Rhineland and Burgundy as king of Middle Francia.\nReign in the West.\nShortly after Verdun, Charles went on to an unsuccessful campaign against Brittany, on the return from which he signed the Treaty of Coulaines with his nobility and clergy. After that, the first years of his reign, up to the death of LothairI in 855, were comparatively peaceful. During these years the three brothers continued the system of \"confraternal government\", meeting repeatedly with one another, at Koblenz (848), at Meerssen (851), and at Attigny (854). In 858, Louis the German, invited by disaffected nobles eager to oust Charles, invaded the West Frankish kingdom. Charles was so unpopular that he was unable to summon an army, and he fled to Burgundy. He was saved only by the support of the bishops, who refused to crown Louis the German king, and by the fidelity of the Welfs, who were related to his mother, Judith. In 860, he in his turn tried to seize the kingdom of his nephew, Charles of Provence, but was repulsed. On the death of his nephew LothairII in 869, Charles tried to seize Lothair's dominions by having himself consecrated as King of Lotharingia at Metz, but he was compelled to open negotiations when Louis found support among Lothair's former vassals. Lotharingia was partitioned between Charles and Louis in the resulting treaty (870).\nBesides these family disputes, Charles had to struggle against repeated rebellions in Aquitaine and against the Bretons. Led by their chiefs Nomeno\u00eb and Erispo\u00eb, who defeated the king at the Battle of Ballon (845) and the Battle of Jengland (851), the Bretons were successful in obtaining a \"de facto\" independence. Charles also fought against the Vikings, who devastated the country of the north, the valleys of the Seine and Loire, and even up to the borders of Aquitaine. At the Vikings' successful siege and sack of Paris in 845 and several times thereafter Charles was forced to purchase their retreat at a heavy price. Charles led various expeditions against the invaders and, by the Edict of Pistres of 864, made the army more mobile by providing for a cavalry element, the predecessor of the French chivalry so famous during the next 600 years. By the same edict, he ordered fortified bridges to be put up at all rivers to block the Viking incursions. Two of these bridges at Paris saved the city during its siege of 885\u2013886. Charles engaged in diplomacy with the Emirate of Cordoba, receiving camels from Emir MuhammadI in 865. From the 860s, the palace of Compi\u00e8gne became an increasingly important centre for Charles and he founded a monastery there in 876. In the tenth century Compi\u00e8gne was known as 'Carlopolis' because of its association with Charles.\nIn 871\u2013872, Charles sent two letters to Pope HadrianII where he made a defence of royal sovereignty in the face of intrusive actions by the papacy into state affairs.\nReign as emperor.\nIn 875, after the death of the Emperor LouisII (son of his half-brother Lothair), Charles the Bald, supported by Pope JohnVIII, traveled to Italy, receiving the royal crown at Pavia and the imperial insignia in Rome on 25 December. As emperor, Charles combined the mottoes that had been used by his grandfather and father into a single formula: \"renovatio imperii Romani et Francorum\", \"renewal of the empire of the Romans and Franks\". These words appeared on his seal.\nLouis the German, also a candidate for the succession of LouisII, revenged himself by invading and devastating Charles's domains, and Charles had to return hastily to West Francia. After the death of Louis the German (28 August 876), Charles in his turn attempted to seize Louis's kingdom, but was decisively beaten at the Battle of Andernach on 8 October 876.\nIn the meantime, Pope JohnVIII, menaced by the Saracens, was urging Charles to come to his defence in Italy. Charles again crossed the Alps, but this expedition was received with little enthusiasm by the nobles, and even by his regent in Lombardy, Boso, and they refused to join his army. At the same time Carloman, son of Louis the German, entered northern Italy. Charles, ill and in great distress, started on his way back to Gaul, but died while crossing the pass of Mont Cenis at Brides-les-Bains, on 6 October 877.\nBurial and succession.\nAccording to the Annals of St-Bertin, Charles was hastily buried at the abbey of Nantua, Burgundy, because the bearers were unable to withstand the stench of his decaying body. A few years later, his remains were transferred to the Abbey of Saint-Denis where he had long wished to be buried, in a porphyry tub which may be the same one known as \"Dagobert's tub\" (\"cuve de Dagobert\"), now in the Louvre. It was recorded that there was a memorial brass there that was melted down at the Revolution.\nCharles was succeeded by his son, Louis. Charles was a prince of education and letters, a friend of the church, and conscious of the support he could find in the episcopate against his unruly nobles, for he chose his councillors from among the higher clergy, as in the case of Guenelon of Sens, who betrayed him, and of Hincmar of Reims.\nBaldness.\nIt has been suggested that Charles's nickname was used ironically and not descriptively; he was not in fact bald but rather was extremely hairy.\nAn alternative or additional interpretation is based on Charles's initial lack of a \"regnum\". \"Bald\" would in this case be a tongue-in-cheek reference to his landlessness at an age at which his brothers already had been sub-kings for some years.\nContemporary depictions of his person, such as in his Bible of 845, on his seal of 847 (as king) and on his seal of 875 (as emperor), show him with a full head of hair, as does the equestrian statuette (c.\u00a0870), which is thought to depict him.\nThe \"Genealogy of Frankish Kings\", a text from Fontanelle dating from possibly as early as 869, names him as \"Karolus Calvus\" (\"Charles the Bald\"),\nand he is given the same name in the late tenth century by Richier of Reims and Adhemar of Chabannes.\nMarriages and children.\nCharles married Ermentrude, daughter of Odo I, Count of Orl\u00e9ans, in 842. She died in 869. In 870, Charles married Richilde of Provence, who was descended from a noble family of Lorraine.\nWith Ermentrude:\nWith Richilde:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47373", "revid": "31192532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47373", "title": "Alberobello", "text": "Town in Apulia, Italy\nAlberobello (; literally \"beautiful tree\"; Barese: ) is a small town and \"comune\" of the Metropolitan City of Bari, Apulia, southern Italy. It has 10,237 inhabitants (2022) and is famous for its unique \"trullo\" buildings. The \"trulli\" of Alberobello have been designated as a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1996. Alberobello is one of I Borghi pi\u00f9 belli d'Italia (\"The most beautiful villages of Italy\").\nHistory.\nThe first occupation of the area started only in the early sixteenth century on the impulse of the Count of Conversano Andrea Matteo III Acquaviva d'Aragona. He allowed about forty peasant families from Noci to settle here and cultivate the land, with an obligation to give him a tenth of their crops.\nIn 1635 his successor, Count Giangirolamo II (1600\u20131665) erected an inn with a tavern and an oratory and started the urbanization of the forest with the construction of few small houses. The expansion of the urban area was helped, firstly by the abundance of calcareous sedimentary limestone from the surrounding karst landscape, and secondly, by the requirement of the Count to build houses only with dry stone walls without the use of mortar, which would become the peculiar \"trulli\". This obligation to have houses built from drystone only, was an expedient of the Count to avoid paying taxes to the Spanish Viceroy of the Kingdom of Naples. The centre of Alberobello was built on the course of the ancient river Cana, which is now followed by Largo Giuseppe Martelotta, the main street of the town.\nAlberobello remained a fief of the Acquaviva of Aragon until 27 May 1797, when King Ferdinand IV of Bourbon elevated the small village to the royal city, freeing it from the feudal servitude of the counts. On 22 June 1797, the first mayor Francesco Giuseppe Lippolis was elected.\nAlberobello is the only inhabited centre with an entire district of trulli, and is considered to be the cultural capital of the trulli of the Itria Valley.\nThe \"trulli\" of Alberobello.\nThe history of the \"trulli\" (from Ancient Greek \u03c4\u03c1\u03bf\u03cd\u03bb\u03bb\u03bf\u03b9) is linked to the Prammatica De Baronibus, an edict of the 15th-century Kingdom of Naples that subjected every new settlement to a tribute. In 1481 the Counts of Conversano D'Acquaviva D'Aragona from 1481, owners of the territory of Alberobello, then imposed on the residents that they built their dwellings dry, without using mortars, so that they could be configured as precarious buildings and easily demolished.\nHaving to use only stones, the peasants found in the round form with self-supporting domed roof the simplest configuration. The roofs were embellished with decorative pinnacles representing the signature of the architect (\"master \").\nInternational relations.\nAlberobello is twinned with:\nDuring the Italian diaspora, a large number of Alberobellesi emigrated to Utica, New York.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47374", "revid": "39039209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47374", "title": "2012", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Events by month/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\n \n \n \n \n \n \nCalendar year\n2012 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \n2012 was designated as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47375", "revid": "205204", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47375", "title": "Chess strategy", "text": "Aspect of chess play concerned with long-term goals and positioning\nChess strategy is the aspect of chess play concerned with evaluation of chess positions and setting goals and long-term plans for future play. While evaluating a position strategically, a player must take into account such factors as the relative value of the pieces on the board, pawn structure, king safety, position of pieces, and control of key squares and groups of squares (e.g. diagonals and open files). Chess strategy is distinguished from chess tactics, which is the aspect of play concerned with move-by-move threats and defenses. Some authors distinguish static strategic imbalances (e.g. having more valuable pieces or better pawn structure), which tend to persist for many moves, from dynamic imbalances (such as one player having an advantage in piece &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;development&lt;/dfn&gt;), which are temporary. This distinction affects the immediacy with which a sought-after plan should take effect. Until players reach Master-level chess skill, chess tactics tend to ultimately decide the outcomes of games more often than strategy. Many chess coaches thus emphasize the study of tactics as the most efficient way to improve one's results in serious chess play.\nThe most basic way to evaluate one's position is to count the total value of pieces on both sides. The point values used for this purpose are based on experience. Usually pawns are considered to be worth one point, knights and bishops three points each, rooks five points, and queens nine points. The fighting value of the king in the endgame is approximately four points. These basic values are modified by other factors such as the position of the pieces (e.g. advanced pawns are usually more valuable than those on their starting squares), coordination between pieces (e.g. a &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;bishop pair&lt;/dfn&gt; usually coordinates better than a bishop plus a knight), and the type of position (knights are generally better in &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;closed positions&lt;/dfn&gt; with many pawns, while bishops are more powerful in &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;open positions&lt;/dfn&gt;).\nAnother important factor in the evaluation of chess positions is the pawn structure or pawn skeleton. Since pawns are the most immobile and least valuable of the pieces, the pawn structure is relatively static and largely determines the strategic nature of the position. Weaknesses in the pawn structure, such as isolated, doubled, or backward pawns and &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;holes&lt;/dfn&gt;, once created, are usually permanent. Care must therefore be taken to avoid them unless they are compensated by another valuable asset, such as the possibility to develop an attack.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_left/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBasic concepts of board evaluation.\nA &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;material&lt;/dfn&gt; advantage applies both strategically and tactically. Generally more pieces or an aggregate of more powerful pieces means greater chances of winning. A fundamental strategic and tactical rule is to capture opponent pieces while preserving one's own.\nBishops and knights are called \"minor pieces\". A knight is about as valuable as a bishop, but less valuable than a rook. Rooks and the queen are called \"major pieces\". Bishops are usually considered slightly better than knights in open positions, such as toward the end of the game when many of the pieces have been captured, whereas knights have an advantage in closed positions. Having two bishops (the &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;bishop pair&lt;/dfn&gt;) is a particularly powerful weapon, especially if the opposing player lacks one or both of their bishops.\nThree pawns are likely to be more useful than a knight in the endgame, but in the middlegame, a knight is often more powerful. Two minor pieces are stronger than a single rook, and two rooks are slightly stronger than a queen. The bishop on squares of the same color as the opponent's king is slightly more valuable in the opening as it can attack the vulnerable square f7 (for White) or f2 (for Black). A rook is more valuable when &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;doubled&lt;/dfn&gt; with another rook or queen; consequently, doubled rooks are worth more than two &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;unconnected rooks&lt;/dfn&gt;.\nOne commonly used simple scoring system is:\nUnder a system like this, giving up a knight or bishop to win a rook (\"winning the exchange\") is advantageous and is worth about two pawns. This ignores complications such as the current position and freedom of the pieces involved, but it is a good starting point. In an open position, bishops are more valuable than knights (a bishop pair can easily be worth seven points or more in some situations); conversely, in a closed position, bishops are less valuable than knights. A knight in the center of the board that cannot be taken, however, is known as a knight outpost and threatens several fork instances. In such a case, a knight is worth far more than a bishop. Also, many pieces have a partner. By doubling up two knights, two rooks, rook and queen, or bishop and queen, the pieces can get stronger than the sum of the individual pieces alone. When a piece loses its partner, its value slightly decreases. The king is priceless since its capture results in the defeat of that player and ends that game. However, especially in the endgame, the king can also be a fighting piece, and is sometimes given a fighting value of three-and-a-half points.\nSpace.\nOther things being equal, the side that controls more &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;space&lt;/dfn&gt; on the board has an advantage. More space means more options, which can be exploited both tactically and strategically. A player who has all pieces developed and no tactical tricks or promising long-term plan should try to find a move that enlarges their influence, particularly in the center. In some openings, however, one player accepts less space for a time, to set up a counterattack in the middlegame. This is one of the concepts behind hypermodern play.\nThe easiest way to gain space is to push the pawn skeleton forward. One must be careful not to over stretch, however. If the opponent succeeds in getting a protected piece behind enemy lines, this piece can become such a serious problem that a piece with a higher value might have to be exchanged for it.\nLarry Evans gives a method of evaluating space. The method (for each side) is to count the number of squares attacked or occupied on the opponent's side of the board. In this diagram from the Nimzo-Indian Defense, Black attacks four squares on White's side of the board (d4, e4, f4, and g4). White attacks seven squares on Black's side of the board (b5, c6, e6, f5, g5, and h6 \u2013 counting b5 twice) and occupies one square (d5). White has a space advantage of eight to four and Black is cramped.\nControl of the center.\nThe strategy consists of placing pieces so that they attack the central four squares of the board. A piece being placed on a central square, however, does not necessarily mean it controls the center; e.g., a knight on a central square does not attack any central squares. Conversely, a piece does not have to be on a central square to control the center. For example, the bishop can control the center from afar.\nControl of the center is generally considered important because tactical battles often take place around the central squares, from where pieces can access most of the board. Center control allows more movement and more possibility for attack and defense.\nChess openings try to control the center while developing pieces. Hypermodern openings are those that control the center with pieces from afar (usually the side, such as with a fianchetto); the older Classical (or Modern) openings control it with pawns.\nInitiative.\nThe initiative belongs to the player who can make threats that cannot be ignored, such as checking the opponent's king. They thus put their opponent in the position of having to use their turns responding to threats rather than making their own, hindering the development of their pieces. The player with the initiative is generally attacking and the other player is generally defending.\nDefending pieces.\nIt is important to defend one's pieces even if they are not directly threatened. This helps stop possible future campaigns from the opponent. If a defender must be added at a later time, this may cost a tempo or even be impossible due to a fork or discovered attack. The approach of always defending one's pieces has an antecedent in the theory of Aron Nimzowitsch who referred to it as \"overprotection.\" Similarly, if one spots undefended enemy pieces, one should immediately take advantage of those pieces' weakness.\nEven a defended piece can be vulnerable. If the defending piece is also defending something else, it is called an overworked piece, and may not be able to fulfill its task. When there is more than one attacking piece, the number of defenders must also be increased, and their values taken into account. In addition to defending pieces, it is also often necessary to defend key squares, open files, and the &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;back rank&lt;/dfn&gt;. These situations can easily occur if the pawn structure is weak.\nExchanging pieces.\nTo exchange pieces means to capture a hostile piece and then allow a piece of the same value to be captured. As a rule of thumb, exchanging pieces eases the task of the defender who typically has less room to operate in.\nExchanging pieces is usually desirable to a player with an existing advantage in material, since it brings the endgame closer and thereby leaves the opponent with less ability to recover ground. In the endgame even a single pawn advantage may be decisive. Exchanging also benefits the player who is being attacked, the player who controls less space, and the player with the better pawn structure.\nWhen playing against stronger players, many beginners attempt to constantly exchange pieces \"to simplify matters\". However, stronger players are often relatively stronger in the endgame, whereas errors are more common during the more complicated middlegame.\nNote that \"the exchange\" may also specifically mean a rook exchanged for a bishop or knight. The phrase \"up the exchange\" means that a player has captured a rook in exchange for a bishop or knight\u2014a materially advantageous trade. Conversely, \"down the exchange\" means having lost a rook but captured a bishop or knight\u2014a materially disadvantageous trade.\nSpecific pieces.\nPawns.\nIn the endgame, passed pawns, unhindered by enemy pawns from promotion, are strong, especially if advanced or protected by another pawn. A passed pawn on the sixth &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;rank&lt;/dfn&gt; is roughly as strong as a knight or bishop and often decides the game. (Also see isolated pawn, doubled pawns, backward pawn, connected pawns.)\nKnights.\nSince knights can easily be chased away by pawn moves, it is often advantageous for knights to be placed in \"&lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;holes&lt;/dfn&gt;\" in the enemy position as outposts\u2014squares where they cannot be attacked by pawns. Such a knight on the fifth rank is a strong asset. The ideal position for a knight is the opponent's third rank, when it is supported by one or two pawns. A knight at the edge or corner of the board controls fewer squares than one on the board's interior, thus the saying \"A knight on the rim is dim!\"\nA king and one knight are not sufficient material to checkmate an opposing lone king (see Two knights endgame). A king and two knights can checkmate a lone king but cannot force it.\nBishops.\nIn general, bishops and knights are of roughly equal value. When bishops are blocked in by pawns, as seen in closed positions, knights are typically superior for their ability to hop over pawn chains. In open positions where bishops have good &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;scope&lt;/dfn&gt;, knights are often inferior\u2014&lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;outpost&lt;/dfn&gt; knights are a common exception.\nBishops have superior mobility to knights, but that mobility is restricted to (and thus focused on) colors of a single square. As a result, lacking a bishop weakens one's ability to exert control over and parry threats from the deprived color complex, though there may be compensation in the form of tactical or positional assets, or from possible countermeasures, such as placing one's pawns on the color of the lost bishop. Bishops complement each other well, and a retained &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;bishop pair&lt;/dfn&gt; is often a strength, especially in open positions.\n\"Fianchettoed\" bishops can keep a king under them well defended, though if the bishop is traded off, the fianchetto pawn structure is especially vulnerable to infiltration on the squares no longer controlled by the bishop.\nDespite their openness, in endgames, bishops are usually considered equal to knights. Endgames in which the two sides have bishops on opposite colors are frequently drawish, even when one side has one or two more pawns than the other.\nA king and a bishop are not sufficient material to checkmate an opposing lone king, but two bishops and a king can checkmate an opposing lone king easily. A king, bishop, and knight can also force mate; this is considered the most difficult forcible checkmate against a lone king.\nRooks.\nRooks have more scope of movement on half-open files (ones with no pawns of one's own color). Rooks on the seventh rank can be very powerful as they attack pawns that can only be defended by other pieces, and they can restrict the enemy king to its back rank. A pair of rooks on the player's seventh rank are often a sign of a winning position.\nIn middlegames and endgames with a passed pawn, Tarrasch's rule states that rooks, both friend and foe of the pawn, are usually strongest behind the pawn rather than in front of it.\nA king and a rook are sufficient material to checkmate an opposing lone king, although it's a little harder than checkmating with king and queen; thus the rook's distinction as a major piece above the knight and bishop.\nQueen.\nQueens are the most powerful pieces. They have great mobility and can make many threats at once. They can act as a rook and as a bishop at the same time. For these reasons, checkmate attacks involving a queen are easier to achieve than those without one. Although powerful, the queen is also easily harassed. Thus, it is generally wise to wait to &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;develop&lt;/dfn&gt; the queen until after the knights and bishops have been developed to prevent the queen from being attacked by minor pieces and losing tempo. When a pawn is promoted, most of the time it is promoted to a queen.\nKing.\nDuring the middlegame, the king is often best protected in a corner behind its pawns. Such a position for either of the players is often achieved by castling by that player. If the rooks and queen leave the first rank (commonly called that player's \"back rank\"), however, an enemy rook or queen can checkmate the king by invading the first rank, commonly called a back-rank checkmate. Moving one of the pawns in front of the king (making a luft) can allow it an escape square, but may weaken the king's overall safety otherwise. One must therefore wisely balance between these trade-offs.\nCastling is often thought to help protect the king and often \"connects\" the player's two rooks together so the two rooks may protect each other. This can reduce a threat of a back-rank skewer in which the king can be skewered with capture of a rook behind it.\nThe king can become a strong piece in the endgame. With reduced material, a quick checkmate becomes less of a concern, and moving the king towards the center of the board gives it more opportunities to make threats and actively influence play.\nConsiderations.\nChess strategy consists of setting and achieving long-term goals during the game\u2014for example, where to place different pieces\u2014while tactics concentrate on immediate maneuver. These two parts of chess thinking cannot be completely separated, because strategic goals are mostly achieved by the means of tactics, while the tactical opportunities are based on the previous strategy of play.\nBecause of different strategic and tactical patterns, a game of chess is usually divided into three distinct phases: the opening, usually the first 10 to 25 moves, when players develop their armies and set up the stage for the coming battle; the middlegame, the developed phase of the game; and the endgame, when most of the pieces are gone and kings start to take an active part in the struggle.\nOpening.\nA chess opening is the group of initial moves of a game (the \"opening moves\"). Recognized sequences of opening moves are referred to as \"openings\" and have been given names such as the Ruy Lopez or Sicilian Defence. They are catalogued in reference works such as the \"Encyclopaedia of Chess Openings\".\nThere are dozens of different openings, varying widely in character from quiet positional play (e.g. the R\u00e9ti Opening) to very aggressive play (e.g. the Latvian Gambit). In some opening lines, the exact sequence considered best for both sides has been worked out to 30\u201335 moves or more. Professional players spend years studying openings, and continue doing so throughout their careers, as opening theory continues to evolve.\nThe fundamental strategic aims of most openings are similar:\nDuring the opening, some pieces have a recognized optimum square they try to reach. Hence, an optimum deployment could be to push the king and queen pawn two squares, followed by moving the knights so they protect the center pawns and give additional control of the center. One can then deploy the bishops, protected by the knights, to pin the opponent's knights and pawns. An opening may end with castling, which moves the king to safety, creates a stronger &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;back rank&lt;/dfn&gt;, and puts a rook on a &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;center file&lt;/dfn&gt;.\nApart from these fundamentals, other strategic plans or tactical sequences may be employed in the opening.\nMost players and theoreticians consider that White, by virtue of the first move, begins the game with a small advantage. Black usually strives to neutralize White's advantage and achieve &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;equality&lt;/dfn&gt;, or to develop &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;dynamic&lt;/dfn&gt; &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;counterplay&lt;/dfn&gt; in an unbalanced position.\nMiddlegame.\nThe middlegame is the part of the game when most pieces have been developed. Because the opening theory has ended, players have to assess the position to form plans based on the features of the positions, and at the same time take into account the tactical possibilities in the position.\nTypical plans or strategic themes\u2014for example the &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;minority attack&lt;/dfn&gt;, that is the attack of &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;queenside&lt;/dfn&gt; pawns against an opponent who has more pawns on the queenside\u2014are often appropriate just for some pawn structures, resulting from a specific group of openings. The study of openings should therefore be connected with the preparation of plans typical for resulting middlegames.\nThe middlegame is also the phase when most combinations occur. Middlegame combinations are often connected with the attack against the opponent's king; some typical patterns have their own names, for example the Boden's Mate or the Lasker\u2013Bauer combination.\nAnother important strategical question in the middlegame is whether and how to reduce material and transform into an endgame (i.e. &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;simplify&lt;/dfn&gt;). For example, minor material advantages can generally be transformed into victory only in an endgame, and therefore the stronger side must choose an appropriate way to achieve an ending. Not every reduction of material is good for this purpose; for example, if one side keeps a light-squared bishop and the opponent has a dark-squared one, the transformation into a \"bishops and pawns ending\" is usually advantageous for the weaker side only, because an endgame with bishops on opposite colors is likely to be a draw, even with an advantage of one or two pawns.\nEndgame.\nThe endgame (or \"end game\" or \"ending\") is the stage of the game when there are few pieces left on the board. There are three main strategic differences between earlier stages of the game and the endgame:\nEndgames can be classified according to the type of pieces remaining on the board. Basic checkmates are positions where one side has only a king and the other side has one or two pieces and can checkmate the opposing king, with the pieces working together with their king. For example, king and pawn endgames involve only kings and pawns on one or both sides and the task of the stronger side is to promote one of the pawns. Other more complicated endings are classified according to the pieces on the board other than kings, e.g. \"rook and pawn versus rook endgame\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography"}
{"id": "47376", "revid": "42677165", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47376", "title": "100s BC (decade)", "text": "Decade \nDecade\nThis article concerns the period 109 BC \u2013 100 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47377", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47377", "title": "326", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 326 (CCCXXVI) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Constantinus and Constantinus (or, less frequently, year 1079 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 326 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47378", "revid": "166", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47378", "title": "Emergent property", "text": ""}
{"id": "47379", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47379", "title": "DJIA", "text": ""}
{"id": "47382", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47382", "title": "Edward the Martyr", "text": "King of the English from 975 to 978\nEdward the Martyr (c.\u2009962 \u2013 18 March 978) was King of the English from 8 July 975 until he was killed in 978. He was the eldest son of King Edgar (r. 959\u2013975). On Edgar's death, the succession to the throne was contested between Edward's supporters and those of his younger half-brother, the future King \u00c6thelred the Unready. As they were both children, it is unlikely that they played an active role in the dispute, which was probably between rival family alliances. Edward's principal supporters were Dunstan, Archbishop of Canterbury, and \u00c6thelwine, Ealdorman of East Anglia, while \u00c6thelred was backed by his mother, Queen \u00c6lfthryth and her friend \u00c6thelwold, Bishop of Winchester. The dispute was quickly settled. Edward was chosen as king and \u00c6thelred received the lands traditionally allocated to the king's eldest son in compensation.\nEdgar had been a strong and overbearing king and a supporter of the monastic reform movement. He had forced the lay nobility and secular clergy to surrender land and sell it at low prices to the monasteries. \u00c6thelwold had been the most active and ruthless in seizing land for his monasteries with Edgar's assistance. The nobles took advantage of Edgar's death to get their lands back, mainly by legal actions but sometimes by force. The leading magnates were split into two factions, the supporters of \u00c6lfhere, Ealdorman of Mercia, and \u00c6thelwine, who both seized some monastic lands which they believed belonged to them, but also estates claimed by their rivals. The disputes never led to warfare.\nEdward's short reign was brought to an end by his murder in March 978 in unclear circumstances. He was killed on the Dowager Queen \u00c6lfthryth's estate at the Gap of Corfe in Dorset, and hurriedly buried at Wareham. A year later, his body was translated with great ceremony to Shaftesbury Abbey in Dorset. Contemporary writers do not name the murderer, but almost all narratives in the period after the Norman Conquest name \u00c6lfthryth. Some modern historians agree, but others do not. Another theory is that the killers were thegns of \u00c6thelred, probably acting without orders.\nMedieval kings were believed to be sacrosanct, and Edward's murder deeply troubled contemporaries who regarded it as a mortal sin. He soon came to be revered as a saint, and his feast of 18 March is listed in the festal calendar of the \"Book of Common Prayer\" of the Church of England. Edward was known in his own time for physical and verbal abuse of his associates and companions, and historians consider his veneration thoroughly undeserved.\nSources.\nThe historian Levi Roach comments: \"Little is known about Edward's reign save what can be gleaned from a few short notices in the \"Chronicle\" and the three authentic charters in his name.\" Other pre-Conquest sources include Charter S 937 of around 999, which gives details of his election as king, Byrhtferth of Ramsey's \"Life of St Oswald\", written around 1000, and parts of some manuscripts of the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" (\"ASC\"). The \"Passio et Miracula Sancti Eadwardi Regis et Martyris\" (\"Passion and Miracles of Saint Edward, King and Martyr\"), was written around 1100, perhaps by the hagiographer Goscelin. Post-Conquest chroniclers giving accounts of Edward's reign include William of Malmesbury and John of Worcester.\nBackground.\nIn the ninth century, Anglo-Saxon England came under increasing attack from Viking raids, culminating with an invasion by the Viking Great Heathen Army in 865. By 878, the Vikings had overrun the kingdoms of Northumbria, East Anglia, and Mercia, and nearly conquered Wessex, but in that year the West Saxons under King Alfred the Great (871\u2013899) achieved a decisive victory at the Battle of Edington. Over the next fifty years, the West Saxons and Mercians gradually conquered the Viking-ruled areas, and in 927 Alfred's grandson \u00c6thelstan (924\u2013939) became the first king of all England when he conquered Northumbria. He was succeeded by his half-brother and Edward's grandfather, Edmund, who almost immediately lost control of the north to the Vikings, but recovered full control of England by 944. He was killed in a brawl with an outlaw in 946, and as his sons Eadwig and Edgar were infants, their uncle Eadred (946\u2013955) became king. Like Edmund, Eadred inherited the kingship of the whole of England and soon lost it when York (southern Northumbria) accepted a Viking king, but he recovered it when the York magnates expelled King Erik Bloodaxe in 954.\nEadred's key advisers included Dunstan, Abbot of Glastonbury and future Archbishop of Canterbury. Eadred, who suffered from ill health, was in his early thirties when he died in 955, and Eadwig succeeded at the age of around fifteen. He was the first king since the early ninth century not to face the threat of imminent foreign invasion, and England remained free from Viking attacks until 980, after Edward's death. From the start, Eadwig demonstrated his determination to establish his independence from his uncle's advisers. He clashed with Dunstan and sent him into exile. In 957, the kingdom was divided between Eadwig, who kept Wessex, and Edward's father Edgar, who became king of Mercia and other lands north of the Thames. It is unclear whether this had been planned since the beginning of his reign or was the result of a successful revolt brought about by Eadwig's incompetence.\nEadwig died in 959, and Edgar succeeded to the rule of the whole kingdom. Eadwig had appointed \u00c6lfhere to be ealdorman of Mercia, and he became the premier layman, a status he retained until his death in 983. His rise was at the expense of the family of \u00c6thelstan Half-King, Ealdorman of East Anglia, leading to a rivalry between the families which disrupted the country in Edward's reign. The Benedictine reform movement reached its peak in Edgar's reign under the leadership of Dunstan, Oswald, Archbishop of York, and \u00c6thelwold, Bishop of Winchester. It became dominant as a result of the strong support of Edgar, earning him high praise by contemporary and later monastic chroniclers. He was a strong, indeed overbearing ruler, and he enriched Benedictine monasteries by forcing the aristocracy and secular (non-monastic) religious institutions to surrender land to them. \u00c6thelwold was the most active and ruthless of the Benedictine leaders in securing land to support his monasteries, in some cases driving secular clergy out of their establishments in favour of monks. Edgar died at the age of only thirty-one or thirty-two in 975.\nFamily.\nEdward, who was born in around 962, was the eldest of the four known children of King Edgar. No contemporary source gives the name of Edward's mother, and post-Conquest sources give varying accounts. The earliest is a life of Dunstan by Osbern of Canterbury, written around 1090. He wrote that Edward's mother was a nun at Wilton Abbey whom the King seduced, and Dunstan punished Edgar by imposing a seven-year penance which delayed his coronation. Osbern's account is rejected by later chroniclers and modern historians. When Eadmer wrote a life of Dunstan in the early twelfth century, he included an account of Edward's parentage which he obtained from his friend Nicholas of Worcester, who consulted ancient chronicles. Nicholas said that Edward was the son of Edgar's lawful wife \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d \"candida\" (the white), daughter of Ealdorman Ordm\u00e6r. No ealdorman with that name is known, but some historians identify \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d's parents as a \"vir potens\" (powerful man) called Ordm\u00e6r and his wife Ealde, who gave Hatfield in Hertfordshire to \u00c6thelstan Half-King in exchange for land in Devon. John of Worcester, writing in the early twelfth century, also said that Edward was the son of \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d, adding that she had the byname \"eneda\" (duck). Edgar, who was brought up by \u00c6thelstan Half-King's wife \u00c6lfwynn, probably met \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d as a result of the connection between her father and his foster-father. Almost all modern historians who have discussed Edward's parentage say that his mother was \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d, and most think that she was Edgar's first wife. The historian Nicholas Brooks argues that Edgar must have married \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d because Dunstan backed Edward's succession to the throne, and he was a strong opponent of irregular unions who would not have supported the claim of an illegitimate son. However, the historian Cyril Hart describes Edward as \"of doubtful legitimacy\". \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d probably died shortly after his birth. Edward's tutor in religion was Sideman, Bishop of Crediton.\nEdgar had his only known daughter, Edith, by his second known consort, Wulfthryth, who retired shortly afterwards to Wilton Abbey with her child. In 964, Edgar married \u00c6lfthryth, the widow of \u00c6thelstan Half-King's eldest son, \u00c6thelwold. Her father was Ordgar, a leading Devonshire thegn who was appointed an ealdorman in the same year. She had two sons, Edmund, who died in 971, and the future King \u00c6thelred the Unready, who was born around 968. She was the only wife of Edgar to be crowned, and she became a powerful political figure, especially in her son's reign.\nDisputed succession.\nEdward is first recorded as a witness to the Winchester New Minster Charter in 966. \u00c6lfthryth attested as the \"legitimate wife\" of the King and Edmund as his \"legitimate son\", whereas Edward was described as \"begotten by the same king\". It is uncertain whether this was on the King's instruction, which would indicate that he wished to cut Edward out of the succession, or was ordered by Bishop \u00c6thelwold, who was a friend and ally of \u00c6lfthryth. The historian Barbara Yorke sees the denial of Edward's legitimacy as \"opportunist special pleading\" by \u00c6thelwold. A genealogy created at Dunstan's Glastonbury Abbey around 969 gives Edward precedence over Edmund and \u00c6thelred. When Edgar died on 8 July 975 there was a dispute over the succession, but as Edward was around thirteen and \u00c6thelred six to nine, the historian Sean Miller observes that \"they were surely figureheads rather than active participants\".\nSome historians have seen Edward's supporters as defenders of monastic reform and \u00c6thelred's as its opponents, but there were supporters on both sides, and this view is now generally rejected. The real reasons for choosing between them probably lay in family alliances. Bishop \u00c6thelwold backed his friend \u00c6lfthryth, who naturally put forward the claim of her son \u00c6thelred, while Archbishop Dunstan was Edward's chief supporter. According to John of Worcester, Archbishop Oswald also supported Edward. Oswald was at odds with Ealdorman \u00c6lfhere, who probably supported \u00c6thelred, together with his brother-in-law \u00c6lfric Cild, while \u00c6lfhere's enemy \u00c6thelwine (son of \u00c6thelstan Half-King) probably backed Edward.\nByrhtferth's life of Oswald portrays Edward as an unstable and violent young man:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Now certain of the magnates of this realm wished to elect the elder son of King Edgar, named Edward, as king; some of the ealdormen wanted the younger son, because he seemed more gentle to everyone in word and deed. But the elder son struck not only fear but even terror into everyone; he hounded them not only with tongue-lashings but even with cruel beatings \u2013 and most of all those who were members of his own household.\"\nThe historian Frank Stenton comments in his \"magisterial and massively authoritative\" \"Anglo-Saxon England\":\n\"Long after [Edward] had passed into veneration as a saint it was remembered that his outbursts of rage had alarmed all who knew him ... It may have been partly for this reason that a large number of nobles resolved to promote the election of \u00c6thelred, the younger brother.\"\nThe Benedictine monk Eadmer of Canterbury wrote in his hagiographical life of Dunstan:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When this Edward ought to have been consecrated as king, many of the princes of the land sought to oppose that he should be made king, on the one hand, because they were wary of the severity of his character with which he had customarily criticized the excesses of his men fiercely and on the other because they knew that his mother, though legally married, had not, however, been consecrated to the kingdom \u2013 just as his father had not \u2013 when she gave birth to him.\nThe historian Ann Williams is sceptical of the last point, commenting that while it is possible that consecration of the king's wife before she gave birth may have been an issue in the tenth century, Eadmer was writing in the early twelfth century when it was an argument raised in favour of King Henry I against his elder brother, and this may have influenced his interpretation. In addition, as Eadmer says that Edgar was not crowned until two years before his death, the same argument applied to \u00c6thelred.\nThe dispute was soon settled. A calendar entry in a manuscript dating to the late tenth or early eleventh century gives the date of Edward's election as king as 19 July, less than a fortnight after Edgar's death. A charter probably dating to 999 states that Edward was unanimously chosen as king by the leading men of both orders. \u00c6thelred was given the lands traditionally held by the king's sons, including some which had been granted by Edgar to Abingdon Abbey, and which were now forcibly repossessed by the order of all the leading nobles. \u00c6thelred commented in the charter that \"whether they did this thing justly or unjustly, they themselves may know\", and he granted other lands to Abingdon in compensation. The charter probably reflects a settlement under which \u00c6thelred's supporters agreed to Edward's succession in return for the land grant. He was crowned by Archbishop Dunstan at Kingston upon Thames, possibly on the same day he was elected.\nThe post-Conquest \"Passio\" gives a different account, claiming that Dunstan forced through the coronation of Edward as king: \"But when, at the time of [Edward's] consecration, some of the leading men of the nation had wished to oppose [it], St Dunstan persevered single-mindedly in his election, and, taking hold of the banner of the holy cross which was customarily carried before him, he fixed it upright in the middle, and with the remaining pious bishops consecrated him king.\"\nEdward's reign.\nThe \"anti-monastic reaction\".\nEdward's succession was followed by what historians sometimes call the \"anti-monastic reaction\". According to the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\", \u00c6lfhere and many other nobles, described by \"ASC D\" as the \"adversaries of God\", launched attacks on monasteries. His rival \u00c6thelwine was called \"amicus Dei\" (friend of God), and portrayed as the chief defender of the monks, by Byrhtferth, who wrote that in Edward's reign:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;the commonwealth of the entire realm was shaken; bishops were perplexed, ealdormen were angry, monks were struck with fear, the people were terrified, and the secular clerics were made happy, because their time had come. Abbots are now expelled, together with their monks; clerics are brought in together with their wives; and 'the last error was worse than the first' ... Monks who were formerly accustomed to sit on caparisoned horses and with their companions to sing the melodious song of King David, could then be seen carting a burden, not being carried like the ancient patriarch on a carriage into Egypt, or walking about with companions and friends, 'without a purse, without shoes'.\nHowever, most historians are sceptical of the claim that the conflict was between the supporters and opponents of monasticism, and attribute the disturbances to the nobles' personal rivalries and their determination to recover or obtain compensation for lands which Edgar had forced them to give up to monasteries. \u00c6thelwine founded Byrhtferth's Ramsey Abbey, but he was remembered at Ely Abbey for stealing several of their estates. \u00c6lfhere is said to have disbanded monasteries founded by \u00c6thelwold, but also to have protected \u00c6thelwold's Ely from \u00c6thelwine and been a benefactor of Dunstan's Glastonbury and \u00c6thelwold's Abingdon. Williams comments that \"there was more to the seizure of monastic lands than anti-monasticism. In many, perhaps most cases, it was the sharp practice involved in acquiring lands for the reformed houses that was being questioned, as the sellers (who had probably been put under considerable pressure) or their heirs sought to obtain a price closer to the actual market value.\"\nHistorians find it very difficult to judge the extent of disorder in Edward's reign in view of the very limited information available. At some point, \u00c6lfhere and \u00c6thelwine appear to have come close to open warfare, but there were no battles. A thegn called Leofsige seized estates at Peterborough, Oundle and Kettering, causing such disorder that no crops were sown for two years. Leofsige was killed by \u00c6thelwine's brother, \u00c6lfwold, who was then pardoned for the crime by Bishop \u00c6thelwold. The historian George Molyneaux is sceptical of the portrayal of Edward's reign as a time of rampant strife in view of the lack of evidence of fighting.\nAdministration.\n\"Witans\" (king's councils) met at Kingston upon Thames, perhaps on the occasion of Edward's coronation, at Kirtlington in Oxfordshire after Easter 977, and at Calne in Wiltshire in the same year. The meeting at Calne was held on an upper storey which collapsed; many leading counsellors were injured and some killed, but Dunstan was unharmed because he was standing on a beam. \u00c6lfhere attested first among the ealdormen and \u00c6thelwine second in all of Edward's charters, indicating that they retained their positions from the previous reign as the leading lay magnates. Edward's first charter was attested by almost all the leading magnates, showing that his rule had been generally accepted. This is the first charter which lists the chronicler \u00c6thelweard as an ealdorman and he was presumably appointed by Edward. There appear to have been no ealdormen covering the south of England in the early 970s, perhaps because Edgar's authority was so great that he was able to cover the area personally. After Edward acceded, three ealdormen were appointed to cover the area, \u00c6thelweard in west Wessex, \u00c6thelm\u00e6r in Hampshire and Eadwine in Sussex and Kent. If stability had depended on Edgar's personal authority, then it is not surprising that the authorities found it so difficult to maintain order after his death. The \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" disapprovingly records the exile of Ealdorman Oslac of York during Edward's reign, but the circumstances are unknown. Few other events are recorded during his reign: there was a severe famine in 976, Bishop Sideman died in 977, and in 978 Dunstan purchased land near Hendon in Middlesex from Edward.\nCharters.\nThe historian Simon Keynes sees a diplomatic tradition which extends from the charters late in Edgar's reign to early in \u00c6thelred's, but excluding the intervening \"slightly anomalous\" charters of Edward. Five charters survive which purport to date to the three years and nine months of Edward's reign, a low number as the average in the period was four to five a year. The authenticity of Charters S 828 and S 829 is disputed. Keynes says that they are fraudulent, but have witness lists which are probably based on genuine texts. The editor of these charters, Susan Kelly, describes them as \"very difficult documents\", and thinks that they may be genuine. They both appear to have been drawn up at the same time by the same careless draftsman during or close to Edward's reign. S 828 is a grant of thirteen hides of land at Kingston Bagpuize in Berkshire by King Edward to Bishop \u00c6lfstan, probably of Ramsbury. S 829 grants seven hides in the same village to Abingdon Abbey. The boundary clause is the same in both charters, perhaps because the bishop and abbey held different scattered units within the estate. Charter S 831 from the Old Minster, Winchester, is probably authentic and is based on one of 941. It is a grant by Edward to his minister \u00c6lfric of land at Wylye in Wiltshire. Charter S 832 is a large grant of land in Cornwall by Edward to Ealdorman \u00c6thelweard. It is closely related to Charter S 830, a grant of land at Cheriton Bishop in Devon by Edward to his \"faithful vassal\" (\"fideli vasallo\") \u00c6lfsige. Both charters are from the Exeter archive but probably written at Crediton, and Hart doubts whether they are genuine in their present form.\nCoinage.\nThe only coin in common use in late Anglo-Saxon England was the silver penny. Until late in Edgar's reign, pennies produced by mints in different towns varied in design, weight and fineness (silver content). In the early 970s, he brought in his reform coinage, with a single design and much greater uniformity of weight and fineness. The coins, with a design called the \"Small Cross\" type, had a left-facing bust of the King on the obverse surrounded by a circle with the King's name (+EADGAR REX ANGLOR[UM]) around the edge. The reverse had a small cross in the centre with the moneyer's name and mint-place around the edge. Edgar's reform design was the sole coin type produced during Edward's reign, and it was replaced early in \u00c6thelred's reign.\nEdward's coins were on average slightly lighter than those of Edgar and heavier than those of \u00c6thelred. The fineness was high and uniform following Edgar's reform at 96%, and this was maintained under Edward apart from a few slightly less fine coins produced in Lincoln and York. After Edward's death, fineness became more variable. During Edgar's reign, dies for coins were almost all cut at one centre, probably Winchester, and distributed from there to other mints across the kingdom. Under Edward, the centre supplied a far smaller number of mints and it was supplemented by regional die-cutting centres. This may have been due to the difficult political situation in his reign.\nDeath.\nEdward was killed on \u00c6lfthryth's estate in the Gap of Corfe in the Purbeck Hills in Dorset on the evening of 18 March 978. The only detailed pre-Conquest account is by Byrhtferth:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One day towards evening the remarkable and elected king, seeking the consolations of brotherly love, arrived at the house where his beloved brother was living with the dowager queen, as we have said. The magnates and leading men went to meet him, as was only fitting; he [the younger son] remained inside with the dowager queen, his mother. Those magnates had agreed among themselves a wicked plot: they were possessed of so damnable an intention and so murky and diabolical a blindness, that they did not fear to lay hands on God's anointed. Armed men surrounded him on all sides; with them was standing the royal butler, humbly waiting to be of service. The venerable king had with him very few soldiers, since he did not suspect anyone, trusting \"in the Lord and in the might of His power\". He had been instructed in holy scripture under the tutelage of Bishop Sideman; he was strong in body and sturdy. For when the conspirators surrounded him \u2014 and it was just as the Jews once surrounded our Lord \u2014 he remained sitting on his horse, fearless. They were seized by a single madness, an equal insanity ... The soldiers laid hold of him: one on his right-hand side drew him towards him, as if he wished to give him a kiss; another grabbed his left side firmly and gave him the death blow. And the King shouted out, as best he could: \"What are you doing, breaking my right hand?\" And suddenly he fell from his horse, and he was dead. This martyr of God was lifted up by his thegns, and taken to the house of a certain churl, where no Gregorian chant and no funereal lament was heard; rather, this distinguished king of the whole country lay covered only by a cheap blanket, awaiting the light of day.\nByrhtferth does not say when and where Edward died, and the oldest surviving version of the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" (\"ASC A\") just says that he was killed in 978. \"ASC C\", written in the 1040s after Edward had come to be seen as a saint, states that he was martyred. The fullest account of his death in the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" is in the northern recension, \"ASC D\" and \"ASC E\", which post-dates the Conquest. This gives the date and location of his death. No version of the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" states who committed the murder, but the northern recension blames his relatives for failing to avenge his death, and a poem about Edward's death dating to around 1000 says: \"It is certain that he died through envy, at the hands of his own kin.\"\nPre-Conquest accounts of the murder do not say who was responsible, whereas post-Conquest chroniclers and hagiographers almost all blame \u00c6lfthryth. The \"Passio\" and John of Worcester claim that she ordered the killing, while William of Malmesbury has her handing him a drink to distract him and her servant stabbing him, and Henry of Huntingdon writes that she killed Edward herself. The \"Passio\" is so biased against \u00c6lfthryth that it deletes favourable information about her in its sources, such as the \"Regularis Concordia\" of around 973, which laid down rules for monastic life. It gave \u00c6lfthryth the role of protectress of nunneries, but the \"Passio\" changes the protectress to Edward's mother.\nModern historians have offered a variety of interpretations of Edward's killing. Some blame \u00c6lfthryth's followers and think that she may have been personally responsible. Cnut's biographer, Michael Lawson, thinks that the failure to punish the killers is suspicious and points to \u00c6lfthryth's guilt. Roach disagrees, seeing the fact that no contemporary blamed \u00c6lfthryth as significant, and comments that we must be careful not to see conspiracies which did not exist. The editor of the \"Passio\", Christine Fell, points out that many of the details of \u00c6lfthryth's role appear in the earlier stories of the murders of Anglo-Saxon royals, Saint Kenelm by his sister and Saint \u00c6thelberht by his potential mother-in-law. Fell argues that it was inevitable that \u00c6lfthryth's hagiographical role in the \"Passio\" would similarly be that of scapegoat. Yorke comments that such stories \"draw upon hagiographical conventions spiced with traditional beliefs in the enmity of step-mothers for step-children, and should not be taken as reliable accounts of what actually occurred\".\nAnother theory is that the murder was the culmination of the conflict between \u00c6lfhere and \u00c6thelwine, and that \u00c6lfhere had Edward killed to preserve his own power and put his own candidate on the throne. The historian Alan Thacker sees \u00c6lfhere's role in the reburial of Edward as an act of expiation. However, Roach points out that Byrhtferth praises \u00c6lfhere's role, even though he was hostile to the ealdorman, and would have condemned him if he had been implicated in the crime. The contemporary poem about Edward's death praises \u00c6lfhere's role, describing him as \"most worthy leader\". Miller thinks that \u00c6thelred's thegns probably acted on their own initiative in the hope of personal advancement.\nEdward's personality may have been a factor in his death, as afterwards the opposing factions were able to reach a compromise. There were few changes at court: \u00c6lfthryth and Bishop \u00c6thelwold became more prominent, but Edward's officials mainly kept their positions. Williams challenges the consensus that Edward's death was the result of a plot. She compares his death to an earlier outbreak of violence due to a misunderstanding:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is possible that King Edward's death was also 'accidental' in that, far from being planned, it arose from a provocative confrontation between the young king (prone to violent behaviour, according to Byrhtferth) and one or more of the noblemen attending on his brother. It remains curious that the perpetrator is not named; Edward's grandfather King Edmund was killed in similar circumstances but \"it was widely known how he ended his life, that Leofa stabbed (\"ofstang\") him at Pucklechurch\". Could it be that too many people (perhaps not all of them belonging to \u00c6lfthryth's faction) were secretly relieved to be rid of a violent and unstable youth?\nLegacy.\nBurial and translation.\nEdward's death deeply troubled contemporaries. Roach observes \"Medieval kings were felt to be touched by divinity; not only had they been chosen by God, but like bishops they were anointed into their office with holy oil. Royal consecration was a well-established tradition and the reformers had done much to emphasize the God-given nature of royal authority further ... To kill a king was, therefore, more than a crime \u2013 it was a sin of the first order.\" England had a long tradition of revering murdered kings as saints, and the circumstances of Edward's death made it almost certain that he would come to be seen as a martyr, but this did not occur immediately. He was not regarded as saintly in his lifetime and he did not die defending Christianity. It was almost a year before he received royal burial, and the delay suggests that there was an argument over what to do with his body, with the case for honourable burial gradually gaining ground. \"ASC D\" and \"ASC E\" say that Edward was initially buried at Wareham without royal honour. Byrhtferth states that a year later \"the renowned Ealdorman \u00c6lfhere arrived with a great train\"; he ordered Edward's body to be disinterred, and it was found to be incorrupt, which was taken as a miraculous sign; the body was carried with great ceremony for burial in Shaftesbury Abbey, a house of nuns. As the senior ealdorman, \u00c6lfhere was probably charged with arranging the translation of Edward's body from Wareham to Shaftesbury for a proper burial to pave the way for \u00c6thelred's coronation on 4 May. The early eleventh century Archbishop of York, Wulfstan, wrote that his body was burned, and Keynes comments that \"the authority of Wulfstan is considerable\", but as political circumstances required that Edward be decently buried, \u00c6lfhere may have been charged with finding another body for the purpose.\nPost-Conquest accounts, such as the \"Passio,\" have more complicated and hagiographical narratives. The \"Passio\" says that \u00c6lfthryth had Edward's body concealed in a marsh, where it was miraculously revealed in February 979 by a column of fire, and locals took it to Wareham church for burial. \u00c6lfhere was filled with joy when he heard about the discovery of the body, and he took it to Shaftesbury for reburial in a more worthy place. The \"Passio\" goes on to say that in 1001 Edward told \"a certain religious\" in a vision of his wish to be moved from the churchyard to a more secure place in the abbey. This information was conveyed to the abbess, who passed it to King \u00c6thelred, and he joyfully gave instructions for the relics to be again translated. He ordered Wulfsige, the Bishop of Sherborne, and another prelate, perhaps \u00c6lfsige, the abbot of the New Minster, Winchester, to carry out the ceremony. The translation took place on 20 June, but the King could not be present because he was preoccupied with a Danish invasion. However, the historian Paul Hayward points out that this second translation is not mentioned in contemporary sources and no pre-Conquest calendar prescribes a feast on 20 June; he argues that it was an invention.\nEarly cult.\nEdward was recognised as a saint soon after his death, and \u00c6thelred appears to have been the chief sponsor of his brother's cult. It was promoted initially by the ecclesiastical and secular leadership to demonstrate the sanctity of the royal office, but as Viking raids intensified they came to be seen as punishment of the English people by God for a terrible crime, the killing of the Lord's anointed, for which they needed to make amends. Sigeric, Archbishop of Canterbury from 990 to 994, persuaded \u00c6thelred to establish a monastery at Cholsey in honour of Edward, and the king appointed Germanus as abbot. Edward's cult was also recognised at Canterbury and promoted by Wulfstan. In 1001, \u00c6thelred granted a former minster church and land at Bradford on Avon in Wiltshire to God and \"his saint, my brother Edward, whom, drenched with his own blood, the Lord has seen fit to magnify in our time with many miracles\", to provide a refuge for the nuns and Edward's relics against Viking attack. Sarah Foot describes the donation as \"somewhat bizarre\" as the Shaftesbury nunnery was in a fortified burh, whereas Bradford was unprotected. Byrhtferth says that the first miracles occurred at Edward's tomb eleven years after his death.\nWulfstan's \"Sermon of the Wolf to the English\" of around 1014 cites the murder of Edward and \u00c6thelred being forced into exile by Sweyn's conquest of England in 1013 as examples of betrayals of lords by the English. Out of twenty-five calendars dating to before 1100, Edward's death date of 18 March is listed in eighteen; only nine saints were listed in more, and five also have a feast on 13 February commemorating his translation from Wareham to Shaftesbury. \u00c6thelred's eldest son, \u00c6thelstan left \u00a36 \"to Holy Cross and St Edward at Shaftesbury\" in his will, made on his deathbed in 1014. Cnut also patronised Edward's cult, and the law code V \u00c6thelred of 1008 includes a clause, possibly inserted by Cnut in around 1018, which commands that the feast of Edward's martyrdom be celebrated on 18 March throughout England. The historian David Rollason argues that \u00c6thelred and Cnut promoted Edward's cult in order to heighten their prestige by emphasising the sanctity of their predecessor. The killing of Edward led to greater interest in other murdered royal saints by Oswald and in his monasteries, especially Ramsey and Winchcombe.\n\u00c6thelred's failure as a king has been seen by post-Conquest writers and some modern historians as a result of Edward's murder. Goscelin wrote in his life of Edith that \u00c6thelred was unworthy to rule because \"his succession had been purchased with his brother's blood\". Stenton comments that \u00c6thelred \"began to reign in an atmosphere of suspicion which destroyed the prestige of the Crown. It was never fully restored in his lifetime ... Much that has brought the condemnation of historians on King \u00c6thelred may well be due in the last resort to the circumstances under which he became king.\" His ineffective conduct as king suggests \"the reaction of a weak king to the consciousness that he had come to power through what his subjects regarded as the worst crime committed among the English peoples since their first coming to Britain\". \u00c6thelred's support for his brother's cult has been seen as an attempt to dispel the cloud of suspicion which hung over him, but this view has been challenged since the late twentieth century by historians who have argued that contemporaries do not appear to have blamed \u00c6thelred or his mother for the murder. Keynes argues that if the royal family had been blamed for Edward's death, glorification of him would have drawn attention to the crime and undermined \u00c6thelred's position.\nSeveral religious communities claimed to have acquired parts of Edward's body during Cnut's reign, but William of Malmesbury stated that half of Edward's body was taken to Leominster and half to Abingdon, where they both crumbled, and only the lung remained at Shaftesbury, where it was displayed, continuing to throb.\nLater cult.\nEdward was the only tenth century king to be buried in a nunnery. Shaftesbury, which had been founded by Alfred the Great for one of his daughters, had strong royal connections, and the cult of Edward was valuable to it, giving it a high status among Wessex monasteries. At the end of the Anglo-Saxon period it was the richest Benedictine nunnery and Glastonbury the richest monastery of all. Later in the Middle Ages there was a saying that \"If the abbot of Glastonbury might marry the abbess of Shaftesbury, their heir would have more land than the King of England\". Edward's cult was important for the prosperity of the nunnery and town of Shaftesbury in the later Middle Ages, and in some medieval documents the town is called \"Edwardsstowe\", \"the holy place of Edward\".\nLanfranc, the first Norman Archbishop of Canterbury, denied the sanctity of many Anglo-Saxon saints. Edward's cult survived but it was regarded as \"rustic\" and relegated to a minor status only to be honoured in establishments with a particular reason to honour him, such as Shaftesbury. His cult revived in the later Middle Ages, although almost wholly in the southern half of the country. He was regarded as one of the English national saints until they were relegated by the Plantagenets' preference for the more martial figure of Saint George. Edward survived the English Reformation, but as a low key figure only remembered on his feast day. Edward's feast of 18 March is still listed in the festal calendar of the 1662 \"Book of Common Prayer\" of the Church of England. The historian Frank Barlow comments that popular detestation of the crime led people to transform an unpleasant youth into a royal martyr. The historian Tom Watson commented, \"For an obnoxious teenager who showed no evidence of sanctity or kingly attributes and who should have been barely a footnote, his cult has endured mightily well.\"\nDispute over Edward's bones.\nShaftesbury Abbey was dissolved in 1539 and the buildings were almost wholly dismantled. Between 1930 and 1932, an amateur historian, John Wilson-Claridge, conducted excavations in the ruins of the abbey. No report of the excavations was ever published, but he claimed to have found the bones of Edward the Martyr in the north transept. The discovery was praised in \"The Times\" as one of the greatest historical discoveries of the century. In 1963, the bones were examined by the forensic pathologist Thomas Stowell, who concluded that they were of a young man between the ages of seventeen and nineteen who had suffered injuries consistent with the description of the murder in Byrhtferth's account. Stowell concluded that beyond reasonable doubt the bones were of Edward the Martyr. One of the bones was carbon-dated and found to date to the correct period. Historians' accounts of Stowell's findings usually mention that they were contradicted by the British Museum osteoarchaeologist Don Brothwell, who is believed to have examined the bones and concluded that they were of an older man and that the damage was probably post-mortem, although no report of his examination was ever published.\nWilson-Claridge negotiated with several churches to take the bones, but none was willing to agree to his requirement that they would be housed and revered as the true relics of the saint. In 1980, Wilson-Claridge met, in his own words, \"by divine providence\" a Mr Pobjoy, who was a member of the Russian Orthodox Church Abroad (ROCA), which agreed to accept the bones on Wilson-Claridge's terms. Wilson-Claridge's brother strongly objected to the bones going to ROCA, arguing that they should go back to Shaftesbury. The dispute was debated in letters to \"The Times\", including one from Keynes which objected to the bones going to a Russian Orthodox church: \"No Saxon can have deserved that fate\". In 1988, a High Court hearing ruled that the bones could go to the ROCA Church of St Edward the Martyr, Brookwood, which had been established for the purpose. Historians are very sceptical that the bones in the Brookwood church are those of Edward the Martyr, both because the body taken to Shaftesbury in 979 was probably not Edward's, and because the bones found in 1931 were probably not the ones believed by contemporaries to be his.\nChurches dedicated to Edward the Martyr.\nChurches dedicated to Edward the Martyr are the Church of St Edward King and Martyr, in Goathurst, Somerset, the Church of St Edward King and Martyr in Peas Hill, Cambridge, the Church of St Edward, King and Martyr, Corfe Castle, the Church of St Edward King &amp; Martyr, Castle Donington, and the Church of St Edward the Martyr, New York.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47383", "revid": "20318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47383", "title": "306", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 306 (CCCVI) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Constantius and Valerius (or, less frequently, year 1059 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 306 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47384", "revid": "39457116", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47384", "title": "Brooklyn", "text": "Borough and county in New York, US\nBrooklyn is the most populous of the five boroughs of New York City, coextensive with Kings County, in the U.S. state of New York. Located at the westernmost end of Long Island and formerly an independent city, Brooklyn shares a land border with the borough and county of Queens. It has several bridge and tunnel connections to the borough of Manhattan, across the East River, including the architecturally significant Brooklyn Bridge, and is connected to Staten Island by the Verrazzano-Narrows Bridge.\nThe borough, as Kings County, at , is the second most densely populated county in the U.S. after Manhattan (New York County), and the most populous county in the state, as of 2022. In the 2020 United States census, the borough had a population of 2,736,074. Had Brooklyn remained an independent city on Long Island, it would now be the fourth most populous American city after the rest of New York City, Los Angeles, and Chicago. With a land area of and a water area of , Kings County, one of the twelve original counties established under British rule in 1683 in the then-province of New York, is the state of New York's fourth-smallest county by land area and third smallest by total area.\nBrooklyn, named after the Dutch town of Breukelen in the Netherlands, was founded by the Dutch in the 17thcentury and grew into a busy port city on New York Harbor by the 19thcentury. On January1, 1898, after a long political campaign and public-relations battle during the 1890s and despite opposition from Brooklyn residents, Brooklyn was consolidated and annexed, along with other areas, to form the current five-borough structure of New York City in accordance with the new municipal charter of Greater New York. The borough continues to maintain a distinct culture. Many Brooklyn neighborhoods are ethnic enclaves. With Jews forming around a fifth of its population, the borough has been described as one of the main global hubs for Jewish culture. Brooklyn's official motto, displayed on the borough seal and flag, is , which translates from early modern Dutch as 'Unity makes strength'.\nEducational institutions in Brooklyn include the City University of New York's Brooklyn College, Medgar Evers College, and College of Technology, as well as Pratt Institute, Long Island University, and the New York University Tandon School of Engineering. In sports, basketball's Brooklyn Nets, and New York Liberty play at the Barclays Center. In the first decades of the 21stcentury, Brooklyn has experienced a renaissance as a destination for hipsters, with associated gentrification, dramatic house-price increases, and a decrease in housing affordability. Some new developments are now required to include affordable housing units. Since the 2010s, parts of Brooklyn have evolved into a hub for entrepreneurship, high-technology startup firms, postmodern art, and design.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nToponymy.\nThe name Brooklyn is derived from the original Dutch town of Breukelen. The oldest mention of the settlement in the Netherlands is in a charter of 67 by Holy Roman Emperor Otto I as \"Broecklede\". This form is made up of the words \"broeck\", meaning bog or marshland, and \"lede\", meaning small (dug) water stream, specifically in peat areas. Breuckelen on the American continent was established in 1646, and the name first appeared in print in 1663.\nOver the past two millennia, the name of the ancient town in Holland has been \"Bracola\", \"Broccke\", \"Brocckede\", \"Broiclede\", \"Brocklandia\", \"Broekclen\", \"Broikelen\", \"Breuckelen,\" and finally \"Breukelen\". The New Amsterdam settlement of \"Breuckelen\" also went through many spelling variations, including \"Breucklyn\", \"Breuckland\", \"Brucklyn\", \"Broucklyn\", \"Brookland\", \"Brockland\", \"Brocklin\", and \"Brookline/Brook-line\". There have been so many variations of the name that its origin has been debated; some have claimed \"breuckelen\" means \"broken land\". The current name, however, is the one that best reflects its meaning.\nThe county's name, Kings County, was named after King Charles II of England, who ruled from 1660 to 1685.\nHistory.\nThe history of European settlement in Brooklyn spans more than 350 years. The settlement began in the 17th century as the small Dutch-founded town of \"Breuckelen\" on the East River shore of Long Island, grew to be a sizeable city in the 19th century and was consolidated in 1898 with New York City (then confined to Manhattan and the Bronx), the remaining rural areas of Kings County, and the largely rural areas of Queens and Staten Island, to form the modern City of New York.\nColonial era.\nNew Netherland.\nThe Dutch were the first Europeans to settle Long Island's western edge, which was then largely inhabited by the Lenape, an Algonquian-speaking American Indian tribe often referred to in European documents by a variation of the place name \"Canarsie\". Bands were associated with place names, but the colonists thought their names represented different tribes. The \"Breuckelen\" settlement was named after Breukelen in the Netherlands; it was part of New Netherland. The Dutch West India Company lost little time in chartering the six original parishes (listed here by their later English town names):\nThe colony's capital of New Amsterdam, across the East River, obtained its charter in 1653. The neighborhood of Marine Park was home to North America's first tide mill. It was built by the Dutch, and the foundation can be seen today. But the area was not formally settled as a town. Many incidents and documents relating to this period are in Gabriel Furman's 1824 compilation.\nProvince of New York.\nPresent-day Brooklyn left Dutch hands after the English conquest of New Netherland in 1664, which sparked the Second Anglo-Dutch War. New Netherland was taken in a naval action, and the English renamed the new capture for their naval commander, James, Duke of York, brother of the then monarch King Charles II and future king himself as King James II. Brooklyn became a part of the West Riding of York Shire in the Province of New York, one of the Middle Colonies in England's North American colonies.\nOn November 1, 1683, \"Kings County\" was partitioned from the West Riding of York Shire, containing the six old Dutch towns on southwestern Long Island, as one of the \"original twelve counties\". This tract of land was recognized as a political entity for the first time, and the municipal groundwork was laid for a later expansive idea of a Brooklyn identity.\nLacking the patroon and tenant farmer system established along the Hudson River Valley, this agricultural county unusually came to have one of the highest percentages of slaves among the population in the \"Original Thirteen Colonies\" along the Atlantic Ocean eastern coast of North America.\nRevolutionary War.\nOn August 27, 1776, the Battle of Long Island (also known as the 'Battle of Brooklyn') was fought, the first major engagement fought in the American Revolutionary War after independence was declared, and the largest of the entire conflict. British troops forced the Continental Army under George Washington off the heights near the modern sites of Green-Wood Cemetery, Prospect Park, and Grand Army Plaza.\nWashington, viewing particularly fierce fighting at the Gowanus Creek and Old Stone House from atop a hill near the west end of present-day Atlantic Avenue, was reported to have emotionally exclaimed: \"What brave men I must this day lose!\".\nThe fortified American positions at Brooklyn Heights consequently became untenable and were evacuated a few days later, leaving the British in control of New York Harbor. While Washington's defeat on the battlefield cast early doubts on his ability as the commander, the tactical withdrawal of all his troops and supplies across the East River in a single night is now seen by historians as one of his most brilliant triumphs.\nThe British controlled the surrounding region for the duration of the war, as New York City was soon occupied and became their military and political base of operations in British-held North America for the remainder of the conflict. The Patriot residents largely fled or changed their political sentiments, and afterward the British generally enjoyed a dominant Loyalist sentiment from the residents in Kings County who did not evacuate, though the region was also the center of the fledgling\u2014and largely successful\u2014Patriot intelligence network, headed by Washington himself.\nThe British set up a system of prison ships off the coast of Brooklyn in Wallabout Bay. More American prisoners of war died on these prison ships than were killed in action on all the battlefield engagements of the war combined. One result of the Treaty of Paris in 1783 was the evacuation of the British from New York City, which was celebrated by New Yorkers into the 20th century.\nPost-independence era.\nUrbanization.\nThe first half of the 19th century saw the beginning of the development of urban areas on the economically strategic East River shore of Kings County, facing the adolescent City of New York confined to Manhattan Island. The New York Navy Yard operated in Wallabout Bay (border between Fort Greene and Williamsburg) during the 19th century and two-thirds of the 20th century.\nThe first center of urbanization sprang up in the Town of Brooklyn, directly across from Lower Manhattan, which saw the incorporation of the Village of Brooklyn in 1816. Reliable steam ferry service across the East River to Fulton Landing converted Brooklyn Heights into a commuter town for Wall Street. Ferry Road to Jamaica Pass became Fulton Street to East New York. Town and Village were combined to form the first, kernel incarnation of the City of Brooklyn in 1834.\nIn a parallel development, the Town of Bushwick, farther up the river, saw the incorporation of the Village of Williamsburgh in 1827, which separated as the Town of Williamsburgh in 1840 and formed the short-lived City of Williamsburgh in 1851. Industrial deconcentration in the mid-century was bringing shipbuilding and other manufacturing to the northern part of the county. Each of the two cities and six towns in Kings County remained independent municipalities and purposely created non-aligning street grids with different naming systems.\nHowever, the East River shore was growing too fast for the three-year-old infant City of Williamsburg; it, along with its Town of Bushwick hinterland, was subsumed within a greater City of Brooklyn in 1855, subsequently dropping the 'h' from its name.\nBy 1841, with the appearance of \"The Brooklyn Eagle, and Kings County Democrat\" published by Alfred G. Stevens, the growing city across the East River from Manhattan was producing its own prominent newspaper. It later became the most popular and highest circulation afternoon paper in America. The publisher changed to L. Van Anden on April 19, 1842, and the paper was renamed \"The Brooklyn Daily Eagle and Kings County Democrat\" on June 1, 1846. On May 14, 1849, the name was shortened to \"The Brooklyn Daily Eagle\"; on September 5, 1938, it was further shortened to \"Brooklyn Eagle\". The establishment of the paper in the 1840s helped develop a separate identity for Brooklynites over the next century. The borough's soon-to-be-famous National League baseball team, the Brooklyn Dodgers, also assisted with this. Both major institutions were lost in the 1950s: the paper closed in 1955 after unsuccessful attempts at a sale following a reporters' strike, and the baseball team decamped for Los Angeles in a realignment of Major League Baseball in 1957.\nAgitation against Southern slavery was stronger in Brooklyn than in New York, and under Republican leadership, the city was fervent in the Union cause in the Civil War. After the war the Henry Ward Beecher Monument was built downtown to honor a famous local abolitionist. A great victory arch was built at what was then the south end of town to celebrate the armed forces; this place is now called Grand Army Plaza.\nThe number of people living in Brooklyn grew rapidly early in the 19th century. There were 4,402 by 1810, 7,175 in 1820 and 15,396 by 1830. The city's population was 25,000 in 1834, but the police department comprised only 12 men on the day shift and another 12 on the night shift. Every time a rash of burglaries broke out, officials blamed burglars from New York City. Finally, in 1855, a modern police force was created, employing 150 men. Voters complained of inadequate protection and excessive costs. In 1857, the state legislature merged the Brooklyn force with that of New York City.\nCivil War.\nFervent in the Union cause, the city of Brooklyn played a major role in supplying troops and materiel for the American Civil War. The best-known regiment to be sent off to war from the city was the 14th Brooklyn \"Red Legged Devils\". They fought from 1861 to 1864, wore red the entire war, and were the only regiment named after a city. President Abraham Lincoln called them into service, making them part of a handful of three-year enlisted soldiers in April 1861. Unlike other regiments during the American Civil War, the 14th wore a uniform inspired by the French Chasseurs, a light infantry used for quick assaults.\nAs a seaport and a manufacturing center, Brooklyn was well prepared to contribute to the Union's strengths in shipping and manufacturing. The two combined in shipbuilding; the ironclad \"Monitor\" was built in Brooklyn.\nTwin city.\nBrooklyn is referred to as the twin city of New York in the 1883 poem, \"The New Colossus\" by Emma Lazarus, which appears on a plaque inside the Statue of Liberty. The poem calls New York Harbor \"the air-bridged harbor that twin cities frame\". As a twin city to New York, it played a role in national affairs that was later overshadowed by decades of subordination by its old partner and rival.\nDuring this period, the affluent, contiguous districts of Fort Greene and Clinton Hill (then characterized collectively as The Hill) were home to such notable figures as Astral Oil Works founder Charles Pratt and his children, including local civic leader Charles Millard Pratt; Theosophical Society co-founder William Quan Judge; and Pfizer co-founders Charles Pfizer and Charles F. Erhart. Brooklyn Heights remained one of the New York metropolitan area's most august patrician redoubts into the early 20th century under the aegis of such figures as abolitionist clergyman Henry Ward Beecher, Congregationalist theologians Lyman Abbott and Newell Dwight Hillis (who followed Beecher as the second and third pastors of Plymouth Church, respectively), financier John Jay Pierrepont (a grandson of founding Heights resident Hezekiah Pierrepont), banker/art collector David Leavitt, educator/politician Seth Low, merchant/banker Horace Brigham Claflin, attorney William Cary Sanger (who served for two years as United States Assistant Secretary of War under Presidents William McKinley and Theodore Roosevelt) and publisher Alfred Smith Barnes. Contiguous to the Heights, the less exclusive South Brooklyn was home to longtime civic leader James S. T. Stranahan, who became known (often derisively) as the \"Baron Haussmann of Brooklyn\" for championing Prospect Park and other public works.\nEconomic growth continued, propelled by immigration and industrialization, and Brooklyn established itself as the third-most populous American city for much of the 19th century. The waterfront from Gowanus to Greenpoint was developed with piers and factories. Industrial access to the waterfront was improved by the Gowanus Canal and the canalized Newtown Creek. was the most famous product of the large and growing shipbuilding industry of Williamsburg. After the Civil War, trolley lines and other transport brought urban sprawl beyond Prospect Park (completed by Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux in 1873 and widely heralded as an improvement upon the earlier Central Park) into the center of the county, as evinced by gradual settlement in the comparatively rustic villages of Windsor Terrace and Kensington in the Town of Flatbush. By century's end, Dean Alvord's Prospect Park South development (adjacent to the village of Flatbush) would serve as the template for contemporaneous \"Victorian Flatbush\" micro-neighborhoods and the post-consolidation emergence of outlying districts, such as Midwood and Marine Park. Along with Oak Park, Illinois, it also presaged the automobile and commuter rail-driven vogue for more remote prewar suburban communities, such as Garden City, New York and Montclair, New Jersey.\nThe rapidly growing population needed more water, so the City built centralized waterworks, including the Ridgewood Reservoir. The municipal Police Department, however, was abolished in 1854 in favor of a Metropolitan force covering also New York and Westchester Counties. In 1865 the Brooklyn Fire Department (BFD) also gave way to the new Metropolitan Fire District.\nThroughout this period the peripheral towns of Kings County, far from Manhattan and even from urban Brooklyn, maintained their rustic independence. The only municipal change seen was the secession of the eastern section of the Town of Flatbush as the Town of New Lots in 1852. The building of rail links such as the Brighton Beach Line in 1878 heralded the end of this isolation.\nSports in Brooklyn became a business. The Brooklyn Bridegrooms played professional baseball at Washington Park in the convenient suburb of Park Slope and elsewhere. Early in the next century, under their new name of Brooklyn Dodgers, they brought baseball to Ebbets Field, beyond Prospect Park. Racetracks, amusement parks, and beach resorts opened in Brighton Beach, Coney Island, and elsewhere in the southern part of the county.\nToward the end of the 19th century, the City of Brooklyn experienced its final, explosive growth spurt. Park Slope was rapidly urbanized, with its eastern summit soon emerging as the city's third \"Gold Coast\" district alongside Brooklyn Heights and The Hill; notable residents of the era included American Chicle Company co-founder Thomas Adams Jr. and New York Central Railroad executive Clinton L. Rossiter. East of The Hill, Bedford-Stuyvesant coalesced as an upper middle class enclave for lawyers, shopkeepers, and merchants of German and Irish descent (notably exemplified by John C. Kelley, a water meter magnate and close friend of President Grover Cleveland), with nearby Crown Heights gradually fulfilling an analogous role for the city's Jewish population as development continued through the early 20th century. Northeast of Bedford-Stuyvesant, Bushwick (by now a working class, predominantly German district) established a considerable brewery industry; the so-called \"Brewer's Row\" encompassed 14 breweries operating in a 14-block area in 1890. On the southwestern waterfront of Kings County, railroads and industrialization spread to Sunset Park (then coterminous with the city's sprawling, sparsely populated Eighth Ward) and adjacent Bay Ridge (hitherto a resort-like subsection of the Town of New Utrecht). Within a decade, the city had annexed the Town of New Lots in 1886; the Towns of Flatbush, Gravesend and New Utrecht in 1894; and the Town of Flatlands in 1896. Brooklyn had reached its natural municipal boundaries at the ends of Kings County.\nSeth Low as mayor.\nLow's time in office from 1882 to 1885 was marked by a number of reforms:\nMayors of the City of Brooklyn.\nBrooklyn elected a mayor from 1834 until 1898, after which it was consolidated into the City of Greater New York, whose own second mayor (1902\u20131903), Seth Low, had been Mayor of Brooklyn from 1882 to 1885. Since 1898, Brooklyn has, in place of a separate mayor, elected a Borough President.\nNew York City borough.\nIn 1883, the Brooklyn Bridge was completed, transportation to Manhattan was no longer by water only, and the City of Brooklyn's ties to the City of New York were strengthened.\nThe question became whether Brooklyn was prepared to engage in the still-grander process of consolidation then developing throughout the region, whether to join with the county of Richmond and the western portion of Queens County, and the county of New York, which by then already included the Bronx, to form the five boroughs of a united City of New York. Andrew Haswell Green and other progressives said yes, and eventually, they prevailed against the \"Daily Eagle\" and other conservative forces. In 1894, residents of Brooklyn and the other counties voted by a slight majority to merge, effective in 1898.\nKings County retained its status as one of New York State's counties, but the loss of Brooklyn's separate identity as a city was met with consternation by some residents at the time. Many newspapers of the day called the merger the \"Great Mistake of 1898\".\nGeography.\nBrooklyn is in area, of which is land (73%), and is water (27%); the borough is the second-largest by land area among the New York City's boroughs. However, Kings County, coterminous with Brooklyn, is New York State's fourth-smallest county by land area and third-smallest by total area. Brooklyn lies at the southwestern end of Long Island, and the borough's western border constitutes the island's western tip.\nBrooklyn's water borders are extensive and varied, including Jamaica Bay; the Atlantic Ocean; The Narrows, separating Brooklyn from the borough of Staten Island in New York City and crossed by the Verrazzano-Narrows Bridge; Upper New York Bay, separating Brooklyn from Jersey City and Bayonne in the U.S. state of New Jersey; and the East River, separating Brooklyn from the borough of Manhattan in New York City and traversed by the Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel, the Brooklyn Bridge, the Manhattan Bridge, the Williamsburg Bridge, and numerous routes of the New York City Subway. To the east of Brooklyn lies the borough of Queens, which contains John F. Kennedy International Airport in that borough's Jamaica neighborhood, approximately two miles from the border of Brooklyn's East New York neighborhood.\nClimate.\nUnder the K\u00f6ppen climate classification, Brooklyn experiences a humid subtropical climate (\"Cfa\"), with partial shielding from the Appalachian Mountains and moderating influences from the Atlantic Ocean. Brooklyn receives plentiful precipitation all year round, with nearly yearly. The area averages 234 days with at least some sunshine annually, and averages 57% of possible sunshine annually, accumulating 2,535 hours of sunshine per annum. Brooklyn lies in the USDA plant hardiness zone 7b.\nNeighborhoods.\nBrooklyn's neighborhoods are dynamic in ethnic composition. For example, the early to mid-20th century, Brownsville had a majority of Jewish residents; since the 1970s it has been majority African American. Midwood during the early 20th century was filled with ethnic Irish, then filled with Jewish residents for nearly 50 years, and is slowly becoming a Pakistani enclave. Brooklyn's most populous racial group, white, declined from 97.2% in 1930 to 46.9% by 1990.\nThe borough attracts people previously living in other cities in the United States. Of these, most come from Chicago, Detroit, San Francisco, Washington, D.C., Baltimore, Philadelphia, Boston, Cincinnati, and Seattle.\nCommunity diversity.\nGiven New York City's role as a crossroads for immigration from around the world, Brooklyn has evolved a globally cosmopolitan ambiance of its own, demonstrating a robust and growing demographic and cultural diversity with respect to metrics including nationality, religion, race, and domiciliary partnership. In 2010, 51.6% of the population was counted as members of religious congregations. In 2014, there were 914 religious organizations in Brooklyn, the 10th most of all counties in the nation. Brooklyn contains dozens of distinct neighborhoods representing many of the major culturally identified groups found within New York City. Among the most prominent are listed below:\nJewish American.\nOver 600,000 Jews, particularly Orthodox and Hasidic Jews, have become concentrated in such historically Jewish areas as Borough Park, Williamsburg, and Midwood, where there are many yeshivas, synagogues, and kosher restaurants, as well as a variety of Jewish businesses. Adjacent to Borough Park, the Kensington area housed a significant population of Conservative Jews (under the aegis of such nationally prominent midcentury rabbis as Jacob Bosniak and Abraham Heller) when it was still considered to be a subsection of Flatbush; many of their defunct facilities have been repurposed to serve extensions of the Borough Park Hasidic community. Other notable religious Jewish neighborhoods with a longstanding cultural lineage include Canarsie, Sea Gate, and Crown Heights, home to the Chabad world headquarters. Neighborhoods with largely defunct yet historically notable Jewish populations include central Flatbush, East Flatbush, Brownsville, East New York, Bensonhurst and Sheepshead Bay (particularly its Madison subsection). Many hospitals in Brooklyn were started by Jewish charities, including Maimonides Medical Center in Borough Park and Brookdale Hospital in East Flatbush.\nAccording to the American Jewish Population Project in 2020, Brooklyn was home to over 480,000 Jews. In 2023, the UJA-Federation of New York estimated that Brooklyn is home to 462,000 Jews, a large decrease compared to the 561,000 estimated in 2011.\nThe predominantly Jewish, Crown Heights (and later East Flatbush)-based Madison Democratic Club served as the borough's primary \"clubhouse\" political venue for decades until the ascendancy of Meade Esposito's rival, Canarsie-based Thomas Jefferson Democratic Club in the 1960s and 1970s, playing an integral role in the rise of such figures as Speaker of the New York State Assembly Irwin Steingut; his son, fellow Speaker Stanley Steingut; New York City Mayor Abraham Beame; real estate developer Fred Trump; Democratic district leader Beadie Markowitz; and political fixer Abraham \"Bunny\" Lindenbaum.\nMany non-Orthodox Jews (ranging from observant members of various denominations to atheists of Jewish cultural heritage) are concentrated in Ditmas Park and Park Slope, with smaller observant and culturally Jewish populations in Brooklyn Heights, Cobble Hill, Brighton Beach, and Coney Island.\nChinese American.\nOver 200,000 Chinese Americans live throughout the southern parts of Brooklyn, primarily concentrated in Sunset Park, Bensonhurst, Gravesend, and Homecrest. Brooklyn is the borough that is home to the highest number of Chinatowns in New York City. The largest concentration is in Sunset Park along 8th Avenue, which has become known for its Chinese culture since the opening of the now-defunct Winley Supermarket in 1986 spurred widespread settlement in the area. It is called \"Brooklyn's Chinatown\" and originally it was a small Chinese enclave with Cantonese speakers being the main Chinese population during the late 1980s and 1990s, but since the 2000s, the Chinese population in the area dramatically shifted to majority Fuzhounese Americans, which contributed immensely to expanding this Chinatown, and bestowing the nicknames \"Fuzhou Town (), Brooklyn\" or the \"Little Fuzhou ()\" of Brooklyn. Many Chinese restaurants can be found throughout Sunset Park, and the area hosts a popular Chinese New Year celebration. Since the 2000s going forward, the growing concentration of the Cantonese speaking population in Brooklyn have dramatically shifted to Bensonhurst/Gravesend and Homecrest creating newer Chinatowns of Brooklyn and these newer Brooklyn Chinatowns are known as \"Brooklyn's Little Hong Kong/Guangdong\" due to their Chinese populations being overwhelmingly Cantonese populated.\nCaribbean and African American.\nBrooklyn's African American and Caribbean communities are spread throughout much of Brooklyn. Brooklyn's West Indian community is concentrated in the Crown Heights, Flatbush, East Flatbush, Kensington, and Canarsie neighborhoods in central Brooklyn. Brooklyn is home to the largest community of West Indians outside of the Caribbean. Although the largest West Indian groups in Brooklyn are Jamaicans, Guyanese and Haitians, there are West Indian immigrants from nearly every part of the Caribbean. Crown Heights and Flatbush are home to many of Brooklyn's West Indian restaurants and bakeries. Brooklyn has an annual, celebrated Carnival in the tradition of pre-Lenten celebrations in the islands. Started by natives of Trinidad and Tobago, the West Indian Labor Day Parade takes place every Labor Day on Eastern Parkway. The Brooklyn Academy of Music also holds the DanceAfrica festival in late May, featuring street vendors and dance performances showcasing food and culture from all parts of Africa. Since the opening of the IND Fulton Street Line in 1936, Bedford-Stuyvesant has been home to one of the most famous African American communities in the United States. Working-class communities remain prevalent in Brownsville, East New York and Coney Island, while remnants of similar communities in Prospect Heights, Fort Greene and Clinton Hill have endured amid widespread gentrification.\nHispanic American.\nIn the aftermath of World War II and subsequent urban renewal initiatives that decimated longtime Manhattan enclaves (most notably on the Upper West Side), Puerto Rican migrants began to settle in such waterfront industrial neighborhoods as Sunset Park, Red Hook and Gowanus, near the shipyards and factories where they worked. The borough's Hispanic population diversified after the 1965 Hart-Cellar Act loosened restrictions on immigration from elsewhere in Latin America.\nBushwick has since emerged as the largest hub of Brooklyn's Hispanic American community. Like other Hispanic neighborhoods in New York City, Bushwick has an established Puerto Rican presence, along with an influx of many Dominicans, South Americans, Central Americans and Mexicans. As nearly 80% of Bushwick's population is Hispanic, its residents have created many businesses to support their various national and distinct traditions in food and other items. Sunset Park's population is 42% Hispanic, made up of these various ethnic groups. Brooklyn's main Hispanic groups are Puerto Ricans, Mexicans, Dominicans and Ecuadorians; they are spread out throughout the borough. Puerto Ricans and Dominicans are predominant in Bushwick, Williamsburg's South Side and East New York. Mexicans (especially from the state of Puebla) now predominate alongside Chinese immigrants in Sunset Park, although remnants of the neighborhood's once-substantial postwar Puerto Rican and Dominican communities continue to reside below 39th Street. Save for Red Hook (which remained roughly one-fifth Hispanic American as of the 2010 Census), the South Side and Sunset Park, similar postwar communities in other waterfront neighborhoods\u2014including western Park Slope, the north end of Greenpoint, and Boerum Hill, long considered the northern subsection of Gowanus\u2014largely disappeared by the turn of the century due to various factors, including deindustrialization, ensuing gentrification and suburbanization among more affluent Dominicans and Puerto Ricans. A Panamanian enclave exists in Crown Heights.\nRussian and Ukrainian American.\nBrooklyn is also home to many Russians and Ukrainians, who are mainly concentrated in the areas of Brighton Beach and Sheepshead Bay. Brighton Beach features many Russian and Ukrainian businesses and has been nicknamed \"Little Russia\" and \"Little Odessa\", respectively. In the 1970s, Soviet Jews won the right to immigrate, and many ended up in Brighton Beach. In recent years, the non-Jewish Russian and Ukrainian communities of Brighton Beach have grown, and the area is now home to a diverse collection of immigrants from across the former USSR. Smaller concentrations of Russian and Ukrainian Americans are scattered elsewhere in south Brooklyn, including Bay Ridge, Bensonhurst, Homecrest, Coney Island, and Mill Basin. A growing community of Uzbek Americans have settled alongside them in recent years due to their ability to speak Russian.\nPolish American.\nBrooklyn's Polish inhabitants are historically concentrated in Greenpoint, home to Little Poland. Other longstanding settlements in Borough Park and Sunset Park have endured, while more recent immigrants are scattered throughout the southern parts of Brooklyn alongside the Russian and Ukrainian American communities.\nItalian American.\nDespite widespread migration to Staten Island and more suburban areas in metropolitan New York throughout the postwar era, notable concentrations of Italian Americans continue to reside in the neighborhoods of Bensonhurst, Dyker Heights, Bay Ridge, Bath Beach and Gravesend. Less perceptible remnants of older communities have persisted in Cobble Hill and Carroll Gardens, where the homes of the remaining Italian Americans can often be contrasted with more recent upper middle class residents through the display of small Madonna statues, the retention of plastic-metal stoop awnings and the use of Formstone in house cladding. All of the aforementioned neighborhoods have retained Italian restaurants, bakeries, delicatessens, pizzerias, cafes and social clubs.\nArab American &amp; Muslim.\nIn the early 20th century, many Lebanese and Syrian Christians settled around Atlantic Avenue west of Flatbush Avenue in Boerum Hill; more recently, this area has evolved into a Yemeni commercial district.\nMore recent, predominantly Muslim Arab immigrants, especially Egyptians and Lebanese, have moved into the southwest portion of Brooklyn, particularly to Bay Ridge, where many Middle Eastern restaurants, hookah lounges, halal grocers, Islamic shops and mosques line the commercial thoroughfares of Fifth and Third Avenues below 86th Street. Brighton Beach is home to a growing Pakistani American community, while Midwood is home to \"Little Pakistan\" along Coney Island Avenue (recently co-named Muhammad Ali Jinnah Way). Pakistani Independence Day is celebrated every year with parades and parties on Coney Island Avenue. Just to the north, Kensington is one of New York's several emerging Bangladeshi enclaves.\nIrish American.\nThird-, fourth- and fifth-generation Irish Americans can be found throughout Brooklyn, with moderate concentrations enduring in the neighborhoods of Windsor Terrace, Park Slope, Bay Ridge, Marine Park and Gerritsen Beach. Historical communities also existed in Vinegar Hill and other waterfront industrial neighborhoods, such as Greenpoint and Sunset Park. Paralleling the Italian American community, many moved to Staten Island and suburban areas in the postwar era. Those that stayed engendered close-knit, stable working-to-middle class communities through employment in the civil service (especially in law enforcement, transportation, and the New York City Fire Department) and the building and construction trades, while others were subsumed by the professional-managerial class and largely shed the Irish American community's distinct cultural traditions (including continued worship in the Catholic Church and other social activities, such as Irish stepdance and frequenting Irish American bars).\nSouth Asian American.\nWhile not as extensive as the Indian American population in Queens, younger professionals of Asian Indian origin are finding Brooklyn to be a convenient alternative to Manhattan to find housing. Nearly 30,000 \nIndian Americans call Brooklyn home.\nBrighton Beach is home to a growing Pakistani American community, while Midwood is home to Little Pakistan along Coney Island Avenue recently renamed Muhammad Ali Jinnah way. Pakistan Independence Day is celebrated every year with parades and parties on Coney Island Avenue.\nJust to the north, Kensington is one of New York's several emerging Bangladeshi enclaves.\nGreek American.\nBrooklyn's Greek Americans live throughout the borough. A historical concentration has endured in Bay Ridge and adjacent areas, where there is a noticeable cluster of Hellenic-focused schools, businesses and cultural institutions. Other businesses are situated in Downtown Brooklyn near Atlantic Avenue. As in much of the New York metropolitan area, Greek-owned diners are found throughout the borough.\nLGBTQ community.\nBrooklyn is home to a large and growing number of same-sex couples. Same-sex marriages in New York were legalized on June 24, 2011, and were authorized to take place beginning 30 days thereafter. The Park Slope neighborhood spearheaded the popularity of Brooklyn among lesbians, and Prospect Heights has an LGBT residential presence. Numerous neighborhoods have since become home to LGBT communities. Brooklyn Liberation March, the largest transgender-rights demonstration in LGBTQ history, took place on June 14, 2020, stretching from Grand Army Plaza to Fort Greene, focused on supporting Black transgender lives, drawing an estimated 15,000 to 20,000 participants.\nArtists-in-residence.\nBrooklyn became a preferred site for artists and hipsters to set up live/work spaces after being priced out of the same types of living arrangements in Manhattan. Various neighborhoods in Brooklyn, including Williamsburg, DUMBO, Red Hook, and Park Slope evolved as popular neighborhoods for artists-in-residence. However, rents and costs of living have since increased dramatically in these same neighborhoods, forcing artists to move to somewhat less expensive neighborhoods in Brooklyn or across Upper New York Bay to locales in New Jersey, such as Jersey City or Hoboken.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\n \nAt the 2020 census, 2,736,074 people lived in Brooklyn. The United States Census Bureau had estimated Brooklyn's population increased by 2.2% to 2,559,903 between 2010 and 2019. Brooklyn's estimated population represented 30.7% of New York City's estimated population of 8,336,817; 33.5% of Long Island's population of 7,701,172; and 13.2% of New York State's population of 19,542,209. In 2020, the government of New York City projected Brooklyn's population at 2,648,403. The 2019 census estimates determined there were 958,567 households with an average of 2.66 persons per household. There were 1,065,399 housing units in 2019 and a median gross rent of $1,426. Citing growth, Brooklyn gained 9,696 building permits at the 2019 census estimates program.\nEthnic groups.\nThe 2020 American Community Survey estimated the racial and ethnic makeup of Brooklyn was 35.4% non-Hispanic white, 26.7% Black or African American, 0.9% American Indian or Alaska Native, 13.6% Asian, 0.1% Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander, 4.1% two or more races, and 18.9% Hispanic or Latin American of any race. According to the 2010 United States census, Brooklyn's population was 42.8% White, including 35.7% non-Hispanic White; 34.3% Black, including 31.9% non-Hispanic black; 10.5% Asian; 0.5% Native American; 0.0% (rounded) Pacific Islander; 3.0% Multiracial American; and 8.8% from other races. Hispanics and Latinos made up 19.8% of Brooklyn's population. In 2010, Brooklyn had some neighborhoods segregated based on race, ethnicity, and religion. Overall, the southwest half of Brooklyn is racially mixed although it contains few black residents; the northeast section is mostly black and Hispanic/Latino.\nLanguages.\nBrooklyn has a high degree of linguistic diversity. As of 2010, 54.1% (1,240,416) of Brooklyn residents ages 5 and older spoke English at home as a primary language, while 17.2% (393,340) spoke Spanish, 6.5% (148,012) Chinese, 5.3% (121,607) Russian, 3.5% (79,469) Yiddish, 2.8% (63,019) French Creole, 1.4% (31,004) Italian, 1.2% (27,440) Hebrew, 1.0% (23,207) Polish, 1.0% (22,763) French, 1.0% (21,773) Arabic, 0.9% (19,388) various Indic languages, 0.7% (15,936) Urdu, and African languages were spoken as a main language by 0.5% (12,305) of the population over the age of five. In total, 45.9% (1,051,456) of Brooklyn's population ages 5 and older spoke a mother tongue other than English.\nCulture.\nBrooklyn has played a major role in various aspects of American culture, including literature, cinema, and theater. Brooklyn's accent has often been portrayed as the \"typical New Yorker accent\" in American media, although this accent and its stereotypes are supposedly diminishing in currency. Brooklyn's official colors are blue and gold.\nCultural venues.\nBrooklyn hosts the world-renowned Brooklyn Academy of Music, the Brooklyn Philharmonic, and the second-largest public art collection in the United States, housed in the Brooklyn Museum.\nThe Brooklyn Museum, opened in 1897, is New York City's second-largest public art museum. It has in its permanent collection more than 1.5\u00a0million objects, from ancient Egyptian masterpieces to contemporary art. The Brooklyn Children's Museum, the world's first museum dedicated to children, opened in December 1899. The only such New York State institution accredited by the American Alliance of Museums, it is one of the few globally to have a permanent collection\u00a0\u2013 over 30,000 cultural objects and natural history specimens.\nThe Brooklyn Academy of Music (BAM) includes a 2,109-seat opera house, an 874-seat theater, and the art-house BAM Rose Cinemas. Bargemusic and St. Ann's Warehouse are on the other side of Downtown Brooklyn in the DUMBO arts district. Brooklyn Technical High School has the second-largest auditorium in New York City (after Radio City Music Hall), with a seating capacity of over 3,000.\nMedia.\nLocal periodicals.\nBrooklyn has several local newspapers: The \"Brooklyn Daily Eagle\", \"Bay Currents\" (Oceanfront Brooklyn), \"Brooklyn View\", \"The Brooklyn Paper\", and Courier-Life Publications. Courier-Life Publications, owned by Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation, is Brooklyn's largest chain of newspapers. Brooklyn is also served by the major New York dailies, including \"The New York Times\", the \"New York Daily News\", and the \"New York Post\". Several others are now defunct, including the \"Brooklyn Union\" (1867\u20131937),&lt;ref name=\"nysl.nysed.gov/nysnp/all/424\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"brooklyn-union/12381\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; and the \"Brooklyn Times\".\nThe borough is home to the arts and politics monthly \"Brooklyn Rail\", as well as the arts and cultural quarterly \"Cabinet\". \"Hello Mr.\" is also published in Brooklyn.\n\"Brooklyn Magazine\" is one of the few glossy magazines about Brooklyn. Several others are now defunct, including \"BKLYN Magazine\" (a bimonthly lifestyle book owned by Joseph McCarthy, that saw itself as a vehicle for high-end advertisers in Manhattan and was mailed to 80,000 high-income households), \"Brooklyn Bridge Magazine\", \"The Brooklynite\" (a free, glossy quarterly edited by Daniel Treiman), and \"NRG\" (edited by Gail Johnson and originally marketed as a local periodical for Clinton Hill and Fort Greene, but expanded in scope to become the self-proclaimed \"Pulse of Brooklyn\" and then the \"Pulse of New York\").\nEthnic press.\nBrooklyn has a thriving ethnic press. \"El Diario La Prensa\", the largest and oldest Spanish-language daily newspaper in the United States, maintains its corporate headquarters at 1\u00a0MetroTech Center in Downtown Brooklyn. Major ethnic publications include the Brooklyn\u2013Queens Catholic paper \"The Tablet\", \"Hamodia\", an Orthodox Jewish daily, and \"The Jewish Press\", an Orthodox Jewish weekly. Many nationally distributed ethnic newspapers are based in Brooklyn. Over 60 ethnic groups, writing in 42 languages, publish some 300 non-English language magazines and newspapers in New York City. Among them is the quarterly \"L'Idea\", a bilingual magazine printed in Italian and English since 1974. In addition, many newspapers published abroad, such as \"The Daily Gleaner\" and \"The Star\" of Jamaica, are available in Brooklyn. \"Our Time Press\", published weekly by DBG Media, covers the Village of Brooklyn with a motto of \"The Local Paper with the Global View\".\nTelevision.\nThe City of New York has an official television station, run by NYC Media, which features programming based in Brooklyn. Brooklyn Community Access Television is the borough's public access channel. Its studios are at the BRIC Arts Media venue, called BRIC House, located on Fulton Street in the Fort Greene section of the borough.\nEconomy.\nBrooklyn's job market is driven by three main factors: the performance of the national and city economy, population flows and the borough's position as a convenient back office for New York's businesses.\nForty-four percent of Brooklyn's employed population, or 410,000 people, work in the borough; more than half of the borough's residents work outside its boundaries. As a result, economic conditions in Manhattan are important to the borough's jobseekers. Strong international immigration to Brooklyn generates jobs in services, retailing and construction.\nSince the late 20th century, Brooklyn has benefited from a steady influx of financial back office operations from Manhattan, the rapid growth of a high-tech and entertainment economy in DUMBO, and strong growth in support services such as accounting, personal supply agencies, and computer services firms.\nJobs in the borough were traditionally concentrated in manufacturing, but since 1975, Brooklyn has shifted from a manufacturing-based to a service-based economy. In 2004, 215,000 Brooklyn residents worked in the services sector, while 27,500 worked in manufacturing. Although manufacturing has declined, a substantial base has remained in apparel and niche manufacturing concerns such as furniture, fabricated metals, and food products. The pharmaceutical company Pfizer was founded in Brooklyn in 1869 and had a manufacturing plant in the borough for many years that employed thousands of workers, but the plant shut down in 2008. However, new light-manufacturing concerns in packaging organic and high-end food have sprung up in the old plant.\nEstablished as a shipbuilding facility in 1801, the Brooklyn Navy Yard employed 70,000 people at its peak during World War II and was then the largest employer in the borough. The \"Missouri\", the ship on which the Japanese formally surrendered, was built there, as was the \"Maine\", whose sinking off Havana led to the start of the Spanish\u2013American War. The iron-sided Civil War vessel the \"Monitor\" was built in Greenpoint. From 1968 to 1979 Seatrain Shipbuilding was the major employer. Later tenants include industrial design firms, food processing businesses, artisans, and the film and television production industry. About 230 private-sector firms providing 4,000 jobs are at the Yard.\nConstruction and services are the fastest-growing sectors. Most employers in Brooklyn are small businesses. In 2000, 91% of the approximately 38,704 business establishments in Brooklyn had fewer than 20 employees. As of August 2008[ [update]], the borough's unemployment rate was 5.9%.\nBrooklyn is also home to many banks and credit unions. According to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, there were 37 banks and 26 credit unions operating in the borough in 2010.\nThe rezoning of Downtown Brooklyn has generated over US$10 billion of private investment and $300 million in public improvements since 2004. Brooklyn is also attracting numerous high technology start-up companies, as Silicon Alley, the metonym for New York City's entrepreneurship ecosystem, has expanded from Lower Manhattan into Brooklyn.\nParks and other attractions.\nSports.\nBrooklyn's major professional sports team is the NBA's Brooklyn Nets. The Nets moved into the borough in 2012, and play their home games at Barclays Center in Prospect Heights. Previously, the Nets had played in Uniondale, New York and in New Jersey. In April 2020, the New York Liberty of the WNBA were sold to the Nets' owners and moved their home venue from Madison Square Garden to the Barclays Center.\nBarclays Center was also the home arena for the NHL's New York Islanders full-time from 2015 to 2018, then part-time from 2018 to 2020 (alternating with Nassau Coliseum in Uniondale). The Islanders had originally played at Nassau Coliseum full-time since their inception until 2015 when their lease at the venue expired and the team moved to Barclays Center. In 2020, the team returned to Nassau Coliseum full-time for one season before moving to the UBS Arena in Elmont, New York in 2021.\nBrooklyn also has a storied sports history. It has been home to many famous sports figures such as Joe Paterno, Vince Lombardi, Mike Tyson, Zab Judah, Joe Torre, Sandy Koufax, Billy Cunningham and Vitas Gerulaitis. Basketball legend Michael Jordan was born in Brooklyn though he grew up in Wilmington, North Carolina.\nIn the earliest days of organized baseball, Brooklyn teams dominated the new game. The second recorded game of baseball was played near what is now Fort Greene Park on October 24, 1845. Brooklyn's Excelsiors, Atlantics and Eckfords were the leading teams from the mid-1850s through the Civil War, and there were dozens of local teams with neighborhood league play, such as at Mapleton Oval. During this \"Brooklyn era\", baseball evolved into the modern game: the first fastball, first changeup, first batting average, first triple play, first pro baseball player, first enclosed ballpark, first scorecard, first known African-American team, first black championship game, first road trip, first gambling scandal, and first eight pennant winners were all in or from Brooklyn.\nBrooklyn's most famous historical team, the Brooklyn Dodgers, named for \"trolley dodgers\" played at Ebbets Field. In 1947 Jackie Robinson was hired by the Dodgers as the first African-American player in Major League Baseball in the modern era. In 1955, the Dodgers, perennial National League pennant winners, won the only World Series for Brooklyn against their rival New York Yankees. The event was marked by mass euphoria and celebrations. Just two years later, the Dodgers moved to Los Angeles. Walter O'Malley, the team's owner at the time, is still vilified, even by Brooklynites too young to remember the Dodgers as Brooklyn's ball club.\nAfter a 43-year hiatus, professional baseball returned to the borough in 2001 with the Brooklyn Cyclones, a minor league team that plays in MCU Park in Coney Island. They are an affiliate of the New York Mets.\nThe minor-league New York Cosmos soccer club played its home games at MCU Park in 2017. A new Brooklyn FC will begin play in 2024, fielding a women's team in the first-division USL Super League and a men's team in the second-division USL Championship beginning in 2025.\nBrooklyn once had a National Football League team named the Brooklyn Lions in 1926, who played at Ebbets Field.\nIn rugby union, Rugby United New York joined Major League Rugby in 2019 and played their home games at MCU Park through the 2021 season.\nBrooklyn has one of the most active recreational fishing fleets in the United States. In addition to a large private fleet along Jamaica Bay, there is a substantial public fleet within Sheepshead Bay. Species caught include Black Fish, Porgy, Striped Bass, Black Sea Bass, Fluke, and Flounder.\nGovernment and politics.\nEach of New York City's five counties, coterminous with each borough, has its own criminal court system and District Attorney, the chief public prosecutor who is directly elected by popular vote. Brooklyn has 16 City Council members, the largest number of any of the five boroughs. The Brooklyn Borough Government includes a borough government president and a court, library, borough government board, head of borough government, deputy head of borough government and deputy borough government president.\nBrooklyn has 18 of the city's 59 community districts, each served by an unpaid community board with advisory powers under the city's Uniform Land Use Review Procedure. Each board has a paid district manager who acts as an interlocutor with city agencies. The Kings County Democratic County Committee (aka the Brooklyn Democratic Party) is the county committee of the Democratic Party in Brooklyn.\nThe United States Postal Service operates post offices in Brooklyn. The Brooklyn Main Post Office is located at 271 Cadman Plaza East in Downtown Brooklyn.\n&lt;section begin=\"federal-reps\"/&gt;As is the case with sister boroughs Manhattan and the Bronx, Brooklyn has not voted for a Republican in a national presidential election since Calvin Coolidge in 1924. In the 2008 presidential election, Democrat Barack Obama received 79.4% of the vote in Brooklyn while Republican John McCain received 20.0%. In 2012, Barack Obama increased his Democratic margin of victory in the borough, dominating Brooklyn with 82.0% of the vote to Republican Mitt Romney's 16.9%.\nIn 2024, Republican Donald Trump reached 27% of the vote, and held Kamala Harris at just over 70%, a significant shift from Joe Biden's performance of over 76% in 2020. While still a decisive Democratic victory, this was the strongest Republican support in Brooklyn since 1988, and the largest number of raw Republican votes there since 1972.\nFederal representation.\nAs of 2023, four Democrats and one Republican represented Brooklyn in the United States House of Representatives. One congressional district lies entirely within the borough.\nHousing.\nBrooklyn offers a wide array of private housing, as well as public housing, which is administered by the New York City Housing Authority (NYCHA). Affordable rental and co-operative housing units throughout the borough were created under the Mitchell\u2013Lama Housing Program.\nThere were 1,101,441 housing units in 2022 at an average density of . Public housing administered by NYCHA accounts for more than 100,000 residents in nearly 50,000 units in 2023.\nEducation.\nEducation in Brooklyn is provided by a vast number of public and private institutions. Non-charter public schools in the borough are managed by the New York City Department of Education, the largest public school system in the United States.\nBrooklyn Technical High School, commonly called Brooklyn Tech, a New York City public high school, is the largest specialized high school for science, mathematics, and technology in the United States. Brooklyn Tech opened in 1922. Brooklyn Tech is across the street from Fort Greene Park. This high school was built from 1930 to 1933 at a cost of about $6\u00a0million and is 12 stories high. It covers about half of a city block. Brooklyn Tech is noted for its famous alumni (including two Nobel Laureates), its academics, and a large number of graduates attending prestigious universities.\nHigher education.\nPublic colleges.\nBrooklyn College is a senior college of the City University of New York (CUNY), and was the first public coeducational liberal arts college in New York City. The college ranked in the top 10 nationally for the second consecutive year in Princeton Review's 2006 guidebook, \"America's Best Value Colleges\". Many of its students are first and second-generation Americans. Founded in 1970, Medgar Evers College is a senior college of the City University of New York. The college offers programs at the baccalaureate and associate degree levels, as well as adult and continuing education classes for central Brooklyn residents, corporations, government agencies, and community organizations. Medgar Evers College is a few blocks east of Prospect Park in Crown Heights.\nCUNY's New York City College of Technology (City Tech) of The City University of New York (Downtown Brooklyn/Brooklyn Heights) is the largest public college of technology in New York State and a national model for technological education. Established in 1946, City Tech can trace its roots to 1881 when the Technical Schools of the Metropolitan Museum of Art were renamed the New York Trade School. That institution\u2014which became the Voorhees Technical Institute many decades later\u2014was soon a model for the development of technical and vocational schools worldwide. In 1971, Voorhees was incorporated into City Tech.\nSUNY Downstate College of Medicine, founded as the Long Island College Hospital in 1860, is the oldest hospital-based medical school in the United States. The Medical Center comprises the College of Medicine, College of Health Related Professions, College of Nursing, School of Public Health, School of Graduate Studies, and University Hospital of Brooklyn. The Nobel Prize winner Robert F. Furchgott was a member of its faculty. Half of the Medical Center's students are minorities or immigrants. The College of Medicine has the highest percentage of minority students of any medical school in New York State.\nPrivate colleges.\nAdelphi University, based in Garden City, moved its Manhattan Campus in 2023 to a new location on Livingston Street in Downtown Brooklyn. The move marks a return to Brooklyn for the university, which originated on Adelphi Street with the Adelphi Academy. The facility is shared with St. Francis College, which has created a new campus at 179 Livingston Street.\nBrooklyn Law School was founded in 1901 and is notable for its diverse student body. Women and African Americans were enrolled in 1909. According to the Leiter Report, a compendium of law school rankings published by Brian Leiter, Brooklyn Law School places 31st nationally for the quality of students.\nLong Island University is a private university headquartered in Brookville on Long Island, with a campus in Downtown Brooklyn with 6,417 undergraduate students. The Brooklyn campus has strong science and medical technology programs, at the graduate and undergraduate levels.\nPratt Institute, in Clinton Hill, is a private college founded in 1887 with programs in engineering, architecture, and the arts. Some buildings in the school's Brooklyn campus are official landmarks. Pratt has over 4700 students, with most at its Brooklyn campus. Graduate programs include a library and information science, architecture, and urban planning. Undergraduate programs include architecture, construction management, writing, critical and visual studies, industrial design and fine arts, totaling over 25 programs in all.\nThe New York University Tandon School of Engineering, the United States' second oldest private institute of technology, founded in 1854, has its main campus in Downtown's MetroTech Center, a commercial, civic and educational redevelopment project of which it was a key sponsor. NYU-Tandon is one of the 18 schools and colleges that comprise New York University (NYU).\nSt. Francis College is a Catholic college in Downtown Brooklyn founded in 1859 by Franciscan friars. Over 2,400 students attend the small liberal arts college. St. Francis is considered by \"The New York Times\" as one of the more diverse colleges, and was ranked one of the best baccalaureate colleges by \"Forbes\" magazine and \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\".\nBrooklyn also has smaller liberal arts institutions, such as Saint Joseph's College in Clinton Hill and Boricua College in Williamsburg.\nCommunity colleges.\nKingsborough Community College is a junior college in the City University of New York system in Manhattan Beach.\nPublic Colleges.\nNew York City College of Technology(City Tech) is a public college in New York City. Founded in 1946, it is the City University of New York's college of technology. Its main urban campus is located in Downtown Brooklyn.\nBrooklyn Public Library.\nAs an independent system, separate from the New York and Queens public library systems, the Brooklyn Public Library offers thousands of public programs, millions of books, and use of more than 850 free Internet-accessible computers. It also has books and periodicals in all the major languages spoken in Brooklyn, including English, Russian, Chinese, Spanish, Hebrew, and Haitian Creole, as well as French, Yiddish, Hindi, Bengali, Polish, Italian, and Arabic. The Central Library is a landmarked building facing Grand Army Plaza.\nThere are 58 library branches, placing one within a half-mile of each Brooklyn resident. In addition to its specialized Business Library in Brooklyn Heights, the Library is preparing to construct its new Visual &amp; Performing Arts Library (VPA) in the BAM Cultural District, which will focus on the link between new and emerging arts and technology and house traditional and digital collections. It will provide access and training to arts applications and technologies not widely available to the public. The collections will include the subjects of art, theater, dance, music, film, photography, and architecture. A special archive will house the records and history of Brooklyn's arts communities.\nTransportation.\nPublic transport.\nIn 2015, about 57 percent of all households in Brooklyn were households without automobiles. The citywide rate is 55 percent in New York City.\nBrooklyn features extensive public transit. Nineteen New York City Subway services, including the Franklin Avenue Shuttle, traverse the borough. Approximately 92.8% of Brooklyn residents traveling to Manhattan use the subway, despite the fact some neighborhoods like Flatlands and Marine Park are poorly served by subway service. Major stations, out of the 170 currently in Brooklyn, include:\nProposed New York City Subway lines never built include a line along Nostrand or Utica Avenues to Marine Park, as well as a subway line to Spring Creek.\nBrooklyn was once served by an extensive network of streetcars, but many were replaced by the public bus network that covers the entire borough. There is also daily express bus service into Manhattan. New York's famous yellow cabs also provide transportation in Brooklyn, although they are less numerous in the borough. There are three commuter rail stations in Brooklyn: East New York, Nostrand Avenue, and Atlantic Terminal, the terminus of the Atlantic Branch of the Long Island Rail Road. The terminal is near the Atlantic Avenue\u2013Barclays Center subway station, with ten connecting subway services.\nIn February 2015, Mayor Bill de Blasio announced that the city government would begin a citywide ferry service called NYC Ferry to extend ferry transportation to communities in the city that have been traditionally underserved by public transit. The ferry opened in May 2017, with the Bay Ridge ferry serving southwestern Brooklyn and the East River Ferry serving northwestern Brooklyn. A third route, the Rockaway ferry, makes one stop in the borough at Brooklyn Army Terminal.\nA streetcar line, the Brooklyn\u2013Queens Connector, was proposed by the city in February 2016, with the planned timeline calling for service to begin around 2024.\nRoadways.\nMost of the limited-access expressways and parkways are in the western and southern sections of Brooklyn, where the borough's two interstate highways are located; Interstate 278, which uses the Gowanus Expressway and the Brooklyn\u2013Queens Expressway, traverses Sunset Park and Brooklyn Heights, while Interstate 478 is an unsigned route designation for the Brooklyn\u2013Battery Tunnel, which connects to Manhattan. Other prominent roadways are the Prospect Expressway (New York State Route 27), the Belt Parkway, and the Jackie Robinson Parkway (formerly the Interborough Parkway). Planned expressways that were never built include the Bushwick Expressway, an extension of I-78 and the Cross-Brooklyn Expressway, I-878. Major thoroughfares include Atlantic Avenue, Fourth Avenue, 86th Street, Kings Highway, Bay Parkway, Ocean Parkway, Eastern Parkway, Linden Boulevard, McGuinness Boulevard, Flatbush Avenue, Pennsylvania Avenue, and Nostrand Avenue.\nMuch of Brooklyn has only named streets, but Park Slope, Bay Ridge, Sunset Park, Bensonhurst, and Borough Park and the other western sections have numbered streets running approximately northwest to southeast, and numbered avenues going approximately northeast to southwest. East of Dahill Road, lettered avenues (like Avenue M) run east and west, and numbered streets have the prefix \"East\". South of Avenue O, related numbered streets west of Dahill Road use the \"West\" designation.\nThis set of numbered streets ranges from West 37th Street to East 108 Street, and the avenues range from A\u2013Z with names substituted for some of them in some neighborhoods (notably Albemarle, Beverley, Cortelyou, Dorchester, Ditmas, Foster, Farragut, Glenwood, Quentin). Numbered streets prefixed by \"North\" and \"South\" in Williamsburg, and \"Bay\", \"Beach\", \"Brighton\", \"Plumb\", \"Paerdegat\" or \"Flatlands\" along the southern and southwestern waterfront are loosely based on the old grids of the original towns of Kings County that eventually consolidated to form Brooklyn. These names often reflect the bodies of water or beaches around them, such as Plumb Beach or Paerdegat Basin.\nBrooklyn is connected to Manhattan by three bridges, the Brooklyn, Manhattan, and Williamsburg Bridge; a vehicular tunnel, the Brooklyn\u2013Battery Tunnel (also known as the Hugh L. Carey Tunnel); and several subway tunnels. The Verrazzano-Narrows Bridge links Brooklyn with the more suburban borough of Staten Island. Though much of its border is on land, Brooklyn shares several water crossings with Queens, including the Pulaski Bridge, the Greenpoint Avenue Bridge, the Kosciuszko Bridge (part of the Brooklyn\u2013Queens Expressway), and the Grand Street Bridge, all of which carry traffic over Newtown Creek, and the Marine Parkway Bridge connecting Brooklyn to the Rockaway Peninsula.\nWaterways.\nBrooklyn was long a major shipping port, especially at the Brooklyn Army Terminal and Bush Terminal in Sunset Park. Most container ship cargo operations have shifted to the New Jersey side of New York Harbor, while the Brooklyn Cruise Terminal in Red Hook is a focal point for New York's growing cruise industry. The \"Queen Mary 2\", one of the world's largest ocean liners, was designed specifically to fit under the Verrazzano-Narrows Bridge, the longest suspension bridge in the United States. She makes regular ports of call at the Red Hook terminal on her transatlantic crossings from Southampton, England. The Brooklyn waterfront formerly employed tens of thousands of borough residents and acted as an incubator for industries across the entire city, and the decline of the port exacerbated Brooklyn's decline in the second half of the 20th century.\nIn February 2015, Mayor Bill de Blasio announced that the city government would begin NYC Ferry to extend ferry transportation to traditionally underserved communities in the city. The ferry opened in May 2017, offering commuter services from the western shore of Brooklyn to Manhattan via three routes. The East River Ferry serves points in Lower Manhattan, Midtown, Long Island City, and northwestern Brooklyn via its East River route. The South Brooklyn and Rockaway routes serve southwestern Brooklyn before terminating in lower Manhattan. Ferries to Coney Island are also planned.\nNY Waterway offers tours and charters. SeaStreak also offers a weekday ferry service between the Brooklyn Army Terminal and the Manhattan ferry slips at Pier 11/Wall Street downtown and East 34th Street Ferry Landing in midtown. A Cross-Harbor Rail Tunnel, originally proposed in the 1920s as a core project for the then-new Port Authority of New York is again being studied and discussed as a way to ease freight movements across a large swath of the metropolitan area.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nPublished before 1941.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPublished 1941\u2013present.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n Geographic data related to https:// at OpenStreetMap"}
{"id": "47385", "revid": "20585603", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47385", "title": "490s BC", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThis article concerns the period 499 BC \u2013 490 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47386", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47386", "title": "308", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 308 (CCCVIII) was a leap year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar. It was known in the Roman Empire as the Year of the Consulship of Diocletian and (Galerius) Maximianus (or, less frequently, year 1061 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 308 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47387", "revid": "33299132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47387", "title": "William III of England", "text": "King of England, Scotland, and Ireland from 1689 to 1702\nWilliam III and II (William Henry; ; 4 November 1650 \u2013 8 March 1702), also known as William of Orange, was the sovereign Prince of Orange from birth, Stadtholder of Holland, Zeeland, Utrecht, Guelders, and Overijssel in the Dutch Republic from 1672, and King of England, Ireland, and Scotland from 1689 until his death in 1702. He ruled England, Scotland, and Ireland with his wife, Queen Mary II, and their joint reign is known as that of William and Mary.\nWilliam was the only child of William II, Prince of Orange, and Mary, Princess Royal, the daughter of King Charles I of England, Scotland, and Ireland. His father died before his birth, making William III the prince of Orange from birth. In 1677, he married his first cousin Mary, the elder daughter of his maternal uncle James, Duke of York (later King James II).\nWhen the Dutch Republic was attacked by Louis XIV of France in 1672, William rose to power and became Louis's greatest obstacle. He made it his life's mission to oppose Louis and waged many campaigns against the armies of the powerful Catholic French ruler. Many Protestants heralded William as a champion of their faith. In 1685, his Catholic uncle and father-in-law, James, became king of England, Scotland, and Ireland. James's reign was unpopular with Protestants in the British Isles, who opposed Catholic Emancipation. Supported by a group of influential English political and religious leaders, William invaded England in the Glorious Revolution. In 1688, he landed at the south-western English port of Brixham; James was deposed shortly afterward.\nWilliam's reputation as a staunch Protestant enabled him and his wife to take power. During the early years of his reign, William was occupied abroad with the Nine Years' War (1688\u20131697), leaving Mary to govern the three kingdoms alone. She died in 1694. In 1696 the Jacobites, a faction loyal to the deposed James, plotted unsuccessfully to assassinate William and restore James to the throne. In Scotland, William's role in ordering the Massacre of Glencoe remains notorious. William's lack of children and the death in 1700 of his nephew the Duke of Gloucester threatened the Protestant succession. The danger was averted by placing William and Mary's cousins, the Protestant House of Hanover, in line to the throne after Anne with the Act of Settlement 1701. Upon his death in 1702, William was succeeded in his kingdoms by Anne and as titular Prince of Orange by his cousin John William Friso.\nEarly life.\nBirth and family.\nWilliam III and II was born in The Hague in the Dutch Republic on 4 November 1650. Baptised William Henry (), he was the only child of Mary, Princess Royal, and \"stadtholder\" William II, Prince of Orange. Mary was the elder daughter of King Charles I of England, Scotland and Ireland and sister of kings Charles II and James II and VII.\nEight days before William was born, his father died of smallpox; thus, William was the sovereign Prince of Orange from the moment of his birth. Immediately, a conflict arose between his mother and his paternal grandmother, Amalia of Solms-Braunfels, over the name to be given to the infant. Mary wanted to name him Charles after her brother, but her mother-in-law insisted on giving him the name William (\"Willem\") to bolster his prospects of becoming \"stadtholder\". William II had intended to appoint his wife as their son's guardian in his will; however, the document remained unsigned at William II's death and was therefore void. On 13 August 1651, the \"Hoge Raad van Holland en Zeeland\" (Supreme Court) ruled that guardianship would be shared between his mother, his grandmother and Frederick William, Elector of Brandenburg, husband of his paternal aunt Louise Henriette.\nChildhood and education.\nWilliam's mother showed little personal interest in her son, sometimes being absent for years, and had always deliberately kept herself apart from Dutch society. William's education was first laid in the hands of several Dutch governesses, some of English descent, including Walburg Howard and the Scottish noblewoman Lady Anna Mackenzie. From April 1656, the Prince received daily instruction in the Reformed religion from the Calvinist preacher Cornelis Trigland, a follower of the Contra-Remonstrant theologian Gisbertus Voetius.\nThe ideal education for William was described in \"Discours sur la nourriture de S. H. Monseigneur le Prince d'Orange\", a short treatise, perhaps by one of William's tutors, Constantijn Huygens. In these lessons, the Prince was taught that he was predestined to become an instrument of Divine Providence, fulfilling the historical destiny of the House of Orange-Nassau. William was seen, despite his youth, as the leader of the \"Orangist\" party, heir to the stadholderships of several provinces and the office of Captain-General of the Union (see Politics and government of the Dutch Republic). He was viewed as the leader of the nation in its independence movement and its protector from foreign threats. This was in the tradition of the princes of Orange before him: his great-grandfather William the Silent, his grand-uncle Maurice, his grandfather Frederick Henry, and his father William II.\nFrom early 1659, William spent seven years at the University of Leiden for a formal education, under the guidance of ethics professor Hendrik Bornius (though never officially enrolling as a student). While residing in the Prinsenhof at Delft, William had a small personal retinue including Hans Willem Bentinck, and a new governor, Frederick Nassau de Zuylenstein, who (as an illegitimate son of stadtholder Frederick Henry of Orange) was his paternal uncle.\nGrand Pensionary Johan de Witt and his uncle Cornelis de Graeff pushed the States of Holland to take charge of William's education and ensure that he would acquire the skills to serve in a future\u2014though undetermined\u2014state function; the States acted on 25 September 1660. Around this time, the young prince played with De Graeff's sons Pieter and Jacob de Graeff in the park of the country house in Soestdijk. In 1674 Wilhelm bought the estate from Jacob de Graeff, which was later converted into Soestdijk Palace. This first involvement of the authorities did not last long. On 23 December 1660, when William was ten years old, his mother died of smallpox at Whitehall Palace, London, while visiting her brother, the recently restored King Charles II. In her will, Mary requested that Charles look after William's interests, and Charles now demanded that the States of Holland end their interference. To appease Charles, they complied on 30 September 1661. That year, Zuylenstein began to work for Charles and induced William to write letters to his uncle asking him to help William become stadtholder someday. After his mother's death, William's education and guardianship became a point of contention between his dynasty's supporters and the advocates of a more republican Netherlands.\nThe Dutch authorities did their best at first to ignore these intrigues, but in the Second Anglo-Dutch War, one of Charles's peace conditions was the improvement of the position of his nephew. As a countermeasure in 1666, when William was sixteen, the States officially made him a ward of the government, or a \"Child of State\". All pro-English courtiers, including Zuylenstein, were removed from William's company. William begged de Witt to allow Zuylenstein to stay, but he refused. De Witt, the leading politician of the Republic, took William's education into his own hands, instructing him weekly in state matters and joining him for regular games of real tennis.\nEarly offices.\nExclusion from stadtholdership.\nAfter the death of William's father, most provinces had left the office of stadtholder vacant. At the demand of Oliver Cromwell, the Treaty of Westminster, which ended the First Anglo-Dutch War, had a secret annexe that required the Act of Seclusion, which forbade the province of Holland from appointing a member of the House of Orange as stadtholder. After the English Restoration, the Act of Seclusion, which had not remained a secret for long, was declared void as the English Commonwealth (with which the treaty had been concluded) no longer existed. In 1660, William's mother Mary and grandmother Amalia tried to persuade several provincial States to designate William as their future stadtholder, but they all initially refused.\nIn 1667, as William approached the age of 18, the Orangist party again attempted to bring him to power by securing for him the offices of stadtholder and Captain-General. To prevent the restoration of the influence of the House of Orange, de Witt, the leader of the States Party, allowed the pensionary of Haarlem, Gaspar Fagel, to induce the States of Holland to issue the Perpetual Edict. The Edict, supported by the important Amsterdam politicians Andries de Graeff and Gillis Valckenier, declared that the Captain-General or Admiral-General of the Netherlands could not serve as stadtholder in any province. Even so, William's supporters sought ways to enhance his prestige and, on 19 September 1668, the States of Zeeland appointed him as \"First Noble\". To receive this honour, William had to escape the attention of his state tutors and travel secretly to Middelburg. A month later, Amalia allowed William to manage his own household and declared him to be of majority age.\nThe province of Holland, the centre of anti-Orangism, abolished the office of stadtholder, and four other provinces followed suit in March 1670, establishing the so-called \"Harmony\". De Witt demanded an oath from each Holland regent (city council member) to uphold the Edict; all but one complied. William saw all this as a defeat, but the arrangement was a compromise: De Witt would have preferred to ignore the Prince completely, but now his eventual rise to the office of supreme army commander was implicit. De Witt further conceded that William would be admitted as a member of the \"Raad van State\", the Council of State, then the generality organ administering the defence budget. William was introduced to the council on 31 May 1670 with full voting rights, despite de Witt's attempts to limit his role to that of an advisor.\nConflict with republicans.\nIn November 1670, William obtained permission to travel to England to urge Charles to pay back at least a part of the 2,797,859\u00a0guilder debt the House of Stuart owed the House of Orange. Charles was unable to pay, but William agreed to reduce the amount owed to 1,800,000 guilders. Charles found his nephew to be a dedicated Calvinist and patriotic Dutchman and reconsidered his desire to show him the Secret Treaty of Dover with France, directed at destroying the Dutch Republic and installing William as \"sovereign\" of a Dutch rump state. In addition to differing political outlooks, William found that his lifestyle differed from his uncles Charles and James, who were more concerned with drinking, gambling, and cavorting with mistresses.\nThe following year, the Republic's security deteriorated quickly as an Anglo-French attack became imminent. In view of the threat, the States of Gelderland wanted William to be appointed Captain-General of the Dutch States Army as soon as possible, despite his youth and inexperience. On 15 December 1671, the States of Utrecht made this their official policy. On 19 January 1672, the States of Holland made a counterproposal: to appoint William for just a single campaign. The Prince refused this and on 25 February a compromise was reached: an appointment by the States General for one summer, followed by a permanent appointment on his 22nd birthday.\nMeanwhile, William had written a secret letter to Charles in January 1672 asking his uncle to exploit the situation by exerting pressure on the States to appoint William stadtholder. In return, William would ally the Republic with England and serve Charles's interests as much as his \"honour and the loyalty due to this state\" allowed. Charles took no action on the proposal, and continued his war plans with his French ally.\nBecoming stadtholder.\n\"Disaster year\" and Franco-Dutch War.\nFor the Dutch Republic, 1672 proved calamitous. It became known as the \"Rampjaar\" (\"disaster year\") because in the Franco-Dutch War and the Third Anglo-Dutch War, the Netherlands was invaded by France and its allies: England, M\u00fcnster, and Cologne. Although the Anglo-French fleet was disabled by the Battle of Solebay, in June the French Army quickly overran the provinces of Gelderland and Utrecht. On 14 June, William withdrew with the remnants of his field army into Holland, where the States had ordered the flooding of the Dutch Waterline on 8 June. Louis XIV of France, believing the war was over, began negotiations to extract as large a sum of money from the Dutch as possible. The presence of a large French army in the heart of the Republic caused a general panic, and the people turned against de Witt and his allies.\nOn 4 July, the States of Holland appointed William stadtholder, and he took the oath five days later. The next day, a special envoy from Charles II, Lord Arlington, met William in Nieuwerbrug and presented a proposal from Charles. In return for William's capitulation to England and France, Charles would make William Sovereign Prince of Holland, instead of stadtholder (a mere civil servant). When William refused, Arlington threatened that William would witness the end of the Republic's existence. William answered famously: \"There is one way to avoid this: to die defending it in the last ditch.\" On 7 July, the inundations were complete and the further advance of the French army was effectively blocked. On 16 July, Zeeland offered the stadtholdership to William.\nJohan de Witt had been unable to function as Grand Pensionary after being wounded by an attempt on his life on 21 June. On 15 August, William published a letter from Charles, in which the English king stated that he had made war because of the aggression of the de Witt faction. The people thus incited, de Witt and his brother, Cornelis, were brutally murdered by an Orangist civil militia in The Hague on 20 August. Subsequently, William replaced many of the Dutch regents with his followers.\nThough William's complicity in the lynching has never been proved (and some 19th-century Dutch historians have made an effort to disprove that he was an accessory), he thwarted attempts to prosecute the ringleaders, and even rewarded some, like Hendrik Verhoeff, with money, and others, like Johan van Banchem and Johan Kievit, with high offices. This damaged his reputation in the same fashion as his later actions at Glencoe.\nWilliam continued to fight against the invaders from England and France, allying himself with Spain, Brandenburg, and Leopold I, Holy Roman Emperor. In November 1672, he took his army to Maastricht to threaten the French supply lines and then attacked Charleroi. In September 1673, the Dutch situation further improved. The resolute defence by John Maurice of Nassau-Siegen and Hans Willem van Aylva in the north of the Dutch Republic finally forced the troops of M\u00fcnster and Cologne to withdraw, while William crossed the Dutch Waterline and recaptured Naarden. In November, a 30,000-strong Dutch-Spanish army, under William's command, marched into the lands of the Bishops of M\u00fcnster and Cologne. The Dutch troops took revenge and carried out many atrocities. Together with 35,000 Imperial troops, they then captured Bonn, an important magazine in the long logistical lines between France and the Dutch Republic. The French position in the Netherlands became untenable and Louis was forced to evacuate French troops. This deeply shocked Louis and he retreated to Saint Germain where no one, except a few intimates, were allowed to disturb him. The next year only Grave and Maastricht remained in French hands.\nFagel now proposed to treat the liberated provinces of Utrecht, Gelderland and Overijssel as conquered territory (Generality Lands), as punishment for their quick surrender to the enemy. William refused but obtained a special mandate from the States General to appoint all delegates in the States of these provinces anew. William's followers in the States of Utrecht on 26 April 1674 appointed him hereditary stadtholder. On 30 January 1675, the States of Gelderland offered him the titles of Duke of Guelders and Count of Zutphen. The negative reactions to this from Zeeland and the city of Amsterdam made William ultimately decide to decline these honours; he was instead appointed stadtholder of Gelderland and Overijssel. Baruch Spinoza's warning in his Political Treatise of 1677 of the need to organize the state so that the citizens maintain control over the sovereign was an influential expression of this unease with the concentration of power in one person.\nMeanwhile, the front of the war against France had shifted to the Spanish Netherlands. In 1674, Allied forces in the Netherlands were numerically superior to the French army under Cond\u00e9, which was based along the Pi\u00e9ton river near Charleroi. William took the offensive and sought to bring on a battle by outflanking the French positions but the broken ground forced him to divide his army into three separate columns. At Seneffe, Cond\u00e9 led a cavalry attack against the Allied vanguard and by midday on 11 August had halted their advance. Against the advice of his subordinates, he then ordered a series of frontal assaults which led to very heavy casualties on both sides with no concrete result. William and the Dutch blamed the Imperial commander, Jean-Louis Raduit de Souches, and after a failed attempt to capture Oudenaarde, largely due to obstructionism from de Souches, he was relieved of command. Frustrated, William joined the army under Carl von Rabenhaupt with 10,000 troops instead of campaigning further in the Spanish Netherlands. He assumed command of operations at Grave, which had been besieged since 28 June. Grave surrendered on 27 October. The Dutch were split by internal disputes; the powerful Amsterdam mercantile body was anxious to end an expensive war once their commercial interests were secured, while William saw France as a long-term threat that had to be defeated. This conflict increased once ending the war became a distinct possibility when Grave was captured in October 1674, leaving only Maastricht.\nOn both sides, the last years of the war saw minimal return for their investment of men and money. The French were preparing a major offensive, however, at the end of 1676. Intended to capture Valenciennes, Cambrai and Saint-Omer in the Spanish Netherlands. Louis believed this would deprive the Dutch regents of the courage to continue the war any longer. In this, however, he was mistaken. The impending French offensive actually led to an intensification of Dutch-Spanish cooperation. Still, the French offensive of 1677 was a success. The Spaniards found it difficult to raise enough troops due to financial constraints and the Allies were defeated in the Battle of Cassel. This meant that they could not prevent the cities from falling into French hands. The French then took a defensive posture, afraid that more success would force England to intervene on the side of the Allies.\nThe peace talks that began at Nijmegen in 1676 were given a greater sense of urgency in November 1677 when William married his cousin Mary, Charles II of England's niece. An Anglo-Dutch defensive alliance followed in March 1678, although English troops did not arrive in significant numbers until late May. Louis seized this opportunity to improve his negotiating position and captured Ypres and Ghent in early March, before signing a peace treaty with the Dutch on 10 August.\nThe Battle of Saint-Denis was fought three days later on 13 August, when a combined Dutch-Spanish force under William attacked the French army under Luxembourg. Luxembourg withdrew and William thus ensured Mons would remain in Spanish hands. On 19 August, Spain and France agreed an armistice, followed by a formal peace treaty on 17 September. \nThe war had seen the rebirth of the Dutch States Army as one of the most disciplined and best-trained European armed forces. This had not been enough to keep France from making conquests in the Spanish Netherlands, which William and the regents blamed mainly on the Spaniards; the Dutch expected the once powerful Spanish Empire to have more military strength.\nMarriage.\nDuring the war with France, William tried to improve his position by marrying, in 1677, his first cousin Mary, elder surviving daughter of the Duke of York, later King James II of England (James VII of Scotland). Mary was eleven years his junior and he anticipated resistance to a Stuart match from the Amsterdam merchants who had disliked his mother (another Mary Stuart), but William believed that marrying Mary would increase his chances of succeeding to Charles's kingdoms, and would draw England's monarch away from his pro-French policies. James was not inclined to consent, but Charles II pressured his brother to agree. Charles wanted to use the possibility of marriage to gain leverage in negotiations relating to the war, but William insisted that the two issues be decided separately. Charles relented, and Bishop Henry Compton married the couple on 4 November 1677. Mary became pregnant soon after the marriage, but miscarried. After a further illness later in 1678, she never conceived again.\nThroughout William and Mary's marriage, William had only one reputed mistress, Elizabeth Villiers, in contrast to the many mistresses his uncles openly kept.\nTensions with France, intrigue with England.\nBy 1678, Louis XIV sought peace with the Dutch Republic. Even so, tensions remained: William remained suspicious of Louis, thinking that the French king desired \"universal kingship\" over Europe; Louis described William as \"my mortal enemy\" and saw him as an obnoxious warmonger. France's annexations in the Southern Netherlands and Germany (the \"R\u00e9union\" policy) and the revocation of the Edict of Nantes in 1685, caused a surge of Huguenot refugees to the Republic. This led William to join various anti-French alliances, such as the Association League, and ultimately the League of Augsburg (an anti-French coalition that also included the Habsburg monarchy, Sweden, Spain and several German states) in 1686.\nAfter his marriage in November 1677, William became a strong candidate for the English throne should his father-in-law (and uncle) James be excluded because of his Catholicism. During the crisis concerning the Exclusion Bill in 1680, Charles at first invited William to come to England to bolster the King's position against the exclusionists, then withdrew his invitation\u2014after which Lord Sunderland also tried unsuccessfully to bring William over, but now to put pressure on Charles. Nevertheless, William secretly induced the States General to send Charles the \"Insinuation\", a plea beseeching the King to prevent any Catholics from succeeding him, without explicitly naming James. After receiving indignant reactions from Charles and James, William denied any involvement.\nIn 1685, when James II succeeded Charles, William at first attempted a conciliatory approach, at the same time trying not to offend the Protestants in England. William, ever looking for ways to diminish the power of France, hoped that James would join the League of Augsburg, but by 1687 it became clear that James would not join the anti-French alliance. Relations worsened between William and James thereafter. In November, James's second wife, Mary of Modena, was announced to be pregnant. That month, to gain the favour of English Protestants, William wrote an open letter to the English people in which he disapproved of James's pro-Roman Catholic policy of religious toleration. Seeing him as a friend, and often having maintained secret contacts with him for years, many English politicians began to urge an armed invasion of England.\nGlorious Revolution.\nInvasion of England.\nWilliam at first opposed the prospect of invasion, but most historians now agree that he began to assemble an expeditionary force in April 1688, as it became increasingly clear that France would remain occupied by campaigns in Germany and Italy, and thus unable to mount an attack while William's troops would be occupied in Britain. Believing that the English people would not react well to a foreign invader, he demanded in a letter to Rear-Admiral Arthur Herbert that the most eminent English Protestants first invite him to invade. In June, Mary of Modena, after a string of miscarriages, gave birth to a son, James Francis Edward Stuart, who displaced William's Protestant wife to become first in the line of succession and raised the prospect of an ongoing Catholic monarchy. Public anger also increased because of the trial of seven bishops who had publicly opposed James's Declaration of Indulgence granting religious liberty to his subjects, a policy which appeared to threaten the establishment of the Church of England.\nOn 30 June 1688\u2014the same day the bishops were acquitted\u2014a group of political figures, known afterward as the \"Immortal Seven\", sent William a formal invitation. William's intentions to invade were public knowledge by September 1688. With a Dutch army, William landed at Brixham in southwest England on 5 November 1688. He came ashore from the ship \"Den Briel\", proclaiming \"the liberties of England and the Protestant religion I will maintain\". William's fleet was vastly larger than the Spanish Armada 100 years earlier: approximately consisting of 463\u00a0ships with 40,000\u00a0men on board, including 9,500 sailors, 11,000 foot soldiers, 4,000 cavalry and 5,000 English and Huguenot volunteers. James's support began to dissolve almost immediately upon William's arrival; Protestant officers defected from the English Army (the most notable of whom was Lord Churchill of Eyemouth, James's most able commander), and influential noblemen across the country declared their support for the invader.\nJames at first attempted to resist William, but saw that his efforts would prove futile. He sent representatives to negotiate with William, but secretly attempted to flee on 11 December, throwing the Great Seal into the Thames on his way. He was discovered and brought back to London by a group of fishermen. He was allowed to leave for France in a second escape attempt on 23 December. William permitted James to leave the country, not wanting to make him a martyr for the Roman Catholic cause; it was in his interests for James to be perceived as having left the country of his own accord, rather than having been forced or frightened into fleeing. William is the last person to successfully invade England by force of arms.\nProclaimed king.\nWilliam summoned a Convention Parliament in England, which met on 22 January 1689, to discuss the appropriate course of action following James's flight. William felt insecure about his position; though his wife preceded him in the line of succession to the throne, he wished to reign as king in his own right, rather than as a mere consort. The only precedent for a joint monarchy in England dated from the 16th century, when Queen Mary I married Philip of Spain. Philip remained king only during his wife's lifetime, and restrictions were placed on his power. William, on the other hand, demanded that he remain as king even after his wife's death. When the majority of Tory Lords proposed to acclaim her as sole ruler, William threatened to leave the country immediately. Furthermore, she, remaining loyal to her husband, refused.\nThe House of Commons, with a Whig majority, quickly resolved that the throne was vacant, and that it was safer if the ruler were Protestant. There were more Tories in the House of Lords, which would not initially agree, but after William refused to be a regent or to agree to remain king only in his wife's lifetime, there were negotiations between the two houses and the Lords agreed by a narrow majority that the throne was vacant. On 13 February 1689, Parliament passed the Declaration of Right, in which it deemed that James, by attempting to flee, had abdicated the government of the realm, thereby leaving the throne vacant.\nThe Crown was not offered to James's infant son, who would have been the heir apparent under normal circumstances, but to William and Mary as joint sovereigns. It was, however, provided that \"the sole and full exercise of the regal power be only in and executed by the said Prince of Orange in the names of the said Prince and Princess during their joint lives\".\nWilliam and Mary were crowned together at Westminster Abbey on 11 April 1689 by the Bishop of London, Henry Compton. Normally, the coronation is performed by the Archbishop of Canterbury, but the Archbishop at the time, William Sancroft, refused to recognise James's removal.\nWilliam also summoned a Convention of the Estates of Scotland, which met on 14 March 1689. He sent it a conciliatory letter, while James sent haughty uncompromising orders, swaying a majority in favour of William. On 11 April, the day of the English coronation, the Convention finally declared that James was no longer King of Scotland. William and Mary were offered the Scottish Crown; they accepted on 11 May.\nRevolution settlement.\nWilliam encouraged the passage of the Toleration Act 1689, which guaranteed religious toleration to Protestant nonconformists. It did not, however, extend toleration as far as he wished, still restricting the religious liberty of Roman Catholics, non-trinitarians, and those of non-Christian faiths. In December 1689, one of the most important constitutional documents in English history, the Bill of Rights, was passed. The Act, which restated and confirmed many provisions of the earlier Declaration of Right, established restrictions on the royal prerogative. It provided, amongst other things, that the Sovereign could not suspend laws passed by Parliament, levy taxes without parliamentary consent, infringe the right to petition, raise a standing army during peacetime without parliamentary consent, deny the right to bear arms to Protestant subjects, unduly interfere with parliamentary elections, punish members of either House of Parliament for anything said during debates, require excessive bail or inflict cruel and unusual punishments. William was opposed to the imposition of such constraints, but he chose not to engage in a conflict with Parliament and agreed to abide by the statute.\nThe Bill of Rights also settled the question of succession to the Crown. After the death of either William or Mary, the other would continue to reign. Next in the line of succession was Mary II's sister, Anne, and her issue, followed by any children William might have had by a subsequent marriage. Roman Catholics, as well as those who married Catholics, were excluded.\nRule with Mary II.\nJacobite resistance.\nAlthough most in Britain accepted William and Mary as sovereigns, a significant minority refused to acknowledge their claim to the throne, instead believing in the divine right of kings, which held that the monarch's authority derived directly from God rather than being delegated to the monarch by Parliament. Over the next 57 years Jacobites pressed for restoration of James and his heirs. Nonjurors in England and Scotland, including over 400 clergy and several bishops of the Church of England and Scottish Episcopal Church as well as numerous laymen, refused to take oaths of allegiance to William.\nIreland was controlled by Roman Catholics loyal to James, and Franco-Irish Jacobites arrived from France with French forces in March 1689 to join the war in Ireland and contest Protestant resistance at the Siege of Derry. William sent his navy to the city in July, and his army landed in August. After progress stalled, William personally intervened to lead his armies to victory over James at the Battle of the Boyne on 1 July 1690, after which James fled back to France.\nUpon William's return to England, his close friend Dutch General Godert de Ginkell, who had accompanied William to Ireland and had commanded a body of Dutch cavalry at the Battle of the Boyne, was named Commander in Chief of William's forces in Ireland and entrusted with further conduct of the war there. Ginkell took command in Ireland in the spring of 1691, and following the Battle of Aughrim, succeeded in capturing both Galway and Limerick, thereby effectively suppressing the Jacobite forces in Ireland within a few more months. After difficult negotiations a capitulation was signed on 3 October 1691\u2014the Treaty of Limerick. Thus concluded the Williamite pacification of Ireland, and for his services, the Dutch general received the formal thanks of the House of Commons and was awarded the title of Earl of Athlone by the King.\nA series of Jacobite risings also took place in Scotland, where John Graham, 1st Viscount Dundee raised Highland forces and won a victory on 27 July 1689 at the Battle of Killiecrankie, but he died in the fight and a month later Scottish Cameronian forces subdued the rising at the Battle of Dunkeld. William offered Scottish clans that had taken part in the rising a pardon provided that they signed allegiance by a deadline, and his government in Scotland punished a delay with the 1692 Massacre of Glencoe, which became infamous in Jacobite propaganda as William had countersigned the orders. Bowing to public opinion, William dismissed those responsible for the massacre, though they still remained in his favour; in the words of the historian John Dalberg-Acton, \"one became a colonel, another a knight, a third a peer, and a fourth an earl.\"\nWilliam's reputation in Scotland suffered further damage when he refused English assistance to the Darien scheme, a Scottish colony (1698\u20131700) that failed disastrously.\nParliament and faction.\nAlthough the Whigs were William's strongest supporters, he initially favoured a policy of balance between the Whigs and Tories. George Savile, 1st Marquess of Halifax, a man known for his ability to chart a moderate political course, gained William's confidence early in his reign. The Whigs, a majority in Parliament, had expected to dominate the government, and were disappointed that William denied them this chance. This \"balanced\" approach to governance did not last beyond 1690, as the conflicting factions made it impossible for the government to pursue effective policy, and William called for new elections early that year.\nAfter the Parliamentary elections of 1690, William began to favour the Tories, led by Thomas Osborne, 1st Earl of Danby and Daniel Finch, 2nd Earl of Nottingham. While the Tories favoured preserving the King's prerogatives, William found them unaccommodating when he asked Parliament to support his continuing war with France. As a result, William began to prefer the Whig faction known as the Junto. The Whig government was responsible for the creation of the Bank of England following the example of the Bank of Amsterdam. William's decision to grant the Royal Charter in 1694 to the Bank of England, a private institution owned by bankers, is his most relevant economic legacy. It laid the financial foundation of the English takeover of the central role of the Dutch Republic and Bank of Amsterdam in global commerce in the 18th century.\nWilliam dissolved Parliament in 1695, and the new Parliament that assembled that year was led by the Whigs. The following year Parliament passed a colonial trade bill.\nWar in Europe.\nWilliam continued to absent himself from Britain for extended periods during his Nine Years' War (1688\u20131697) against France, leaving each spring and returning to England each autumn. England joined the League of Augsburg, which then became known as the Grand Alliance. Whilst William was away fighting, his wife, Mary II, governed the realm, but acted on his advice. Each time he returned to England, Mary gave up her power to him without reservation, an arrangement that lasted for the rest of Mary's life.\nAfter the Anglo-Dutch fleet defeated a French fleet at La Hogue in 1692, the allies controlled the seas for the rest of the conflict, and the Treaty of Limerick (1691) pacified Ireland. At the same time, the Grand Alliance fared poorly in Europe, as William lost Namur in the Spanish Netherlands in 1692. A surprise attack on the French under the command of the Duke of Luxembourg at Steenkerke was repulsed and the French defeated the allies at the Battle of Landen in 1693. However, William managed to inflict such damage on the French in these battles that further major French offensives were ruled out. The following year, the Allies possessed the numerical upper hand in the Low Countries. This enabled William to recapture Huy in 1694. A year later, the Allies achieved their grand success and recaptured Namur from the French. The fortress was considered one of the strongest fortresses in Europe and the conquest was a major blow to Louis XIV's reputation.\nEconomic crisis.\nWilliam's rule led to rapid inflation in England, which caused widespread hunger from 1693 onwards. The Nine Years' War damaged English maritime trade and led to a doubling in taxation. These factors coupled with government mismanagement caused a currency crisis 1695\u20131697 and a run on the recently created Bank of England.\nLater years.\nMary II died of smallpox on 28 December 1694, aged 32, leaving William to rule alone. William deeply mourned his wife's death. Despite his conversion to Anglicanism, William's popularity in England plummeted during his reign as a sole monarch.\nRumours of homosexuality.\nDuring the 1690s, rumours grew of William's alleged homosexual inclinations and led to the publication of many satirical pamphlets by his Jacobite detractors. He did have several close male associates, including two Dutch courtiers to whom he granted English titles: Hans Willem Bentinck became Earl of Portland, and Arnold Joost van Keppel was created Earl of Albemarle. These relationships with male friends, and his apparent lack of mistresses, led William's enemies to suggest that he might prefer homosexual relationships. William's modern biographers disagree on the veracity of these allegations. Some believe there may have been truth to the rumours, while others affirm that they were no more than figments of his enemies' imaginations, as it was common for someone childless like William to adopt, or evince paternal affections for, a younger man.\nWhatever the case, Bentinck's closeness to William did arouse jealousies at the royal court. William's young prot\u00e9g\u00e9, Keppel, aroused more gossip and suspicion, being 20 years William's junior, strikingly handsome, and having risen from the post of a royal page to an earldom with some ease. Portland wrote to William in 1697 that \"the kindness which your Majesty has for a young man, and the way in which you seem to authorise his liberties\u00a0... make the world say things I am ashamed to hear.\" This, he said, was \"tarnishing a reputation which has never before been subject to such accusations\". William tersely dismissed these suggestions, however, saying, \"It seems to me very extraordinary that it should be impossible to have esteem and regard for a young man without it being criminal.\"\nPeace with France.\nIn 1696, the Dutch County of Drenthe made William its Stadtholder. In the same year, Jacobites plotted to assassinate William in an attempt to restore James to the English throne. The plan failed and support for William surged. Parliament passed a bill of attainder against the ringleader, John Fenwick, and he was beheaded in 1697. In accordance with the Treaty of Rijswijk (20 September 1697), which ended the Nine Years' War, King Louis XIV recognised William as King of England, and undertook to give no further assistance to James II. Thus deprived of French dynastic backing after 1697, Jacobites posed no further serious threats during William's reign.\nAs his life drew towards its conclusion, William, like many other contemporary European rulers, felt concern over the question of succession to the throne of Spain, which brought with it vast territories in Italy, the Low Countries and the New World. Charles II of Spain was an invalid with no prospect of having children; some of his closest relatives included Louis XIV of France and Leopold I, Holy Roman Emperor. William sought to prevent the Spanish inheritance from going to either monarch, for he feared that such a calamity would upset the balance of power. William and Louis agreed to the First Partition Treaty (1698), which provided for the division of the Spanish Empire: Joseph Ferdinand, Electoral Prince of Bavaria, would obtain Spain, while France and the Holy Roman Emperor would divide the remaining territories between them. Charles II accepted the nomination of Joseph Ferdinand as his heir, and war appeared to be averted.\nWhen, however, Joseph Ferdinand died of smallpox in February 1699, the issue re-opened. In 1700, William and Louis agreed to the Second Partition Treaty (also called the Treaty of London), under which the territories in Italy would pass to a son of the King of France, and the other Spanish territories would be inherited by a son of the Holy Roman Emperor. This arrangement infuriated both the Spanish, who still sought to prevent the dissolution of their empire, and the Holy Roman Emperor, who regarded the Italian territories as much more useful than the other lands. Unexpectedly, Charles II of Spain interfered as he lay dying in late 1700. Unilaterally, he willed all Spanish territories to Philip, Duke of Anjou, a grandson of Louis XIV. The French conveniently ignored the Second Partition Treaty and claimed the entire Spanish inheritance. Furthermore, Louis alienated William by recognising James Francis Edward Stuart, the son of the former King James II (who died in September 1701), as \"de jure\" King of England. The subsequent conflict, known as the War of the Spanish Succession, broke out in July 1701 and continued until 1713/1714.\nEnglish royal succession.\nAnother royal inheritance, apart from that of Spain, also concerned William. His marriage with Mary had not produced any children, and he did not seem likely to remarry. Mary's sister, Anne, had borne numerous children, all of whom died during childhood. The death of her last surviving child (Prince William, Duke of Gloucester) in 1700 left her as the only individual in the line of succession established by the Bill of Rights. As the complete exhaustion of the defined line of succession would have encouraged a restoration of James II's line, the English Parliament passed the Act of Settlement 1701, which provided that if Anne died without surviving issue and William failed to have surviving issue by any subsequent marriage, the Crown would pass to a distant relative, Sophia, Electress of Hanover (a granddaughter of James I), and to her Protestant heirs. The Act debarred Roman Catholics from the throne, thereby excluding the candidacy of several dozen people more closely related to Mary and Anne than Sophia. The Act extended to England and Ireland, but not to Scotland, whose Estates had not been consulted before the selection of Sophia.\nDeath.\nIn 1702, William died at Kensington Palace of pneumonia, a complication from a broken collarbone following a fall from his horse, Sorrel. It was rumoured that the horse had been confiscated from Sir John Fenwick, one of the Jacobites who had conspired against William. Because his horse had stumbled into a mole's burrow, many Jacobites toasted \"the little gentleman in the black velvet waistcoat\". Years later, Winston Churchill, in his \"A History of the English-Speaking Peoples\", stated that the fall \"opened the door to a troop of lurking foes\". William was buried in Westminster Abbey alongside his wife. His sister-in-law and cousin, Anne, became queen regnant of England, Scotland and Ireland.\nWilliam's death meant that he would remain the only member of the Dutch House of Orange to reign over England. Members of this House had served as stadtholder of Holland and the majority of the other provinces of the Dutch Republic since the time of William the Silent (William I). The five provinces of which William III was stadtholder\u2014Holland, Zeeland, Utrecht, Gelderland, and Overijssel\u2014all suspended the office after his death. Thus, he was the last patrilineal descendant of William I to be named stadtholder for the majority of the provinces. Under William III's will, John William Friso stood to inherit the Principality of Orange as well as several lordships in the Netherlands. He was William's closest agnatic relative, as well as grandson of William's aunt Henriette Catherine. However, Frederick I of Prussia also claimed the principality as the senior cognatic heir, his mother Louise Henriette being Henriette Catherine's older sister. Under the Treaty of Utrecht (1713), Frederick I's successor, Frederick William I of Prussia, ceded his territorial claim to Louis XIV, keeping only a claim to the title. Friso's posthumous son, William IV, succeeded to the title at his birth in 1711; in the Treaty of Partition (1732), William IV agreed to share the title \"Prince of Orange\" with Frederick William.\nLegacy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He was a great man, an enemy of France, to which he did a great deal of harm, but we owe him our esteem.\u2014\u200a \nWilliam's primary achievement was to contain France when it was in a position to impose its will across much of Europe. His life's aim was largely to oppose Louis XIV of France. This effort continued after his death during the War of the Spanish Succession. Another important consequence of William's reign in England involved the ending of a bitter conflict between Crown and Parliament that had lasted since the accession of the first English monarch of the House of Stuart, James I, in 1603. The conflict over royal and parliamentary power had led to the English Civil War during the 1640s and the Glorious Revolution of 1688. During William's reign, however, the conflict was settled in Parliament's favour by the Bill of Rights 1689, the Triennial Act 1694 and the Act of Settlement 1701.\nThe historical verdict on William's qualities as an army commander is mixed. Many contemporaries agreed that he was a great field commander. Even his enemies spoke highly of him. The French Marquis de Quincy, for example, wrote that it was due to William's insight and personal courage that the Allies held out at the Battle of Seneffe, while he also praises how William led his troops to safety during the battles of Steenkerque and Landen. The 19th-century Dutch historian Willem Jan Knoop, who wrote extensively about William's military career, argued that William was an exceptional strategist and considered William\u2019s military thinking unusually advanced for the 17th century, noting that his indirect approach to liberating Dutch territory in 1673, by cutting off French lines of communication, prefigured Napoleonic operational strategy. Still, William has been blamed by French and British historians for his impatience and recklessness, and for treating lightly his life and the lives of his soldiers. British historian John Childs acknowledges William's great qualities, but feels that he fell short as a field commander because, by often throwing himself into the fray, he no longer had the complete oversight. While William's campaigns were often tarnished by setbacks it would be wrong to place the responsibility solely on him. William was nearly always outnumbered and up against a strong uniformly organised army with a coalition army. Many of the coalition troops were not as practised and disciplined as the Dutch troops, and it took time to incorporate them into the Dutch system. William did not attach much value to traditional victory signs either. Aware of his disadvantages, William often focused on limiting enemy gains and considered himself a winner if he managed to inflate French losses to the point where French offensive plans had to be abandoned. The battles he fought were almost all ones of attrition. That the Allies also suffered many casualties he took for granted. The Dutch army organisation was prepared for that; and, from 1689, so was England's.\nWilliam was not only an active field commander but also a military reformer. After the crisis of 1672, William III initiated major reforms that transformed the Dutch States Army into a professional standing force. He ended the system where officers bore the financial risk of war, allowing losses to be quickly replenished, and introduced a modern supply system by outsourcing logistics to private contractors. These changes enabled the Dutch to field larger armies and sustain longer campaigns. By the time of William\u2019s death in 1702, on the eve of the War of the Spanish Succession, the Dutch army was among the best in Europe. The infantry, in particular, was highly regarded and known for its discipline, superior training, and platoon fire.\nWilliam endowed the College of William and Mary in Virginia in 1693. Nassau County, New York, a county on Long Island, is a namesake. Long Island itself was also known as Nassau during early Dutch rule. Though many alumni of Princeton University think that the town of Princeton, New Jersey (and hence the university), were named in his honour, this is probably untrue, although Nassau Hall, the college's first building, is named for him. New York City was briefly renamed New Orange for him in 1673 after the Dutch recaptured the city, which had been renamed New York by the English in 1665. His name was applied to the fort and administrative centre for the city on two separate occasions reflecting his different sovereign status\u2014first as Fort Willem Hendrick in 1673, and then as Fort William in 1691 when the English evicted colonists who had seized the fort and city. Nassau, the capital of The Bahamas, is named after Fort Nassau, which was renamed in 1695 in his honour. The Dutch East India Company built a military fort in Cape Town, South Africa, in the 17th century, naming it the Castle of Good Hope. The five bastions were named after William III's titles: Orange, Nassau, Catzenellenbogen, Buuren and Leerdam.\nTitles, styles, and arms.\nTitles and styles.\nBy 1674, William was fully styled as \"Willem III, by God's grace Prince of Orange, Count of Nassau etc., Stadtholder of Holland, Zeeland, Utrecht etc., Captain- and Admiral-General of the United Netherlands\". After their accession in Great Britain in 1689, William and Mary used the titles \"King and Queen of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, etc.\"\nArms.\nAs Prince of Orange, William's coat of arms was: Quarterly, I Azure billetty a lion rampant Or (for Nassau); II Or a lion rampant guardant Gules crowned Azure (Katzenelnbogen); III Gules a fess Argent (Vianden), IV Gules two lions passant guardant Or, armed and langued azure (Dietz); between the I and II quarters an inescutcheon, Or a fess Sable (Moers); at the fess point an inescutcheon, quarterly I and IV Gules, a bend Or (Ch\u00e2lons); II and III Or a bugle horn Azure, stringed Gules Orange) with an inescutcheon, Nine pieces Or and Azure (Geneva); between the III and IV quarters, an inescutcheon, Gules a fess counter embattled Argent (Buren).\nThe coat of arms used by the king and queen was: Quarterly, I and IV Grand quarterly, Azure three fleurs-de-lis Or (for France) and Gules three lions passant guardant in pale Or (for England); II Or a lion rampant within a double tressure flory-counter-flory Gules (for Scotland); III Azure a harp Or stringed Argent (for Ireland); over all an escutcheon Azure billetty a lion rampant Or.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47389", "revid": "41849648", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47389", "title": "Svein Haraldsson", "text": ""}
{"id": "47390", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47390", "title": "309", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 309 (CCCIX) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar. In the Roman Empire, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Licinianus and Constantius (or, less frequently, year 1062 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 309 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47391", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47391", "title": "307", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 307 (CCCVII) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Severus and Maximinus (or, less frequently, year 1060 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 307 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47392", "revid": "1568174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47392", "title": "310", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 310 (CCCX) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Andronicus and Probus (or, less frequently, year 1063 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 310 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47393", "revid": "1308644683", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47393", "title": "AD 311", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 311 (CCCXI) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Valerius and Maximinus (or, less frequently, year 1064 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 311 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47395", "revid": "1568174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47395", "title": "327", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 327 (CCCXXVII) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known in Rome as the Year of the Consulship of Constantius and Maximus (or, less frequently, year 1080 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 327 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47396", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47396", "title": "328", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 328 (CCCXXVIII) was a leap year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Ianuarinus and Iustus (or, less frequently, year 1081 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 328 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47397", "revid": "28422", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47397", "title": "\u00c6thelfl\u00e6d", "text": "Ruler of Mercia in England from 911 to 918\n\u00c6thelfl\u00e6d (c.\u2009870 \u2013 12 June 918) ruled as Lady of the Mercians in the English Midlands from 911 until her death in 918. She was the eldest child of Alfred the Great, king of the Anglo-Saxon kingdom of Wessex, and his wife Ealhswith.\n\u00c6thelfl\u00e6d was born around 870 at the height of the Viking invasions of England. By 878, most of England was under Danish Viking rule \u2013 East Anglia and Northumbria having been conquered, and Mercia partitioned between the English and the Vikings \u2013 but in that year Alfred won a crucial victory at the Battle of Edington. Soon afterwards the English-controlled western half of Mercia came under the rule of \u00c6thelred, Lord of the Mercians, who accepted Alfred's overlordship. Alfred adopted the title King of the Anglo-Saxons (previously he was titled King of the West Saxons like his predecessors) claiming to rule all Anglo-Saxon people not living in areas under Viking control. In the mid-880s, Alfred sealed the strategic alliance between the surviving English kingdoms by marrying \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d to \u00c6thelred.\n\u00c6thelred played a major role in fighting off renewed Viking attacks in the 890s, together with \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d's brother, the future King Edward the Elder. \u00c6thelred and \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d fortified Worcester, gave generous donations to Mercian churches and built a new minster in Gloucester. \u00c6thelred's health probably declined early in the next decade, after which it is likely that \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d was mainly responsible for the government of Mercia. Edward had succeeded as King of the Anglo-Saxons in 899, and in 909 he sent a West Saxon and Mercian force to raid the northern Danelaw. They returned with the remains of the royal Northumbrian saint Oswald, which were translated to the new Gloucester minster. \u00c6thelred died in 911 and \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d then ruled Mercia as Lady of the Mercians. The accession of a female ruler in Mercia is described by the historian Ian Walker as \"one of the most unique events in early medieval history\".\nAlfred had built a network of fortified burhs and in the 910s Edward and \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d embarked on a programme of extending them. Among the towns where she built defences were Wednesbury, Bridgnorth, Tamworth, Stafford, Warwick, Chirbury and Runcorn. In 917 she sent an army to capture Derby, the first of the Five Boroughs of the Danelaw to fall to the English, a victory described by Tim Clarkson as \"her greatest triumph\". In 918 Leicester surrendered without a fight. Shortly afterwards the Viking leaders of York offered her their loyalty, but she died on 12June 918 before she could take advantage of the offer, and a few months later Edward completed the conquest of Mercia. \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d was succeeded by her daughter \u00c6lfwynn, but in December Edward took personal control of Mercia and carried \u00c6lfwynn off to Wessex.\nHistorians disagree whether Mercia was an independent kingdom under \u00c6thelred and \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d but they agree that \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d was a great ruler who played an important part in the conquest of the Danelaw. She was praised by Anglo-Norman chroniclers such as William of Malmesbury, who described her as \"a powerful accession to [Edward's] party, the delight of his subjects, the dread of his enemies, a woman of enlarged soul\". According to Pauline Stafford, \"like\u00a0... ElizabethI she became a wonder to later ages\". In Nick Higham's view, medieval and modern writers have been so captivated by her that Edward's reputation has suffered unfairly in comparison.\nBackground.\nMercia was the dominant kingdom in southern England in the eighth century and maintained its position until it suffered a decisive defeat by Wessex at the Battle of Ellendun in 825. Thereafter the two kingdoms became allies, which was to be an important factor in English resistance to the Vikings.\nIn 865 the Viking Great Heathen Army landed in East Anglia and used this as a starting point for an invasion. The East Anglians were forced to buy peace and the following year the Vikings invaded Northumbria, where they appointed a puppet king in 867. They then moved on Mercia, where they spent the winter of 867\u2013868. King Burgred of Mercia was joined by King \u00c6thelred of Wessex and his brother, the future King Alfred, for a combined attack on the Vikings, who refused an engagement; in the end the Mercians bought peace with them. The following year, the Vikings conquered East Anglia. In 874 the Vikings expelled King Burgred and Ceolwulf became the last King of Mercia with their support. In 877 the Vikings partitioned Mercia, taking the eastern regions for themselves and allowing Ceolwulf to keep the western ones. He was described by the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" as \"a foolish king's thegn\" who was a puppet of the Vikings. The historian Ann Williams regards this view as partial and distorted, that he was accepted as a true king by the Mercians and by King Alfred. The situation was transformed the following year when Alfred won a decisive victory over the Danes at the Battle of Edington.\nCeolwulf is not recorded after 879. His successor as the ruler of the English western half of Mercia, \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d's husband \u00c6thelred, is first seen in 881 when, according to the historian of medieval Wales, Thomas Charles-Edwards, he led an unsuccessful Mercian invasion of the north Welsh Kingdom of Gwynedd. In 883, he made a grant with the consent of King Alfred, thus acknowledging Alfred's lordship. In 886 Alfred occupied the Mercian town of London, which had been in Viking hands. He then received the submission of all English not under Viking control and handed control of London over to \u00c6thelred. In the 890s, \u00c6thelred and Edward, Alfred's son and future successor, fought off more Viking attacks. Alfred died in 899 and Edward's claim to the throne was disputed by \u00c6thelwold, son of Alfred's elder brother. \u00c6thelwold joined forces with the Vikings when he was unable to get sufficient support in Wessex, and his rebellion only ended with his death in battle in December 902.\nSources.\nThe most important source for history in this period is the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" but \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d is almost ignored in the standard West Saxon version, in what F. T. Wainwright calls \"a conspiracy of silence\". He argues that King Edward was anxious not to encourage Mercian separatism and did not wish to publicise his sister's accomplishments, in case she became a symbol of Mercian claims. Brief details of her actions were preserved in a pro-Mercian version of the \"Chronicle\" known as the \"Mercian Register\" or the \"Annals of \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d\"; although it is now lost, elements were incorporated into several surviving versions of the \"Chronicle\". The \"Register\" covers the years 902 to 924, and focuses on \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d's actions; Edward is hardly mentioned and her husband only twice, on his death and as father of their daughter. Information about \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d's career is also preserved in the Irish chronicle known as the \"Three Fragments\". According to Wainwright, it \"contains much that is legendary rather than historical. But it also contains, especially for our period, much genuine historical information which seems to have its roots in a contemporary narrative.\" She was praised by Anglo-Norman chroniclers such as William of Malmesbury and John of Worcester and she has received more attention from historians than any other secular woman in Anglo-Saxon England.\nFamily.\n\u00c6thelfl\u00e6d was born around 870, the oldest child of King Alfred the Great and his Mercian wife, Ealhswith, who was a daughter of \u00c6thelred Mucel, ealdorman of the Gaini, one of the tribes of Mercia. Ealhswith's mother, Eadburh, was a member of the Mercian royal house, probably a descendant of King Coenwulf (796\u2013821). \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d was thus half-Mercian and the alliance between Wessex and Mercia was sealed by her marriage to \u00c6thelred, Lord of the Mercians. They are mentioned in Alfred's will, which probably dates to the 880s. \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d, described only as \"my eldest daughter\", received an estate and 100 mancuses, while \u00c6thelred, the only ealdorman to be mentioned by name, received a sword worth 100 mancuses. \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d was first recorded as \u00c6thelred's wife in a charter of 887, when he granted two estates to the see of Worcester \"with the permission and sign-manual of King Alfred\" and the attestors included \"\u00c6thelfl\u00e6d \"conjux\"\". The marriage may have taken place earlier, perhaps when he submitted to Alfred following the recovery of London in 886. \u00c6thelred was much older than \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d and they had one known child, a daughter called \u00c6lfwynn. According to William of Malmesbury, \u00c6thelstan, the eldest son of Edward the Elder and future king of England, was brought up in the Mercian court, and this receives some support from a document dating to the reign of Edward I which refers to a grant made by \u00c6thelstan in accordance with \"the pact of paternal piety which formerly he pledged with \u00c6thelred, ealdorman of the people of the Mercians\". In the view of the historian Martin Ryan, \u00c6thelstan certainly campaigned in Mercia with his uncle and aunt.\n\u00c6thelred's descent is unknown. Richard Abels describes him as \"somewhat of a mysterious character\", who may have claimed royal blood and been related to \u00c6thelred Mucel. In the view of Ian Walker: \"He was a royal ealdorman whose power base lay in the south-west of Mercia in the former kingdom of the Hwicce around Gloucester\". Alex Woolf suggests that he was probably the son of King Burgred of Mercia and King Alfred's sister \u00c6thelswith, although that would mean that the marriage between \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d and \u00c6thelred was uncanonical, because Rome then forbade marriage between first cousins.\n\u00c6thelfl\u00e6d and \u00c6thelred.\nCompared to the rest of England, much of English Mercia\u00a0\u2014Gloucestershire, Worcestershire, Herefordshire and Shropshire\u00a0\u2014was unusually stable in the Viking age. It did not suffer major attacks and it did not come under great pressure from Wessex. Mercian scholarship had high prestige at the courts of Alfred and Edward. Worcester was able to preserve considerable intellectual and liturgical continuity and, with Gloucester, became the centre of a Mercian revival under \u00c6thelred and \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d that extended into the more unstable areas of Staffordshire and Cheshire. Charters show the Mercian leaders supporting the revival by their generosity to monastic communities. In 883 \u00c6thelred granted privileges to Berkeley Abbey and in the 890s he and \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d issued a charter in favour of the church of Worcester. This was the only occasion in Alfred's lifetime when they are known to have acted jointly; generally \u00c6thelred acted on his own, usually acknowledging the permission of King Alfred. \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d witnessed five surviving charters of \u00c6thelred between 887 and 901. In 901 \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d and \u00c6thelred gave land and a golden chalice weighing thirty mancuses to the shrine of Saint Mildburg at Much Wenlock church.\nAt the end of the ninth century, \u00c6thelred and \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d fortified Worcester, with the permission of King Alfred and at the request of Bishop Werferth, described in the charter as \"their friend\". They granted the church of Worcester a half share of the rights of lordship over the city, covering land rents and the proceeds of justice, and in return the cathedral community agreed in perpetuity to dedicate a psalm to them three times a day and a mass and thirty psalms every Saturday. As the rights of lordship had previously belonged fully to the church, this represented the beginning of transfer from episcopal to secular control of the city. In 904 Bishop Werferth granted a lease of land in the city to \u00c6thelred and \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d, to be held for the duration of their lives and that of their daughter \u00c6lfwynn. The land was valuable, including most of the city's usable river frontage, and control of it enabled the Mercian rulers to dominate over and profit from the city.\n\u00c6thelred's health probably declined several years before his death in 911, with the result that \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d became the de facto ruler of Mercia, perhaps as early as 902, although he witnessed charters at a meeting attended by the king in 903. According to the \"Three Fragments\", the Norse (Norwegian) Vikings were expelled from Dublin and then made an abortive attack on Wales. When this failed they applied to \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d for permission to settle near Chester. \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d agreed, perhaps in the hope that they would provide protection against attack by other Vikings. These events probably date to 902-903. The \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" states that in 907 Chester was \"restored\". \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d was probably responsible for restoriation of the town's Roman defences by running walls from the north-west and south-east corners of the fort to the River Dee. The Norse Vikings later joined with the Danes in an attack on Chester, but this failed because \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d had fortified the town, and she persuaded the Irish among the attackers to change sides. Most historians date the attack on Chester to 907, but Matthew Firth argues that 910 is more likely and that it may have been part of the invasion which ended in Viking defeat at the Battle of Tettenhall. Simon Ward, who excavated an Anglo-Saxon site in Chester, sees the later prosperity of the town as owing much to the planning of \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d and Edward. After \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d's death, Edward encountered fierce resistance to his efforts to consolidate his control of the north-west and he died there in 924, shortly after suppressing a local rebellion.\nIn 909 Edward sent a West Saxon and Mercian force to the northern Danelaw, where it raided for five weeks. The remains of the royal Northumbrian saint Oswald were seized and taken from his resting place in Bardney Abbey in Lincolnshire to Gloucester. In the late ninth century Gloucester had become a burh with a street plan similar to Winchester, and \u00c6thelred and \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d had repaired its ancient Roman defences. In 896 a meeting of the Mercian witan was held in the royal hall at Kingsholm, just outside the town. The Mercian rulers built a new minster in Gloucester and, although the building was small, it was embellished on a grand scale, with rich sculpture. The church appears to have been an exact copy of the Old Minster, Winchester. It was initially dedicated to St Peter but when Oswald's remains were brought to Gloucester in 909, \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d had them translated from Bardney to the new minster, which was renamed St Oswald's in his honour. The relics gave the church great prestige as Oswald had been one of the most important founding saints of Anglo-Saxon Christianity as well as a ruling monarch, and the decision to translate his relics to Gloucester shows the importance of the town to \u00c6thelred and \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d, who were buried in St Oswald's Minster. Simon Keynes describes the town as \"the main seat of their power\" and Carolyn Heighway believes that the foundation of the church was probably a family and dynastic enterprise, encouraged by Alfred and supported by Edward and Bishop Werferth. Heighway and Michael Hare wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the age when English scholarship and religion reached their lowest ebb, Mercia and in particular the lower Severn valley seem to have maintained traditional standards of learning. It is in this context that the establishment of a new minster at Gloucester by \u00c6thelred and \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d is to be seen.\nMercia had a long tradition of venerating royal saints and this was enthusiastically supported by \u00c6thelred and \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d. Saintly relics were believed to give supernatural legitimacy to rulers' authority, and \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d was probably responsible for the foundation or re-foundation of Chester Minster and the transfer to it of the remains of the seventh-century Mercian princess Saint Werburgh from Hanbury in Staffordshire. She may also have translated the relics of the martyred Northumbrian prince Ealhmund from Derby to Shrewsbury. In 910 the Danes retaliated against the English attack of the previous year by invading Mercia, raiding as far as Bridgnorth in Shropshire. On their way back they were caught by an English army in Staffordshire and their army was destroyed at the Battle of Tettenhall, opening the way for the recovery of the Danish Midlands and East Anglia over the next decade.\nLady of the Mercians.\nOn her husband's death in 911, \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d became \"Myrcna hl\u00e6dige\", \"Lady of the Mercians\". Ian Walker describes her succession as the only case of a female ruler of a kingdom in Anglo-Saxon history and \"one of the most unique events in early medieval history\". In Wessex, royal women were not allowed to play any political role; Alfred's wife was not granted the title of queen and was never a witness to charters in the king's lifetime. In Mercia, Alfred's sister \u00c6thelswith had been the wife of King Burgred of Mercia; she had witnessed charters as queen and had made grants jointly with her husband and in her own name. \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d benefited from a Mercian tradition of queenly importance, and was able to play a key role in the history of the early tenth century as Lady of the Mercians, which would not have been possible in Wessex.\nWhen \u00c6thelred died, Edward took control of the Mercian towns of London and Oxford and their hinterlands, which Alfred had put under Mercian control. Ian Walker suggests that \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d accepted this loss of territory in return for recognition by her brother of her position in Mercia. Alfred had constructed a network of fortified burhs in Wessex, and Edward and \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d now embarked on a programme of extending them to consolidate their defences and provide bases for attacks on the Vikings. According to Frank Stenton, \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d led Mercian armies on expeditions, which she planned. He commented: \"It was through reliance on her guardianship of Mercia that her brother was enabled to begin the forward movement against the southern Danes which is the outstanding feature of his reign\".\n\u00c6thelfl\u00e6d had already fortified an unknown location called \"Bremesburh\" in 910 and in 912 she built defences at Bridgnorth to cover a crossing of the River Severn. In 913 she built forts at Tamworth to guard against the Danes in Leicester, and in Stafford to cover access from the Trent Valley. In 914 a Mercian army drawn from Gloucester and Hereford repelled a Viking invasion from Brittany, and the Iron Age Eddisbury hill fort was repaired to protect against invasion from Northumbria or Cheshire, while Warwick was fortified as further protection against the Leicester Danes. In 915 Chirbury was fortified to guard a route from Wales and Runcorn on the River Mersey. Defences were built before 914 at Hereford, and probably Shrewsbury and two other fortresses, at \"Scergeat\" and \"Weardbyrig\", which have not been located.\nIn 917 invasions by three Viking armies failed as \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d sent an army which captured Derby and the territory around it. The town was one of the Five Boroughs of the Danelaw, together with Leicester, Lincoln, Nottingham and Stamford. Derby was the first to fall to the English. The \"Mercian Register\" states that she lost \"four of her thegns who were dear to her\" in the battle, an unusual statement which the historian Matthew Firth argues indicates these to have been key members of her court. Clarkson, who describes \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d as \"renowned as a competent war-leader\", regards the victory at Derby as \"her greatest triumph\". At the end of the year, the East Anglian Danes submitted to Edward. In early 918, \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d gained possession of Leicester without opposition and most of the local Danish army submitted to her. A few months later, the leading men of Danish-ruled York offered to pledge their loyalty to \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d, probably to secure her support against Norse raiders from Ireland, but she died on 12 June 918, before she could take advantage of the offer. No similar offer is known to have been made to Edward. According to the \"Three Fragments\", in 918 \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d led an army of Scots and Northumbrian English against forces led by the Norse Viking leader Ragnall at the Battle of Corbridge in Northumbria. Historians consider this unlikely, but she may have sent a contingent to the battle. Both sides claimed victory but Ragnall was able to establish himself as ruler of Northumbria. In the \"Three Fragments\", \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d also formed a defensive alliance with the Scots and the Strathclyde British, a claim accepted by Clarkson.\nLittle is known of \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d's relations with the Welsh. The only recorded event took place in 916, when she sent an expedition to avenge the murder of a Mercian abbot and his companions; her men destroyed the royal crannog of Brycheiniog on Llangorse Lake and captured the queen and thirty-three of her companions. The incursion reestablished Mercian overlordship over Brycheiniog, which had sworn allegiance to King Alfred in the late ninth century. According to a version of the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" strongly sympathetic to Edward the Elder, after \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d's death \"the kings among the Welsh, Hywel and Clydog and Idwal, and all the Welsh people sought to have [Edward] as their lord\". Hywel Dda was king of Dyfed in south-west Wales, Clydog ap Cadell probably king of Powys in the north-east, and Idwal ab Anarawd king of Gwynedd in the north-west. Gwent in south-east Wales was already under West Saxon lordship but, in the view of Charles-Edwards, this passage shows that the other Welsh kingdoms were under Mercian lordship until Edward took direct power over Mercia.\nNo coins were issued with the name of \u00c6thelred or \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d on them, but in the 910s silver pennies were minted in west Mercian towns with unusual ornamental designs on the reverse and this may have reflected \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d's desire to distinguish specie issued under her control from that of her brother. After her death, west Mercian coin reverses were again the same as those on coins produced in Wessex. No charters of Edward survive for the period between 910 and his death in 924. In contrast, two survive in \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d's sole name, S 224, possibly dating to 914 and S 225, dated 9 September 915, issued at \"Weardbyrig\", one of the burhs she built at an unidentified location.\nDeath and aftermath.\n\u00c6thelfl\u00e6d died at Tamworth on 12June 918 and her body was carried to Gloucester, where she was buried with her husband in their foundation, St Oswald's Minster. According to the \"Mercian Register\", \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d was buried in the east porticus. A building suitable for a royal mausoleum has been found by archaeological investigation at the east end of the church and this may have been St Oswald's burial place. Placement next to the saint would have been a prestigious burial location for \u00c6thelred and \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d. William of Malmesbury wrote that their burial places were found in the \"south\" porticus during building works in the early twelfth century. He may have been misinformed about the position but it is also possible that the tombs were moved from their prestigious position next to the saint, when the couple became less known over time or when tenth-century kings acted to minimise the honour paid to their Mercian predecessors.\nThe choice of burial place was symbolic. Victoria Thompson argues that if \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d had chosen Edward's royal mausoleum in Winchester as the burial place for her husband and herself, that would have emphasised Mercia's subordinate status, whereas a traditional Mercian royal burial place such as Repton would have been a provocative declaration of independence; Gloucester, near the border with Wessex, was a compromise between the two. Martin Ryan sees the foundation as \"something like a royal mausoleum, intended to replace the one at Repton (Derbyshire) that had been destroyed by the Vikings\". \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d died a few months too early to see the final conquest of the southern Danelaw by Edward. She was succeeded as Lady of the Mercians by her daughter, \u00c6lfwynn, but in early December 918 Edward deposed her and took Mercia under his control. Many Mercians disliked the subordination of their ancient kingdom to Wessex, and Wainwright describes the Mercian annalist's description of the deposition of \u00c6lfwynn as \"heavy with resentment\". Edward died in 924 at Farndon in Cheshire a few days after putting down a rebellion by Mercians and Welshmen at Chester.\nLegacy.\nTo the West Saxon version of the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\", \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d was merely King Edward's sister, whereas for the \"Mercian Register\" she was Lady of the Mercians. Irish and Welsh annals described her as a queen and the Annals of Ulster, which ignore the deaths of Alfred and Edward, described her as \"famosissima regina Saxonum\" (renowned Saxon queen). She was also praised by Anglo-Norman historians such as John of Worcester and William of Malmesbury, who described her as \"a powerful accession to [Edward's] party, the delight of his subjects, the dread of his enemies, a woman of enlarged soul\". He claimed that she declined to have sex after the birth of her only child because it was \"unbecoming of the daughter of a king to give way to a delight which, after a time, produced such painful consequences\". According to Nick Higham, \"successive medieval and modern writers were quite captivated by her\" and her brother's reputation has suffered unfairly in comparison. In the twelfth century, Henry of Huntingdon paid her his own tribute:\nO mighty \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d! O virgin, the dread of men,\nconqueror of nature, worthy of a man\u2019s name!\nNature made you a girl, so you would be more illustrious;\nyour prowess made you acquire the name of man.\nFor you alone it is right to change the name of your sex:\nyou were a mighty queen and a king who won victories.\nEven Caesar\u2019s triumphs did not bring such great rewards.\nVirgin heroine, more illustrious then than Caesar, farewell.\nAll three medieval writers, John of Worcester, William of Malmesbury and Henry of Huntingdon, rely mainly on versions of the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" in their eulogies of \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d, but they also go beyond the known sources, suggesting in Firth's view that \"they were responding to cultural memory of her reign current in their own time\".\nSome historians believe that \u00c6thelred and \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d were independent rulers. In the \"Handbook of British Chronology\", David Dumville refers to \"Q. \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d\" and comments, \"The titles given her by all sources (\"hl\u00e6fdige, regina\") imply that she wielded royal power and authority\". Alex Woolf concurs and Pauline Stafford describes \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d as \"the last Mercian queen\", referred to in charters in such terms as \"by the gift of Christ's mercy ruling the government of the Mercians\". Stafford argues that \u00c6thelred and \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d exercised most or all of the powers of a monarch after Alfred's death but it would have been a provocative act formally to claim regality, especially after \u00c6thelwold's rebellion. Stafford sees her as a \"warrior queen\", \"Like\u00a0... ElizabethI she became a wonder to later ages.\" According to Charles Insley,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The assumption that Mercia was in some sort of limbo in this period, subordinate to Wessex and waiting to be incorporated into \"England\" cannot be sustained\u00a0... \u00c6thelred's death in 911 changed little, for his formidable wife carried on as sole ruler of Mercia until she died in 918. Only then did Mercia's independent existence come to an end.\nWainwright sees \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d as willingly accepting a subordinate role in a partnership with her brother and agreeing to his plan of unification of Wessex and Mercia under his rule. Wainwright argues that he probably sent his oldest son \u00c6thelstan to be brought up in Mercia, to make him more acceptable to the Mercians as king; \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d does not appear to have tried to find a husband for her daughter, who must have been nearly thirty by 918. In Wainwright's view, she was ignored in West Saxon sources for fear that recognition of her achievements would encourage Mercian separatism:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[\u00c6thelfl\u00e6d] played a vital role in England in the first quarter of the tenth century. The success of Edward's campaigns against the Danes depended to a great extent upon her cooperation. In the Midlands and the North she came to dominate the political scene. And how she used her influence to make the unification of England possible under the kings of the West Saxon royal house. But her reputation has suffered from bad publicity, or rather from a conspiracy of silence among her West Saxon contemporaries.\nSimon Keynes points out that all coins were issued in Edward's name, and while the Mercian rulers were able to issue some charters on their own authority, others acknowledged Edward's lordship. In 903 a Mercian ealdorman \"petitioned King Edward, and also \u00c6thelred and \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d, who then held rulership and power over the race of the Mercians under the aforesaid king\". Keynes argues that a new polity was created when \u00c6thelred submitted to Alfred in the 880s, covering Wessex and English (western) Mercia. In Keynes's view, \"the conclusion seems inescapable that the Alfredian polity of the kingship 'of the Anglo-Saxons' persisted in the first quarter of the tenth century, and that the Mercians were thus under Edward's rule from the beginning of his reign\". Ryan believes that the Mercian rulers \"had a considerable but ultimately subordinate share of royal authority\".\nIn Higham's view, Keynes makes a strong case that Edward ruled over an Anglo-Saxon state with a developing administrative and ideological unity but that \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d and \u00c6thelred did much to encourage a separate Mercian identity, such as establishing cults of Mercian saints at their new burhs, as well as reverence for their great Northumbrian royal saint at Gloucester:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There must remain some doubt as to the extent to which Edward's intentions for the future were shared in all respects by his sister and brother-in-law, and one is left to wonder what might have occurred had their sole offspring been male rather than female. Celtic visions of \u00c6thelred and \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d as king and queen certainly offer a different, and equally valid, contemporary take on the complex politics of this transition to a new English state.\nCommemoration.\nIn June 2018, \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d's funeral was re-enacted in front of a crowd of 10,000 people in Gloucester, as part of a series of living history events marking the 1,100th anniversary of her death.\nThe 1,100th anniversary of the death of \u00c6thelflaed was marked throughout 2018 in Tamworth with a number of major events, including the unveiling of a new six-metre statue, the creation of the town's biggest ever piece of community art, a major commemorative church service, talks, a special guided walk, commemorative ale and an academic conference weekend drawing academics and delegates from all over the world.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47398", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47398", "title": "Orchestration", "text": "Study or practice of writing music for an orchestra\nOrchestration is the study or practice of writing music for an orchestra (or, more loosely, for any musical ensemble, such as a concert band) or of adapting music composed for another medium for an orchestra. Also called \"instrumentation\", orchestration is the assignment of different instruments to play the different parts (e.g., melody, bassline, etc.) of a musical work. For example, a work for solo piano could be adapted and orchestrated so that an orchestra could perform the piece, or a concert band piece could be orchestrated for a symphony orchestra.\nIn classical music, composers have historically orchestrated their own music. Only gradually over the course of music history did orchestration come to be regarded as a separate compositional art and profession in itself. In modern classical music, composers almost invariably orchestrate their own work. Two notable exceptions to this are Ravel's orchestration of Mussorgsky's solo piano work Pictures at an Exhibition and Malcolm Arnold's orchestration of William Walton's String Quartet in A minor, producing the latter's Sonata for Strings.\nHowever, in musical theatre, film music and other commercial media, it is customary to use orchestrators and arrangers to one degree or another, since time constraints and/or the level of training of composers may preclude them orchestrating the music themselves.\nThe precise role of the orchestrator in film music is highly variable, and depends greatly on the needs and skill set of the particular composer.\nIn musical theatre, the composer typically writes a piano/vocal score and then hires an arranger or orchestrator to create the instrumental score for the pit orchestra to play.\nIn jazz big bands, the composer or songwriter may write a lead sheet, which contains the melody and the chords, and then one or more orchestrators or arrangers may \"flesh out\" these basic musical ideas by creating parts for the saxophones, trumpets, trombones, and the rhythm section (bass, piano/jazz guitar/Hammond organ, drums). But, commonly enough, big band composers have done their own arranging, just like their classical counterparts.\nAs profession.\nAn orchestrator is a trained musical professional who assigns instruments to an orchestra or other musical ensemble from a piece of music written by a composer, or who adapts music composed for another medium for an orchestra. Orchestrators may work for musical theatre productions, film production companies or recording studios. Some orchestrators teach at colleges, conservatories or universities. The training done by orchestrators varies. Most have completed formal postsecondary education in music, such as a Bachelor of Music (B.Mus.), Master of Music (M.Mus.) or an artist's diploma. Orchestrators who teach at universities, colleges and conservatories may be required to hold a master's degree or a Doctorate (the latter may be a Ph.D. or a D.M.A). Orchestrators who work for film companies, musical theatre companies and other organizations may be hired solely based on their orchestration experience, even if they do not hold academic credentials. In the 2010s, as the percentage of faculty holding terminal degrees and/or Doctoral degrees is part of how an institution is rated, this is causing an increasing number of postsecondary institutions to require terminal and/or Doctoral degrees.\nIn practice.\nThe term \"orchestration\" in its specific sense refers to the way instruments are used to portray any musical aspect such as melody, harmony or rhythm. For example, a C major chord is made up of the notes C, E, and G. If the notes are held out the entire duration of a measure, the composer or orchestrator will have to decide what instrument(s) play this chord and in what register. Some instruments, including woodwinds and brass are monophonic and can only play one note of the chord at a time. However, in a full orchestra there are more than one of these instruments, so the composer may choose to outline the chord in its basic form with a group of clarinets or trumpets (with separate instruments each being given one of the three notes of the chord). Other instruments, including the strings, piano, harp, and pitched percussion are polyphonic and may play more than one note at a time. As such, if the orchestrator wishes to have the strings play the C major chord, they could assign the low C to the cellos and basses, the G to the violas, and then a high E to the second violins and an E an octave higher to the first violins. If the orchestrator wishes the chord to be played only by the first and second violins, they could give the second violins a low C and give the first violins a double stop of the notes G (an open string) and E.\nAdditionally in orchestration, notes may be placed into another register (such as transposed down for the basses), doubled (both in the same and different octaves), and altered with various levels of dynamics. The choice of instruments, registers, and dynamics affect the overall tone color. If the C major chord was orchestrated for the trumpets and trombones playing fortissimo in their upper registers, it would sound very bright; but if the same chord was orchestrated for the cellos and double basses playing sul tasto, doubled by the bassoons and bass clarinet, it might sound heavy and dark.\nNote that although the above example discussed orchestrating a chord, a melody or even a single note may be orchestrated in this fashion. Also note that in this specific sense of the word, \"orchestration\" is not necessarily limited to an orchestra, as a composer may \"orchestrate\" this same C major chord for, say, a woodwind quintet, a string quartet or a concert band. Each different ensemble would enable the orchestrator/composer to create different tone \"colours\" and timbres.\nA melody is also orchestrated. The composer or orchestrator may think of a melody in their head, or while playing the piano or organ. Once they have thought of a melody, they have to decide which instrument (or instruments) will play the melody. One widely used approach for a melody is to assign it to the first violins. When the first violins play a melody, the composer can have the second violins double the melody an octave below, or have the second violins play a harmony part (often in thirds and sixths). Sometimes, for a forceful effect, a composer will indicate in the score that all of the strings (violins, violas, cellos, and double basses) will play the melody in unison, at the same time. Typically, even though the instruments are playing the same note names, the violins will play very high-register notes, the violas and cellos will play lower-register notes, and the double basses will play the deepest, lowest pitches.\nAs well, the woodwinds and brass instruments can effectively carry a melody, depending on the effect the orchestrator desires. The trumpets can perform a melody in a powerful, high register. Alternatively, if the trombones play a melody, the pitch will likely be lower than the trumpet, and the tone will be heavier, which may change the musical effect that is created. While the cellos are often given an accompaniment role in orchestration, there are notable cases where the cellos have been assigned the melody. In even more rare cases, the double bass section (or principal bass) may be given a melody, like, the high-register double bass solo in Prokofiev's \"Lieutenant Kije Suite.\"\nWhile assigning a melody to a particular section, such as the string section or the woodwinds will work well, as the stringed instruments and all the woodwinds blend together well, some orchestrators give the melody to one section and then have the melody doubled by a different section or an instrument from a different section. For example, a melody played by the first violins could be doubled by the glockenspiel, which would add a sparkling, chime-like colour to the melody. Alternatively, a melody played by the piccolos could be doubled by the celesta, which would add a bright tone to the sound.\nIn the 20th and 21st century, contemporary composers began to incorporate electric and electronic instruments into the orchestra, such as the electric guitar played through a guitar amplifier, the electric bass played through a bass amplifier, the Theremin and the synthesizer. The addition of these new instruments gave orchestrators new options for creating tonal colours in their orchestration. For example, in the late 20th century and onwards, an orchestrator could have a melody played by the first violins doubled by a futuristic-sounding synthesizer or a theremin to create an unusual effect.\nOrchestral instrumentation is denoted by an abbreviated formulaic convention, as follows: flute, oboe, clarinet, bassoon, horn, trumpet, trombone, tuba. More details can be contained in brackets. A dot separates one player from another, a slash indicates doubling. Timpani and percussion are denoted 2Tmp+ number of percussion.\nFor example, 3[1.2.3/pic] 2[1.Eh] 3[1.2.3/Ebcl/bcl] 3[1.2/cbn.cbn] tmp+2 is interpreted as:\nAs an example, Mahler Symphony 2 is scored: 4[1/pic.2/pic.3/pic.4/pic] 4[1.2.3/Eh.4/Eh] 5[1.2.3/bcl.4/Ebcl2.Ebcl] 4[1.2.3.4/cbn]- 10 8 4 1- 2tmp+4-2\u00a0hp- org- str.\nExamples from the repertoire.\nJ.S Bach.\nDuring the Baroque era, composers showed increasing awareness of the expressive potential of orchestration. While some early Baroque pieces have no indication of which instruments should play the piece, the choice of instruments being left to the musical group's leader or concertmaster, there are Baroque works which specify certain instruments. The orchestral accompaniment to the aria 'et misericordia' from J. S. Bach's \"Magnificat\", BWV 243 (1723) features muted strings doubled by flutes, a subtle combination of mellow instrumental timbres.\nA particularly imaginative example of Bach's use of changing instrumental colour between orchestral groups can be found in his Cantata BWV 67, \"Halt im Ged\u00e4chtnis Jesum Christ\". In the dramatic fourth movement, Jesus is depicted as quelling his disciples' anxiety (illustrated by agitated strings) by uttering \"Friede sei mit euch\" (\"\"). The strings dovetail with sustained chords on woodwind to accompany the solo singer, an effect John Eliot Gardiner likens to \"a cinematic dissolve\".\nThe orchestral introduction to the opening chorus of J. S. Bach's epiphany Cantata \"Sie werden aus Saba alle kommen\" BWV 65, which John Eliot Gardiner (2013, p.\u00a0328) describes as \"one of the crowning glories of Bach's first Christmas season\" further demonstrates the composer's mastery of his craft. Within a space of eight bars, we hear recorders, oboes da caccia, horns and strings creating a \"glittery sheen\" of contrasted timbres, sonorities and textures ranging from just two horns against a string pedal point in the first bar to a \"restatement of the octave unison theme, this time by all the voices and instruments spread over five octaves\" in bars 7-8:\nIn contrast, Bach's deployment of his instrumental forces in the opening movement of his \"St John Passion\" evokes a much darker drama: \n \"The relentless tremulant pulsation generated by the reiterated bass line, the persistent sighing figure in the violas and the violins the swirling motion in the violins so suggestive of turmoil\u2026 all contribute to its unique pathos. Over this ferment, pairs of oboes and flutes locked in lyrical dialogue but with anguished dissonances enact a very different kind of physicality, one that creates a harrowing portrayal of nails being driven into bare flesh.\"\nIgor Stravinsky (1959, p45) marvelled at Bach's skill as an orchestrator: \"What incomparable instrumental writing is Bach's. You can smell the resin [(rosin)] in his violin parts, [and] taste the reeds in the oboes.\"\nRameau.\nJean Philippe Rameau was famous for \"the eloquence of [his] orchestral writing which was something entirely new... - with a feeling for colour [(i.e., tone colour or timbre)] that is altogether 'modern'.\" In 'The Entrance of Polymnie' from his opera \"Les Bor\u00e9ades\" (1763), the predominant string texture is shot through with descending scale figures on the bassoon, creating an exquisite blend of timbres:In the aria 'Rossignols amoureux' from his opera \"Hippolyte et Aricie\", Rameau evokes the sound of lovelorn nightingales by means of two flutes blending with a solo violin, while the rest of the violins play sustained notes in the background.\nHaydn.\nJoseph Haydn was a pioneer of symphonic form, but he was also a pioneer of orchestration. In the minuet of Symphony No. 97, \"we can see why Rimsky-Korsakov declared Haydn to be the greatest of all masters of orchestration. The oom-pah-pah of a German dance band is rendered with the utmost refinement, amazingly by kettledrums and trumpets pianissimo, and the rustic \"glissando\"\u2026 is given a finicky elegance by the grace notes in the horns as well as by the doubling of the melody an octave higher with the solo violin. These details are not intended to blend, but to be set in relief; they are individually exquisite.\" Another example of Haydn's imagination and ingenuity that shows how well he understood how orchestration can support harmony may be found in the concluding bars of the second movement of his Symphony No. 94 (the \"Surprise Symphony\".) Here, the oboes and bassoons take over the theme, while sustained chords in the strings accompany it with \"soft, but very dissonant harmony. \" Flute, Horns and timpani add to the mix, all contributing to the \"air of uncanny poignancy\" that characterises this atmospheric conclusion. \nMozart.\nMozart \"was acutely sensitive to matters of instrumentation and instrumental effect where orchestral writing was concerned\", including a \"meticulous attitude towards the spacing of chords.\" H. C. Robbins Landon marvels at the \"gorgeous wash of colour displayed in Mozart's scores.\" For example, the opening movement of the Symphony No. 39 (K543) contains \"a charming dialogue between strings and woodwind\" that demonstrates the composer's exquisite aural imagination for the blending and contrast of timbres. Bars 102-3 feature a widely spaced voicing over a range of four octaves. The first and second violins weave curly parallel melodic lines, a tenth apart, underpinned by a pedal point in the double basses and a sustained octave in the horns. Wind instruments respond in bars 104\u20135, accompanied by a spidery ascending chromatic line in the cellos. A graceful continuation to this features clarinets and bassoons with the lower strings supplying the bass notes.Next, a phrase for strings alone blends pizzicato cellos and basses with bowed violins and violas, playing mostly in thirds:The woodwind repeat these four bars with the violins adding a counter-melody against the cellos and basses playing \"arco\". The violas add crucial harmonic colouring here with their D flat in bar 115. In 1792, an early listener marvelled at the dazzling orchestration of this movement \"ineffably grand and rich in ideas, with striking variety in almost all obbligato parts.\"\"The main feature in [his] orchestration is Mozart's density, which is of course part of his density of thought.\" Another important technique of Mozart's orchestration was antiphony, the \"call and response\" exchange of musical motifs or \"ideas\" between different groups in the orchestra. In an antiphonal section, the composer may have one group of instruments introduce a melodic idea (e.g., the first violins), and then have the woodwinds \"answer\" by restating this melodic idea, often with some type of variation. In the trio section of the minuet from his Symphony No. 41 (1788), the flute, bassoons and horn exchange phrases with the strings, with the first violin line doubled at the octave by the first oboe: Charles Rosen (1971, p.\u00a0240) admires Mozart's skill in orchestrating his piano concertos, particularly the Concerto in E flat major, K482, a work that introduced clarinets into the mix. \"This concerto places the greatest musical reliance on tone colour, which is, indeed, almost always ravishing. One lovely example of its sonorities comes near the beginning.\" \nThe orchestral tutti in the first two bars is answered by just horns and bassoon in bars 2\u20136. This passage repeats with fresh orchestration: \"Here we have the unusual sound on the violins providing the bass for the solo clarinets. The simplicity of the sequence concentrates all our interest on tone-colour, and what follows \u2013 a series of woodwind solos \u2013 keeps it there. The orchestration throughout, in fact, has a greater variety than Mozart had wished or needed before, and fits the brilliance, charm, and grace of the first movement and the finale.\"\nBeethoven.\nBeethoven's innovative mastery of orchestration and his awareness of the effect of highlighting, contrasting and blending distinct instrumental colours are well exemplified in the Scherzo of his Symphony No. 2. George Grove asks us to note \"the sudden contrasts both in amount and quality of sound\u2026 we have first the full orchestra, then a single violin, then two horns, then two violins, then the full orchestra again, all within the space of half-a-dozen bars.\" \"The scoring, a bar of this followed by a bar of that, is virtually unique, and one can visualize chaos reigning at the first rehearsal when many a player must have been caught unprepared.\" \nAnother demonstration of Beethoven's consummate skill at obtaining the maximum variety out of seemingly unprepossessing and fairly simple material can be found in the first movement of the Piano Concerto No. 5 in E flat ('The Emperor') Opus 73 (1810). The second subject of the sonata form is a deceptively simple tune that, according to Fiske (1970, p.\u00a041) \"is limited to notes playable on the horns for which it must have been specially designed.\" This theme appears in five different orchestrations throughout the movement, with changes of mode (major to minor), dynamics (forte to pianissimo) and a blending of instrumental colour that ranges from boldly stated tutti passages to the most subtle and differentiated episodes, where instrumental sounds are combined often in quite unexpected ways:\nThe theme first appears in the minor mode during the orchestral introduction, performed using staccato articulation and orchestrated in the most delicate and enchanting colours: This is followed by a more straightforward version in the major key, with horns accompanied by strings. The theme is now played legato by the horns, accompanied by a sustained pedal point in the bassoons. The violins simultaneously play an elaborated version of the theme. (See also heterophony.) The timpani and pizzicato lower strings add further colour to this variegated palette of sounds. \"Considering that the notes are virtually the same the difference in effect is extraordinary\": When the solo piano enters, its right hand plays a variant of the minor version of the theme in a triplet rhythm, with the backing of pizzicato (plucked) strings on the off-beats: This is followed by a bold \"tutti\" statement of the theme, \"with the whole orchestra thumping it out in aggressive semi-staccato. : The minor version of the theme also appears in the cadenza, played staccato by the solo piano: This is followed, finally, by a restatement of the major key version, featuring horns playing legato, accompanied by pizzicato strings and filigree arpeggio figuration in the solo piano: Fiske (1970) says that Beethoven shows \"a superb flood of invention\" through these varied treatments. \"The variety of moods this theme can convey is without limit.\"\nBerlioz.\nThe most significant orchestral innovator of the early 19th century was Hector Berlioz. (The composer was also the author of a \"Treatise on Instrumentation\".) \"He was drawn to the orchestra as his chosen medium by instinct \u2026 and by finding out the exact capabilities and timbres of individual instruments, and it was on this raw material that his imagination worked to produce countless new sonorities, very striking when considered as a totality, crucially instructive for later composers, and nearly all exactly tailored to their dramatic or expressive purpose.\" Numerous examples of Berlioz's orchestral wizardry and his penchant for conjuring extraordinary sonorities can be found in his \"Symphonie fantastique\". The opening of the fourth movement, entitled \"March to the Scaffold\" features what for the time (1830) must have seemed a bizarre mix of sounds. The timpani and the double basses play thick chords against the snarling muted brass: \n\"Although he derives from Beethoven, Berlioz uses features that run counter to the rules of composition in general, such as the chords in close position in the low register of the double basses.\"\nBerlioz was also capable of conveying great delicacy in his instrumental writing. A particularly spectacular instance is the \"Queen Mab\" scherzo from the symphony, which Hugh Macdonald (1969, p51) describes as \"Berlioz's supreme exercise in light orchestral texture, a brilliant, gossamer fabric, prestissimo and pianissimo almost without pause: \nBoulez points out that the very fast tempo must have made unprecedented demands on conductors and orchestras of the time (1830), \"Because of the rapid and precise rhythms, the staccatos which must be even and regular in all registers, because of the isolated notes that occur right at the end of the bar on the third quaver\u2026all of which must fall into place with absolutely perfect precision.\"\nMacdonald highlights the passage towards the end of the scherzo where \"The sounds become more ethereal and fairylike, low clarinet, high harps and the bell-like antique cymbals\u2026The pace and fascination of the movement are irresistible; it is some of the most ethereally brilliant music ever penned.\" The New Grove Dictionary says that for Berlioz, orchestration \"was intrinsic to composition, not something applied to finished music...in his hands timbre became something that could be used in free combinations, as an artist might use his palette, without bowing to the demands of line, and this leads to the rich orchestral resource of Debussy and Ravel.\"\nWagner.\nAfter Berlioz, Richard Wagner was the major pioneer in the development of orchestration during the 19th century. Pierre Boulez speaks of the \"sheer richness of Wagner's orchestration and his irrepressible instinct for innovation.\" Peter Latham says that Wagner had a \"unique appreciation of the possibilities for colour inherent in the instruments at his disposal, and it was this that guided him both in his selection of new recruits for the orchestral family and in his treatment of its established members. The well-known division of that family into strings, woodwind, and brass, with percussion as required, he inherited from the great classical symphonists such changes as he made were in the direction of splitting up these groups still further.\" Latham gives as an example, the sonority of the opening of the opera \"Lohengrin\", where \"the ethereal quality of the music\" is due to the violins being \"divided up into four, five, or even eight parts instead of the customary two.\" \"The A major chord with which the \"Lohengrin\" Prelude begins, in the high register, using harmonics and held for a long time, lets us take in all its detail. It is undoubtedly an A major chord, but it is also high strings, harmonics, long notes \u2013 which gives it all its expressivity, but an expressivity in which the acoustic features play a central role, as we have still heard neither melody nor harmonic progression.\" As he matured as a composer, particularly through his experience of composing \"The Ring\" Wagner made \"increasing use of the contrast between pure and mixed colours, bringing to a fine point the art of transition from one field of sonority to another.\" For example, in the evocative \"Fire Music\" that concludes , \"the multiple arpeggiations of the wind chords and the contrary motion in the strings create an oscillation of tone-colours almost literally matching the visual flickering of the flames.\"Robert Craft found Wagner's final opera \"Parsifal\" to be a work where \"Wagner's powers are at their pinnacle\u2026 The orchestral blends and separations are without precedent.\" Craft cites the intricate orchestration of the single line of melody that opens the opera:\n\"\"Parsifal\" makes entirely new uses of orchestral colour\u2026 Without the help of the score, even a very sensitive ear cannot distinguish the instruments playing the unison beginning of the Prelude. The violins are halved, then doubled by the cellos, a clarinet, and a bassoon, as well as, for the peak of the phrase, an alto oboe [cor anglais]. The full novelty of this colour change with the oboe, both as intensity and as timbre, can be appreciated only after the theme is repeated in harmony and in one of the most gorgeous orchestrations of even Wagner's Technicolor imagination.\"\nLater, during the opening scene of the first act of \"Parsifal\", Wagner offsets the bold brass with gentler strings, showing that the same musical material feels very different when passed between contrasting families of instruments:\nOn the other hand, the prelude to the opera \"Tristan and Isolde\" exemplifies the variety that Wagner could extract through combining instruments from different orchestral families with his precise markings of dynamics and articulation. In the opening phrase, the cellos are supported by wind instruments: \nWhen this idea returns towards the end of the prelude, the instrumental colors are varied subtly, with sounds that were new to the 19th century orchestra, such as the cor anglais and the bass clarinet. These, together with the ominous rumbling of the timpani effectively convey the brooding atmosphere: \n\"It's impressive to see how Wagner\u2026 produces balance in his works. He is true genius in this respect, undeniably so, even down to the working out of the exact number of instruments.\" Boulez is \"fascinated by the precision with which Wagner gauges orchestral balance, [which] \u2026 contains a multiplicity of details that he achieved with astonishing precision.\" According to Roger Scruton, \"Seldom since Bach's inspired use of obbligato parts in his cantatas have the instruments of the orchestra been so meticulously and lovingly adapted to their expressive role by Wagner in his later operas.\"\nMahler.\nWilliam Austin (1966) says \"Mahler expanded the orchestra, going ahead to a historic climax in the direction already marked by Beethoven, Berlioz and Wagner\u2026 The purpose of this famous expansion was not a sheer increase in volume, but a greater variety of sound with more nearly continuous gradations\u2026 Mahler only occasionally required all his vast orchestra to play together, and his music was as often soft as loud. Its colours were continually shifting, blending or contrasting with each other.\" Adorno (1971) similarly describes Mahler's symphonic writing as characterised by \"massive tutti effects\" contrasted with \"chamber-music procedures\". The following passage from the first movement of his Symphony No. 4 illustrates this: Only in the first bar of the above is there a full ensemble. The remaining bars feature highly differentiated small groups of instruments. Mahler's experienced conductor's ear led him to write detailed performance markings in his scores, including carefully calibrated dynamics. For example, in bar 2 above, the low harp note is marked \"forte\", the clarinets, \"mezzo-forte\" and the horns \"piano\". Austin (1966) says that \"Mahler cared about the finest nuances of loudness and tempo and worked tirelessly to fix these details in his scores.\"\nMahler's imagination for sonority is exemplified in the closing bars of the slow movement of the Fourth Symphony, where there occurs what Walter Piston (1969, p.\u00a0140) describes as \"an instance of inspired orchestration\u2026 To be noted are the sudden change of mode in the harmonic progression, the unusual spacing of the chord in measure 5, and the placing of the perfect fourth in the two flutes. The effect is quite unexpected and magical.\" According to Donald Mitchell, the \"rational basis\" of Mahler's orchestration was \"to enable us to comprehend his music by hearing precisely what was going on.\"\nDebussy.\nApart from Mahler and Richard Strauss, the major innovator in orchestration during the closing years of the nineteenth and the first decades of the twentieth century was Claude Debussy. According to Pierre Boulez (1975, p20) \"Debussy's orchestration\u2026 when compared with even such brilliant contemporaries as Strauss and Mahler\u2026 shows an infinitely fresher imagination.\" Boulez said that Debussy's orchestration was \"conceived from quite a different point of view; the number of instruments, their balance, the order in which they are used, their use itself, produces a different climate.\" Apart from the early impact of Wagner, Debussy was also fascinated by music from Asia that according to Austin \"he heard repeatedly and admired intensely at the Paris World exhibition of 1889\".\nBoth influences inform Debussy's first major orchestral work, \"Pr\u00e9lude \u00e0 l'apr\u00e8s-midi d'un faune\" (1894). Wagner's influence can be heard in the strategic use of silence, the sensitively differentiated orchestration and, above all in the striking half-diminished seventh chord spread between oboes and clarinets, reinforced by a glissando on the harp. Austin (1966, p.\u00a016) continues \"Only a composer thoroughly familiar with the Tristan chord could have conceived the beginning of the \"Faune\".\"\nLater in the \"Faune\", Debussy builds a complex texture, where, as Austin says, \"Polyphony and orchestration overlap...He adds to all the devices of Mozart, Weber, Berlioz and Wagner the possibilities that he learned from the heterophonic music of the Far East... The first harp varies the flute parts in almost the same way that the smallest bells of a Javanese gamelan vary the slower basic melody.\"\nDebussy's final orchestral work, the enigmatic ballet \"Jeux\" (1913) was composed nearly 20 years after the \"Faune\". The opening bars feature divided strings, spread over a wide range, a harp doubling horns with the addition of the bell-like celesta in the 5th bar and the sultry voicing of the whole tone chords in the woodwind:\nJensen (2014, p.\u00a0228) says \"Perhaps the greatest marvel of \"Jeux\" is its orchestration. While working on the piano score, Debussy wrote: 'I am thinking of that orchestral colour which seems to be illuminated from behind, and for which there are such marvellous displays in \"Parsifal\"' The idea, then, was to produce timbre without glare, subdued... but to do so with clarity and precision.\"\nAs adaptation.\nIn a more general sense, \"orchestration\" also refers to the re-adaptation of existing music into another medium, particularly a full or reduced orchestra. There are two general kinds of adaptation: transcription, which closely follows the original piece, and arrangement, which tends to change significant aspects of the original piece. In terms of adaptation, \"orchestration\" applies, strictly speaking, only to writing for orchestra, whereas the term \"instrumentation\" applies to instruments used in the texture of the piece. In the study of orchestration\u00a0\u2013 in contradistinction to the practice\u00a0\u2013 the term \"instrumentation\" may also refer to consideration of the defining characteristics of individual instruments rather than to the art of combining instruments.\nIn commercial music, especially musical theatre and film music, independent orchestrators are often used because it is difficult to meet tight deadlines when the same person is required both to compose and to orchestrate. Frequently, when a stage musical is adapted to film, such as \"Camelot\" or \"Fiddler on the Roof\", the orchestrations for the film version are notably different from the stage ones. In other cases, such as \"Evita\", they are not, and are simply expanded versions from those used in the stage production.\nMost orchestrators often work from a draft (sketch), or short score, that is, a score written on limited number of independent musical staves. Some orchestrators, particularly those writing for the opera or music theatres, prefer to work from a piano vocal score up, since the singers need to start rehearsing a piece long before the whole work is fully completed. That was, for instance, the method of composition of Jules Massenet. In other instances, simple cooperation between various creators is utilized, as when Jonathan Tunick orchestrates Stephen Sondheim's songs, or when orchestration is done from a lead sheet (a simplified music notation for a song which includes just the melody and the chord progression). In the latter case, arranging as well as orchestration will be involved.\nFilm orchestration.\nDue to the enormous time constraints of film scoring schedules, most film composers employ orchestrators rather than doing the work themselves, although these orchestrators work under the close supervision of the composer. Some film composers have made the time to orchestrate their own music, including Bernard Herrmann (1911\u20131975), Georges Delerue (1925\u20131992), Ennio Morricone (1928\u20132020), John Williams (born 1932) (his very detailed sketches are 99% orchestrated), Howard Shore (born 1946), James Horner (1953\u20132015) (on Braveheart), Bruno Coulais (born 1954), Rachel Portman (born 1960), Philippe Rombi (born 1968) and Abel Korzeniowski (born 1972).\nSome staff composers at the Walt Disney studios during the 1930s and 1940s (except for Frank Churchill) had orchestrated their own music, such as Paul J. Smith (on \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\", \"Pinocchio\", \"The Three Caballeros\", and \"Fun and Fancy Free\".\nLeigh Harline (on \"Snow White\" and \"Pinocchio\"), Oliver Wallace (on \"Dumbo\") and Edward H. Plumb (on \"Bambi\"). These composers also developed themes and songs that Churchill had written. Plumb continued to provide numerous film orchestrations at the Disney studios until his death in 1958.\nAlthough there have been hundreds of orchestrators in film over the years, the most prominent film orchestrators for the latter half of the 20th century were Jack Hayes, Herbert W. Spencer, Edward Powell (who worked almost exclusively with Alfred Newman), Arthur Morton, Greig McRitchie, and Alexander Courage. Some of the most in-demand orchestrators today (and of the past 30 years) include Jeff Atmajian, Pete Anthony, Brad Dechter (James Newton Howard, Christopher Young, Theodore Shapiro, Teddy Castellucci, Danny Elfman, John Powell, Marco Beltrami, John Debney, Marc Shaiman, Michael Giacchino, Ludwig G\u00f6ransson), Conrad Pope (John Williams, Alexandre Desplat, Jerry Goldsmith, James Newton Howard, Alan Silvestri, James Horner, Mark Isham, John Powell, Michael Convertino, Danny Elfman, Howard Shore), Eddie Karam (John Williams, James Horner), Bruce Fowler (Hans Zimmer, Klaus Badelt, Harry Gregson-Williams, Steve Jablonsky, Mark Mancina, John Powell), John Ashton Thomas (John Powell, John Debney, Alan Silvestri, James Newton Howard, Henry Jackman, Lyle Workman, Theodore Shapiro, John Ottman, John Paesano, Alex Heffes, Christophe Beck, Carter Burwell), Robert Elhai (Elliot Goldenthal, Michael Kamen, Ed Shearmur, Brian Tyler, Klaus Badelt, Ilan Eshkeri) and J.A.C. Redford (James Horner, Thomas Newman).\nConrad Salinger was the most prominent orchestrator of MGM musicals from the 1940s to 1962, orchestrating such famous films as \"Singin' in the Rain\", \"An American in Paris\", and \"Gigi\". In the 1950s, film composer John Williams frequently spent time with Salinger informally learning the craft of orchestration. Robert Russell Bennett (George Gershwin, Rodgers and Hammerstein) was one of America's most prolific orchestrators (particularly of Broadway shows) of the 20th century, sometimes scoring over 80 pages a day.\nProcess.\nMost films require 30 to 120 minutes of musical score. Each individual piece of music in a film is called a \"cue\". There are roughly 20-80 cues per film. A dramatic film may require slow and sparse music while an action film may require 80 cues of highly active music. Each cue can range in length from five seconds to more than ten minutes as needed per scene in the film. After the composer is finished composing the cue, this sketch score is delivered to the orchestrator either as hand written or computer generated. Most composers in Hollywood today compose their music using sequencing software (e.g. Digital Performer, Logic Pro, or Cubase). A sketch score can be generated through the use of a MIDI file which is then imported into a music notation program such as Finale or Sibelius. Thus begins the job of the orchestrator.\nEvery composer works differently and the orchestrator's job is to understand what is required from one composer to the next. If the music is created with sequencing software then the orchestrator is given a MIDI sketch score and a synthesized recording of the cue. The sketch score only contains the musical notes (e.g. eighth notes, quarter notes, etc.) with no phrasing, articulations, or dynamics. The orchestrator studies this synthesized \"mockup\" recording listening to dynamics and phrasing (just as the composer has played them in). They then accurately try to represent these elements in the orchestra. However some voicings on a synthesizer (synthestration) will not work in the same way when orchestrated for the live orchestra.\nThe sound samples are often doubled up very prominently and thickly with other sounds in order to get the music to \"speak\" louder. The orchestrator sometimes changes these synth voicings to traditional orchestral voicings in order to make the music flow better. He may move intervals up or down the octave (or omit them entirely), double certain passages with other instruments in the orchestra, add percussion instruments to provide colour, and add Italian performance marks (e.g. Allegro con brio, Adagio, ritardando, dolce, staccato, etc.). If a composer writes a large action cue, and no woodwinds are used, the orchestrator will often add woodwinds by doubling the brass music up an octave. The orchestra size is determined from the music budget of the film.\nThe orchestrator is told in advance the number of instruments he has to work with and has to abide by what is available. A big-budget film may be able to afford a Romantic music era-orchestra with over 100 musicians. In contrast, a low-budget independent film may only be able to afford a 20 performer chamber orchestra or a jazz quartet. Sometimes a composer will write a three-part chord for three flutes, although only two flutes have been hired. The orchestrator decides where to put the third note. For example, the orchestrator could have the clarinet (a woodwind that blends well with flute) play the third note. After the orchestrated cue is complete it is delivered to the copying house (generally by placing it on a computer server) so that each instrument of the orchestra can be electronically extracted, printed, and delivered to the scoring stage.\nThe major film composers in Hollywood each have a lead orchestrator. Generally the lead orchestrator attempts to orchestrate as much of the music as possible if time allows. If the schedule is too demanding, a team of orchestrators (ranging from two to eight) will work on a film. The lead orchestrator decides on the assignment of cues to other orchestrators on the team. Most films can be orchestrated in one to two weeks with a team of five orchestrators. New orchestrators trying to obtain work will often approach a film composer asking to be hired. They are generally referred to the lead orchestrator for consideration. At the scoring stage the orchestrator will often assist the composer in the recording booth giving suggestions on how to improve the performance, the music, or the recording. If the composer is conducting, sometimes the orchestrator will remain in the recording booth to assist as a producer. Sometimes the roles are reversed with the orchestrator conducting and the composer producing from the booth.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47399", "revid": "2387872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47399", "title": "Edgar, King of England", "text": "King of the English from 959 to 975\nEdgar (or Eadgar), c.\u2009944 \u2013 8 July 975, also known as Edgar the Peacemaker and the Peaceable, was King of the English from 959 until his death in 975. He became king of all England on his brother Eadwig's death. He was the younger son of King Edmund I and his first wife, \u00c6lfgifu. A detailed account of Edgar's reign is not possible, because only a few events were recorded by chroniclers and monastic writers, who were more interested in recording the activities of the leaders of the church.\nEdgar mainly followed the political policies of his predecessors, but there were major changes in the religious sphere. The English Benedictine Reform, which he strongly supported, became a dominant religious and social force. It is seen by historians as a major achievement, and it was accompanied by a literary and artistic flowering, mainly associated with \u00c6thelwold, Bishop of Winchester. Monasteries aggressively acquired estates from lay landowners with Edgar's assistance, leading to disorder when he died and former owners sought to recover their lost property, sometimes by force. Edgar's major administrative reform was the introduction of a standardised coinage in the early 970s to replace the previous decentralised system. He also issued legislative codes which mainly concentrated on improving procedures for enforcement of the law.\nEngland had suffered from Viking invasions for over a century when Edgar came to power, but there were none during his reign, which fell in a lull in attacks between the mid-950s and the early 980s. After his death the throne was disputed between the supporters of his two surviving sons; the elder one, Edward the Martyr, was chosen with the support of Dunstan, the Archbishop of Canterbury. Three years later Edward was murdered; he was succeeded by his younger half-brother, \u00c6thelred the Unready. Later chroniclers presented Edgar's reign as a golden age when England was free from external attacks and internal disorder, especially compared with \u00c6thelred's disastrous rule. Modern historians see Edgar's reign as the pinnacle of Anglo-Saxon culture, but they disagree about his political legacy, and some see the disorders following his death as a natural reaction to his overbearing control.\nSources.\nEdgar is described by the historian Ann Williams as \"an enigmatic figure\" because of the very limited information available on him, and Barbara Yorke describes his personality as \"elusive\". The \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" (\"ASC\") has only ten entries on his reign, and other sources dating to the late tenth and early eleventh centuries are mainly interested in the episcopal leaders of the English Benedictine Reform movement. There are further details in the works of post-Conquest monastic chroniclers, but their material is often legendary and unreliable. A few events have been recorded in detail, but it is not possible to write a chronological account of Edgar's reign.\nBackground.\nIn the ninth century, Anglo-Saxon England came under increasing attack from Viking raids, culminating in invasion by the Viking Great Heathen Army in 865. By 878, the Vikings had overrun the kingdoms of Northumbria, East Anglia, and Mercia, and nearly conquered Wessex, but in that year the West Saxons achieved a decisive victory at the Battle of Edington under King Alfred the Great. By 883, \u00c6thelred, Lord of the Mercians, had accepted Alfred's overlordship, and in the 880s and 890s the Anglo-Saxons ruled Wessex and western Mercia, but the rest of England remained under Viking rule. Alfred died in 899, and in the 910s his son King Edward the Elder and daughter \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d, Lady of the Mercians, who was \u00c6thelred's widow, conquered Viking-ruled eastern Mercia and East Anglia. \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d died in 918 and the Mercians installed her daughter \u00c6lfwynn as the second Lady of the Mercians, but Edward seized her and established full control over Mercia.\nEdward died in 924 and was succeeded by his eldest son \u00c6thelstan, who may have been king only of Mercia at first, but ruled the whole of his father's realm by the next year. In 927, he conquered Northumbria, and thus became the first king of all England. He died in October 939 and was succeeded by his half-brother and Edgar's father, Edmund, who almost immediately lost control of the north to the Vikings, but recovered full control of England by 944. In May 946, he was stabbed to death trying to protect his seneschal from attack by a convicted outlaw, and as his sons Eadwig and Edgar were infants, their uncle Eadred became king. Like Edmund, Eadred inherited the kingship of the whole of England and soon lost it when York (southern Northumbria) accepted a Viking king, but he recovered it when the York magnates expelled Erik Bloodaxe in 954.\nEadred was very close to Edmund and inherited his leading counsellors, which resulted in a high degree of continuity of government when he became king. These counsellors included their mother, Eadgifu; Oda, Archbishop of Canterbury; \u00c6lfsige, Bishop of Winchester; and \u00c6thelstan, ealdorman of East Anglia, who was known as the Half-King because it was believed that kings depended on his advice. Another key adviser was Dunstan, Abbot of Glastonbury and future Archbishop of Canterbury. Eadred suffered from ill health, which became much worse towards the end of his reign. Most surviving charters of the last two years of his reign were produced by an agency associated with Glastonbury Abbey, and almost all of these were not attested by the king, suggesting that Dunstan was authorised to issue charters in Eadred's name when he was too ill to carry out his duties. Eadred was in his early thirties when he died on 23 November 955, and Eadwig succeeded at the age of around fifteen. He was the first king since the early ninth century not to face the threat of imminent foreign invasion, and England remained free from Viking attacks until 980.\nEarly life.\nEdgar was the younger son of Edmund and his first wife, \u00c6lfgifu, and he was born in 943 or 944, the year his mother died. She was a benefactor of Shaftesbury Abbey, an establishment for nuns, and was buried and venerated as a saint there. Her mother Wynfl\u00e6d, who died around 950, was a vowess (religious woman), who was also a benefactor of the nunnery. Edgar was brought up by \u00c6lfwynn, the wife of \u00c6thelstan Half-King, and in about 958 Edgar gave her a ten-hide () estate at Old Weston in Huntingdonshire in gratitude. \u00c6thelstan was a strong supporter of the Benedictine reform movement, which became dominant during Edgar's reign, and the historian Robin Fleming comments that Edgar (prince eligible for the throne) was profoundly influenced by his upbringing:\nThus, the was reared in the household of one of his father's closest allies and raised among Half-King's own brothers and sons, five of whom at one time or another were ealdormen. Since Half-King was an intimate of the reform circle, and St Dunstan in particular, Edgar came of age in an atmosphere dominated by the ideals of monastic reform. Some of Edgar's affection for monks and his determination to revive Benedictine monasticism must have been acquired in this household of his youth.\nEadwig and Edgar are not recorded in contemporary sources until 955, when they first attested charters, suggesting that they did not regularly attend court when they were young. Shortly before his death Eadred granted the secular (non-monastic) minster at Abingdon to \u00c6thelwold, the future Bishop of Winchester, who converted it into a monastic establishment, Abingdon Abbey, with himself as its abbot. Edgar was educated there by \u00c6thelwold, who was another leader of the monastic reform movement, and who was thus able to reinforce the young prince's belief in its virtues. As Eadwig succeeded shortly after \u00c6thelwold's appointment, it is likely that Edgar's education at Abingdon was approved by his elder brother as king, and that \u00c6thelwold and Eadwig were on good terms.\nEdgar in Eadwig's early reign, 955 to 957.\nEadwig became king on Eadred's death on 23 November 955. Historians have often been critical of Eadwig, portraying him as irresponsible or incompetent, and one piece of evidence cited for this view is the exceptional number of charters he issued in 956. His sixty-odd gifts of land in that year make up around five per cent of all genuine Anglo-Saxon charters, and no other ruler in Europe is known to have matched that yearly total before the twelfth century. The historian Ann Williams observes that the many charters may indicate that Eadwig had to buy support, but too little is known about the background to be certain.\nWhen Eadwig succeeded, the court was ruled by powerful factions, and he appears to have been determined to show his independence of action from the start. In the view of the historian Ben Snook, \"Eadwig, unlike his brother Edgar, was clearly his own man. Immediately on coming to power, he acted to put a stop to all this.\" Simon Keynes argues that \"whether Eadwig and Edgar were able to assert their own independence of action, or remained at the mercy of established interests at court, is unclear\". Eadwig quarrelled with some of his uncle's leading counsellors, especially Dunstan, whom he exiled abroad. Eadgifu had frequently attested charters in the reigns of her sons Edmund and Eadred, but she only attested one of Eadwig's, and she later alleged that she had been \"despoiled of all her property\" during his reign. On the other hand, Edgar was prominent at his brother's court between 955 and 957, attesting many of his charters, in one of which he is shown as (underking).\nSome of the hostility towards Eadwig was probably due to his promotion of his friends, especially \u00c6lfhere, Ealdorman of Mercia, at the expense of the old guard, such as Dunstan. \u00c6lfhere and his brothers were acknowledged by several kings as relatives, but the nature of the relationship is unknown. They were close to Eadwig and he made the eldest brother, \u00c6lfheah, his (seneschal). \u00c6lfheah and his wife \u00c6lfswith, who was also acknowledged by Eadwig as a relative, benefited from his generosity. \u00c6lfhere, who was to become the pre-eminent lay magnate until his death in 983, was appointed an ealdorman in Mercia in 956. Other ealdormen appointed were \u00c6thelstan Rota in Mercia in late 955 and Byrhtnoth, the future hero of the Battle of Maldon, who became ealdorman of Essex in 956. Eadwig appointed \u00c6thelwold, the eldest son of \u00c6thelstan Half-King, as an ealdorman in East Anglia. These were sound appointments of men from established families and Edgar kept them when he came to power. Frank Stenton, in his volume in the Oxford History of England, \"Anglo-Saxon England\" (described by Keynes as \"magisterial and massively authoritative\"), comments that \"it can at least be said for King Eadwig that he agreed to the promotion of good servants\".\nKing of Mercia, 957 to 959.\nIn 957, the kingdom of England was divided between Eadwig, who kept Wessex, and Edgar who became king of Mercia, with the River Thames forming the boundary. It is uncertain whether this was the result of a coup against Eadwig or a decision to divide the kingdom between the brothers. Christopher Lewis (historian) sees the division as the solution to \"a dangerously unstable government and a court in deep crisis\"; Sean Miller and Rory Naismith attribute it to an unsuccessful attempt by Eadwig to promote a powerful new faction at the expense of the old guard. According to Dunstan's first biographer, who only named himself as \"B\": \"King Eadwig was totally abandoned by the people north [of the Thames]. They despised him for his imprudent discharge of the power entrusted to him. The wise and sensible he destroyed in a spirit of idle hatred, replacing them with ignoramuses like himself to whom he took a liking.\" This is the view of a partisan of Dunstan, who was Eadwig's enemy. \"B\" was probably in exile with Dunstan when the division took place. Archbishop Oda forced Eadwig to divorce his wife \u00c6lfgifu on the ground that they were too closely related, but Edgar was on good terms with her when he became king.\nFour versions of the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" mention the division of the kingdom, and they all state that Edgar \"succeeded\" to the kingship of the Mercians, as if it was a normal and expected event. Manuscripts D and F of the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" (\"ASC D\" and \"ASC F\"), date the division to 955, whereas \"ASC B\" and \"ASC C\" correctly date it to 957. The difference in dates may be because it was agreed in Eadred's reign that the kingdom would be divided between the brothers, but he died before Edgar was old enough to act in person and had to wait until he reached the age of majority of fourteen in 957. Charter attestations show that the magnates did not decide which court to attend on the basis of personal loyalty: ealdormen and bishops with jurisdictions south of the Thames stayed with Eadwig, and those north of it served Edgar. Keynes comments: \"One need not imagine that the unity of England would have been regarded in the 950s as something necessarily desirable for its own sake, not least because it was of such recent creation.\" Almost all thegns who had attested Eadwig's charters before the division stayed with him. The historian Frederick Biggs argues that the division was a revival of the earlier Anglo-Saxon practice of joint kingship, against the opposition of the Church, and Bishop \u00c6thelwold complained that Eadwig had \"through the ignorance of childhood dispersed his kingdom and divided its unity\".\nEadwig retained some degree of seniority, as he attested charters as \"King of the English\", whereas Edgar was usually \"King of the Mercians\", and also occasionally of the Northumbrians and the British. All coins, including those issued in Mercia, were in Eadwig's name until his death, The contemporary chronicler \u00c6thelweard, who may have been Eadwig's brother-in-law, wrote that he \"held the kingdom continuously for four years\". There is no evidence of rivalry between the brothers, but they did disagree over Dunstan. Edgar recalled him from his exile, and soon afterwards appointed him to the Mercian bishoprics of London and Worcester. \u00c6thelstan Half-King retired when the division took place, perhaps because Edgar had reached an age to take over. In 958, Edgar gave an estate at Sutton in Nottinghamshire to Oscytel, Archbishop of York, probably in support of a policy initiated by Eadwig of strengthening control over this area of Viking settlement by granting land in it to the archbishop.\nConsorts and children.\nEdgar had children by three consorts. Almost all historians accept that he married the third one, but some question whether he married the first one and others the second. Yorke sees a case for recognising three marriages, as well as temporary liaisons. The name of his first consort, who was the mother of his eldest son, Edward the Martyr, was not recorded until after the Norman Conquest. According to Osbern of Canterbury, writing in the late eleventh century, she was a nun who was seduced by Edgar, but this is rejected by later chroniclers, and historians generally accept the statements of the twelfth-century writers John of Worcester and William of Malmesbury that she was \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d Eneda, the daughter of Ordm\u00e6r. Ann Williams describes her as his wife, but Cyril Hart says that Edward the Martyr was of doubtful legitimacy. The chroniclers described Ordm\u00e6r as an ealdorman, but no ealdorman or thegn with that name attested any surviving tenth century charter. According to the , a (powerful man) called Ordm\u00e6r and his wife Ealde exchanged land with \u00c6thelstan Half-King, and Edgar may have met \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d when he was \u00c6thelstan's foster son. She probably died around 960. The historian Nicholas Brooks argues that Edgar must have married \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d because Dunstan backed her son's succession to the throne, and he would not have supported an illegitimate son.\nEdgar's second consort was called Wulfthryth. According to the late eleventh century Benedictine writer Goscelin, Edgar wished to marry her cousin Saint Wulfhild, the daughter of a nobleman called Wulfhelm who had sent her to Wilton Abbey to be educated. Goscelin stated in his hagiography of Wulfhild that she resisted his determined advances as she wished to become a nun, and he agreed to marry Wulfthryth, who was also being educated at Wilton. They had a daughter, Edith. Williams regards it as uncertain whether they married, but Yorke argues that they did, pointing out that Goscelin stated that she and Edgar were \"bound by indissoluble vows\", and that Edith's personal seal, which still survives, describes her as the \"royal sister\" of Kings Edward and \u00c6thelred, implying that they recognised her legitimacy. Wulfthryth returned to Wilton Abbey with her daughter by 964 and became a nun, allowing Edgar to remarry. He employed the Lotharingian scholar Radbod of Rheims, and the artist Benna of Trier, to educate Edith. Anglo-Saxon custom allowed for remarriage after a spouse entered a religious community, but on a strict interpretation of canon law, this was forbidden so long as the spouse lived, and so Edgar's third marriage may have had political repercussions. Wulfthryth and Edith were both later regarded as saints, but Wulfthryth's cult never became widely established, unlike that of Edith, who was the subject of another hagiography by Goscelin.\nWilliam of Malmesbury wrote that the Danish king Cnut had no affection for English saints, and \"when at Wilton one Whitsun he poured out his customary jeers at Edith herself: he would never credit the sanctity of the daughter of King Edgar, a vicious man, an especial slave to lust, and more tyrant than king\". William claimed that Cnut ordered her tomb to be broken into so that she could prove her sanctity, and when this was done she threatened to attack him, terrifying him into submission. Yorke comments that the story has been used by William \"to highlight her father's reputation for immorality\". Yorke sees a provision in the that monasteries were under the protection of the king and nunneries of the queen to avoid scandal as \"a pointed reference to Edgar's priapic interest in nuns\", which would have been seen as normal royal behaviour by most people. Williams observes that \"the king's devotion to the Benedictine reform movement should not be taken as evidence of high personal morals\".\nEdgar's third consort was \u00c6lfthryth, who was the widow of Ealdorman \u00c6thelwold. He died in 962 and she married Edgar in 964. They had two sons, Edmund, who died young, and \u00c6thelred, whose disastrous reign earned him the epithet of \"the Unready\". In 966 she attested the Winchester New Minster Charter as the \"legitimate wife\" of the king, and her recently born elder son Edmund attested as his \"legitimate son\", whereas Edward was described as \"begotten by the same king\", but it is uncertain whether this was on the king's instruction, which would indicate that he wished to cut Edward out of the succession, or was ordered by Bishop \u00c6thelwold, who was a friend and ally of \u00c6lfthryth. She was consecrated as queen in 973 and thereafter attested charters as , the first West Saxon queen to do so on a regular basis. Her consecration was a major change in status as previous West Saxon's kings' consorts had only been described as the king's wife, whereas she also had the status of being the queen.\nUnlike Edgar's earlier consorts, \u00c6lfthryth became politically influential, and Edgar appointed her father, Ordgar, as ealdorman of Devon. Williams describes her as \"a force to be reckoned with\"; Pauline Stafford regards her as \"one of the most important tenth-century queens\" and comments that \"\u00c6lfthryth, if not Eadgifu, heralded a new dawn in the history of English queens\". Both women had a dominant position over other royal women, and both were most powerful as queen mothers, in \u00c6lfthryth's case during the minority of her son \u00c6thelred. She was later accused of being responsible for the murder of Edward the Martyr to make her own son king.\nKing of England.\nEdmund was killed in 946 trying to protect his seneschal from attack by an outlaw, and because his children were infants he was succeeded by his younger brother Eadred, who ruled until his death in 955. Edgar's older brother, Eadwig, then became king and in 957 the kingdom was divided, Eadwig ruling south of the Thames and Edgar north of it. Historians disagree whether this was the result of a revolt by Edgar's supporters against Eadwig's incompetent rule or had been previously agreed.\nAdministration.\nEdgar became king of the whole of England when Eadwig died on 1 October 959, and his former tutor \u00c6thelwold became one of the most powerful figures at court. He was probably in Edgar's personal service as an adviser from 960 until 963, when the king appointed him Bishop of Winchester. Dunstan, who became Archbishop of Canterbury at the start of Edgar's reign, was diligent in attending court, and in the historian Alan Thacker's view: \"While \u00c6thelwold's characteristic context is his monastic empire, Dunstan's is the royal court\". In the early 970s the leading secular magnates were \u00c6thelwine, Ealdorman of East Anglia (\u00c6thelwold's brother and successor), \u00c6lfhere of Mercia, Oslac of York and Byrhtnoth of Essex.\nThe charters of the 960s and early 970s are similar and do not suggest political change in the period, but from the late 960s northern magnates were more regularly represented. In 954, Eadred had appointed Osulf, the ruler of the north Northumbrian territory of Bamburgh, as the ealdorman of the whole of Northumbria following the expulsion of the Viking king of York, Erik Bloodaxe. Osulf did not owe his power to southern English support, and when he died in the 960s Edgar again divided Northumbria and appointed Oslac as ealdorman of York (southern Northumbria), increasing his control over the area, but he was not able to choose who held power in Bamburgh.\nEaldormen were important in providing stability in a period when kings died young, but the families of \u00c6thelwine of East Anglia and \u00c6lfhere of Mercia gained unassailable positions and their rivalries were a threat to the stability of the kingdom. Edgar was able to keep them under control, but these tensions collapsed into open hostilities after his death. Ealdormen for areas south of the Thames do not attest after 970, and this may be because Edgar chose to govern these areas through royal officials of lower status. Reeves may have been entrusted with duties which were previously carried out by ealdormen. This made his rule less uniform, with different methods of government in different areas. The gap was filled after his death by the appointment of three new southern ealdormen.\nKingship was peripatetic. There was no fixed capital city and the court moved from one royal estate to another, four or five times a year. According to John of Worcester, each winter and spring Edgar would travel round the kingdom to enquire whether the statutes he had promulgated were being observed and whether the poor were being unjustly treated by the powerful. The historian Richard Huscroft describes this account as \"perhaps a little rose-tinted\". Harrying was a standard punishment for crimes committed by communities, and in 974 Edgar ordered the people of Thanet to be deprived of their property and some of them executed, because they had robbed passing traders from York. Forfeiture of land for wrongdoing gave the king opportunities for patronage or receiving payments for remission of punishment. In one case, Edgar rescinded a forfeiture for 100 mancuses of gold, and in another he restored several confiscated estates for 120 mancuses.\nCharters.\nSince the 930s, charters had been produced by a royal secretariat, but this probably did not survive the division of 957 to 959 in unchanged form. When Edgar succeeded in 959 he appears to have preferred to retain the secretariat he had employed as king of Mercia rather than use the one he had inherited from Eadwig. Edgar's charters were written in competent but formulaic and derivative Latin, drawing on the prose of much earlier charters. They are more diverse in style than those of previous kings, and Snook argues that this does not indicate a decline in central control, but rather the increasing sophistication of the Anglo-Saxon bureaucracy. Although there is great variety in the charters' proems (introductions), and in the sanctions against anyone defying the provisions of the charter, the political and legal protocols follow a stable tradition.\nThe charters fall into several groups. Most belong to the \"diplomatic mainstream\", including those produced by the scribe known as Edgar A. Scholars disagree about his location. Richard Dr\u00f6gereit in the 1930s and Pierre Chaplais in the 1960s linked the scribe with \u00c6thelwold's Abingdon, and perhaps with \u00c6thelwold himself. Keynes argued in 1980 that he was probably a priest in the royal writing office, and Susan Kelly defended the older view in 2000. Edgar A started drafting when Edgar was king of Mercia and a significant proportion of charters in the early 960s were produced by him. He ceased work in 963, but some charters later in the reign were produced by scribes who adopted his style. Another group is associated with Dunstan and called the Dunstan B charters. They were produced between 951 and 975, with a break in Eadwig's reign. The ones dating to the period when Edgar was only king of Mercia were not personally attested by him. There were also charters produced by midlands and west country agencies, and in some cases the beneficiary may have played an important role in the drafting.\nCharters are problematic sources because of the difficulty of distinguishing genuine ones from the many forgeries. About 160 charters of Edgar survive, including 10 dating to 957 to 959 when he was king of Mercia. Most of the Mercian ones, and around 100 of those he issued as king of the English, are substantially genuine, the highest numbers being in 961 to 963 and 968. They are mainly standard grants of land to religious houses or individuals, with a few more complex ones such as the one granting privileges to the New Minster, Winchester (see image below). Most charters are only known from later copies, but sixteen survive as single sheets which are or may be originals. Some give Edgar's regnal year, and the start date they were based on varied, some being from 959, 960 and 973, but most often 957. Like \u00c6thelstan, Edgar used the title king of the English in some charters and king of Britain in other ones, and Keynes comments that \"the consistent usages of Edgar's reign represent nothing less than a determined reaffirmation of the polity created by \u00c6thelstan in the 930s\".\nLaw.\nFour law codes have been attributed to Edgar, but the correct number is two. The \"Hundred Ordinance\" was formerly called I Edgar by historians, but it does not say who issued it, and it may date to an earlier king. II and III Edgar are the ecclesiastical and secular sections of one set of provisions, known as the Andover Code. IV Edgar is thus the second code. Edgar was more concerned with the administration of the law than its substance. His primary concern was to ensure that existing laws were properly enforced. Law codes were not unilateral royal pronouncements, but issued with the advice of the king's councillors.\nThe legal historian Patrick Wormald describes the Andover Code as impressive and rational. II Edgar covers ecclesiastical matters, especially church dues. For the first time, a specific penalty was prescribed for non-payment of tithes, and anyone who did not pay Romescot, the penny due to the Pope, had to take it to Rome \u2013 a penalty theoretical rather than real. III Edgar is concerned with making justice accessible, preventing unjust judgments, standardisation of weights and measures, and that \"one coinage is to be current throughout all the king's dominion\". Plaintiffs had to exhaust other avenues before they were allowed recourse to the king, judgements had to be just and punishments had to be appropriate. Courts were to be held regularly, and every man was to provide himself with a surety to hold him to his legal duty. The preservation of order required the cooperation of the secular and religious authorities, but it is not until III Edgar that ealdormen and bishops were required to work together in the judgement of legal cases.\nIV Edgar is more wordy than the Andover Code and more rhetorical than any previous one. It has attracted the most attention by historians as it recognises the separate customs of the former Viking Kingdom of York, which was to have \"such good laws as they best decide on\". Wapentakes, the name in the northern Danelaw for the administrative divisions known to the Anglo-Saxons as hundreds, are first mentioned in this law code. One exception to the concession that the Danelaw was to have its own customs was a provision to make the sale of stolen goods more difficult. At least twelve sworn witnesses were to be appointed in each burh, hundred and wapentake, and all transactions had to be witnessed by two or three of these witnesses. Shires, hundreds and wapentakes began to play an important part in the king's control over the population around this time. IV Edgar refers \"to all the nation, whether Englishmen, Danes or Britons, in every province of my dominion\", recognising that Edgar's subjects were made up of three distinct political communities. He ordered that many copies of the code be sent to ealdormen \u00c6lfhere and \u00c6thelwine, so that they can be widely distributed and made known to rich and poor.\nThe late tenth-century hagiographer, Lantfred of Winchester, writing at about the time that Edgar died, stated:\nAt the command of the glorious King Edgar, a law ... was promulgated throughout England, to serve as a deterrent against all sorts of crime ... that if any thief or robber were found anywhere in the , he would be tortured at length by having his eyes put out, his hands cut off, his ears torn off, his nostrils carved open and his feet removed; and finally, with the skin and hair of his head shaved off, he would be abandoned in the open fields dead in respect of nearly all his limbs, to be devoured by wild beasts and birds and hounds of the night.\nEdgar's known laws do not specify mutilation, although IV Edgar does refer a list of punishments which does not survive. A code of Cnut specifies similar punishments, and its author, Archbishop Wulfstan of York, stated that Cnut's legislation was based on the laws of Edgar. Wormald describes the punishments as \"ghastly\", and Keynes observes that it is no wonder that Edgar was hailed as \"the strongest of all kings\", but that if we are disposed to admire the peace he brought then we should bear in mind the measures he took to enforce it.\nCnut held up Edgar's legislation as the precedent to be followed, and declared in a proclamation of 1020 that everyone should \"steadfastly observe the law of Edgar.\" \"ASC D\" states that in 1018 the Danes and the English reached an agreement \"according to Edgar's law\". In a letter from Cnut to his subjects in 1019/20, he referred to a law code agreed at Oxford, which he described as Edgar's law, and urged people to keep to it. In Wormald's view, Cnut considered that his regime was based on the Oxford agreement to keep to Edgar's law. However, the code bears little resemblance to Edgar's legislation, and the reference to him was probably symbolic as a revered lawmaker, rather than practical as a source. Edgar's legislation continued to be held in high regard after the Norman Conquest, and the twelfth-century historian Eadmer referred to the \"holy laws\" of \"the most glorious king Edgar\", although there is no evidence that he knew the codes.\nCoinage.\nThe only coin in common use in late Anglo-Saxon England was the silver penny, but a few halfpennies were also produced and nine are known for Edgar. Edgar's coinage is divided into two phases, pre-reform which broadly carried on the diverse coinage design of his immediate predecessors, and the major reform near the end of his reign.\nThere had been an increase in regional variation in coinage in the reigns of Edmund and Eadred, especially in Northumbria, which switched back and forth between English and Viking control, and the permanent restoration of control over the north after 954 allowed a gradual return to the greater unity of \u00c6thelstan's coinage. Edgar's pre-reform coin designs included Horizontal types, which continued from Eadwig's reign. The Circumscription Cross type was introduced under \u00c6thelstan and was rare for the next twenty years, before becoming common under Edgar. The Bust Crowned type (see image) also became much more common in Edgar's reign. Edgar's early coinage is described by Naismith as \"an important step towards the fundamental change\" of the reformed coinage. \u00c6thelstan's reign and Edgar's pre-reform coinage are the only pre-reform periods when the mint place was commonly shown, and even in these periods many coins did not show the information. Thirty mint-places are named on Edgar's pre-reform coins, and another six are inferred by numismatists for coins which do not show the town. There was a gradual decline in the standard of coinage from the reigns of Alfred and Edward the Elder until Edgar's reform. In most of the first half of the tenth century the fineness of the coinage was maintained at a high level, with over 90% silver. A few less fine coins were produced in the 950s, and the number increased significantly in Edgar's pre-reform coinage. The average weight of coins had gradually declined since the reign of Edward the Elder, and this continued into Edgar's time.\nEdgar's reformed coinage brought in standardised designs over the whole country. It was modelled on \u00c6thelstan's coinage and had been partly prefigured in the previous fifteen years. It was of a high and uniform fineness (proportion of silver), compared both with the preceding period and with most other contemporary European coinages, with about 96% silver. The weight increased, but there were still regional variations. All mints used the same design, with the king's bust facing left on the obverse in an inner circle with his name around the outside as +EADGAR REX ANGLOR[UM]. On the reverse was a small cross in the middle, surrounded by the moneyer's name and the mint location. The design was not original: it was very similar to \u00c6thelstan's Bust Crowned coinage, but uniformity over the whole kingdom was completely new. The reform of the coinage is not recorded in documentary sources until the thirteenth century, when Roger of Wendover was the only chronicler to mention it. It is not known exactly when the reform was introduced, but it was towards the end of his reign. The fineness of coins became more geographically uneven after his death.\nEdgar's standardization of the coinage reflects his concern with uniformity, and his ability to impose the change shows the strength of his control. It was part of his determined effort towards the end of his reign to increase the secular and spiritual cohesion of his kingdom. For the first time, all of the approximately forty mints were producing a uniform design of coin. Edgar's coinage reform is described by the historian Levi Roach as \"one of the crowning achievements of late Anglo-Saxon kingship\". It lasted for more than one hundred and fifty years.\nReligion.\nAs king of Mercia in 958, Edgar granted land to St Werburgh's Minster, Chester. This was an unreformed community, a house of secular clergy, and would have been an unlikely beneficiary of royal patronage later in Edgar's reign. The Benedictine reformers later presented his accession as a victory for their cause, but this donation shows that monastic status was not then crucial for him and his advisers.\nEarlier kings had supported reform, but there were only two Benedictine monasteries when Edgar came to the throne, and his support was key to the wider success of the movement. In Stenton's view, his accession to the throne of England led to few changes in secular personnel, but it caused momentous changes in the church. He comments: \"There is no doubt that in the re-establishment of English monasticism, which is the principal achievement of this period, the enthusiasm of King Edgar was the decisive factor.\" He favoured all three of the leading figures in the movement, Dunstan, Oswald and \u00c6thelwold. Oda had died in 958, and Eadwig's choice of successor as Archbishop of Canterbury, \u00c6lfsige, froze to death in the Alps on the way to get his pallium from the Pope. Byrhthelm, Bishop of Wells, was Eadwig's second choice, but when Edgar succeeded, he dismissed Byrhthelm on the ground that he was too gentle to maintain discipline and appointed Dunstan. \nOswald became bishop of Worcester in 962 and then archbishop of York in 971 without relinquishing Worcester.\nIn the early years of Edgar's reign, the third monastic leader, \u00c6thelwold, was the only abbot who attested charters, showing his special status. He was a strong critic of secular clergy (sometimes called canons), who were able to marry, unlike monks. Following his appointment as Bishop of Winchester in 963, \u00c6thelwold converted the city's New Minster into an institution exclusively of monks. Edgar successfully sought papal authority for the forcible expulsion of the canons and sent an armed force under a royal official to help in carrying it out. In 966, he granted privileges to the new community in a magnificent charter (see image), which referred to the cleansing of the church by the driving out of the canons and recorded the grant of the New Minster to Christ by Edgar, who is described as (vicar of Christ). One of the main justifications for the king's involvement was that the canons' sinful nature meant that their prayers for him were worthless.\nEdgar and \u00c6lfthryth granted \u00c6thelwold an estate at Sudbourne on condition that he translate the (Rule of Saint Benedict) from Latin into English to assist the religious instruction of the laity, and the translation survives. The laid down rules for English monasteries. It was written as a result of instructions sent by Edgar to a synod at Winchester to draw up a single monastic rule for all England, and it exhibits his desire for unity and uniformity. He urged his bishops, abbots and abbesses, \"to be of one mind regarding monastic usage ... lest differing ways of observing the customs of one Rule and one country should bring their holy conversation into disrepute\". The instructed that psalms be said several times a day for the king and queen in all monasteries, and required the consent of the king for the election of abbots. The document dates to around 973, perhaps after Edgar's coronation in Bath on 11 May.\nContinental reformers accepted that secular clergy had their place in the church, and Dunstan and Oswald agreed. They did not expel the canons from their cathedral communities. \u00c6thelwold was more extreme, and in a text known as \"King Edgar's Establishment of Monasteries\", he wrote that Edgar:\ncleansed holy places from all men's foulnesses, not only in the kingdom of the West Saxons but in the land of the Mercians also. Assuredly he drove out canons who abounded beyond measure in the aforesaid sins, and he established monks in the foremost places of all his dominion for the glorious service of the Saviour Christ. In some places also he established nuns and entrusted them to his consort, \u00c6lfthryth, that she might help them in every necessity.\nThe reformers practised personal austerity, but their masses, liturgy and prayers became more and more lavish along Continental lines, and they worked vigorously to increase the land and wealth of the monasteries to pay for the buildings and objects required. The reformers did not only receive physical and financial support from Edgar and his officials, but also from other members of the laity. In addition, the leaders of the movement were wealthy aristocrats who used their own resources to support the movement. \u00c6thelwold paid Edgar 200 mancuses of gold and a silver cup worth five pounds to renew privileges of Winchester Old Minster, granted by Edward the Elder, in relation to a large estate at Taunton, and \u00c6thelwold also paid \u00c6lfthryth 50 mancuses \"in return for her help in his just mission\". \u00c6thelwold relentlessly pursued land claims through the courts on behalf of monasteries in his diocese, and Edgar frequently intervened to support him. After his death landowners brought legal actions, and sometimes used violence, to recover estates lost by the aggressive and dubious claims of monasteries. Even the greatest magnates were not immune from the reformers' demands, and \u00c6thelwine brought a successful action to recover an estate of forty hides in Hatfield, complaining that Edgar had forced him and his brothers to surrender it to \u00c6thelwold. The anti-monastic reaction following Edgar's death shows how dependent the reformers were on the king's support, but no writings survive of the reformers' opponents to show how they saw Edgar.\nEdgar's support for the reformers earned him extravagant praise in the works of Benedictine authors such as Byrhtferth and Wulfstan, both writing in the late 990s. The reformers gave Edgar a status which was almost theocratic, and he is compared in the to the Good Shepherd. The contemporary theologian \u00c6lfric of Eynsham also praised Edgar; he urged obedience to monarchy, which he regarded as divinely instituted. The historian Catherine Karkov observes that: \"From the very beginning of his reign Edgar had been portrayed as an able and powerful , whose kingship derived directly from God\". The reform was the English branch of a European movement, and monasteries in post-Carolingian Europe universally followed the , but Wormald comments that \"England was the only place in post-Carolingian Europe where monastic uniformity was a matter of political principle\".\nLike other kings, Edgar was generous in his donations to churches. In 970 \u00c6thelwold re-founded the community of secular priests at Ely Abbey as a house for monks with the generous support of Edgar, whose gifts included a cross covered in gold and silver gilt, together with golden images and precious stones; a cloak embellished with gold; and a gospel book gilded with precious stones and enamels. He was a major patron of Romsey Abbey, a Benedictine nunnery which was founded or refounded in 967, and his son Edmund was buried there. Edgar also supported the Old Minster, Winchester, which had the body of Saint Swithun. In 971, the saint's body was translated from its tomb in the grounds to one inside the minster, on the order of Edgar and with the support of \u00c6thelwold. This was the start of a major new cult. A second translation was carried out in around 974. Swithun's relics were carried in a barefoot procession for three miles before being placed in a grand new reliquary of gold, silver and rubies which Edgar had ordered to be made. He was also the greatest benefactor of \u00c6thelwold's Abingdon Abbey.\nReformed Benedictine monasteries were mainly confined to Wessex and some areas of Mercia, and they were greatly outnumbered by the many secular minsters, although the reformed monasteries were much wealthier. The reformers portrayed Edgar's reign as a golden age which fundamentally changed the English church, but the historian John Blair is sceptical: \"The polemic may belie a religious culture in Edgar's reign which, when we probe beneath the surface, starts to look less exclusive and more like that of \u00c6thelstan's and Edmund's.\"\nLearning and art.\nWhen Alfred came to the throne in 871, learning had declined to a low level and the knowledge of Latin was very poor. He started the revival of learning, and it was brought to its height by Edgar. Lapidge comments that his reign \"marks a decisive turning-point in English literary history\". No Latin works by Oswald are known, but \u00c6thelwold and Dunstan were outstanding scholars. \u00c6thelwold's translation of the is of the highest standard, and his New Minster Charter was written in elaborate hermeneutic Latin to display the dazzling erudition of the Benedictine movement and glorify King Edgar and the reform. Some of the works in Old English produced by \u00c6thelwold are so lavishly and expensively produced that they cannot have been for the instruction of young oblates and were probably intended for nobles and royalty. There was also a great increase in Latin literature in Edgar's reign, all of it apparently associated with \u00c6thelwold's Winchester. Much of this literature consisted of poetry, often containing many grecisms. The three leading reformers were strongly influenced by Continental scholarship and welcomed learned foreign clerics, such as Lantfred from Fleury Abbey, to their households. The art historian David Wilson states that Edgar's reign \"produced some of the highest achievements in painting and sculpture ever seen in England\". The Benedictional of St. \u00c6thelwold is one of the greatest examples of English art. Several half-sisters of Edgar's father had married Continental royalty, and these connections helped Edgar to bring in foreign scholars such as Radbod and painters and goldsmiths such as Benna, who made metalwork for the king and decorated the ceiling of Wilton church.\nWarfare and foreign relations.\nPeter Rex observes in his biography of Edgar that his reign was remarkable for the lack of opposition to his rule both from within and outside his kingdom. Although no Viking attacks on England are recorded in his reign, there were several battles fought by ealdormen and neighbouring kings. In 966, Thored, son of Gunnar, ravaged Westmorland, perhaps as part of English resistance to the southward expansion of Strathclyde, and King Kenneth of Scotland conducted raids on Northumbria in the early 970s. In the late 960s, there was dissension between the princes of the north Welsh Kingdom of Gwynedd, and in 967, the English under \u00c6lfhere laid waste to it; in the early 970s, Anglesey was twice attacked by the Vikings. The \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" boasted of the strength of Edgar's navy. \"ASC D\" and \"E\", after declaring that many kings honoured Edgar, go on: \"Nor was there fleet so proud nor host so strong that it got itself prey in England as long as the noble king held the throne.\" Later chroniclers made exaggerated claims, such as John of Worcester, who wrote that Edgar had 3,600 ships, and that he used to circumnavigate the island of Britain each summer, but there is evidence for naval organisation in the reign of his son \u00c6thelred, and Edgar probably had a substantial fleet which laid the foundation for it.\nA poem in the northern versions \"ASC D\" and \"E\", which is thought on stylistic grounds to have been written by Wulfstan, praises Edgar, but then goes on \"Yet he did one ill-deed too greatly: he loved evil foreign customs and brought too firmly heathen manners within this land, and attracted hither foreigners and enticed harmful people to this country.\" This probably refers to Edgar hiring Viking mercenaries and their ships, an expedient which was employed by Alfred and probably \u00c6thelstan before Edgar, and \u00c6thelred after him.\nIn 972/973, Edgar sent an embassy to the German emperor, Otto the Great. According to Byrhtferth:\nEdgar sent some wonderful gifts to the emperor, through the agency of Abbot \u00c6scwig and Wulfm\u00e6r, his thegn; they brought back to him even more wonderful gifts, which served to establish a treaty of steadfast peace. The king was bountiful in his generosity, as befits a king. As a result of his abundant generosity, the kings of other peoples praised him exceedingly, and because he displayed the rage of a savage lion against his enemies, neighbouring kings and princes feared him.\nThe events of 973.\nNaismith describes the year 973 as an for the English kingdom. Edgar and \u00c6lfryth were consecrated king and queen at Bath on Whit Sunday, 11 May 973. Kings were normally formally elected by their leading men and then crowned soon after their accession, but there is no record of Edgar being crowned early in his reign. The \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" implies that it was a first coronation. \"ASC A\", \"ASC B\" and \"ASC C\" say \"Edmund's son, bold in battle, had spent 29 years in the world when this came about, and then in the thirtieth was consecrated king.\"; \"ASC D\" and \"ASC E\" describe him as \"the Edgar\". Historians debate whether it was a second coronation, and if not, the reason for the delay. One theory is that he waited until he was in his thirtieth year because thirty was the minimum age for consecration as a priest, but this has been questioned because at twenty-nine he was still too young. According to Nicholas, a twelfth-century prior of Worcester, Edgar postponed his consecration until he had outgrown the passions of his youth, and Stenton thinks that he may have waited \"until he felt that he had come to full maturity of mind and conduct\". Other historians, such as Janet Nelson, think that he was almost certainly crowned at the start of his reign. She argues that Edgar must have been crowned early in his reign because his legitimacy as king would otherwise have been impaired, and that the 973 consecration was intended to celebrate and display his claim to imperial status as overlord of Britain.\" The fact that it was recorded in verse in early versions of the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" (\"ASC A\" and \"B\"), whereas it was rare for the \"Chronicle\" to mention coronations at all, suggests that there was something special about this one. The German court was the leader in elaborate ritual and display, and the information learned by Edgar's embassy to Otto I may have played a major role in planning the coronation in Bath.\nA northern version of the \"Chronicle\" dating to the second half of the eleventh or early twelfth centuries, \"ASC D\", says that Edgar then sailed with his navy to Chester, where six kings promised to be his allies on land and sea. \u00c6lfric of Eynsham, writing no more than twenty-five years later, apparently about the same event, says that \"all the kings who were in this island, Cumbrians and Scots, came to Edgar, once eight kings on one day, and they all submitted to Edgar's direction\". In the twelfth century, John of Worcester and William of Malmesbury gave accounts of the Chester meeting. They stated that the kings rowed Edgar on the River Dee as a symbol of their submission. Unlike earlier sources, they name the kings, and the historian of Wales Thomas Charles-Edwards gives their probable identities: Kenneth of Scotland, Dufnal and his son Malcolm of Strathclyde, Maccus, King of the Isles, Iacob and his nephew Hywel of Gwynedd, and two who are otherwise unknown, Siferth, who may have been a Viking, and Iuchil, perhaps a version of the Old Welsh name . John of Worcester gives the fullest account, stating that the kings, who he calls underkings:\nwent to meet him, as he had commanded, and swore that they would be loyal to, and cooperate with, him by land and sea. With them, on a certain day, he boarded a skiff; having set them to the oars, and having taken the helm himself, he skilfully steered it through the course of the River Dee, and with a crowd of ealdormen and nobles following in a similar boat, sailed from the palace to the monastery of St John the Baptist, where, when he had prayed, he returned with the same pomp to the palace. As he was entering it he is reported to have declared to his nobles at length that each of his successors would be able to boast that he was king of the English, and would enjoy the pomp of such honour with so many kings at his command.\nSome historians see the meeting as a parley between equals. The Chester meeting may have been a conference of kings following the English attacks on Wales and Scottish on England. Lothian had probably been under Scottish control since the 950s, and around this time Edgar formally ceded it to them. Kenneth may have attended the meeting to secure this concession and in Williams's view it is unlikely that he saw himself as Edgar's subordinate. The historian Christopher Lewis comments: \"Precisely what happened at Chester has been irretrievably obscured by the embellishments of twelfth-century historians\".\nOther historians are more ready to accept claims of English superiority. Levi Roach and Richard Huscroft think that it makes better sense to see the events at Chester as a display of Edgar's overlordship. Molyneaux agrees, arguing that the English king was able to intimidate other rulers because he possessed far greater military strength: \"If Edgar's neighbours wished to avoid their lands being ravaged, the invitation to Chester was probably not one that they could decline.\" Edgar claimed dominion over Britain by describing himself as ruler of \"Britannia\" and \"Albion\" in charters. Such claims, which are also found in the writings of the monastic reformers, are displayed in the titles of other tenth-century kings. They reached a peak during Edgar's reign, but in reality English power over the other nations of Britain was lower than at times earlier in the century. Scottish and Welsh kings sometimes attested \u00c6thelstan's charters, but never those of Edgar. His coronation at Bath was only attended by English magnates, whereas at least two Welsh kings were present at that of Eadred in 946. After his reign, southern kings' hegemony over other parts of Britain weakened further, and there is no evidence of Scottish, Welsh or Cumbrian kings acknowledging English overlordship until 1031.\nDeath and aftermath.\nEdgar was thirty-one or thirty-two years old when he died on 8 July 975. He was buried at Glastonbury Abbey, which was the burial place of his father and a monastery particularly associated with Dunstan and Benedictine reform. His burial at Glastonbury helped to make it a leading royal cult centre, although there is no evidence that he was revered as a saint earlier than the mid-eleventh century. The historian David Rollason comments that his cult had surprisingly little success in view of his role in monastic reform, \"although presumably weakened by stories of his sexual adventures, notably with nuns\". He is listed as a saint in some modern Catholic sources with a feast day of 8 July. Two of his children, Edith and Edward, were widely revered as saints shortly after their deaths.\nThe succession to the throne was disputed between the supporters of his two surviving sons. \u00c6thelred had the powerful backing of his mother and her ally, Bishop \u00c6thelwold, but Edgar's eldest son Edward became king with the support of Dunstan and \u00c6thelwine. The dispute was personal, between the supporters of Edward and \u00c6thelred, not between the supporters and opponents of monastic reform. The fact that there was no question of dividing the country between the two claimants may be a tribute to the success of Edgar's reforms aimed at unifying the country. Edward was murdered in 978; he was succeeded by \u00c6thelred, whose disastrous reign ended with the Danish conquest of England.\nAssessment.\nThe historian Judith Green describes Edgar's reign as \"in many respects the apogee of Old English kingship\", and Eric John comments that it \"marks the high point in the history of the Anglo-Saxon state. One sign of this is, paradoxically, that we know little of secular events in Edgar's time. Violent incident was staple fare for annalists.\" Other historians also praise Edgar. Levi Roach sees his reign as \"noteworthy for its stability, as both monastic reform and administrative developments served to provide a more secure basis for a unified kingdom. In the view of Martin Ryan: \"By the end of the reign of King Edgar, Anglo-Saxon England possessed a sophisticated machinery of rule, capable of significant and, in medieval terms, precocious administrative feats.\" In Molyneaux's view, the mid-to late-tenth century was a crucial period for administrative development. However, it is uncertain how far Edgar was personally responsible: \"This period, far more than the reigns of either Alfred or \u00c6thelstan, was probably the most pivotal phase in the development of the institutional structures that were fundamental to royal rule in the eleventh century English kingdom\". The fact that such a major change as his reform of the currency was not recorded until after the Conquest suggests that other important changes in his reign may have been wrongly attributed to the later time when they were first recorded.\nStenton's praise is more moderate. He describes Edgar's reign as \"singularly devoid of recorded incident\", which he attributes to Edgar's competence as a ruler, but he also writes that: \nwhen Edgar is compared with other outstanding members of his house \u2013 with Alfred or with \u00c6thelstan \u2013 he falls at once into a lower class than theirs. He was never required to defend English civilization against barbarians from over sea, nor to deal with the problems raised by the existence of barbarian states within England itself. His part in history was to maintain the peace established in England by earlier kings.\nSome historians are more critical. Keynes comments: \"It is a sign of Edgar's 'strength' as a ruler that when he died, on 8 July 975, the \"peace\" of his kingdom was immediately disturbed ... In general terms, the disturbances of Edward's reign should be regarded as a manifestation of the kind of social and political disorder which might be expected to attend the unexpected removal of one who was seen as the personification of an overbearing regime.\" His rule appears to have depended to a great degree on his personal control, which makes it understandable that his death should have created so many problems. Williams takes a similar view, and Snook argues that the infighting after his death and the disintegration of the state under his son \u00c6thelred shows that the factionalism of the 950s had only been temporarily suppressed by Edgar. Commenting on the flattering portrait of Edgar by monastic writers, Stafford comments: \"Sparse sources make the construction of any alternative to this plaster saint of monastic hagiography difficult.\"\nAlmost all of the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" is in prose, but three tenth-century kings are the subjects of panegyric poems. Two are about specific events, \u00c6thelstan's victory at the Battle of Brunanburh in 937 and Edmund's recovery of the Five Boroughs of the Danelaw in 942, whereas three are general, all of them commemorating Edgar's reign. They are placed in the years of his accession, coronation and death, and the historian Mercedes Salvador-Bello sees them as products of monastic reformers who celebrated him as a patron of their cause and compared him to Christ. After the troubles of the reigns of Edgar's sons, his rule came to be seen as a golden age, but his byname, , is not recorded until the twelfth-century, in the chronicle of John of Worcester. Its translation as \"Peaceful\" is common in popular sources, but very rare in academic works on the period. The historian Sean Miller argues that as Edgar was very ready to resort to violence, the term is better translated as \"peacemaker\", someone who preserved peace through \"strict control backed up by military force rather than serenity of character\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47400", "revid": "1827553", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47400", "title": "880", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 880 (DCCCLXXX) was a leap year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47401", "revid": "17163", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47401", "title": "Titans", "text": "Order of divine beings in Greek mythology\nIn Greek mythology, the Titans (, ; singular: \u03a4\u03b9\u03c4\u03ac\u03bd, ) were the deities that preceded the Olympians. According to the \"Theogony\" of Hesiod, they were the twelve children of the primordial deities Uranus (Sky) and Gaia (Earth). The six male Titans were Oceanus, Coeus, Crius, Hyperion, Iapetus, and Cronus, and the six female Titans (called the Titanesses; , ; singular: \u03a4\u03b9\u03c4\u03b1\u03bd\u03af\u03c2, ) were Theia, Rhea, Themis, Mnemosyne, Phoebe, and Tethys.\nAfter Cronus married his sister Rhea, she bore the first generation of Olympians: the six siblings Zeus, Hera, Poseidon, Demeter, Hades, and Hestia. Certain other children of the Titans, such as Prometheus, Atlas, Helios, and Leto, are sometimes also called Titans.\nThe Titans were the former deities: the generation of gods preceding the Olympians. They were overthrown as part of the Greek succession myth, which tells how Cronus seized power from his father Uranus and ruled the cosmos with his fellow Titans before being in turn defeated and replaced as the ruling pantheon of gods by Zeus and the Olympians in a ten-year war called the \"Titanomachy\" ('battle of the Titans'). As a result of this war, the vanquished Titans were banished from the upper world and held imprisoned under guard in Tartarus. Some Titans were apparently allowed to remain free.\nGenealogy.\nHesiod's genealogy.\nAccording to Hesiod, the children of Uranus and Gaia were Oceanus, Coeus, Crius, Hyperion, Iapetus, Theia, Rhea, Themis, Mnemosyne, Phoebe, Tethys, and Cronus. Among eight of the twelve Titans there were four marriages between brothers and sisters: Oceanus and Tethys, Coeus and Phoebe, Hyperion and Theia, and Cronus and Rhea. The other two Titans, Iapetus and Crius, married with familiars who were not their sisters. Iapetus married his niece Clymene, the daughter of Oceanus and Tethys, while Crius married his half-sister Eurybia, the daughter of Gaia and Pontus. The other two Titanesses, Themis and Mnemosyne, married with their nephew Zeus, the son of Cronus and Rhea.\nFrom Oceanus and Tethys came the three thousand river gods, and three thousand Oceanids. From Coeus and Phoebe came Leto, another wife of Zeus, and Asteria. From Crius and Eurybia came Astraeus, Pallas, and Perses. From Hyperion and Theia came the celestial personifications Helios (Sun), Selene (Moon), and Eos (Dawn). From Iapetus and Clymene came Atlas, Menoetius, Prometheus, and Epimetheus. From Cronus and Rhea came the Olympians: Hestia, Demeter, Hera, Hades, Poseidon, and Zeus. By Zeus, Themis bore the three Horae (Hours), and the three Moirai (Fates), and Mnemosyne bore the nine Muses.\nWhile the descendants of the Titans Oceanus and Tethys, Cronus and Rhea, Themis, and Mnemosyne (i.e. the river gods, the Oceanids, the Olympians, the Horae, the Moirai, and the Muses) are not normally considered to be Titans, descendants of the other Titans, notably: Leto, Helios, Atlas, and Prometheus, are themselves sometimes referred to as Titans.\nVariations.\nPassages in a section of the \"Iliad\" called the Deception of Zeus suggest the possibility that Homer knew of a tradition in which Oceanus and Tethys (rather than Uranus and Gaia, as in Hesiod) were the parents of the Titans. Twice Homer has Hera describe the pair as \"Oceanus, from whom the gods are sprung, and mother Tethys\", while in the same passage Hypnos describes Oceanus as \"from whom they all are sprung\".\nPlato, in his \"Timaeus\", provides a genealogy (probably Orphic) which perhaps reflected an attempt to reconcile this apparent divergence between Homer and Hesiod, with Uranus and Gaia as the parents of Oceanus and Tethys, and Oceanus and Tethys as the parents of Cronus and Rhea \"and all that go with them\", plus Phorcys. In his \"Cratylus\", Plato quotes Orpheus as saying that Oceanus and Tethys were \"the first to marry\", possibly also reflecting an Orphic theogony in which Oceanus and Tethys, rather than Uranus and Gaia, were the primeval parents. To Hesiod's twelve Titans, the mythographer Apollodorus, adds a thirteenth Titan, Dione, the mother of Aphrodite by Zeus. Plato's inclusion of Phorkys, apparently, as a Titan, and the mythographer Apollodorus's inclusion of Dione, suggests an Orphic tradition in which the canonical twelve Titans consisted of Hesiod's twelve with Phorkys and Dione taking the place of Oceanus and Tethys.\nThe Roman mythographer Hyginus, in his somewhat confused genealogy, after listing as offspring of Aether (Upper Sky) and Earth (Gaia), Ocean [Oceanus], Themis, Tartarus, and Pontus, next lists \"the Titans\", followed by two of Hesiod's Hundred-Handers: Briareus and Gyges, one of Hesiod's three Cyclopes: Steropes, then continues his list with Atlas, Hyperion and Polus, Saturn [Cronus], Ops [Rhea], Moneta, Dione, and the three Furies: Alecto, Megaera, and Tisiphone. The geographer Pausanias, mentions seeing the image of a man in armor, who was supposed to be the Titan Anytos, who was said to have raised the Arcadian goddess Despoina.\nFormer gods.\nThe Titans, as a group, represent a pre-Olympian order. Hesiod uses the expression \"the former gods\" () in reference to the Titans. They were the banished gods, who were no longer part of the upper world. Rather they were the gods who dwelt underground in Tartarus, and as such, they may have been thought of as \"gods of the underworld\", who were the antithesis of, and in opposition to, the Olympians, the gods of the heavens. Hesiod called the Titans \"earth-born\" (chthonic), and in the \"Homeric Hymn to Apollo\", Hera prays to the Titans \"who dwell beneath the earth\", calling on them to aid her against Zeus, just as if they were chthonic spirits. In a similar fashion, in the \"Iliad\", Hera, upon swearing an oath by the underworld river Styx, \"invoked by name all the gods below Tartarus, that are called Titans\" as witnesses.\nThey were not, as was once thought, the gods of an indigenous group in Greece, historically displaced by the new gods of Greek invaders. Rather, they were a group of gods whose mythology seems to have been borrowed from the Near East (see \"Near East origins,\" below). These imported gods gave context and provided a backstory for the Olympian gods, explaining where these Greek Olympian gods had come from, and how they had come to occupy their position of supremacy in the cosmos. The Titans were the previous generation, and family of gods, whom the Olympians had to overthrow, and banish from the upper world, in order to become the ruling pantheon of Greek gods.\nFor Hesiod, possibly in order to match the twelve Olympian gods, there were twelve Titans: six males and six females, with some of Hesiod's names perhaps being mere poetic inventions, so as to arrive at the right number. In Hesiod's \"Theogony\", apart from Cronus, the Titans play no part at all in the overthrow of Uranus, and we only hear of their collective action in the Titanomachy, their war with the Olympians. As a group, they have no further role in conventional Greek myth, nor do they play any part in Greek cult.\nAs individuals, few of the Titans have any separate identity. Aside from Cronus, the only other figure Homer mentions by name as being a Titan is Iapetus. Some Titans seem only to serve a genealogical function, providing parents for more important offspring: Coeus and Phoebe as the parents of Leto, the mother, by Zeus, of the Olympians Apollo and Artemis; Hyperion and Theia as the parents of Helios, Selene and Eos; Iapetus as the father of Atlas and Prometheus; and Crius as the father of three sons Astraeus, Pallas, and Perses, who themselves seem only to exist to provide fathers for more important figures such as the Anemoi (Winds), Nike (Victory), and Hecate.\nOverthrown.\nThe Titans play a key role in an important part of Greek mythology, the succession myth. It told how the Titan Cronus, the youngest of the Titans, overthrew Uranus, and how in turn Zeus, by waging and winning a great ten-year war pitting the new gods against the old gods, called the Titanomachy (\"Titan war\"), overthrew Cronus and his fellow Titans, and was eventually established as the final and permanent ruler of the cosmos.\nHesiod.\nAccording to the standard version of the succession myth, given in Hesiod's \"Theogony\", Uranus initially produced eighteen children with Gaia: the twelve Titans, the three Cyclopes, and the three Hecatoncheires (Hundred-Handers), but hating them, he hid them away somewhere inside Gaia. Angry and in distress, Gaia fashioned a sickle made of adamant and urged her children to punish their father. Only her son Cronus was willing. So Gaia hid Cronus in \"ambush\", gave him an adamantine sickle, and when Uranus came to lie with Gaia, Cronus reached out and castrated his father. This enabled the Titans to be born and Cronus to assume supreme command of the cosmos, with the Titans as his subordinates.\nCronus, having now taken over control of the cosmos from Uranus, wanted to ensure that he maintained control. Uranus and Gaia had prophesied to Cronus that one of Cronus' own children would overthrow him, so when Cronus married Rhea, he made sure to swallow each of the children she birthed. This he did with the first five: Hestia, Demeter, Hera, Hades, Poseidon (in that order), to Rhea's great sorrow. However, when Rhea was pregnant with Zeus, Rhea begged her parents Gaia and Uranus to help her save Zeus. So they sent Rhea to Lyctus on Crete to bear Zeus, and Gaia took the newborn Zeus to raise, hiding him deep in a cave beneath Mount Aigaion. Meanwhile, Rhea gave Cronus a huge stone wrapped in baby's clothes which he swallowed thinking that it was another of Rhea's children.\nZeus, now grown, forced Cronus (using some unspecified trickery of Gaia) to disgorge his other five children. Zeus then released his uncles the Cyclopes (apparently still imprisoned beneath the earth, along with the Hundred-Handers, where Uranus had originally confined them) who then provide Zeus with his great weapon, the thunderbolt, which had been hidden by Gaia. A great war was begun, the Titanomachy, for control of the cosmos. The Titans fought from Mount Othrys, while the Olympians fought from Mount Olympus. In the tenth year of that great war, following Gaia's counsel, Zeus released the Hundred-Handers, who joined the war against the Titans, helping Zeus to gain the upper hand. Zeus cast the fury of his thunderbolt at the Titans, defeating them and throwing them into Tartarus, with the Hundred-Handers as their guards.\nHomer.\nOnly brief references to the Titans and the succession myth are found in Homer. In the \"Iliad\", Homer tells us that \"the gods ... that are called Titans\" reside in Tartarus. Specifically, Homer says that \"Iapetus and Cronos ... have joy neither in the rays of Helios Hyperion [the Sun] nor in any breeze, but deep Tartarus is round about them\", and further, that Zeus \"thrust Cronos down to dwell beneath earth and the unresting sea.\"\nOther early sources.\nBrief mentions of the Titanomachy and the imprisonment of the Titans in Tartarus also occur in the \"Homeric Hymn to Apollo\" and Aeschylus' \"Prometheus Bound\". \nIn the \"Hymn\", Hera, angry at Zeus, calls upon the \"Titan gods who dwell beneath the earth about great Tartarus, and from whom are sprung both gods and men\".\nIn \"Prometheus Bound\", Prometheus (the son of the Titan Iapetus) refers to the Titanomachy, and his part in it:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When first the heavenly powers were moved to wrath, and mutual dissension was stirred up among them\u2014some bent on casting Cronus from his seat so Zeus, in truth, might reign; others, eager for the contrary end, that Zeus might never win mastery over the gods\u2014it was then that I, although advising them for the best, was unable to persuade the Titans, children of Heaven and Earth; but they, disdaining counsels of craft, in the pride of their strength thought to gain the mastery without a struggle and by force. ... That it was not by brute strength nor through violence, but by guile that those who should gain the upper hand were destined to prevail. And though I argued all this to them, they did not pay any attention to my words. With all that before me, it seemed best that, joining with my mother, I should place myself, a welcome volunteer, on the side of Zeus; and it is by reason of my counsel that the cavernous gloom of Tartarus now hides ancient Cronus and his allies within it.\nApollodorus.\nThe mythographer Apollodorus, gives a similar account of the succession myth to Hesiod's, but with a few significant differences. According to Apollodorus, there were thirteen original Titans, adding the Titaness Dione to Hesiod's list. The Titans (instead of being Uranus' firstborn as in Hesiod) were born after the three Hundred-Handers and the three Cyclopes, and while Uranus imprisoned these first six of his offspring, he apparently left the Titans free. Not just Cronus, but all the Titans, except Oceanus, attacked Uranus. After Cronus castrated Uranus, the Titans freed the Hundred-Handers and Cyclopes (unlike in Hesiod, where they apparently remained imprisoned), and made Cronus their sovereign, who then reimprisoned the Hundred-Handers and Cyclopes in Tartarus.\nAlthough Hesiod does not say how Zeus was eventually able to free his siblings, according to Apollodorus, Zeus was aided by Oceanus' daughter Metis, who gave Cronus an emetic which forced him to disgorge his children that he had swallowed. According to Apollodorus, in the tenth year of the ensuing war, Zeus learned from Gaia, that he would be victorious if he had the Hundred-Handers and the Cyclopes as allies. So Zeus slew their warder Campe (a detail not found in Hesiod) and released them, and in addition to giving Zeus his thunderbolt (as in Hesiod), the Cyclopes also gave Poseidon his trident, and Hades his helmet, and \"with these weapons the gods overcame the Titans, shut them up in Tartarus, and appointed the Hundred-handers their guards\".\nHyginus.\nThe Roman mythographer Hyginus, in his \"Fabulae\", gives an unusual (and perhaps confused) account of the Titanomachy. According to Hyginus the Titanomachy came about because of a dispute between Jupiter and Juno (the Roman equivalents of Zeus and Hera). Juno, Jupiter's jealous wife, was angry at her husband, on account of Jupiter's son Epaphus by Io (one of her husband's many lovers). Because of this Juno incited the Titans to rebel against Jupiter and restore Saturn (Cronus) to the kingship of the gods. Jupiter, with the help of Minerva (Athena), Apollo, and Diana (Artemis), put down the rebellion, and hurled the Titans (as in other accounts) down to Tartarus.\nAfter the Titanomachy.\nAfter being overthrown in the Titanomachy, Cronus and his fellow vanquished Titans were cast into Tartarus:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;That is where the Titan gods are hidden under murky gloom by the plans of the cloud-gatherer Zeus, in a dank place, at the farthest part of huge earth. They cannot get out, for Poseidon has set bronze gates upon it, and a wall is extended on both sides.\nHowever, besides Cronus, exactly which of the other Titans were supposed to have been imprisoned in Tartarus is unclear. The only original Titan, mentioned by name, as being confined with Cronus in Tartarus, is Iapetus.\nBut, not all the Titans were imprisoned there. Certainly Oceanus, the great world encircling river, seems to have remained free, and in fact, seems not to have fought on the Titans' side at all. In Hesiod, Oceanus sends his daughter Styx, with her children Zelus (Envy), Nike (Victory), Kratos (Power), and Bia (Force), to fight on Zeus' side against the Titans, while in the \"Iliad\", Hera says that, during the Titanomachy, she was cared for by Oceanus and his wife the Titaness Tethys. Aeschylus' \"Prometheus Bound\", has Oceanus free to visit his nephew Prometheus sometime after the war. Like Oceanus, Helios, the Titan son of Hyperion, certainly remained free to drive his sun-chariot daily across the sky, taking an active part in events subsequent to the Titanomachy. The freedom of Oceanus, along with Helios (Sun), and perhaps Hyperion (to the extent that he also represented the Sun), would seem to be the result of cosmological necessity, for how could a world encircling river, or the Sun, be confined in Tartarus?\nAs for other male offspring of the Titans, some seem to have participated in the Titanomachy, and were punished as a result, and others did not, or at least (like Helios) remained free. Three of Iapetus' sons, Atlas, Menoetius, and Prometheus are specifically connected by ancient sources with the war. In the \"Theogony\" both Atlas and Menoetius received punishments from Zeus, but Hesiod does not say for what crime exactly they were punished. Atlas was famously punished by Zeus, by being forced to hold up the sky on his shoulders, but none of the early sources for this story (Hesiod, Homer, Pindar, and Aeschylus) say that his punishment was as a result of the war. According to Hyginus however, Atlas led the Titans in a revolt against Zeus (Jupiter). The \"Theogony\" has Menoetius struck down by Zeus' thunderbolt and cast into Erebus \"because of his mad presumption and exceeding pride\". Whether Hesiod was using Erebus as another name for Tartarus (as was sometimes done), or meant that Menoetius's punishment was because of his participation in the Titanomachy is unclear, and no other early source mentions this event, however Apollodorus says that it was. Hesiod does not mention Prometheus in connection with the Titanomachy, but Prometheus does remain free, in the \"Theogony\", for his deception of Zeus at Mecone and his subsequent theft of fire, for which transgressions Prometheus was famously punished by Zeus by being chained to a rock where an eagle came to eat his \"immortal liver\" every day, which then grew back every night. However Aeschylus's \"Prometheus Bound\" (as mentioned above) does have Prometheus say that he was an ally of Zeus during the Titanomachy.\nThe female Titans, to the extent that they are mentioned at all, appear also to have been allowed to remain free. Three of these, according to the \"Theogony\", become wives of Zeus: Themis, Mnemosyne, and Leto, the daughter of the Titans Coeus and Phoebe. Themis gives birth to the three Horae (Hours), and the three Moirai (Fates), and Mnemosyne gives birth to the nine Muses. Leto, who gives birth to the Olympians Apollo and Artemis, takes an active part on the side of the Trojans in the \"Iliad\", and is also involved in the story of the giant Tityos. Tethys, presumably along with her husband Oceanus, took no part in the war, and, as mentioned above, provided safe refuge for Hera during the war. Rhea remains free and active after the war: appearing at Leto's delivery of Apollo, as Zeus' messenger to Demeter announcing the settlement concerning Persephone, bringing Pelops back to life.\nPossible release.\nWhile in Hesiod's \"Theogony\", and Homer's \"Iliad\", Cronus and the other Titans are confined to Tartarus\u2014apparently forever\u2014another tradition, as indicated by later sources, seems to have had Cronus, or other of the Titans, being eventually set free. Pindar, in one of his poems (462 BC), says that, although Atlas still \"strains against the weight of the sky ... Zeus freed the Titans\", and in another poem (476 BC), Pindar has Cronus, in fact, ruling in the Isles of the Blessed, a land where the Greek heroes reside in the afterlife:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Those who have persevered three times, on either side, to keep their souls free from all wrongdoing, follow Zeus' road to the end, to the tower of Cronus, where ocean breezes blow around the island of the blessed, and flowers of gold are blazing, some from splendid trees on land, while water nurtures others. With these wreaths and garlands of flowers they entwine their hands according to the righteous counsels of Rhadamanthys, whom the great father, the husband of Rhea whose throne is above all others, keeps close beside him as his partner.\n\"Prometheus Lyomenos\", an undated lost play by Aeschylus (c. 525 \u2013 c. 455 BC), had a chorus composed of freed Titans. Possibly even earlier than Pindar and Aeschylus, two papyrus versions of a passage of Hesiods' \"Works and Days\" also mention Cronus being released by Zeus, and ruling over the heroes who go to the Isle of the Blessed; but other versions of Hesiod's text do not, and most editors judge these lines of text to be later interpolations.\nNear East origins.\nIt is generally accepted that the Greek succession myth was imported from the Near East, and that along with this imported myth came stories of a group of former ruling gods, who had been defeated and displaced, and who became identified, by the Greeks, as the Titans. Features of Hesiod's account of the Titans can be seen in the stories of the Hurrians, the Hittites, the Babylonians, and other Near Eastern cultures.\nThe Hurro-Hittite text \"Song of Kumarbi\" (also called \"Kingship in Heaven\"), written five hundred years before Hesiod, tells of a succession of kings in heaven: Anu (Sky), Kumarbi, and the storm-god Teshub, with many striking parallels to Hesiod's account of the Greek succession myth. Like Cronus, Kumarbi castrates the sky-god Anu, and takes over his kingship. And like Cronus, Kumarbi swallows gods (and a stone?), one of whom is the storm-god Teshub, who like the storm-god Zeus, is apparently victorious against Kumarbi and others in a war of the gods.\nOther Hittite texts contain allusions to \"former gods\" (), precisely what Hesiod called the Titans, . Like the Titans, these Hittite , were twelve (usually) in number and end up confined in the underworld by the storm-god Teshub, imprisoned by gates they cannot open. In Hurrian, the Hittite's were known as the \"gods of down under\" () and the Hittites identified these gods with the Anunnaki, the Babylonian gods of the underworld, whose defeat and imprisonment by the storm-god Marduk, in the Babylonian poem \"En\u00fbma Eli\u0161\" (late second millennium BC or earlier), parallels the defeat and imprisonment of the Titans. Other collectivities of gods, perhaps associated with the Mesopotamian Anunnaki, include the Dead Gods (\"Dingirugg\u00fb\"), the Banished Gods (\"il\u0101ni dars\u016bti\"), and the Defeated (or Bound) Gods (\"il\u0101ni kam\u00fbti\").\nOrphic literature.\nThe \"sparagmos\".\nIn Orphic literature, the Titans play an important role in what is often considered to be the central myth of Orphism, the \"sparagmos\", that is the dismemberment of Dionysus, who in this context is often given the title Zagreus. As pieced together from various ancient sources, the reconstructed story, usually given by modern scholars, goes as follows. Zeus had intercourse with Persephone in the form of a serpent, producing Dionysus. He is taken to Mount Ida where (like the infant Zeus) he is guarded by the dancing Curetes. Zeus intended Dionysus to be his successor as ruler of the cosmos, but a jealous Hera incited the Titans\u2014who apparently unlike in Hesiod and Homer, were not imprisoned in Tartarus\u2014to kill the child. The Titans whiten their faces with gypsum, and distracting the infant Dionysus with various toys, including a mirror, they seized Dionysus and tore (or cut) him to pieces. The pieces were then boiled, roasted and partially eaten, by the Titans. But Athena managed to save Dionysus' heart, by which Zeus was able to contrive his rebirth from Semele.\nThe anthropogony.\nCommonly presented as a part of the myth of the dismembered Dionysus Zagreus, is an Orphic anthropogony, that is an Orphic account of the origin of human beings. According to this widely held view, as punishment for their crime, Zeus struck the Titans with his thunderbolt, and from the remains of the destroyed Titans humankind was born, which resulted in a human inheritance of ancestral guilt, for this original sin of the Titans, and by some accounts \"formed the basis for an Orphic doctrine of the divinity of man.\" However, when and to what extent there existed any Orphic tradition which included these elements is the subject of open debate.\nThe 2nd century AD biographer and essayist Plutarch makes a connection between the \"sparagmos\" and the punishment of the Titans, but makes no mention of the anthropogony, or Orpheus, or Orphism. In his essay \"On the Eating of Flesh\", Plutarch writes of \"stories told about the sufferings and dismemberment of Dionysus and the outrageous assaults of the Titans upon him, and their punishment and blasting by thunderbolt after they had tasted his blood\". While, according to the early 4th century AD Christian apologist Arnobius, and the 5th century AD Greek epic poet Nonnus, it is as punishment for their murder of Dionysus that the Titans end up imprisoned by Zeus in Tartarus.\nThe only ancient source to explicitly connect the \"sparagmos\" and the anthropogony is the 6th century AD Neoplatonist Olympiodorus, who writes that, according to Orpheus, after the Titans had dismembered and eaten Dionysus, \"Zeus, angered by the deed, blasts them with his thunderbolts, and from the sublimate of the vapors that rise from them comes the matter from which men are created.\" Olympiodorus goes on to conclude that, because the Titans had eaten his flesh, we their descendants, are a part of Dionysus.\nModern interpretations.\nSome 19th- and 20th-century scholars, including Jane Ellen Harrison, have argued that an initiatory or shamanic ritual underlies the myth of the dismemberment and cannibalism of Dionysus by the Titans. Martin Litchfield West also asserts this in relation to shamanistic initiatory rites of early Greek religious practices.\nEtymology.\nThe etymology of \"\u03a4i\u03c4\u1fb6\u03bd\u03b5\u03c2\" (\"Titanes\") is uncertain. Hesiod in the \"Theogony\" gives a double etymology, deriving it from [to strain] and [vengeance], saying that Uranus gave them the name Titans: \"in reproach, for he said that they strained and did presumptuously a fearful deed, and that vengeance for it would come afterwards\". But modern scholars doubt Hesiod's etymology.\nJane Ellen Harrison asserts that the word \"Titan\" comes from the Greek \u03c4\u03af\u03c4\u03b1\u03bd\u03bf\u03c2, signifying white \"earth, clay, or gypsum\", and that the Titans were \"white clay men\", or men covered by white clay or gypsum dust in their rituals.\nIn astronomy.\nThe planet Saturn is named for the Roman equivalent of the Titan Cronus. Saturn's largest moon, Titan, is named after the Titans generally, and the other moons of Saturn are named after individual Titans, specifically Tethys, Phoebe, Rhea, Hyperion, and Iapetus. Astronomer William Henry Pickering claimed to have discovered another moon of Saturn which he named Themis, but this discovery was never confirmed, and the name Themis was given to an asteroid, 24 Themis. Asteroid 57 Mnemosyne was also named for the Titan.\nA proto-planet Theia is hypothesized to have been involved in a collision in the early solar system, forming the Earth's moon.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47402", "revid": "1707575", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47402", "title": "Titan (moon)", "text": "Largest moon of Saturn\nTitan is the largest moon of Saturn and the second-largest in the Solar System. It is the only moon known to have a dense atmosphere\u2014denser than Earth's\u2014and is the only known object in the Solar System besides Earth with clear evidence of stable bodies of surface liquid. Titan is one of seven gravitationally rounded moons of Saturn and the second-most distant among them. Frequently described as a planet-like moon, Titan is 50% larger in diameter than Earth's Moon and 80% more massive. It is the second-largest moon in the Solar System after Jupiter's Ganymede and is larger than Mercury; yet Titan is only 40% as massive as Mercury, because Mercury is mainly iron and rock while much of Titan is mostly ice, which is less dense.\nDiscovered in 1655 by the Dutch astronomer Christiaan Huygens, Titan was the first known moon of Saturn and the sixth known planetary satellite (after Earth's moon and the four Galilean moons of Jupiter). Titan orbits Saturn at 20 Saturn radii or 1,200,000\u00a0km above Saturn's apparent surface. From Titan's surface, Saturn, disregarding its rings, subtends an arc of 5.09 degrees, and when viewed from above its thick atmospheric haze it would appear 11.4 times larger in the sky, in diameter, than the Moon from Earth, which subtends 0.48\u00b0 of arc.\nTitan is primarily composed of ice and rocky material, with a rocky core surrounded by various layers of ice, including a crust of ice Ih and a subsurface layer of ammonia-rich liquid water. Much as with Venus before the Space Age, the dense opaque atmosphere prevented understanding of Titan's surface until the \"Cassini\u2013Huygens\" mission in 2004 provided new information, including the discovery of liquid hydrocarbon lakes in Titan's polar regions and the discovery of its atmospheric super-rotation. The geologically young surface is generally smooth, with few impact craters, although mountains and several possible cryovolcanoes have been found.\nThe atmosphere of Titan is mainly nitrogen and methane; minor components lead to the formation of hydrocarbon clouds and heavy . Its climate\u2014including wind and rain\u2014creates surface features similar to those of Earth, such as dunes, rivers, lakes, seas (probably of liquid methane and ethane), and deltas, and is dominated by seasonal weather patterns as on Earth. With its liquids (both surface and subsurface) and robust nitrogen atmosphere, Titan's methane cycle nearly resembles Earth's water cycle, albeit at a much lower temperature of about . Due to these factors, Titan is sometimes called the most Earth-like celestial object in the Solar System.\nDiscovery and naming.\nThe Dutch astronomer Christiaan Huygens discovered Titan on March 25, 1655. Fascinated by Galileo's 1610 discovery of Jupiter's four largest moons and his advancements in telescope technology, Huygens, with the help of his elder brother Constantijn Huygens Jr., began building telescopes around 1650 and discovered the first observed moon orbiting Saturn with one of the telescopes they built.\nHuygens named his discovery \"Saturni Luna\" (or \"Luna Saturni\", Latin for \"moon of Saturn\"), publishing in the 1655 tract \"De Saturni Luna Observatio Nova\" (\"A New Observation of Saturn's Moon\"). After Giovanni Domenico Cassini published his discoveries of four more moons of Saturn between 1673 and 1686, astronomers began referring to these and Titan as Saturn I through V (with Titan then in fourth position). Other early epithets for Titan include \"Saturn's ordinary satellite.\" The International Astronomical Union officially numbers Titan as \"Saturn VI.\"\nThe name \"Titan\", and the names of all seven satellites of Saturn then known, came from John Herschel (son of William Herschel, discoverer of two other Saturnian moons, Mimas and Enceladus), in his 1847 publication \"Results of Astronomical Observations Made during the Years 1834, 5, 6, 7, 8, at the Cape of Good Hope\". Numerous small moons have been discovered around Saturn since then. Saturnian moons are named after mythological giants. The name Titan comes from the Titans, a race of immortals in Greek mythology.\nPlanetary moons other than Earth's were never given symbols in the astronomical literature. Denis Moskowitz, a software engineer who designed most of the dwarf planet symbols, proposed a Greek tau (the initial of Titan) combined with the crook of the Saturn symbol as the symbol of Titan (). This symbol is not widely used.\nFormation.\nThe regular moons of Jupiter and Saturn likely formed via co-accretion, similar to the process believed to have formed the planets in the Solar System. As the young gas giants formed, they were surrounded by discs of material that gradually coalesced into moons. While the four Galilean moons of Jupiter exist in highly regular, planet-like orbits, Titan overwhelmingly dominates Saturn's system and has a high orbital eccentricity not immediately explained by co-accretion alone. A proposed model for the formation of Titan is that Saturn's system began with a group of moons similar to Jupiter's Galilean moons, but that they were disrupted by a series of giant impacts, which would go on to form Titan. Saturn's mid-sized moons, such as Iapetus and Rhea, were formed from the debris of these collisions. Such a violent beginning would also explain Titan's orbital eccentricity. A 2014 analysis of Titan's atmospheric nitrogen suggested that it was possibly sourced from material similar to that found in the Oort cloud and not from sources present during the co-accretion of materials around Saturn.\nOrbit and rotation.\nTitan orbits Saturn once every 15 days and 22 hours. Like Earth's Moon and many of the satellites of the giant planets, Titan is tidally locked in synchronous rotation with Saturn, and permanently shows one face to the planet. Consequently, its rotational period, or day, is identical to its orbital period. Longitudes on Titan are measured westward, starting from the prime meridian defined as passing through the centre of this face. Its orbital eccentricity is 0.0288, and the orbital plane is inclined 0.348 degrees relative to the Saturnian equator.\nThe small and irregularly shaped satellite Hyperion is locked in a 3:4 orbital resonance with Titan\u2014that is, Hyperion orbits three times for every four times Titan orbits. Hyperion probably formed in a stable orbital island, whereas the massive Titan absorbed or ejected any other bodies that made close approaches.\nBulk characteristics.\nTitan is in diameter; it is 6% larger than the planet Mercury and 50% larger than Earth's Moon. Titan is the tenth-largest object known in the Solar system, including the Sun. Before the arrival of \"Voyager 1\" in 1980, Titan was thought to be slightly larger than Ganymede, which has a diameter , and thus the largest moon in the Solar System. This was an overestimation caused by Titan's dense, opaque atmosphere, with a haze layer 100\u2013200\u00a0km above its surface. This increases its apparent diameter. Titan's diameter and mass (and thus its density) are similar to those of the Jovian moons Ganymede and Callisto. Based on its bulk density of 1.881\u00a0g/cm3, Titan's composition is 40\u201360% rock, with the rest being water ice and other materials.\nTitan is probably partially differentiated into distinct layers with a rocky center. This rocky center is believed to be surrounded by several layers composed of different crystalline forms of ice, and/or water. The exact structure depends heavily on the heat flux from within Titan itself, which is poorly constrained. The interior may still be hot enough for a liquid layer consisting of a \"magma\" composed of water and ammonia between the ice Ih crust and deeper ice layers made of high-pressure forms of ice. The heat flow from inside Titan may even be too high for high pressure ices to form, with the outermost layers instead consisting primarily of liquid water underneath a surface crust. The presence of ammonia allows water to remain liquid even at a temperature as low as (for eutectic mixture with water).\nThe \"Cassini\" probe discovered evidence for the layered structure in the form of natural extremely-low-frequency radio waves in Titan's atmosphere. Titan's surface is thought to be a poor reflector of extremely-low-frequency radio waves, so they may instead be reflecting off the liquid\u2013ice boundary of a subsurface ocean. Surface features were observed by the \"Cassini\" spacecraft to systematically shift by up to between October 2005 and May 2007, which suggests that the crust is decoupled from the interior, and provides additional evidence for an interior liquid layer. Further supporting evidence for a liquid layer and ice shell decoupled from the solid core comes from the way the gravity field varies as Titan orbits Saturn. Comparison of the gravity field with the RADAR-based topography observations also suggests that the ice shell may be substantially rigid.\nAtmosphere.\nTitan is the only moon in the Solar System with an atmosphere denser than Earth's, with a surface pressure of , and it is one of only two moons whose atmospheres are able to support clouds, hazes, and weather\u2014the other being Neptune's moon Triton. The presence of a significant atmosphere was first suspected by astronomer Josep Comas i Sol\u00e0, who observed distinct limb darkening on Titan in 1903. Due to the extensive, hazy atmosphere, Titan was once thought to be the largest moon in the Solar System until the \"Voyager\" missions revealed that Ganymede is slightly larger. The haze also shrouded Titan's surface from view, so direct images of its surface could not be taken until the \"Cassini\u2013Huygens\" mission in 2004.\nThe primary constituents of Titan's atmosphere are nitrogen, methane, and hydrogen. The precise atmospheric composition varies depending on altitude and latitude due to methane cycling between a gas and a liquid in Titan's lower atmosphere\u2014the methane cycle. Nitrogen is the most abundant gas, with a concentration of around 98.6% in the stratosphere that decreases to 95.1% in the troposphere. Direct observations by the \"Huygens\" probe determined that methane concentrations are highest near the surface, with a concentration of 4.92% that remains relatively constant up to above the surface. Methane concentrations then gradually decrease with increasing altitude, down to a concentration of 1.41% in the stratosphere. Methane also increases in concentration near Titan's winter pole, probably due to evaporation from the surface in high-latitude regions. Hydrogen is the third-most abundant gas, with a concentration of around 0.1%. There are trace amounts of other hydrocarbons, such as ethane, diacetylene, methylacetylene, acetylene, and propane, and other gases, such as cyanoacetylene, hydrogen cyanide, carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, cyanogen, argon, and helium. The hydrocarbons are thought to form in Titan's upper atmosphere in reactions resulting from the breakup of methane by the Sun's ultraviolet light, producing a thick orange smog.\nEnergy from the Sun should have converted all traces of methane in Titan's atmosphere into more complex hydrocarbons within 50 million years\u2014a short time compared to the age of the Solar System. This suggests that methane must be replenished by a reservoir on or within Titan itself. The ultimate origin of the methane in its atmosphere may be its interior, released via eruptions from cryovolcanoes.\nOn April 3, 2013, NASA reported that complex organic chemicals, collectively called tholins, likely arise on Titan, based on studies simulating the atmosphere of Titan.\nOn June 6, 2013, scientists at the IAA-CSIC reported the detection of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in the upper atmosphere of Titan.\nOn September 30, 2013, propene was detected in the atmosphere of Titan by NASA's \"Cassini\" spacecraft, using its composite infrared spectrometer (CIRS). This is the first time propene has been found on any moon or planet other than Earth and is the first chemical found by the CIRS. The detection of propene fills a mysterious gap in observations that date back to NASA's \"Voyager 1\" spacecraft's first close planetary flyby of Titan in 1980, during which it was discovered that many of the gases that make up Titan's brown haze were hydrocarbons, theoretically formed via the recombination of radicals created by the Sun's ultraviolet photolysis of methane.\nClimate.\nTitan's surface temperature is about . At this temperature, water ice has an extremely low vapor pressure, so the little water vapor present appears limited to the stratosphere. Titan receives about 1% as much sunlight as Earth. Before sunlight reaches the surface, about 90% has been absorbed by the thick atmosphere, leaving only 0.1% of the amount of light Earth receives.\nAtmospheric methane creates a greenhouse effect on Titan's surface, without which Titan would be much colder. Conversely, haze in Titan's atmosphere contributes to an anti-greenhouse effect by absorbing sunlight, canceling a portion of the greenhouse effect and making its surface significantly colder than its upper atmosphere.\nTitan's clouds, probably composed of methane, ethane or other simple organics, are scattered and variable, punctuating the overall haze. The findings of the \"Huygens\" probe indicate that Titan's atmosphere periodically rains liquid methane and other organic compounds onto its surface.\nClouds typically cover 1% of Titan's disk, though outburst events have been observed in which the cloud cover rapidly expands to as much as 8%. One hypothesis asserts that the southern clouds are formed when heightened levels of sunlight during the southern summer generate uplift in the atmosphere, resulting in convection. This explanation is complicated by the fact that cloud formation has been observed not only after the southern summer solstice but also during mid-spring. Increased methane humidity at the south pole possibly contributes to the rapid increases in cloud size. It was summer in Titan's southern hemisphere until 2010, when Saturn's orbit, which governs Titan's motion, moved Titan's northern hemisphere into the sunlight. When the seasons switch, it is expected that ethane will begin to condense over the south pole.\nSurface features.\nThe surface of Titan has been described as \"complex, fluid-processed, [and] geologically young\". Titan has been around since the Solar System's formation, but its surface is much younger, between 100 million and 1 billion years old. Geological processes may have reshaped Titan's surface. Titan's atmosphere is four times as thick as Earth's, making it difficult for astronomical instruments to image its surface in the visible light spectrum. The \"Cassini\" spacecraft used infrared instruments, radar altimetry and synthetic aperture radar (SAR) imaging to map portions of Titan during its close fly-bys. The first images revealed a diverse geology, with both rough and smooth areas. There are features that may be volcanic in origin, disgorging water mixed with ammonia onto the surface. There is also evidence that Titan's ice shell may be substantially rigid, which would suggest little geologic activity.\nThere are also streaky features, some of them hundreds of kilometers in length, that appear to be caused by windblown particles. Examination has also shown the surface to be relatively smooth; the few features that seem to be impact craters appeared to have been partially filled in, perhaps by raining hydrocarbons or cryovolcanism. Radar altimetry suggests topographical variation is low, typically no more than 150\u00a0meters. Occasional elevation changes of 500\u00a0meters have been discovered and Titan has mountains that sometimes reach several hundred meters to more than one kilometer in height.\nTitan's surface is marked by broad regions of bright and dark terrain. These include Xanadu, a large, reflective equatorial area about the size of Australia. It was first identified in infrared images from the Hubble Space Telescope in 1994, and later viewed by the \"Cassini\" spacecraft. The convoluted region is filled with hills and cut by valleys and chasms. It is criss-crossed in places by dark lineaments\u2014sinuous topographical features resembling ridges or crevices. These may represent tectonic activity, which would indicate that Xanadu is geologically young. Alternatively, the lineaments may be liquid-formed channels, suggesting old terrain that has been cut through by stream systems. There are dark areas of similar size elsewhere on Titan, observed from the ground and by \"Cassini\"; at least one of these, Ligeia Mare, Titan's second-largest sea, is almost a pure methane sea.\nLakes and seas.\nFollowing the \"Voyager\" flybys, Titan was confirmed to have an atmosphere capable of supporting liquid hydrocarbons on its surface. However, the first tentative detection only came in 1995, when data from the Hubble Space Telescope and radar observations suggested expansive hydrocarbon lakes, seas, or oceans. The existence of liquid hydrocarbons on Titan was finally confirmed in situ by the \"Cassini\" orbiter, with the \"Cassini\" mission team announcing \"definitive evidence of the presence of lakes filled with liquid methane on Saturn's moon Titan\" in January 2007.\nThe observed lakes and seas of Titan are largely restricted to its polar regions, where colder temperatures allow the presence of permanent liquid hydrocarbons. Near Titan's north pole are Kraken Mare, the largest sea; Ligeia Mare, the second-largest sea; and Punga Mare, each filling broad depressions and cumulatively representing roughly 80% of Titan's sea and lake coverage \u2014 combined. All three maria's sea levels are similar, suggesting that they may be hydraulically connected. The southern polar region, meanwhile, hosts four dry broad depressions, potentially representing dried-up seabeds. Additional smaller lakes occupy Titan's polar regions, covering a cumulative surface area of . Lakes in Titan's lower-latitude and equatorial regions have been proposed, though none have been confirmed; seasonal or transient equatorial lakes may pool following large rainstorms. \"Cassini\" RADAR data has been used to conduct bathymetry of Titan's seas and lakes. Using detected subsurface reflections, the measured maximum depth of Ligeia Mare is roughly , and that of Ontario Lacus is roughly .\nTitan's lakes and seas are dominated by methane (), with smaller amounts of ethane () and dissolved nitrogen (). The fraction of these components varies across different bodies: observations of Ligeia Mare are consistent with 71% , 12% , and 17% by volume; whilst Ontario Lacus is consistent with 49% , 41% , and 10% by volume. As Titan is synchronously locked with Saturn, there exists a permanent tidal bulge of roughly at the sub- and anti-Saturnian points. Titan's orbital eccentricity means that tidal acceleration varies by 9%, though the long orbital period means that these tidal cycles are very gradual. A team of researchers led by Ralph D. Lorenz evaluated that the tidal range of Titan's major seas are around .\nIn July 2025, NASA researchers published a study identifying cell-like compartments called vesicles, needed to form the precursors of living cells, could form in the lakes of Titan. Astrobiologists theorize that liquid hydrocarbons could allow molecules needed for life to form. Understanding such a process could shed light on the mystery of how life emerged on Earth.\nTectonics and cryovolcanism.\nThrough \"Cassini\" RADAR mapping of Titan's surface, numerous landforms have been interpreted as candidate cryovolcanic and tectonic features by multiple authors. A 2016 analysis of mountainous ridges on Titan revealed that ridges are concentrated in Titan's equatorial regions, implying that ridges either form more frequently in or are better preserved in low-latitude regions. The ridges\u2014primarily oriented east to west\u2014are linear to arcuate in shape, with the authors of the analysis comparing them to terrestrial fold belts indicative of horizontal compression or convergence. They note that the global distribution of Titan's ridges could be indicative of global contraction, with a thickened ice shell causing regional uplift.\nThe identification of cryovolcanic features on Titan remains controversial and inconclusive, primarily due to limitations of \"Cassini\" imagery and coverage. \"Cassini\" RADAR and VIMS imagery revealed several candidate cryovolcanic features, particularly flow-like terrains in western Xanadu and steep-sided lakes in the northern hemisphere that resemble maar craters on Earth, which are created by explosive subterranean eruptions. The likeliest cryovolcano features is a complex of landforms that includes two mountains, Doom Mons and Erebor Mons; a large depression, Sotra Patera; and a system of flow-like features, Mohini Fluctus. Between 2005 and 2006, parts of Sotra Patera and Mohini Fluctus became significantly brighter whilst the surrounding plains remained unchanged, potentially indicative of ongoing cryovolcanic activity. Indirect lines of evidence for cryovolcanism include the presence of Argon-40 in Titan's atmosphere. Radiogenic 40Ar is sourced from the decay of 40K, and has likely been produced within Titan over the course of billions of years within its rocky core. 40Ar's presence in Titan's atmosphere is thus supportive of active geology on Titan, with cryovolcanism being one possible method of bringing the isotope up from the interior.\nImpact craters.\nTitan's surface has comparatively few impact craters, with erosion, tectonics, and cryovolcanism possibly working to erase them over time. Compared to the craters of similarly sized and structured Ganymede and Callisto, those of Titan are much shallower. Many have dark floors of sediment; geomorphological analysis of impact craters largely suggests that erosion and burial are the primary mechanisms of crater modification. Titan's craters are also not evenly distributed, as the polar regions are almost devoid of any identified craters whilst the majority are located in the equatorial dune fields. This inequality may be the result of oceans that once occupied Titan's poles, polar sediment deposition by past rainfall, or increased rates of erosion in the polar regions.\nPlains and dunes.\nThe majority of Titan's surface is covered by plains. Of the several types of plains observed, the most extensive are the Undifferentiated Plains that encompass vast, radar-dark uniform regions.\nThese mid-latitude plains\u2014located largely between 20 and 60\u00b0 north or south\u2014appear younger than all major geological features except dunes and several craters. The Undifferentiated Plains likely were formed by wind-driven processes and composed of organic-rich sediment.\nAnother extensive type of terrain on Titan are sand dunes, grouped together into vast dune fields or \"sand seas\" located within 30\u00b0 north or south. Titanian dunes are typically wide and spaced apart, with some individual dunes over in length. Limited radar-derived height data suggests that the dunes are tall, with the dunes appearing dark in \"Cassini\" SAR imagery. Interactions between the dunes and obstacle features, such as mountains, indicate that sand is generally transported in a west-to-east direction. The sand that constructs the dunes is dominated by organic material, probably from Titan's atmosphere; possible sources of sand include river channels or the Undifferentiated Plains.\nObservation and exploration.\nTitan is never visible to the naked eye, but can be observed through small telescopes or strong binoculars. Amateur observation is difficult because of the proximity of Titan to Saturn's brilliant globe and ring system; an occulting bar, covering part of the eyepiece and used to block the bright planet, greatly improves viewing. Titan has a maximum apparent magnitude of +8.2, and mean opposition magnitude 8.4. This compares to +4.6 for the similarly sized Ganymede, in the Jovian system.\nObservations of Titan prior to the space age were limited. In 1907 astronomer Josep Comas i Sol\u00e0 observed limb darkening of Titan, the first evidence that the body has an atmosphere. In 1944 Gerard P. Kuiper used a spectroscopic technique to detect an atmosphere of methane.\n\"Pioneer\" and \"Voyager\".\nThe first probe to visit the Saturnian system was \"Pioneer 11\" in 1979, which revealed that Titan was probably too cold to support life. It took images of Titan, including Titan and Saturn together in mid to late 1979. The quality was soon surpassed by the two \"Voyagers\".\nTitan was examined by both \"Voyager 1\" and \"2\" in 1980 and 1981, respectively. \"Voyager 1\"'s trajectory was designed to provide an optimized Titan flyby, during which the spacecraft was able to determine the density, composition, and temperature of the atmosphere, and obtain a precise measurement of Titan's mass. Atmospheric haze prevented direct imaging of the surface, though in 2004 intensive digital processing of images taken through \"Voyager 1\"'s orange filter did reveal hints of the light and dark features now known as Xanadu and Shangri-la, which had been observed in the infrared by the Hubble Space Telescope. \"Voyager 2\", which would have been diverted to perform the Titan flyby if \"Voyager 1\" had been unable to, did not pass near Titan and continued on to Uranus and Neptune.\n\"Cassini\u2013Huygens\".\nThe \"Cassini\u2013Huygens\" spacecraft reached Saturn on July 1, 2004, and began the process of mapping Titan's surface by radar. A joint project of the European Space Agency (ESA) and NASA, \"Cassini\u2013Huygens\" proved a very successful mission. The \"Cassini\" probe flew by Titan on October 26, 2004, and took the highest-resolution images ever of Titan's surface, at only , discerning patches of light and dark that would be invisible to the human eye.\nOn July 22, 2006, \"Cassini\" made its first targeted, close fly-by at from Titan; the closest flyby was at on June 21, 2010. Liquid has been found in abundance on the surface in the north polar region, in the form of many lakes and seas discovered by \"Cassini\".\n\"Huygens\" landing.\n\"Huygens\" was an atmospheric probe that touched down on Titan on January 14, 2005, discovering that many of its surface features seem to have been formed by fluids at some point in the past. Titan is the most distant body from Earth to have a space probe land on its surface.\nThe \"Huygens\" probe landed just off the easternmost tip of a bright region now called Adiri. The probe photographed pale hills with dark \"rivers\" running down to a dark plain. Current understanding is that the hills (also referred to as highlands) are composed mainly of water ice. Dark organic compounds, created in the upper atmosphere by the ultraviolet radiation of the Sun, may rain from Titan's atmosphere. They are washed down the hills with the methane rain and are deposited on the plains over geological time scales.\nAfter landing, \"Huygens\" photographed a dark plain covered in small rocks and pebbles, which are composed of water ice. The two rocks just below the middle of the image on the right are smaller than they may appear: the left-hand one is 15\u00a0centimeters across, and the one in the center is 4\u00a0centimeters across, at a distance of about 85\u00a0centimeters from \"Huygens\". There is evidence of erosion at the base of the rocks, indicating possible fluvial activity. The ground surface is darker than originally expected, consisting of a mixture of water and hydrocarbon ice.\nIn March 2007, NASA, ESA, and COSPAR decided to name the \"Huygens\" landing site the \"Hubert Curien Memorial Station\" in memory of the former president of the ESA.\n\"Dragonfly\".\nThe \"Dragonfly\" mission, developed and operated by the Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory, is scheduled to launch in July 2028. It consists of a large drone powered by an RTG to fly in the atmosphere of Titan as New Frontiers 4. Its instruments will study how far prebiotic chemistry may have progressed. The mission is planned to arrive at Titan in the mid-2030s.\nProposed or conceptual missions.\nThere have been several conceptual missions proposed in recent years for returning a robotic space probe to Titan. Initial conceptual work has been completed for such missions by NASA (and JPL), and ESA. At present, none of these proposals have become funded missions. The Titan Saturn System Mission (TSSM) was a joint NASA/ESA proposal for exploration of Saturn's moons. It envisions a hot-air balloon floating in Titan's atmosphere for six months. It was competing against the Europa Jupiter System Mission (EJSM) proposal for funding. In February 2009 it was announced that ESA/NASA had given the EJSM mission priority ahead of the TSSM. The proposed Titan Mare Explorer (TiME) was a low-cost lander that would splash down in Ligeia Mare in Titan's northern hemisphere. The probe would float whilst investigating Titan's hydrocarbon cycle, sea chemistry, and Titan's origins. It was selected for a Phase-A design study in 2011 as a candidate mission for the 12th NASA Discovery Program opportunity, but was not selected for flight.\nAnother mission to Titan proposed in early 2012 by Jason Barnes, a scientist at the University of Idaho, is the Aerial Vehicle for In-situ and Airborne Titan Reconnaissance (AVIATR): an uncrewed plane (or drone) that would fly through Titan's atmosphere and take high-definition images of the surface of Titan. NASA did not approve the requested $715 million, and the future of the project is uncertain.\nA conceptual design for another lake lander was proposed in late 2012 by the Spanish-based private engineering firm SENER and the Centro de Astrobiolog\u00eda in Madrid. The concept probe is called Titan Lake In-situ Sampling Propelled Explorer (TALISE). The major difference compared to the TiME probe would be that TALISE is envisioned with its own propulsion system and would therefore not be limited to simply drifting on the lake when it splashes down.\nA Discovery Program contestant for its mission #13 is Journey to Enceladus and Titan (JET), an astrobiology Saturn orbiter that would assess the habitability potential of Enceladus and Titan.\nIn 2015, the NASA Innovative Advanced Concepts program (NIAC) awarded a Phase II grant to a design study of a Titan Submarine to explore the seas of Titan.\nPrebiotic conditions and life.\nTitan is thought to be a prebiotic environment rich in complex organic compounds, but its surface is in a deep freeze at so it is currently understood that life cannot exist on the moon's frigid surface. However, Titan seems to contain a global ocean beneath its ice shell, and within this ocean, conditions are potentially suitable for microbial life.\nThe \"Cassini\u2013Huygens\" mission was not equipped to provide evidence for biosignatures or complex organic compounds; it showed an environment on Titan that is similar, in some ways, to ones hypothesized for the primordial Earth. Scientists surmise that the atmosphere of early Earth was similar in composition to the current atmosphere on Titan, with the important exception of a lack of water vapor on Titan.\nFormation of complex molecules.\nThe Miller\u2013Urey experiment and several following experiments have shown that with an atmosphere similar to that of Titan and the addition of UV radiation, complex molecules and polymer substances like tholins can be generated. The reaction starts with dissociation of nitrogen and methane, forming hydrogen cyanide and acetylene. Further reactions have been studied extensively.\nIt has been reported that when energy was applied to a combination of gases like those in Titan's atmosphere, five nucleotide bases, the building blocks of DNA and RNA, were among the many compounds produced. In addition, amino acids\u2014the building blocks of protein\u2014were found. It was the first time nucleotide bases and amino acids had been found in such an experiment without liquid water being present.\nPossible subsurface habitats.\nLaboratory simulations have led to the suggestion that enough organic material exists on Titan to start a chemical evolution analogous to what is thought to have started life on Earth. The analogy assumes the presence of liquid water for longer periods than is currently observable; several hypotheses postulate that liquid water from an impact could be preserved under a frozen isolation layer. It has also been hypothesized that liquid-ammonia oceans could exist deep below the surface. Another model suggests an ammonia\u2013water solution as much as 200\u00a0km (120 miles) deep beneath a water-ice crust with conditions that, although extreme by terrestrial standards, are such that life could survive. Heat transfer between the interior and upper layers would be critical in sustaining any subsurface oceanic life. Detection of microbial life on Titan would depend on its biogenic effects, with the atmospheric methane and nitrogen examined.\nMethane and life at the surface.\nIt has been speculated that life could exist in the lakes of liquid methane on Titan, just as organisms on Earth live in water. Such organisms would inhale H2 in place of O2, metabolize it with acetylene instead of glucose, and exhale methane instead of carbon dioxide. However, such hypothetical organisms would be required to metabolize at a deep freeze temperature of .\nAll life forms on Earth (including methanogens) use liquid water as a solvent; it is speculated that life on Titan might instead use a liquid hydrocarbon, such as methane or ethane, although water is a stronger solvent than methane. Water is also more chemically reactive, and can break down large organic molecules through hydrolysis. A life form whose solvent was a hydrocarbon would not face the risk of its biomolecules being destroyed in this way.\nIn 2005, astrobiologist Chris McKay argued that if methanogenic life did exist on the surface of Titan, it would likely have a measurable effect on the mixing ratio in the Titan troposphere: levels of hydrogen and acetylene would be measurably lower than otherwise expected. Assuming metabolic rates similar to those of methanogenic organisms on Earth, the concentration of molecular hydrogen would drop by a factor of 1000 on the Titanian surface solely due to a hypothetical biological sink. McKay noted that, if life is indeed present, the low temperatures on Titan would result in very slow metabolic processes, which could conceivably be hastened by the use of catalysts similar to enzymes. He also noted that the low solubility of organic compounds in methane presents a more significant challenge to any possible form of life. Forms of active transport, and organisms with large surface-to-volume ratios could theoretically lessen the disadvantages posed by this fact.\nIn 2010, Darrell Strobel, from Johns Hopkins University, identified a greater abundance of molecular hydrogen in the upper atmospheric layers of Titan compared to the lower layers, arguing for a downward flow at a rate of roughly 1028 molecules per second and disappearance of hydrogen near Titan's surface; as Strobel noted, his findings were in line with the effects McKay had predicted if methanogenic life-forms were present. The same year, another study showed low levels of acetylene on Titan's surface, which were interpreted by McKay as consistent with the hypothesis of organisms consuming hydrocarbons. Although restating the biological hypothesis, he cautioned that other explanations for the hydrogen and acetylene findings are more likely: the possibilities of yet unidentified physical or chemical processes (e.g. a surface catalyst accepting hydrocarbons or hydrogen), or flaws in the current models of material flow. Composition data and transport models need to be substantiated, etc. Even so, despite saying that a non-biological catalytic explanation would be less startling than a biological one, McKay noted that the discovery of a catalyst effective at would still be significant. With regards to the acetylene findings, Mark Allen, the principal investigator with the NASA Astrobiology Institute Titan team, provided a speculative, non-biological explanation: sunlight or cosmic rays could transform the acetylene in icy aerosols in the atmosphere into more complex molecules that would fall to the ground with no acetylene signature.\nAs NASA notes in its news article on the June 2010 findings: \"To date, methane-based life forms are only hypothetical. Scientists have not yet detected this form of life anywhere.\" As the NASA statement also says: \"some scientists believe these chemical signatures bolster the argument for a primitive, exotic form of life or precursor to life on Titan's surface.\"\nIn February 2015, a hypothetical cell membrane capable of functioning in liquid methane at cryogenic temperatures (deep freeze) conditions was modeled. Composed of small molecules containing carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen, it would have the same stability and flexibility as cell membranes on Earth, which are composed of phospholipids, compounds of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and phosphorus. This hypothetical cell membrane was termed an \"azotosome\", a combination of \"azote\", French for nitrogen, and \"liposome\". Barriers to azotosome formation may be present based of thermodynamic calculations, however a newer proposed formation mechanism may have overcome these objections.\nObstacles.\nDespite these biological possibilities, there are formidable obstacles to life on Titan, and any analogy to Earth is inexact. At a vast distance from the Sun, Titan is frigid, and its atmosphere lacks CO2. At Titan's surface, water exists only in solid form. Because of these difficulties, scientists such as Jonathan Lunine have viewed Titan less as a likely habitat for life than as an experiment for examining hypotheses on the conditions that prevailed prior to the appearance of life on Earth. Although life itself may not exist, the prebiotic conditions on Titan and the associated organic chemistry remain of great interest in understanding the early history of the terrestrial biosphere. Using Titan as a prebiotic experiment involves not only observation through spacecraft, but laboratory experiments, and chemical and photochemical modeling on Earth.\nPanspermia hypothesis.\nIt is hypothesized that large asteroid and cometary impacts on Earth's surface may have caused fragments of microbe-laden rock to escape Earth's gravity, suggesting the possibility of panspermia. Calculations indicate that these would encounter many of the bodies in the Solar System, including Titan. On the other hand, Jonathan Lunine has argued that any living things in Titan's cryogenic hydrocarbon lakes would need to be so different chemically from Earth life that it would not be possible for one to be the ancestor of the other.\nFuture conditions.\nConditions on Titan could become far more habitable in the far future. Five billion years from now, as the Sun becomes a sub-red giant, its surface temperature could rise enough for Titan to support liquid water on its surface, making it habitable. As the Sun's ultraviolet output decreases, the haze in Titan's upper atmosphere will be depleted, lessening the anti-greenhouse effect on the surface and enabling the greenhouse created by atmospheric methane to play a far greater role. These conditions together could create a habitable environment, and could persist for several hundred million years. This is proposed to have been sufficient time for simple life to spawn on Earth, though the higher viscosity of ammonia-water solutions coupled with low temperatures would cause chemical reactions to proceed more slowly on Titan.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47403", "revid": "1320335103", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47403", "title": "Instrumentation", "text": "Measuring instruments which monitor and control a process\nInstrumentation is a collective term for measuring instruments, used for indicating, measuring, and recording physical quantities. It is also a field of study about the art and science about making measurement instruments, involving the related areas of metrology, automation, and control theory. The term has its origins in the art and science of scientific instrument-making.\nInstrumentation can refer to devices as simple as direct-reading thermometers, or as complex as multi-sensor components of industrial control systems. Instruments can be found in laboratories, refineries, factories and vehicles, as well as in everyday household use (e.g., smoke detectors and thermostats).\nMeasurement parameters.\nInstrumentation is used to measure many parameters (physical values), including:\nHistory.\nThe history of instrumentation can be divided into several phases.\nPre-industrial.\nElements of industrial instrumentation have long histories. Scales for comparing weights and simple pointers to indicate position are ancient technologies. Some of the earliest measurements were of time. One of the oldest water clocks was found in the tomb of the ancient Egyptian pharaoh Amenhotep I, buried around 1500 BCE. Improvements were incorporated in the clocks. By 270 BCE they had the rudiments of an automatic control system device.\nIn 1663 Christopher Wren presented the Royal Society with a design for a \"weather clock\". A drawing shows meteorological sensors moving pens over paper driven by clockwork. Such devices did not become standard in meteorology for two centuries. The concept has remained virtually unchanged as evidenced by pneumatic chart recorders, where a pressurized bellows displaces a pen. Integrating sensors, displays, recorders, and controls was uncommon until the industrial revolution, limited by both need and practicality.\nEarly industrial.\nEarly systems used direct process connections to local control panels for control and indication, which from the early 1930s saw the introduction of pneumatic transmitters and automatic 3-term (PID) controllers.\nThe ranges of pneumatic transmitters were defined by the need to control valves and actuators in the field. Typically, a signal ranged from 3 to 15 psi (20 to 100kPa or 0.2 to 1.0\u00a0kg/cm2) as a standard, was standardized with 6 to 30 psi occasionally being used for larger valves. \nTransistor electronics enabled wiring to replace pipes, initially with a range of 20 to 100mA at up to 90V for loop powered devices, reducing to 4 to 20mA at 12 to 24V in more modern systems. A transmitter is a device that produces an output signal, often in the form of a 4\u201320\u00a0mA electrical current signal, although many other options using voltage, frequency, pressure, or ethernet are possible. The transistor was commercialized by the mid-1950s.\nInstruments attached to a control system provided signals used to operate solenoids, valves, regulators, circuit breakers, relays and other devices. Such devices could control a desired output variable, and provide either remote monitoring or automated control capabilities.\nEach instrument company introduced their own standard instrumentation signal, causing confusion until the 4\u201320\u00a0mA range was used as the standard electronic instrument signal for transmitters and valves. This signal was eventually standardized as ANSI/ISA S50, \"Compatibility of Analog Signals for Electronic Industrial Process Instruments\", in the 1970s. The transformation of instrumentation from mechanical pneumatic transmitters, controllers, and valves to electronic instruments reduced maintenance costs as electronic instruments were more dependable than mechanical instruments. This also increased efficiency and production due to their increase in accuracy. Pneumatics enjoyed some advantages, being favored in corrosive and explosive atmospheres.\nAutomatic process control.\nIn the early years of process control, process indicators and control elements such as valves were monitored by an operator, that walked around the unit adjusting the valves to obtain the desired temperatures, pressures, and flows. As technology evolved pneumatic controllers were invented and mounted in the field that monitored the process and controlled the valves. This reduced the amount of time process operators needed to monitor the process. Latter years, the actual controllers were moved to a central room and signals were sent into the control room to monitor the process and outputs signals were sent to the final control element such as a valve to adjust the process as needed. These controllers and indicators were mounted on a wall called a control board. The operators stood in front of this board walking back and forth monitoring the process indicators. This again reduced the number and amount of time process operators were needed to walk around the units. The most standard pneumatic signal level used during these years was 3\u201315 psig.\nLarge integrated computer-based systems.\nProcess control of large industrial plants has evolved through many stages. Initially, control would be from panels local to the process plant. However, this required a large manpower resource to attend to these dispersed panels, and there was no overall view of the process. The next logical development was the transmission of all plant measurements to a permanently staffed central control room. Effectively this was the centralization of all the localized panels, with the advantages of lower manning levels and easy overview of the process. Often the controllers were behind the control room panels, and all automatic and manual control outputs were transmitted back to plant.\nHowever, whilst providing a central control focus, this arrangement was inflexible as each control loop had its own controller hardware, and continual operator movement within the control room was required to view different parts of the process. With coming of electronic processors and graphic displays it became possible to replace these discrete controllers with computer-based algorithms, hosted on a network of input/output racks with their own control processors. These could be distributed around plant, and communicate with the graphic display in the control room or rooms. The distributed control concept was born.\nThe introduction of DCSs and SCADA allowed easy interconnection and re-configuration of plant controls such as cascaded loops and interlocks, and easy interfacing with other production computer systems. It enabled sophisticated alarm handling, introduced automatic event logging, removed the need for physical records such as chart recorders, allowed the control racks to be networked and thereby located locally to plant to reduce cabling runs, and provided high level overviews of plant status and production levels.\nApplication.\nIn some cases, the sensor is a very minor element of the mechanism. Digital cameras and wristwatches might technically meet the loose definition of instrumentation because they record and/or display sensed information. Under most circumstances neither would be called instrumentation, but when used to measure the elapsed time of a race and to document the winner at the finish line, both would be called instrumentation.\nHousehold.\nA very simple example of an instrumentation system is a mechanical thermostat, used to control a household furnace and thus to control room temperature. A typical unit senses temperature with a bi-metallic strip. It displays temperature by a needle on the free end of the strip. It activates the furnace by a mercury switch. As the switch is rotated by the strip, the mercury makes physical (and thus electrical) contact between electrodes.\nAnother example of an instrumentation system is a home security system. Such a system consists of \nsensors (motion detection, switches to detect door openings), simple algorithms to detect intrusion, local control (arm/disarm) and remote monitoring of the system so that the police can be summoned. Communication is an inherent part of the design.\nKitchen appliances use sensors for control.\nAutomotive.\nModern automobiles have complex instrumentation. In addition to displays of engine rotational speed and vehicle linear speed, there are also displays of battery voltage and current, fluid levels, fluid temperatures, distance traveled, and feedback of various controls (turn signals, parking brake, headlights, transmission position). Cautions may be displayed for special problems (fuel low, check engine, tire pressure low, door ajar, seat belt unfastened). Problems are recorded so they can be reported to diagnostic equipment. Navigation systems can provide voice commands to reach a destination. Automotive instrumentation must be cheap and reliable over long periods in harsh environments. There may be independent airbag systems that contain sensors, logic and actuators. Anti-skid braking systems use sensors to control the brakes, while cruise control affects throttle position. A wide variety of services can be provided via communication links on the OnStar system. Autonomous cars (with exotic instrumentation) have been shown.\nAircraft.\nEarly aircraft had a few sensors. \"Steam gauges\" converted air pressures into needle deflections that could be interpreted as altitude and airspeed. A magnetic compass provided a sense of direction. The displays to the pilot were as critical as the measurements.\nA modern aircraft has a far more sophisticated suite of sensors and displays, which are embedded into avionics systems. The aircraft may contain inertial navigation systems, global positioning systems, weather radar, autopilots, and aircraft stabilization systems. Redundant sensors are used for reliability. A subset of the information may be transferred to a crash recorder to aid mishap investigations. Modern pilot displays now include computer displays including head-up displays.\nAir traffic control radar is a distributed instrumentation system. The ground part sends an electromagnetic pulse and receives an echo (at least). Aircraft carry transponders that transmit codes on reception of the pulse. The system displays an aircraft map location, an identifier and optionally altitude. The map location is based on sensed antenna direction and sensed time delay. The other information is embedded in the transponder transmission.\nLaboratory instrumentation.\nAmong the possible uses of the term is a collection of laboratory test equipment controlled by a computer through an IEEE-488 bus (also known as GPIB for General Purpose Instrument Bus or HPIB for Hewlitt Packard Instrument Bus). Laboratory equipment is available to measure many electrical and chemical quantities. Such a collection of equipment might be used to automate the testing of drinking water for pollutants.\nInstrumentation engineering.\nInstrumentation engineering is the engineering specialization focused on the principle and operation of measuring instruments that are used in design and configuration of automated systems in areas such as electrical and pneumatic domains, and the control of quantities being measured.\nThey typically work for industries with automated processes, such as chemical or manufacturing plants, with the goal of improving system productivity, reliability, safety, optimization and stability.\nTo control the parameters in a process or in a particular system, devices such as microprocessors, microcontrollers or PLCs are used, but their ultimate aim is to control the parameters of a system.\nInstrumentation engineering is loosely defined because the required tasks are very domain dependent. An expert in the biomedical instrumentation of laboratory rats has very different concerns than the expert in rocket instrumentation. Common concerns of both are the selection of appropriate sensors based on size, weight, cost, reliability, accuracy, longevity, environmental robustness, and frequency response. Some sensors are literally fired in artillery shells. Others sense thermonuclear explosions until destroyed. Invariably sensor data must be recorded, transmitted or displayed. Recording rates and capacities vary enormously. Transmission can be trivial or can be clandestine, encrypted and low power in the presence of jamming. Displays can be trivially simple or can require consultation with human factors experts. Control system design varies from trivial to a separate specialty.\nInstrumentation engineers are responsible for integrating the sensors with the recorders, transmitters, displays or control systems, and producing the Piping and instrumentation diagram for the process. They may design or specify installation, wiring and signal conditioning. They may be responsible for commissioning, calibration, testing and maintenance of the system.\nIn a research environment it is common for subject matter experts to have substantial instrumentation system expertise. An astronomer knows the structure of the universe and a great deal about telescopes \u2013 optics, pointing and cameras (or other sensing elements). That often includes the hard-won knowledge of the operational procedures that provide the best results. For example, an astronomer is often knowledgeable of techniques to minimize temperature gradients that cause air turbulence within the telescope.\nInstrumentation technologists, technicians and mechanics specialize in troubleshooting, repairing and maintaining instruments and instrumentation systems.\nImpact of modern development.\nRalph M\u00fcller (1940) stated, \"That the history of physical science is largely the history of instruments and their intelligent use is well known. The broad generalizations and theories which have arisen from time to time have stood or fallen on the basis of accurate measurement, and in several instances new instruments have had to be devised for the purpose. There is little evidence to show that the mind of modern man is superior to that of the ancients. His tools are incomparably better.\"\nDavis Baird has argued that the major change associated with Floris Cohen's identification of a \"fourth big scientific revolution\" after World War II is the development of scientific instrumentation, not only in chemistry but across the sciences. In chemistry, the introduction of new instrumentation in the 1940s was \"nothing less than a scientific and technological revolution\" in which classical wet-and-dry methods of structural organic chemistry were discarded, and new areas of research opened up.\nAs early as 1954, W. A. Wildhack discussed both the productive and destructive potential inherent in process control.\nThe ability to make precise, verifiable and reproducible measurements of the natural world, at levels that were not previously observable, using scientific instrumentation, has \"provided a different texture of the world\". This instrumentation revolution fundamentally changes human abilities to monitor and respond, as is illustrated in the examples of DDT monitoring and the use of UV spectrophotometry and gas chromatography to monitor water pollutants.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47404", "revid": "43080961", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47404", "title": "Anne of Cleves", "text": "Queen of England in 1540\nAnne of Cleves (; 28 June or 22 September 1515 \u2013 16 July 1557) was Queen of England from 6 January to 12 July 1540 as the fourth wife of Henry VIII. Born in D\u00fcsseldorf to the House of La Marck, little is known about Anne before 1527, when she became betrothed to Francis, Duke of Bar, son and heir of Antoine, Duke of Lorraine, although their marriage did not proceed.\nIn March 1539, negotiations for Anne's marriage to Henry began. Henry believed he needed to form a political alliance with her brother, William, Duke of J\u00fclich-Cleves-Berg, a leader of the Protestants of Western Germany, to strengthen his position against potential attacks from Catholic France and the Holy Roman Empire. Anne arrived in England in December 1539 and married Henry a week later, but the marriage was declared unconsummated after six months and Anne was not crowned queen consort.\nFollowing the annulment, Henry gave her a generous settlement and Anne was thereafter known as \"the King's Beloved Sister\". Remaining in England, she lived to see the reigns of Henry's children, Edward VI and Mary I, and attended Mary's coronation in 1553. Anne outlived the rest of Henry's wives. Upon her death she was interred as a queen in Westminster Abbey.\nEarly life.\nAnne was born in 1515, on either 22 September or 28 June. She was born in D\u00fcsseldorf, Duchy of Berg, the second daughter of John III of the House of La Marck, Duke of J\u00fclich \"jure uxoris\", Cleves, Berg \"jure uxoris\", Count of Mark, also known as de la Marck and Ravensberg \"jure uxoris\" (often referred to as Duke of Cleves) who died in 1538, and his wife Maria, Duchess of J\u00fclich-Berg (1491\u20131543). She grew up in Schloss Burg on the edge of Solingen.\nAnne's father was influenced by Erasmus and followed a moderate path within the Reformation. He decided to side with the Schmalkaldic League and opposed Emperor Charles V. After John's death, Anne's brother William became Duke of J\u00fclich-Cleves-Berg, bearing the promising epithet \"The Rich\". In 1526, her elder sister Sibylle was married to John Frederick, Elector of Saxony, head of the Protestant Confederation of Germany and considered the \"Champion of the Reformation\".\nIn 1527, at the age of 11, Anne was betrothed to Francis, the 9-year-old son and heir of Antoine, Duke of Lorraine but because Francis was under the age of consent (10 years old) at the time of the arrangement, the betrothal was considered unofficial and was cancelled in 1535. Her brother William was a Lutheran but the family was unaligned religiously, with her mother, the Duchess Maria, described as a \"strict Catholic\". Her father's ongoing dispute over the Duchy of Guelders with Charles V made the family suitable allies for England's King Henry VIII in the wake of the Truce of Nice. The match with Anne was urged on the King by his chief minister, Thomas Cromwell.\nWedding preparations.\nThe artist Hans Holbein the Younger was dispatched to D\u00fcren to paint portraits of Anne and her younger sister, Amalia, each of whom Henry VIII was considering as his fourth wife. Henry required the artist to be as accurate as possible, not to flatter the sisters. The portraits are now located in the Louvre Museum in Paris and the Victoria and Albert Museum in London. Another 1539 portrait, by the school of Barthel Bruyn the Elder, is in the collection of Trinity College, Cambridge.\nNegotiations to arrange the marriage were in full swing by March 1539. Thomas Cromwell oversaw the talks and a marriage treaty was signed on 4 October of that year.\nHenry valued education and cultural sophistication in women (e.g., Anne Boleyn), but Anne lacked these traits. She had received no formal education but was skilled in needlework and liked playing card games. She could read and write, but only in German. Nevertheless, Anne was considered gentle, virtuous and docile, which is why she was recommended as a suitable candidate for Henry.\nAnne was described by French ambassador Charles de Marillac as tall and slim, \"of medium beauty, and of very assured and resolute countenance.\" She was fair-haired and was said to have had a lovely face. In the words of the chronicler Edward Hall, \"Her hair hanging down, which was fair, yellow and long\u00a0... she was apparelled after the English fashion, with a French hood, which so set forth her beauty and good visage, that every creature rejoiced to behold her.\" She appeared rather solemn by English standards, and looked old for her age. Holbein painted her with a high forehead, heavy-lidded eyes and a pointed chin.\nAnne was initially to travel to England alone with her cort\u00e8ge \u2013 the death of her father prevented her brother and mother from travelling \u2013 but there were concerns about a beautiful, sheltered young woman who had never travelled by sea making such a journey, especially during the winter. She travelled from D\u00fcsseldorf to Cleves, and then to Antwerp where she was received by fifty English merchants.\nHenry met her privately on New Year's Day 1540 at Rochester Abbey in Rochester on her journey from Dover. Henry and some of his courtiers, following a courtly-love tradition, went disguised into the room where Anne was staying. The chronicler Charles Wriothesley reported:\n[The King] so went up into the chamber where the said Lady Anne was looking out of a window to see the bull-baiting which was going on in the courtyard, and suddenly he embraced and kissed her, and showed her a token which the king had sent her for New Year's gift, and she being abashed and not knowing who it was thanked him, and so he spoke with her. But she regarded him little, but always looked out the window\u00a0... and when the king saw that she took so little notice of his coming he went into another chamber and took off his cloak and came in again in a coat of purple velvet. And when the lords and knights saw his grace they did him reverence.\nAccording to the testimony of Henry's companions, he was disappointed with Anne, feeling that she was not as described. Although Anne \"regarded him little\", it is unknown whether she knew this was the King. Henry then revealed his true identity to Anne, and although he is said to have been put off, the marriage preparations proceeded. Henry and Anne then met officially on 3 January on Blackheath outside the gates of Greenwich Park, where a grand reception was laid out.\nMost historians believe that Henry's misgivings about the marriage derived from his assessment that Anne's appearance was unsatisfactory and failure to inspire him to consummate the marriage. He felt that he had been misled by his advisors' praise: \"She is nothing so fair as she hath been reported\", he complained. He told others in his court that if \"it were not that she had come so far into my realm, and the great preparations and state that my people have made for her, and for fear of making a ruffle in the world and of driving her brother into the arms of the Emperor and the French King, I would not now marry her. But now it is too far gone, wherefore I am sorry.\"\nCromwell received some blame for the Holbein portrait, which Henry believed not an accurate representation of Anne, and for some of the exaggerated reports of her beauty. Henry urged Cromwell to find a legal way to avoid the marriage but, by this point, doing so was impossible without endangering the vital alliance with the Germans. In his anger and frustration, the King turned on Cromwell, to his subsequent regret.\nMarriage.\nDespite Henry's very vocal misgivings, the two were married on 6 January 1540 at the royal Palace of Placentia in Greenwich, London, by Archbishop Thomas Cranmer. The phrase \"God send me well to keep\" was engraved around Anne's wedding ring. According to Edward Hall, she wore a \"gowne of ryche cloth of gold set full of large flowers of great and Orient pearl, made after the Duche fassion rownde\". A round gown had no train. On the Sunday after the wedding there were jousts, Anne dressed in the English fashion, with a French hood. \nImmediately after arriving in England, Anne conformed to the Catholic form of worship which Henry had retained after his break with Rome. The couple's first night as husband and wife was not a successful one. Henry confided to Cromwell that he had not consummated the marriage, saying, \"I liked her before not well, but now I like her much worse\".\nIn February 1540, speaking to the Countess of Rutland, Anne praised the King as a kind husband, saying: \"When he comes to bed he kisseth me, and he taketh me by the hand, and biddeth me 'Good night, sweetheart'; and in the morning kisseth me and biddeth 'Farewell, darling.'\" Lady Rutland responded: \"Madam, there must be more than this, or it will be long ere we have a duke of York, which all this realm most desireth.\" \nAnne was commanded to leave the Court on 24 June, and on 6 July she was informed of her husband's decision to reconsider the marriage. Witness statements were taken from a number of courtiers and two physicians which register the King's disappointment at her appearance. Henry had also commented to Thomas Heneage and Anthony Denny that he could not believe she was a virgin.\nShortly afterwards, Anne was asked for her consent to an annulment, to which she agreed. Cromwell, the moving force behind the marriage, was attainted for treason. The marriage was annulled on 12 July 1540, on the grounds of non-consummation and her pre-contract to Francis of Lorraine. Henry VIII's physician stated that, after the wedding night, Henry said he was not impotent because he experienced \"\" (two nocturnal pollutions while in sleep).\nAfter the annulment.\nAnne had been given dower lands in January 1540 to fund her household, including manors in Hampshire formerly owned by Breamore Priory and Southwick Priory. Following the annulment she received a generous settlement, including Richmond Palace, and Hever Castle, home of Henry's former in-laws, the Boleyns. Anne of Cleves House, in Lewes, East Sussex, is just one of many properties she owned, though she never lived there. Henry and Anne became friendly\u2014she was an honorary member of the King's family and was referred to as \"the King's Beloved Sister\". She was invited to court often and, out of gratitude for not contesting the annulment, Henry decreed that she would be given precedence over all women in England save his own wife and daughters.\nAfter Catherine Howard was beheaded in 1542, Anne and her brother William pressed the King to remarry Anne. Henry quickly refused to do so. Anne seems to have disliked Catherine Parr and reportedly reacted to the news of Henry's sixth marriage in 1543 with the remark \"Madam Parr is taking a great burden on herself.\"\nIn March 1547, Edward VI's Privy Council asked her to move out of Bletchingley Palace, her usual residence, to Penshurst Place to make way for Thomas Cawarden, Master of Revels. They pointed out that Penshurst was nearer to Hever and the move had been Henry VIII's will.\nOn 4 August 1553, Anne wrote to Mary I to congratulate her on her marriage to Philip of Spain. On 28 September 1553, when Mary left St James's Palace for Whitehall, she was accompanied by her sister Elizabeth and Anne of Cleves. Anne also took part in Mary I's coronation procession, and may have been present at her coronation at Westminster Abbey. These seem to have been her last public appearances, although there is an account of Anne at Westminster Abbey in August 1554 after the wedding of Mary and Philip. As the new queen was a strict Catholic, Anne yet again changed religion, then becoming a Roman Catholic.\nAfter a brief return to prominence, she lost royal favour in 1554, following Wyatt's rebellion. According to Simon Renard, the Imperial ambassador, Anne's close association with Elizabeth had convinced the Queen that \"the Lady [Anne] of Cleves was of the plot and intrigued with the Duke of Cleves to obtain help for Elizabeth: matters in which the king of France was the prime mover\". There is no evidence that Anne was invited back to court after 1554. She was compelled to live a quiet and obscure life on her estates. After her arrival as the King's bride, Anne never left England. Despite occasional feelings of homesickness, Anne was generally content in England and was described by Raphael Holinshed as \"a ladie of right commendable regards, courteous, gentle, a good housekeeper and verie bountifull to her servants.\"\nIn the summer of 1556, Anne's brother William complained about some of her servants. He had heard that Otto Wylick, Jasper Brockhausen, and his wife, Gertrude, made difficulties in Anne's household. Gertrude was said to have beguiled Anne with impostures and incantations. The matter came before Queen Mary and the English council of Philip II, and in September Brockhausen and Wylick were expelled.\nDeath.\nWhen Anne's health began to fail, Mary allowed her to live at Chelsea Old Manor, where Henry's last wife, Catherine Parr, had lived after her remarriage. Here, in the middle of July 1557, Anne dictated her last will. In it, she mentions her brother, sister, and sister-in-law, as well as the future Queen Elizabeth, the Duchess of Suffolk, and the Countess of Arundel. She left some money to her servants and asked Mary and Elizabeth to employ them in their households. She was remembered by everyone who served her as a particularly generous and easy-going mistress.\nAnne died at Chelsea Old Manor on 16 July 1557, aged 41 or 42. The most likely cause of her death was cancer. She was buried in Westminster Abbey on 3\u00a0August in what has been described as a \"somewhat hard-to-find tomb\" on the opposite side of Edward the Confessor's shrine and slightly above eye level for a person of average height.\nAnne's epitaph in Westminster Abbey, reads simply:\nANNE OF CLEVES\nQUEEN OF ENGLAND\nBORN 1515 \u2022 DIED 1557\nShe was the last of Henry VIII's wives to die.\nFictional portrayals.\nThe role of Anne of Cleves was played by:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47406", "revid": "50920840", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47406", "title": "Catherine Parr", "text": "Queen of England and Ireland from 1543 to 1547\nCatherine Parr (c.\u2009July or August 1512 \u2013 5 September 1548) was Queen of England and Ireland as the last of the six wives of King Henry\u00a0VIII from their marriage on 12 July 1543 until Henry's death on 28 January 1547. Catherine was the final queen consort of the House of Tudor, and outlived Henry by a year and eight months. With four husbands, she is the most-married English queen consort. She was the first woman in England to publish in print an original work under her own name in the English language.\nCatherine enjoyed a close relationship with Henry's three children, Mary, Elizabeth and Edward. She was personally involved in the education of Elizabeth and Edward. She was influential in Henry's passing of the Third Succession Act in 1543 that restored his daughters Mary and Elizabeth to the line of succession to the throne. Catherine was appointed regent from July to September 1544 while Henry was on a military campaign in France; in the event that he lost his life, she was to rule as regent until Edward came of age. However, he did not give her any function in government in his will.\nOn account of her Protestant sympathies, she provoked the enmity of anti-Protestant officials, who sought to turn the King against her; a warrant for her arrest was drawn up, probably in the spring of 1546. However, she and the king soon reconciled.\nOn 25 April 1544, Catherine published her first book, \"Psalms or Prayers\", anonymously. Her book \"Prayers or Meditations\" became the first original book published by an English queen under her own name on 2 June 1545. She published a third book, \"The Lamentation of a Sinner\", on 5 November 1547, nine months after the death of King Henry VIII.\nAfter Henry's death on 28 January 1547, Catherine was allowed as queen dowager to keep the queen's jewels and dresses. She assumed the role of guardian to her stepdaughter Elizabeth, and took Henry's great-niece Lady Jane Grey into her household. About six months after Henry's death, she married her fourth and final husband, Thomas Seymour, 1st Baron Seymour of Sudeley. As brother of Jane Seymour, Henry's third wife, Seymour was uncle to Henry's son and successor Edward\u00a0VI, and the younger brother of Lord Protector of England Edward Seymour, 1st Duke of Somerset. Catherine's fourth and final marriage was short-lived, as she died on 5 September 1548 due to complications of childbirth. Her funeral, held on 7 September 1548, was the first Protestant funeral in England, Scotland or Ireland to be held in English.\nEarly life and adolescence.\nCatherine Parr was the eldest child of Sir Thomas Parr, lord of the manor of Kendal in Westmorland (now in Cumbria), and Maud Green, daughter and co-heiress of Sir Thomas Green, lord of Greens Norton, Northamptonshire, and Joan Fogge. Sir Thomas Parr was a descendant of King Edward III, and the Parrs were a substantial northern family which included many knights. Catherine had a younger brother, William, who was later created first Marquess of Northampton, and a younger sister, Anne, later Countess of Pembroke. Sir Thomas was a close companion to King Henry VIII, and was rewarded as such with responsibilities and/or incomes from his positions as Sheriff of Northamptonshire, Master of the Wards, and Comptroller of the Household. Catherine's mother was a close friend and attendant of Catherine of Aragon, and Catherine Parr was probably named after Queen Catherine, who was her godmother.\nShe was born in 1512, probably in either late July or August. It was once thought that Catherine Parr had been born at Kendal Castle in Westmorland. However, at the time of her birth, Kendal Castle was already in very poor condition. During her pregnancy, Maud Parr remained at court attending the Queen, and by necessity the Parr family were living in their townhouse at Blackfriars. Historians now consider it unlikely that Sir Thomas would have taken his pregnant wife on an arduous two-week journey north over bad roads to give birth in a crumbling castle in which neither of them seemed to spend much time. Catherine's father died when she was young, and she was close to her mother as she grew up.\nHer initial education was similar to other well-born women, but she developed a passion for learning which would continue throughout her life. She was fluent in French, Italian, and Latin, and began learning Spanish after becoming queen. Catherine was raised as a Catholic but like Anne Boleyn at some point turned to Protestantism. According to biographer Linda Porter, the story that as a child Catherine could not tolerate sewing and often said to her mother that \"my hands are ordained to touch crowns and sceptres, not spindles and needles\" is very likely apocryphal.\nFirst marriage (1529\u20131533).\nIn 1529, when she was seventeen, Catherine married Sir Edward Burgh (pronounced and sometimes written as \"Borough\"), a grandson of Edward Burgh, 2nd Baron Burgh. Earlier biographies mistakenly reported that Catherine had married the older Burgh. Following the 2nd Baron Burgh's death in December 1528, Catherine's father-in-law Sir Thomas Burgh was summoned to Parliament in 1529 as Baron Burgh.\nCatherine's first husband was in his twenties and may have been in poor health. He served as a feoffee for Thomas Kiddell and as a justice of the peace. His father also secured a joint patent in survivorship with his son for the office of steward of the manor of the soke of Kirton in Lindsey. The younger Sir Edward Burgh died in the spring of 1533, not surviving to inherit the title of Baron Burgh.\nLady Latimer (1534\u20131543).\nFollowing her first husband's death, Catherine Parr may have spent time with the Dowager Lady Strickland, Katherine Neville, who was the widow of Catherine's cousin Sir Walter Strickland, at the Stricklands' family residence of Sizergh Castle in Westmorland (now in Cumbria). In the summer of 1534, Catherine married, secondly, John Neville, 3rd Baron Latimer, her father's second cousin and a kinsman of Lady Strickland. With this marriage, Catherine became only the second woman in the Parr family to marry into the peerage.\nThe twice-widowed Latimer was nearly twice Catherine's age. From his first marriage to Dorothy de Vere, sister of John de Vere, 14th Earl of Oxford, he had two children, John and Margaret. Although Latimer was in financial difficulties after he and his brothers had pursued legal action to claim the title of Earl of Warwick, Catherine now had a home of her own, a title and a husband with position and influence in the north.\nPilgrimage of Grace and later.\nLatimer was a supporter of the Catholic Church and had opposed the King's first annulment, his subsequent marriage to Anne Boleyn, and the religious consequences. In October 1536, during the Lincolnshire Rising, Catholic rebels appeared before the Latimers' home, threatening violence if Latimer did not join their efforts to reinstate the links between England and Rome. Catherine watched as her husband was dragged away. Between October 1536 and April 1537, Catherine lived alone in fear with her step-children, struggling to survive. It is probable that, in these uncertain times, Catherine's strong reaction against the rebellion strengthened her adherence to the reformed Church of England. In January 1537, during the uprising known as the Pilgrimage of Grace, Catherine and her step-children were held hostage at Snape Castle in North Yorkshire. The rebels ransacked the house and sent word to Lord Latimer, who was returning from London, that if he did not return immediately they would kill his family. When Latimer returned to the castle, he managed to talk the rebels into releasing his family and leaving, but the aftermath was taxing on the whole family.\nThe King and Thomas Cromwell heard conflicting reports as to whether Latimer was a prisoner or a conspirator. As a conspirator, he could be found guilty of treason, forfeiting his estates and leaving Catherine and her step-children penniless. The King himself wrote to Thomas Howard, 3rd Duke of Norfolk, pressing him to make sure Latimer would \"condemn that villain [Robert] Aske and submit to our clemency\". Latimer complied. It is likely that Catherine's brother William Parr and her uncle, William Parr, 1st Baron Parr of Horton, who both fought against the rebellion, intervened to save Latimer's life.\nAlthough no charges were laid against him, Latimer's reputation, which reflected upon Catherine, was tarnished for the rest of his life. Over the next seven years, the family spent much of their time in the south. In 1542, the family spent time in London as Latimer attended parliament. Catherine visited her brother William Parr, 1st Marquess of Northampton and her sister Anne Parr, Countess of Pembroke at court. It was here that Catherine became acquainted with her future fourth husband, Sir Thomas Seymour. The atmosphere of the court was greatly different from that of the rural estates she knew. There, Catherine could find the latest trends, not only in religious matters, but in less weighty secular matters such as fashion and jewellery.\nBy the winter of 1542, Lord Latimer's health had worsened. Catherine nursed her husband until his death in 1543. In his will, Catherine was named as guardian of his daughter, Margaret, and was put in charge of his affairs until his daughter's majority. Latimer left Catherine a life interest in the manor of Stowe in Northamptonshire, eleven miles from Horton, and other properties. He also bequeathed money for supporting his daughter, and in the case that his daughter did not marry within five years, Catherine was to take \u00a330 a year out of the income to support her. Catherine was left a rich widow, but after Lord Latimer's death she faced the possibility of having to return north. It is likely that Catherine sincerely mourned her husband; she kept a remembrance of him, his New Testament with his name inscribed inside, until her death.\nUsing her late mother's friendship with Henry's first queen, Catherine of Aragon, Catherine took the opportunity to renew her own friendship with the former queen's daughter, Lady Mary. By 16 February 1543, Catherine had established herself as part of Mary's household, and it was there that Catherine caught the attention of the King. Although she had begun a romantic friendship with Sir Thomas Seymour, the brother of the late queen Jane Seymour, she saw it as her duty to accept Henry's proposal over Seymour's. Seymour was given a posting in Brussels to remove him from the King's court.\nQueen of England and Ireland.\nCatherine married Henry VIII on 12 July 1543 at Hampton Court Palace. She was the first queen of England also to be queen of Ireland following Henry's adoption of the title king of Ireland. She was also the third of his wives to be named Catherine, although she spelled it \"Kateryn\" in signatures. Catherine and her new husband shared several common royal and noble ancestors, making them multiple cousins. By Henry's mother and Catherine's father they were third cousins once removed, sharing Ralph Neville, 1st Earl of Westmorland, and Lady Joan Beaufort (granddaughter of Edward III), and by their fathers they were double fourth cousins once removed, sharing Thomas Holland, 2nd Earl of Kent (son of Joan of Kent) and Lady Alice FitzAlan (granddaughter of Henry, 3rd Earl of Lancaster) and John of Gaunt, 1st Duke of Lancaster (son of Edward III) and Katherine Swynford.\nOn becoming queen, Catherine installed her former stepdaughter, Margaret Neville, as her lady-in-waiting, and gave her cousin Maud, Lady Lane and her stepson John's wife, Lucy Somerset, positions in her household. Catherine was partially responsible for reconciling Henry with his daughters from his first two marriages, and also developed a good relationship with Henry's son Edward. When she became queen, her uncle Lord Parr of Horton became her Lord Chamberlain.\nParr's \"Psalms or Prayers taken out of Holy Scriptures\", was printed by the King's printer on 25 April 1544. It was an anonymous translation of a Latin work by Bishop John Fisher (c.\u20091525) that had been reprinted on 18 April 1544. Fisher had been executed in 1535 for refusing to take the oath of supremacy, and his name does not appear on the title page. Parr's volume appeared as preparations for war were being finalised, and it served as a powerful piece of wartime propaganda designed to help Henry win the war against France and Scotland via the prayers of his people. The volume contains seventeen \"Psalms\", focused largely on defeating enemies, and it concludes with \"A Prayer for the King\", derived from a prayer for the Holy Roman Emperor by Georg Witzel, and \"A Prayer for Men to Say Entering into Battle\", a translation of a prayer by Erasmus. Parr paid for deluxe gift copies of the book which were printed on vellum and distributed at court. One deluxe copy has annotations by Henry VIII. The \"Ninth Psalm\" was set to pre-existing music by Thomas Tallis and was likely performed as part of special wartime ceremony at St. Paul's Cathedral on 22 May 1544. Parr's \"A Prayer for the King\" had an important afterlife. In 1559, it was edited and inserted into the \"Book of Common Prayer\", probably by Elizabeth I who was then Supreme Governor of the Church of England. This prayer remains in the \"Book of Common Prayer\" and is still used to pray for the British monarch by Anglican communities around the globe.\nHenry went on his last campaign to France from July to September 1544, leaving Catherine as his regent. Because her regency council was composed of sympathetic members, including: Thomas Cranmer (the Archbishop of Canterbury), Lord Hertford and her uncle William Parr, Lord Parr of Horton (included at her particular request), Catherine obtained effective control and was able to rule as she saw fit. She handled provision, finances, and musters for Henry's French campaign, signed five royal proclamations, and maintained constant contact with her lieutenant in the northern Marches, Lord Shrewsbury, over the complex and unstable situation with Scotland. It is thought that her actions as regent, together with her strength of character and noted dignity, and later religious convictions, greatly influenced her stepdaughter Lady Elizabeth (the future Elizabeth I).\nParr's second publication, \"Prayers or Meditations\", appeared in June 1545, and, like her first book, it was a bestseller. In this case, Parr's compositional method was a complex one as she reworked the third book of Thomas \u00e0 Kempis's \"Imitatio Christi\" to produce a monologue spoken by a generic Christian speaker. The volume also circulated in manuscript and deluxe print copies. Princess Elizabeth translated the work into Latin, Italian and French as a New Year's gift for Henry VIII in December 1545 and presented the manuscript in a beautiful hand-embroidered cover. The volume has been digitised by the British Library.\nThe Queen's religious views were viewed with suspicion by anti-Protestant officials such as Stephen Gardiner (the Bishop of Winchester) and Lord Wriothesley (the Lord Chancellor). Although brought up as a Catholic, she later became sympathetic to and interested in the \"New Faith\". By the mid-1540s, she came under suspicion that she was actually a Protestant. This view is supported by the strong reformed ideas that she revealed after Henry's death, when her third book, \"Lamentation of a Sinner,\" was published in late 1547. In 1546, the Bishop of Winchester and Lord Wriothesley tried to turn the King against her. An arrest warrant was drawn up for her and rumours abounded across Europe that the King was attracted to her close friend, the Duchess of Suffolk. However, she saw the warrant and managed to reconcile with the King after vowing that she had only argued about religion with him to take his mind off the suffering caused by his ulcerous leg. The following day chancellor Wriothesley (with a detachment of the Guard), who was unaware of the reconciliation, tried to arrest her while she walked with Henry. The King angrily dismissed his chancellor.\nFinal marriage and death.\nShortly before he died, Henry made provision for an allowance of \u00a37,000 per year for Catherine to support herself. He further ordered that, after his death, Catherine, though a queen dowager, should be given the respect of a queen of England, as if he were still alive. After the coronation of her stepson, Edward VI, on 31 January 1547, Catherine retired from court to her home at Old Manor in Chelsea.\nFollowing Henry's death, Catherine's old love and the new king's uncle, Thomas Seymour (who was soon created 1st Baron Seymour of Sudeley), returned to court. Catherine was quick to accept when Seymour renewed his suit of marriage. Since only four months had passed since the death of King Henry, Seymour knew that the Regency council would not agree to a petition for the Queen Dowager to marry so soon. Sometime near the end of May, Catherine and Seymour married in secret. King Edward VI and the council were not informed of the union for several months. When their union became public knowledge, it caused a minor scandal. The King and Lady Mary were very much displeased by the union. After being censured and reprimanded by the council, Seymour wrote to the Lady Mary asking her to intervene on his behalf. Mary became furious at his forwardness and tasteless actions and refused to help. Mary even went as far as asking her half-sister, Lady Elizabeth, not to interact with Queen Catherine any further.\nDuring this time, Catherine began having altercations with her brother-in-law, Edward Seymour, 1st Duke of Somerset. Like Thomas, Edward was the King's uncle, and was also the Lord Protector. A rivalry developed between Catherine and his wife, her own former lady-in-waiting, Anne Seymour, Duchess of Somerset, which became particularly acute over the matter of Catherine's jewels. The Duchess argued that Catherine, as queen dowager, was no longer entitled to wear the jewels belonging to the wife of the king. Instead she, as the wife of the protector, should be the one to wear them. The whole ordeal left her relationship with Catherine permanently damaged; the relationship between the two Seymour brothers also worsened as a result, since Thomas saw the whole dispute as a personal attack by his brother on his social standing.\nIn November 1547, Catherine published her third book, \"The Lamentation of a Sinner\". The book promoted the Protestant concept of justification by faith alone, which the Catholic Church deemed to be heresy. It was sponsored by Katherine Brandon, Duchess of Suffolk, and by William Parr (Catherine's brother), and William Cecil, Elizabeth I's future chief minister, wrote the preface. In 1544 or 1545, Parr had started to organise an English translation of Erasmus's \"Paraphrases Upon the New Testament\", and the massive volume was finally printed in January 1548. Parr had enlisted Nicholas Udall, Thomas Keyes and Mary Tudor to translate different sections and she may have produced the paraphrase of Matthew. In July 1547 the Edwardian state ordered every parish to obtain a copy and many generations of literate parishioners would have encountered lengthy dedications praising Parr's learning, her commitment to the vernacular Bible, and her role in the English reformation. Parr owned many books and she participated in the cultural practice of writing in her books and signing books that belonged to others.\nAt the age of 35, Catherine became pregnant. This pregnancy was a surprise, as Catherine had not conceived during her first three marriages. During this time, Seymour began to take an interest in Lady Elizabeth. Seymour had reputedly plotted to marry her before marrying Catherine, and it was reported later that Catherine discovered the two in an embrace. On a few occasions before the situation risked getting completely out of hand, according to the deposition of Kat Ashley, Catherine appears not only to have acquiesced in episodes of horseplay, but actually to have assisted her husband. Whatever actually happened, Elizabeth was sent away in May 1548 to stay with Sir Anthony Denny's household at Cheshunt and never saw her beloved stepmother again, although the two corresponded. Elizabeth immediately wrote a letter to the Queen and Seymour after she left Chelsea. The letter demonstrates a sort of remorse.\nKat Ashley, whose deposition was given after Catherine had died and Seymour had been arrested for another attempt at marrying Lady Elizabeth, had developed a crush on Seymour during her time at Chelsea and encouraged her charge to \"play along\". At one point she even made a comment at how lucky Elizabeth would have been to have a husband like Seymour. Ashley even told Lady Elizabeth that Seymour had confided his sentiments to her of wanting to marry Elizabeth before Catherine. After Catherine's death, Ashley strongly encouraged Elizabeth to write to Seymour offering her condolences; to \"comfort him of his sorrow...for he would think great kindness therein.\"\nIn June 1548, Catherine, accompanied by Lady Jane Grey, moved to Sudeley Castle in Gloucestershire. The dowager queen promised to provide education for her. It was there that Catherine would spend the last few months of her pregnancy and the last summer of her life.\nCatherine gave birth to her only child, a daughter, Mary Seymour, named after Catherine's stepdaughter Mary, on 30 August 1548. Catherine died on 5 September 1548, at Sudeley Castle, from what is thought to have been \"childbed fever\". This illness was common due to the lack of hygiene around childbirth.\nCatherine's funeral was held on 7 September 1548. It was the first Protestant funeral held in English. Her chief mourner was Lady Jane Grey. She was buried in St. Mary's Chapel on the grounds of Sudeley Castle, Gloucestershire, England.\nThomas Seymour was beheaded for treason on 20 March 1549 and Mary Seymour was taken to live with the Dowager Duchess of Suffolk, a close friend of Catherine's. Catherine's other jewels were kept in a coffer with five drawers at Sudeley and this was sent to the Tower of London on 20 April 1549, and her clothes and papers followed in May. After a year and a half, on 17 March 1550, Mary's property was restored to her by the Restitution of Mary Seymour Act 1549 (3 &amp; 4 Edw. 6. c. 14), easing the burden of the infant's household on the Duchess. The last mention of Mary Seymour on record is on her second birthday, and although stories circulated that she eventually married and had children, most historians believe she died as a child at Grimsthorpe Castle in Lincolnshire.\nRemains.\nDuring the English Civil War, Sudeley Castle was used as a base by King Charles I, leading to its siege and sack by Parliamentarians in January 1643, during which Catherine's grave was probably disturbed and her monument destroyed. Contemporary writer Bruno Ryves reported that:\n\"There is in the castle a goodly fair church, here they dug up the graves, and disturb the ashes of the dead, they break down the monuments of the Chandoses\".\nThe castle changed hands several times during the war, suffering a second siege, before being slighted in 1649, leading to it being largely abandoned, and the royal grave lost.\nCatherine's presence at the castle was first rediscovered by the antiquarian Rev. Huggett when researching at the College of Arms, passing his findings onto George Pitt, 1st Baron Rivers, the owner of the castle in 1768.\nJoseph Lucas, a member of the local gentry who dwelled in the outer court of the castle, renting it from Baron Rivers, was aware of Huggett's work and searched for the lost grave, discovering it among the ruins of the chapel in 1782. An account of the discovery was later published in \"Notes and Queries\" by the daughter of a Mr. Brooks, who had been present at the discovery.\n\"In the summer of the year 1782 the earth in which Qu. K. Par lay inter'd was removed, and at the depth of about two feet (or very little more) her leaden coffin or coffin was found quite whole... Mr. Jno Lucas had the curiosity to rip up the top of the coffin, expecting to discover within it only the bones of the deceased, but to his great surprise found the whole body wrapped in 6 or 7 seer cloth linen, entire and uncorrupted... his unwarranted curiosity led him to make an incision through the seer cloth which covered one of the arms of the corpse, the flesh of which at the time was white and moist\".\nThe coffin was reopened in 1783, 1784, 1786; and in 1792, when local vandals broke into the coffin and threw the corpse in a rubbish heap, leading to Mr. Lucas reinterring the body in a hidden, walled grave.\nThe first time the coffin had been reopened by John Lucas had Catherine left with a piece of her hair missing, a tooth missing and parts of the fabric to her clothing missing. John used this evidence to tell the locals about his discovery which led to the tomb being reopened repeatedly.\nThe last time the coffin was opened was in 1817 when the local rector decided to move it to the crypt under the chapel. When opening it this final time it was found the body had been reduced to a skeleton, and much of the coffin filled with ivy.\nDuring these various openings of the coffin, fragments of Catherine's dress and locks of her hair were collected, one of which was gifted to Elizabeth Hamilton. The majority of these items are now on display at Sudeley Castle.\nThe coffin was last moved in 1861 to its final location in the fully restored chapel, under a canopied neo-Gothic tomb designed by Sir George Gilbert Scott, with a recumbent marble figure by John Birnie Philip.\nIconography.\nThe full-length portrait of Catherine Parr by Master John in the National Portrait Gallery was for many years thought to represent Lady Jane Grey. The painting has recently been re-identified as Catherine Parr, with whose name it was originally associated. The full-length format was very rare in portraits of this date, and was usually used only for very important sitters. Lady Jane Grey, although of royal blood, was a relatively obscure child of eight when this was painted (c. 1545); it was to be another eight years before the short-lived attempt at placing her on the throne. The distinctive crown-shaped jewel the sitter wears can be traced to an inventory of jewels that belonged to Catherine Parr, and the cameo beads appear to have belonged to Catherine Howard, from whom they would have passed to her successor as queen.\nAnother contemporary painting of Catherine Parr by Master John was likely painted in c.1547\u20131548, and in the past mistakenly labelled as Mary I or Lady Jane Grey. The painting, from the collection of the earls of Jersey, was thought to be lost in a fire by 1969, but was auctioned at Sotheby's in July 2023.\nHistoriography.\nThe popular myth that Catherine Parr acted more as her husband's nurse than his wife was born in the 19th century from the work of Victorian moralist and proto-feminist Agnes Strickland. David Starkey challenged this assumption in his book \"Six Wives\", in which he points out that such a situation would have been vaguely obscene to the Tudors\u2014given that Henry had a huge staff of physicians waiting on him hand and foot, and Catherine was expected to live up to the heavy expectations of queenly dignity.\nCatherine's good sense, moral rectitude, compassion, firm religious commitment, and strong sense of loyalty and devotion have earned her many admirers among historians. These include Starkey, feminist activist Karen Lindsey, Lady Antonia Fraser, Alison Weir, Carolly Erickson, Alison Plowden, Susan James and Linda Porter. Biographers have described her as strong-willed and outspoken, physically desirable, susceptible (like Queen Elizabeth) to roguish charm, and even willing to resort to obscene language if the occasion suited.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47407", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47407", "title": "Gabriele D'Annunzio", "text": "Italian writer (1863\u20131938)\nGeneral Gabriele D'Annunzio, Prince of Montenevoso (, ; ; 12 March 1863 \u2013 1 March 1938), sometimes written d'Annunzio as he used to sign himself, was an Italian poet, playwright, orator, journalist, aristocrat, and Royal Italian Army officer during World War I. He occupied a prominent place in Italian literature from 1889 to 1910 and in its political life from 1914 to 1924. He had the epithets (The Prophet) and (The Poet): stems from the Latin , meaning a prophetic, divinatory, or inspirational poet.\nD'Annunzio was associated with the Decadent movement in his literary works, which interplayed closely with French symbolism and British aestheticism. Such works represented a turn against the naturalism of the preceding romantics and was both sensuous and mystical. He came under the influence of Friedrich Nietzsche, which would find outlets in his literary and later political contributions. His affairs with several women, including Eleonora Duse and Luisa Casati, received public attention. In his politics, which evolved many times, he associated himself with socialism and the progressivist views of the political left, responding to the illiberal and reactionary policies of Luigi Pelloux, as well as with the Historical Far Left.\nDuring World War I, D'Annunzio's image in Italy transformed from literary figure to national war hero. He was associated with the elite \"Arditi\" storm troops of the Italian Army and took part in actions such as the Flight over Vienna. As part of an Italian nationalist reaction against the Paris Peace Conference of 1919, he set up the short-lived Italian Regency of Carnaro in Fiume with himself as \"Duce\". The Charter of Carnaro made music the fundamental principle of the state, which was corporatist in nature. Although D'Annunzio later preached nationalism and never called himself a fascist, he has been credited with partially inventing Italian fascism, as both his ideas and his aesthetics were an influence upon Benito Mussolini. At the same time, he was an influence on Italian socialists and an early inspiration to the first phase of the Italian resistance movement to fascism.\nBiography.\nEarly life and family.\nD'Annunzio was born in the township of Pescara, in the modern-day Italian region of Abruzzo, the son of a wealthy landowner and mayor of the town, Francesco Paolo Rapagnetta D'Annunzio (1838\u20131893) and his wife Luisa de Benedictis (1839\u20131917). His father was born Francesco Paolo Rapagnetta, the sixth child of Camillo Rapagnetta, a shoemaker, and Rita Olimpia Lolli. At the age of 13, he was adopted by a sister of his mother Rita, Anna Lolli, who had remarried, after the death of her first husband, a wealthy merchant and shipowner, Antonio D'Annunzio. D'Annunzio's paternal grandfather, Camillo Rapagnetta (1795\u20131866) registered his birth. Legend has it that D'Annunzio was initially baptised Gaetano and given the name of Gabriele later in childhood because of his angelic looks; this story is purely fictitious, as can be seen by D'Annunzio's birth certificate and baptismal records, which record \"Gabriele\" as both his birth and baptismal name.\nD'Annunzio's precocious talent was recognised early in life, and he was sent to school at the Liceo Cicognini in Prato, Tuscany. He published his first poems \u2013 a small volume of verses called \"Primo Vere\" \u2013 in 1879, at the age of sixteen and while still at school. Influenced by Giosu\u00e8 Carducci's \"Odi barbare\", he placed some almost brutal imitations of Lorenzo Stecchetti, the fashionable poet of \"Postuma\", side by side with translations from the Latin. His verse was so distinguished that the literary critic Giuseppe Chiarini, upon reading it, brought the unknown youth before the public in an enthusiastic article.\nIn 1881, D'Annunzio entered the University of Rome La Sapienza, where he became a member of various literary groups, including , and wrote articles and criticism for local newspapers. In those university years, he started to promote Italian irredentism.\nLiterary work.\nD'Annunzio published (1882), (1882), (1883), (1884) and the greater part of the short stories that were afterwards collected under the general title of (1886). contains poems full of pulsating youth and the promise of power, some descriptive of the sea and some of the Abruzzese landscape, commented on and completed in prose by , the latter a collection of short stories dealing in radiant language with the peasant life of the author's native province. is the beginning of D'Annunzio's second and characteristic manner. His conception of style was new, and he chose to express all the most subtle vibrations of voluptuous life. Both style and contents began to startle his critics; some who had greeted him as an \"enfant prodige\" rejected him as a perverter of public morals, whilst others hailed him as one bringing a breath of fresh air and an impulse of new vitality into the somewhat prim, lifeless work hitherto produced.\nMeanwhile, the review of D'Annunzio publisher Angelo Sommaruga perished in the midst of scandal, and his group of young authors found itself dispersed. Some entered the teaching career and were lost to literature, others threw themselves into journalism. D'Annunzio took this latter course, and joined the staff of the , under the pseudonym of \"Duca Minimo\". Here he wrote (1886), a love poem, in which for the first time he drew inspiration adapted to modern sentiments and passions from the rich colours of the Renaissance. is also interesting because in it one can find most of the germs of his future work, just as in and in certain ballads and sonnets one can find descriptions and emotions which later went to form the aesthetic contents of , and (1892).\nD'Annunzio's first novel (1889, translated into English as \"The Child of Pleasure\") was followed in 1891 by \"Giovanni Episcopo\", and in 1892 by \"L'innocente\" (\"The Intruder\"). These three novels made a profound impression. \"L'innocente\", admirably translated into French by Georges Herelle, brought its author the notice and applause of foreign critics. His next work, \"Il trionfo della morte\" (\"The Triumph of Death\") (1894), was followed soon by (\"The Maidens of the Rocks\") (1896) and (\"The Flame of Life\") (1900); the latter is in its descriptions of Venice perhaps the most ardent glorification of a city existing in any language.\nD'Annunzio's poetic work of this period, in most respects his finest, is represented by (1893), the (1893), a superb attempt at civic poetry, and (1900). A later phase of D'Annunzio's work is his dramatic production, represented by (1897), a lyrical fantasia in one act, and his (\"The Dead City\") (1898), written for Sarah Bernhardt. In 1898 he wrote his and \"La Gioconda\"; in the succeeding year \"La gloria\", an attempt at contemporary political tragedy which met with no success, probably because of the audacity of the personal and political allusions in some of its scenes; and then \"Francesca da Rimini\" (1901), based on an episode from Dante Alighieri's \"Inferno\"; a perfect reconstruction of medieval atmosphere and emotion, magnificent in style, and declared by an authoritative Italian critic \u2013 Edoardo Boutet \u2013 to be the first real, if imperfect, tragedy ever given to the Italian theatre. It was adapted by Tito Ricordi to become the libretto for the opera Francesca da Rimini by Riccardo Zandonai, which premiered in 1914.\nIn 1883, D'Annunzio married Maria Hardouin di Gallese, and had three sons, Mario (1884\u20131964), Gabriele Maria \"Gabriellino\" (1886\u20131945) and Ugo Veniero (1887\u20131945), but the marriage ended in 1891. In 1894, he began a love affair with the actress Eleonora Duse which became a \"cause c\u00e9l\u00e8bre\". He provided leading roles for her in his plays of the time such as \"La citt\u00e0 morta\" (1898) and \"Francesca da Rimini\" (1901), but the tempestuous relationship finally ended in 1910. After meeting the Marchesa Luisa Casati in 1903, he began a lifelong turbulent on again-off again affair with Luisa, that lasted until a few years before his death.\nIn 1897, D'Annunzio was elected to the Chamber of Deputies for a three-year term, where he sat as an independent. By 1910, his daredevil lifestyle had forced him into debt, and he fled to France to escape his creditors. There he collaborated with composer Claude Debussy on a musical play, \"Le Martyre de saint S\u00e9bastien\" (\"The Martyrdom of St Sebastian\"), 1911, written for Ida Rubinstein. The Holy See reacted by placing all of his works in the Index of Forbidden Books. The work was not successful as a play, but it has been recorded in adapted versions several times, notably by Pierre Monteux (in French), Leonard Bernstein (songs in French, dialogue in English), and Michael Tilson Thomas (in French). In 1912 and 1913, D'Annunzio worked with opera composer Pietro Mascagni, writing the libretto for the opera \"Parisina\", staying sometimes in a house rented by the composer in Bellevue, near Paris. D'Annunzio insisted that the entire, long libretto should be set to music, which eventually meant that the work was too long for audiences of the time, and required the entire last act to be removed.\nIn 1901, D'Annunzio and Ettore Ferrari, the Grand Master of the Grand Orient of Italy, founded the Universit\u00e0 Popolare di Milano (Popular University of Milan), located in via Ugo Foscolo. D'Annunzio held the inaugural speech and subsequently became an associated professor and a lecturer in the same institution. In 1902, D'Annunzio visited Istria, an \"irredent land\", then under Austro-Hungarian rule. He was welcomed in Pisino by a \"pouring of flowers\" let down from the windows of the crowded houses, visited the Italian gymnasium and was paid a homage designed by the future wife of Francesco Salata. In a letter addressed to the same Italian historian, D'Annunzio complimented with him about the civility of the Italian population living there, praising the struggle of the \"great, manifold, transfiguring Latin civilization against the barbaric abuse\".\nD'Annunzio was a Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of Italy, a Scottish Rite that in 1908 had separated from the Grand Orient of Italy. Subsequently, he adhered to the mystic and philosophic movimento known as Martinism, collaborating in Fiume with other 33rd degree Scottish Rite Freemasons and occultists like Alceste De Ambris, Sante Ceccherini, and Marco Egidio Allegri. The Masonic initiation of D'Annunzio his testified by the choice of Masonic symbols for the flag of the Regence of Carnaro like the Ouroboros and the seven stars of the Ursa Major.\nWorld War I.\nAfter the start of World War I, D'Annunzio returned to Italy and made public speeches in favor of Italy's entry on the side of the Triple Entente. Since taking a flight with Wilbur Wright in 1908, D'Annunzio had been interested in aviation. With the war beginning he volunteered and achieved further celebrity as a fighter pilot, losing the sight of an eye in a flying accident.\nIn February 1918, he took part in a daring, if militarily irrelevant, raid on the harbour of Bakar (known in Italy as , lit. \"the Bakar Mockery\"), helping to raise the spirits of the Italian public, still battered by the Caporetto disaster. On 9 August 1918, as commander of the 87th fighter squadron \"La Serenissima\", he organized one of the great feats of the war, leading nine planes in a 700-mile round trip to drop propaganda leaflets on Vienna. This is called in Italian \"il Volo su Vienna\", \"the Flight over Vienna\".\nFiume.\nThe war strengthened D'Annunzio's ultranationalist and Italian irredentist views, and he campaigned widely for Italy to assume a role alongside her wartime allies as a first-rate European power. Angered by the proposed handing over of the city of Fiume (now Rijeka in Croatia) whose population, when the suburbs are included, was mostly Italian, at the Paris Peace Conference, on 12 September 1919, D'Annunzio led 186 grenadiers of the Royal Italian Army's 2nd Grenadiers Regiment's I Battalion from Ronchi to Fiume to seize the city. Within days troops from other army units joined D'Annunzio in Fiume, who soon commanded a force of 2,500 troops of former Royal Italian Army troops, Italian nationalists, and World War I veterans of the Italian front. D'Annunzio then forced the inter-Allied (American, British and French) occupying forces to withdraw. The plotters sought to have Italy annex Fiume but were denied. Instead, Italy initiated a blockade of Fiume while demanding that the plotters surrender.\nD'Annunzio then declared Fiume an independent state, the Italian Regency of Carnaro; the Charter of Carnaro foreshadowed much of the later Italian Fascist system, with himself as \"Duce\" (leader). Some elements of the Royal Italian Navy, such as the destroyer \"Espero\" joined up with D'Annunzio's local forces. He attempted to organize an alternative to the League of Nations for (selected) oppressed nations of the world (such as the Irish, whom D'Annunzio attempted to arm in 1920), and sought to make alliances with various separatist groups throughout the Balkans (especially groups of Italians, though also some Slavic and Albanian groups), although without much success. D'Annunzio ignored the Treaty of Rapallo and declared war on Italy itself, only finally surrendering the city on 29 December 1920 after a bombardment by the Italian navy and five days of fighting.\nLater life.\nAfter the Fiume episode, D'Annunzio retired to his home on Lake Garda and spent his latter years writing and campaigning. Although D'Annunzio had a strong influence on the ideology of Benito Mussolini, he never became directly involved in fascist government politics in Italy. In 1922, shortly before the march on Rome, he was pushed out of a window by an unknown assailant, or perhaps simply slipped and fell out himself while intoxicated. He survived but was badly injured, and recovered only after Mussolini had been appointed Prime Minister.\nIn 1924, D'Annunzio was ennobled by King Victor Emmanuel III and given the hereditary title of Prince of Montenevoso (). In 1937 he was made president of the Royal Academy of Italy. D'Annunzio died in 1938 of a stroke, at his home in Gardone Riviera. He was given a state funeral by Mussolini and was interred in a magnificent tomb constructed of white marble at Il Vittoriale degli Italiani. His son, Gabriellino D'Annunzio, became a film director. His 1921 film \"The Ship\" was based on a novel by his father. In 1924, he co-directed the historical epic , an expensive failure, before retiring from filmmaking.\nPolitics.\nD'Annunzio and fascism.\nAlthough D'Annunzio initially briefly associated himself with the Historical Right and his political views often evolved, D'Annunzio later associated himself with the Historical Far Left, socialism, and progressivism. D'Annunzio is also often seen within the context of proto-fascism as a precursor of the ideals and techniques of Italian fascism. His political ideals emerged in Fiume when he coauthored a constitution with Alceste de Ambris, a syndicalist, the Charter of Carnaro. De Ambris provided the legal and political framework, to which D'Annunzio added his skills as a poet. De Ambris was the leader of a group of Italian seamen who had mutinied and then given their vessel to the service of D'Annunzio. The constitution established a corporatist state, with nine corporations to represent the different sectors of the economy (workers, employers, and professionals), and a tenth (D'Annunzio's invention) to represent the perceived superior human beings, the heroes, poets, prophets, and supermen. The Charter of Carnaro also declared that music was the fundamental principle of the state. Others disagree and cite his initial opposition to fascism, as well as his influence on Italian socialists and anti-fascists.\nD'Annunzio, the \"de facto\" dictator of Fiume, maintained control through what has been described as a \"new and dangerously potent politics of spectacle\". It was this culture of dictatorship that Benito Mussolini imitated and learned from D'Annunzio. D'Annunzio has been described as the John the Baptist of Italian fascism, as virtually the entire ritual of Fascism was invented by D'Annunzio during his occupation of Fiume and his leadership of the Italian Regency of Carnaro. These included the balcony address, the Roman salute, the cries of \"Eia, eia, eia! Alala!\" taken from Achilles's cry in the \"Iliad\", the dramatic and rhetorical dialogue with the crowd, the use of religious symbols in new secular settings, as well as blackshirted followers (the Arditi) with their disciplined, bestial responses and strongarm repression of dissent. He was even said to have originated the practice of forcibly dosing opponents with large amounts of castor oil, a very effective laxative, to humiliate, disable, or kill them, a practice that became a common tool of Mussolini's Blackshirts.\nRivalry with Benito Mussolini.\nIn his essay \"Mussolini and The Cult of the Leader\", John Whittam wrote:\nThis famous poet, novelist and war hero was a self-proclaimed Superman. He was the outstanding interventionist in May 1915 and his dramatic exploits during the war won him national and international acclaim. In September 1919 he gathered together his 'legions' and captured the disputed seaport of Fiume. He held it for over a year and it was he who popularised the black shirts, the balcony speeches, the promulgation of ambitious charters and the entire choreography of street parades and ceremonies. He even planned a march on Rome. One historian had rightly described him as the 'First Duce' and Mussolini must have heaved a sigh of relief when he was driven from Fiume in December 1920 and his followers were dispersed. But he remained a threat to Mussolini and in 1921 Fascists like Balbo seriously considered turning to him for leadership.\nIn contrast, Mussolini vacillated from left to right at this time. Although Mussolini's fascism was heavily influenced by the Charter of Carnaro, the constitution for Fiume written by Alceste De Ambris and D'Annunzio, neither wanted to play an active part in the new movement, both refusing when asked by Fascist supporters to run in the elections of 15 May 1921. Before the March on Rome, De Ambris even went so far as to depict the Italian fascist movement as \"a filthy pawn in Mister Giolitti's game of chess, and made out of the least dignified section of the bourgeoisie\".\nD'Annunzio was seriously injured when he fell out of a window on 13 August 1922; subsequently the planned \"meeting for national pacification\" with Francesco Saverio Nitti and Mussolini was cancelled. The incident was never explained and is considered by some historians an attempt to murder him, motivated by his popularity. Despite D'Annunzio's retreat from active public life after this event, Mussolini still found it necessary to regularly dole out funds to D'Annunzio as a bribe for not re-entering the political arena. When asked about this by a close friend, Mussolini purportedly stated: \"When you have a rotten tooth you have two possibilities open to you: either you pull the tooth or you fill it with gold. With D'Annunzio I have chosen for the latter treatment.\"\nD'Annunzio kept attempting to intervene in politics almost until his death in 1938. He wrote to Mussolini in 1933 to try to convince him not to ally with Adolf Hitler. In 1934, he tried to disrupt the relationship between Hitler and Mussolini after their first meeting, even writing a satirical pamphlet about Hitler. In September 1937, D'Annunzio met with Mussolini at the Verona train station to try to convince him to leave the Axis powers.\nLiterature.\nAt the height of his success, D'Annunzio was celebrated for the originality, power and decadence of his writing. Although his work had immense impact across Europe, and influenced generations of Italian writers, his \"fin de si\u00e8cle\" works are now little known, and his literary reputation has always been clouded by nationalistic ideals, and he had his strong detractors. A \"New York Times\" review in 1898 of his novel \"The Intruder\" referred to him as \"evil\", \"entirely selfish and corrupt\". Three weeks into its December 1901 run at the Teatro Constanzi in Rome, his tragedy \"Francesca da Rimini\" was banned by the censor on grounds of morality.\nA prolific writer, D'Annunzio's novels in Italian include (\"The Child of Pleasure\", 1889), (\"The Triumph of Death\", 1894), and (\"The Maidens of the Rocks\", 1896). He wrote the screenplay to the feature film \"Cabiria\" (1914) based on episodes from the Second Punic War. D'Annunzio's literary creations were strongly influenced by the French Symbolist school, and contain episodes of striking violence and depictions of abnormal mental states interspersed with gorgeously imagined scenes. One of D'Annunzio's most significant novels, scandalous in its day, is \"Il fuoco\" (\"The Flame of Life\") of 1900, in which he portrays himself as the Nietzschean Superman (\"\u00dcbermensch\") Stelio Effrena, in a fictionalized account of his love affair with Eleonora Duse. His short stories showed the influence of Guy de Maupassant. He was also associated with the Italian noblewoman Luisa Casati, an influence on his novels and one of his mistresses.\nThe 1911 \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" wrote of him:\nThe work of d' Annunzio, although by many of the younger generation injudiciously and extravagantly admired, is almost the most important literary work given to Italy since the days when the great classics welded her varying dialects into a fixed language. The psychological inspiration of his novels has come to him from many sources\u2014French, Russian, Scandinavian, German\u2014and in much of his earlier work there is little fundamental originality.His creative power is intense and searching, but narrow and personal; his heroes and heroines are little more than one same type monotonously facing a different problem at a different phase of life. But the faultlessness of his style and the wealth of his language have been approached by none of his contemporaries, whom his genius has somewhat paralysed. In his later work [meaning as of 1911], when he begins drawing his inspiration from the traditions of bygone Italy in her glorious centuries, a current of real life seems to run through the veins of his personages. And the lasting merit of D'Annunzio, his real value to the literature of his country, consists precisely in that he opened up the closed mine of its former life as a source of inspiration for the present and of hope for the future, and created a language, neither pompous nor vulgar, drawn from every source and district suited to the requirements of modern thought, yet absolutely classical, borrowed from none, and, independently of the thought it may be used to express, a thing of intrinsic beauty. As his sight became clearer and his purpose strengthened, as exaggerations, affectations, and moods dropped away from his conceptions, his work became more and more typical Latin work, upheld by the ideal of an Italian Renaissance.\nIn Italy, some of D'Annunzio's poetic works remain popular, most notably his poem \"La pioggia nel pineto\" (\"The Rain in the Pinewood\"), which exemplifies his linguistic virtuosity as well as the sensuousness of his poetry. His work was part of the literature event in the art competition at the 1912 Summer Olympics.\nMuseums.\nD'Annunzio's life and work are commemorated in a museum, \"Il Vittoriale degli Italiani\" (\"The Shrine of the Italian People's Victories\"). He planned and developed it himself, adjacent to his villa at Gardone Riviera on the southwest bank of Lake Garda, between 1923 and his death. Now a national monument, it is a complex of military museum, library, literary and historical archive, theatre, war memorial and mausoleum. The museum preserves his torpedo boat \"MAS 96\" and the SVA-5 aircraft he flew over Vienna. His birthplace is also open to the public as a museum, Birthplace of Gabriele D'Annunzio Museum in Pescara.\nWorks.\nAutobiographical works.\nD'Annunzio's epistolary work, \"Solus ad solam\", was published posthumously.\nLegacy.\nThe D'Annunzio University of Chieti\u2013Pescara is named after him, as is the Brescia Airport. El Bayyada in Libya was founded as \"Villaggio D'Annunzio\" as a rural village to be populated by Italian colonists.\nThe Chilean poetess Lucila Godoy Alcayaga, 1945 Nobel Prize in Literature, took the first name of her pseudonym, Gabriela Mistral, in his honour. The play \"Tamara\" is based on his meeting with the painter Tamara de Lempicka. Luchino Visconti's last film, \"The Innocent\", is based on D'Annunzio's novel. The writer Ernesto Gim\u00e9nez Caballero was given the nickname the \"Spanish D'Annunzio\".\n\"As an air team leader in the flights of the August offensive, he was able, setting a magnificent example, to make the action coordinated and highly effective. In the battlefield of the sky, opposed by intense fire from every weapon, he dared the limits of human courage, striking the enemy from the lowest altitudes with very audacious persistence.\"\n\u2014 Sky over the Karst, 19\u201326 August 1917\n\"Animator of every spirit, transfusing his faith and love into everyone, in a magnificent and superb mission he led a flight of brave men over Vienna, affirming in a hitherto unsurpassed way the power of the wings of Italy.\"\n\u2014 Vienna sky, 9 August 1918\n\"Volunteer and war-maimed, during three years of bitter struggle, with animating faith, with tireless work, participating in very audacious undertakings, on land, on the sea, in the sky, the high intellect and the tenacious will of the purposes \u2013 in harmony of thought and action \u2013 entirely dedicated to the sacred ideals of the Fatherland, in the pure dignity of duty and sacrifice.\"\n\u2014 War zone, May 1915\u2013November 1918\n\"As an observer officer he voluntarily took part in various war missions carried out in enemy territory by seaplanes of the \"Regia Marine\" [Royal Navy], always maintaining an exemplary and courageous demeanor and constantly demonstrating cold-blooded and youthful courage even under enemy fire. During a landing he suffered a serious injury to his right eye.\"\n\u2014 Adriatic, May 1915\u2013February 1916\n\"During the actions from 10 to 12 October and from 1 to 3 November, he was a companion to the soldiers who conquered Veliki and Faiti. Enthusiastic and daring in every act of his, the example given was equal to the word and the effects obtained were effective and complete.\"\n\u2014 Veliki Kribak, 10\u201312 October; Faiti Krib, 1\u20133 November 1916\n\"In the grand aerial feat he himself championed and in the harsh land combat he overcame on the Timavo, his courage amazed the brave men themselves.\"\n\u2014 Karst sky-Timavo, 23\u201328 May 1917\n\"In land[-based] aircraft, covering a long stretch of open sea, in adverse conditions, he managed, with others, to reach the mouth of Cattaro and hit the naval objectives with great accuracy and effectiveness, returning with all the others to base, despite the inevitable detours in the growing haze.\"\n\u2014 Bay of Kotor 4\u20135 October 1917\n\"An effective promoter, admirable for his faith and courage, a persevering example of military virtue, he voluntarily participated in the Buccari incursion.\"\n\u2014 Bakar 10\u201311 February 1918\n\u2014 Conferred by Royal Decree of 15 March 1924 / 1915\u20131920\n\u2014 Awarded by Royal Decree of 1925 / 1915\u20131918\n\u2014 Awarded by Royal Decree of 1925 / Fiume 25 June 1920\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "47409", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47409", "title": "530s BC", "text": "This article concerns the period 539 BC \u2013 530 BC.\nDecade"}
{"id": "47410", "revid": "45595768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47410", "title": "540s BC", "text": "Decade\nThis article concerns the period 549 BC \u2013 540 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47411", "revid": "49479969", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47411", "title": "Margaret of Anjou", "text": "Queen of England (1445\u20131461, 1470\u20131471)\nMargaret of Anjou (; 23 March 1430 \u2013 25 August 1482) was Queen of England by marriage to King Henry VI from 1445 to 1461 and again from 1470 to 1471. Through marriage, she was also nominally Queen of France from 1445 to 1453. Born in the Duchy of Lorraine into the House of Valois-Anjou, Margaret was the second eldest daughter of Ren\u00e9 of Anjou, King of Naples, and Isabella, Duchess of Lorraine.\nMargaret was one of the principal figures in the series of dynastic civil wars known as the Wars of the Roses and at times personally led the Lancastrian faction. Some of her contemporaries, such as the Duke of Suffolk, praised \"her valiant courage and undaunted spirit\", and the 16th-century historian Edward Hall described her personality in these terms: \"This woman excelled all other, as well in beauty and favour, as in wit and policy, and was of stomach and courage, more like to a man, than a woman\".\nOwing to her husband's frequent bouts of insanity, Margaret ruled the kingdom in his place. It was she who called for a Great Council in May 1455 that excluded the Yorkist faction headed by Richard of York, 3rd Duke of York. This provided the spark that ignited a civil conflict that lasted for more than 30 years, decimated the old nobility of England, and caused the deaths of thousands of men, including her only son, Edward of Westminster, Prince of Wales, at the Battle of Tewkesbury in 1471.\nMargaret was taken prisoner by the victorious Yorkists after the Lancastrian defeat at Tewkesbury. In 1475, she was ransomed by her cousin, King Louis XI of France. She went to live in France as a poor relation of the French king, and she died there at the age of 52.\nEarly life and marriage.\nChildhood.\nMargaret was born on 23 March 1430 at Pont-\u00e0-Mousson in Lorraine, a fief of the Holy Roman Empire east of France ruled by a cadet branch of the French kings, the House of Valois-Anjou. Margaret was the second daughter of Ren\u00e9 of Anjou and Isabella, Duchess of Lorraine. She had five brothers and four sisters, as well as three half-siblings from her father's relationships with mistresses. Her father, popularly known as \"Good King Ren\u00e9\" (Bon Roi Ren\u00e9), was duke of Anjou and titular king of Naples, Sicily, and Jerusalem; he has been described as \"a man of many crowns but no kingdoms\". Margaret was baptised at Toul in Lorraine and, in the care of her father's old nurse Theophanie la Magine, she spent her early years at the castle at Tarascon on the river Rh\u00f4ne in Provence and in the old royal palace at Capua, near Naples in the Kingdom of Sicily. Her mother took care of her education and may have arranged for her to have lessons with the scholar Antoine de la Sale, who taught her brothers. In childhood, Margaret was known as \"la petite cr\u00e9ature\" (the little creature) and was interested in French romances and hunting.\nHer family included several prominent women who exercised power in politics, war, and administration as regents and queen-lieutenants. Her mother, Isabella of Lorraine, fought wars on behalf of her husband while he was imprisoned in 1431\u20131432 and 1434\u20131436 by the duke of Burgundy, Philip the Good, and ruled the Duchy of Lorraine in her own right. Her paternal grandmother, Yolande of Aragon, ruled the Duchy of Anjou as regent for her son while Margaret was a child, repelling an English military presence and supporting the disinherited Charles VII of France (Dauphin). It has been suggested that this family example provided her with precedents for her later actions as regent for her son. Attitudes to women's exercise of power were different in Western Europe than in England at the time, with England more opposed to women exercising authority.\nMarriage, concession of Maine, and subsequent rule.\nMargaret met with English envoys at Tours on 4 May 1444 to discuss her marriage to Henry VI of England. On 24 May, she was formally betrothed to Henry by proxy. Her uncle, Charles VII of France, who may have suggested the marriage as part of peace efforts between France and England near the conclusion of the Hundred Years' War, was present. The marriage was negotiated principally by William de la Pole, Duke of Suffolk, and the settlement included a remarkably small dowry of 20,000 francs and the unrealised claim, via Margaret's mother, to the territories of Mallorca and Menorca, which had been occupied for centuries by the Crown of Aragon. The marriage settlement also contained the promise of a twenty-three-month truce with France. Opinions were mixed as to the wisdom of the marriage, but the prevailing understanding was that it represented a genuine effort at peace.\nLoans were taken out by the government in order to pay for the considerable expense of transporting Margaret to England. Solicitation for the loans emphasised the role that the marriage, and Margaret herself, would play in seeking peace with France. This was a theme that continued throughout the preparations for her wedding. She arrived in England on 9 April 1445. \nOn 23 April 1445, Margaret married King Henry VI of England at Titchfield Abbey in Hampshire. She was fifteen and he was twenty-three. She then travelled to London accompanied by various lords and courtiers, arriving on 28 May 1445, where she was met by the mayor and aldermen of the city. The predicted turnout for her arrival and procession was so large that on 8 May, an inspection of roofs and balconies was ordered due to the expectation that spectators would use them as vantage points for her progress.\nHer ceremonial progress through the city lasted two days, the intervening night spent, by custom, in the Tower of London. It was accompanied by eight theatrical pageants. Five of these pageants concerned the peace with France, casting Margaret as a symbol of, or the agent of, peace. Three spoke of her spiritual role as a redeemer and intercessor. It is uncertain whether these pageants represented a propaganda effort on the part of the Crown or reflected popular sentiment.\nShe was then crowned Queen of England on 30 May 1445 at Westminster Abbey by John Stafford, Archbishop of Canterbury. Those that anticipated the future return of English claims to French territory believed that she already understood her duty to protect the interests of the Crown fervently. The wedding and her transport were very expensive, estimated by some historians at more than \u00a35,000.\nShortly after her coronation, Ren\u00e9 of Anjou entered negotiations with the English crown in an attempt to barter a lifetime's alliance and a twenty-year truce in exchange for the cession of the English-held territory of Maine to Anjou and Henry's agreement to abandon his claim to Anjou. Ultimately, the agreement ended without an alliance with Anjou and with the loss of Maine. Margaret, alongside Henry, corresponded closely with Charles VII regarding the agreement, attempting to act as a mediator.\nThe loss of Maine, regarded as a betrayal, was deeply unpopular with the English public, who were already inclined to mistrust Margaret due to her French origins. Blame was cast on William de la Pole, due to his role in negotiations. The reputation of Margaret's marriage suffered as a result, although she herself was not openly blamed for the loss.\nIn the early years of their marriage, prior to Henry's illness, Margaret and Henry spent significant proportions of their time together by choice. They shared an interest in education and culture. On 30 March 1448, she was granted licence to found Queens' College, Cambridge. Prior to 1453, there is little evidence of public political efforts on her part. Most of her surviving letters were written during that period, and the majority pertain to acts of intercession, mediation, and intervention in matters on which she had been asked to act, such as the arranging of marriages, the return of wrongfully taken property, and the collection of alms. These were expected and important parts of the role of a noblewoman or queen. Some were successful, and others regarded as high-handed or ill-thought-out. On one occasion, she recommended a man named Alexander Manning to the role of gaoler at Newgate; shortly after, he turned the prisoners loose in an act of protest at his rumoured dismissal for negligence and was then gaoled himself.\nBirth of a son.\nHenry, who was more interested in religion and learning than in military matters, was not a successful king. He had reigned since he was only a few months old, and his actions had been controlled by protectors, magnates who were effectively regents. When he married Margaret, his mental condition was already unstable, and by the time of the birth of their only son, Edward of Westminster, Prince of Wales (born 13 October 1453), he had suffered a complete breakdown.\nBeginnings of the dynastic civil wars.\nEnmity between Margaret and the Duke of York.\nAfter retiring from London to live in lavish state at Greenwich, Margaret was occupied with the care of her young son and did not display any political inclinations until she believed her husband was threatened with deposition by the ambitious Richard of York, 3rd Duke of York, who, to her dismay, had been appointed Lord Protector while Henry was mentally incapacitated from 1453 to 1454. The duke was a credible claimant to the English throne, and by the end of his protectorship, there were many powerful nobles and relatives prepared to back his claim. Whereas the Duke of York was ambitious and capable, Henry (surrounded by corrupt advisers) was trusting, pliable, and increasingly unstable. Margaret herself was defiantly unpopular, grimly and gallantly determined to maintain the English crown for her progeny. Yet at least one scholar identifies the source of the eventual Lancastrian downfall not as York's ambitions nearly so much as Margaret's ill-judged enmity toward York and her over-indulgence in unpopular allies. Nevertheless, Queen Margaret was a powerful force in the world of politics.\nMargaret's biographer Helen Maurer, however, disagrees with earlier historians having dated the much-vaunted enmity between the Queen and York to the time he obtained the office of the protectorship. She suggests the mutual antagonism came about two years later in 1455 in the wake of the First Battle of St Albans, when Margaret perceived him as a challenge to the king's authority. Maurer bases this conclusion on a judicious study of Margaret's pattern of presenting gifts; this revealed that Margaret took a great deal of care to demonstrate that she favoured both York and Edmund Beaufort, 2nd Duke of Somerset, equally in the early 1450s. Maurer also claims that Margaret appeared to accept York's protectorship and asserts there is no substantial evidence to back up the long-standing belief that she was responsible for the Yorkists' exclusion from the Great Council following Henry's recovery (see below).\nThe late historian Paul Murray Kendall, on the other hand, maintained that Margaret's allies Edmund Beaufort and William de la Pole, then Earl of Suffolk, had no difficulty in persuading her that York, until then one of Henry VI's most trusted advisers, was responsible for her unpopularity and already too powerful to be trusted. Margaret not only persuaded Henry to recall York from his post as governor in France and banish him instead to Ireland, she also repeatedly attempted to have him assassinated during his travels to and from Ireland, once in 1449 and again in 1450. Edmund Beaufort and Suffolk's joint responsibility for the secret surrender of Maine in 1448, and then the subsequent disastrous loss of the rest of Normandy in 1449 embroiled Margaret and Henry's court in riots, uprisings by the magnates, and calls for the impeachment and execution of Margaret's two strongest allies. It also might have made an ultimate battle to the death between Margaret and the House of York inevitable by making manifest Richard's dangerous popularity with the Commons. Richard of York safely returned from Ireland in 1450, confronted Henry, and was readmitted as a trusted advisor. Soon thereafter, Henry agreed to convene Parliament to address the calls for reform. When Parliament met, the demands could not have been less acceptable to Margaret: not only were both Edmund Beaufort and Suffolk impeached for criminal mismanagement of French affairs and subverting justice, but it was charged as a crime against Suffolk (now a duke) that he had antagonised the king against the Duke of York. Further, the demands for reform put forward included that the Duke of York be acknowledged as the first councillor to the king, and the Speaker of Commons, perhaps with more fervour than wisdom, even proposed Richard, Duke of York, be recognised as heir to the throne. Within a few months, however, Margaret had regained control of Henry, Parliament was dissolved, the incautious Speaker thrown in prison, and Richard of York retired to Wales for the time being.\nThe Wars of the Roses.\nEarly campaigns.\nHostilities between the rival Yorkist and Lancastrian factions flared into armed conflict in 1455 with provocations directed against the Duke of York that are reckoned as the beginning of the War of the Roses, in which Margaret asserted a decided role of leadership as the position of her husband deteriorated. In May, just over five months after Henry VI recovered from a bout of mental illness and Richard of York's protectorship had ended, Margaret and Henry called for a Great Council from which the Yorkists were excluded. The Council called for an assemblage of the peers at Leicester with the stated purpose to protect the king from his enemies. York, fearing that the purpose of the council was to destroy him, prepared for battle and soon was marching south to meet the Lancastrian army marching north. The Lancastrians suffered a crushing defeat at the First Battle of St Albans on 22 May 1455. Edmund Beaufort, the Earl of Northumberland and Lord Clifford were killed, Wiltshire fled the battlefield, and King Henry was taken prisoner by the victorious Duke of York. In March 1458, along with her husband and leading nobles of the warring factions, she took part in The Love Day procession in London. In 1459, hostilities resumed at the Battle of Blore Heath, where James Tuchet, 5th Baron Audley, was defeated and killed by the Yorkist army under the command of Richard Neville, 5th Earl of Salisbury.\nIn 1457, the kingdom was again shaken when it was discovered that Pierre de Br\u00e9z\u00e9, a powerful French general and an adherent of Margaret, had landed on the English coast and burnt the town of Sandwich. As leader of a French force of 4,000 men from Honfleur, he aimed at taking advantage of the chaos in England. The mayor, John Drury, was killed in this raid. It thereafter became an established tradition, which survives to this day, that the Mayor of Sandwich wears a black robe mourning this ignoble deed. Margaret, in association with Br\u00e9z\u00e9, became the object of scurrilous rumours and vulgar ballads. Public indignation was so high that Margaret, with great reluctance, was forced to give the Duke of York's kinsman Richard Neville, 16th Earl of Warwick, a commission to keep the sea for three years. He already held the post of Captain of Calais.\nWhile Margaret was attempting to raise further support for the Lancastrian cause in Scotland, her principal commander, Henry Beaufort, 3rd Duke of Somerset, gained a major victory for her at the Battle of Wakefield on 30 December 1460 by defeating the combined armies of the Duke of York and the Earl of Salisbury. Both men were beheaded and their heads displayed on the gates of the city of York. As Margaret was in Scotland at the time of the battle, it was impossible that she issued the orders for their execution, despite popular belief to the contrary. Next was the Second Battle of St Albans (at which she was present) on 17 February 1461. In this battle, she defeated the Yorkist forces of Richard Neville, 16th Earl of Warwick, and recaptured her husband. After this battle, she ordered the execution of two Yorkist prisoners of war, William Bonville, 1st Baron Bonville, the rival of the loyal Lancastrian, the Earl of Devon, and Sir Thomas Kyriell. Both men had kept watch over King Henry, a prisoner to Warwick, to keep him out of harm's way during the battle. The king had promised the two knights immunity, but Margaret gainsaid him and ordered their execution by decapitation. It is alleged that she put the men on trial with her son presiding. \"Fair son\", she allegedly asked, \"what death shall these knights die?\" Prince Edward replied that their heads should be cut off, despite the king's pleas for mercy.\nSojourn to France.\nThe Lancastrian army was beaten at the Battle of Towton on 29 March 1461 by the son of the late Duke of York, the future Edward IV of England, who deposed King Henry and proclaimed himself king. Margaret was determined to win back her son's inheritance and fled with him into Wales and later Scotland. Finding her way to France, she made an ally of her cousin, King Louis XI of France, and at his instigation, she allowed an approach from Edward's former supporter, Richard Neville, Earl of Warwick, who had fallen out with his former friend as a result of Edward's marriage to Elizabeth Woodville, and was now seeking revenge for the loss of his political influence. Warwick's daughter, Anne Neville, was married to Margaret's son Edward, Prince of Wales, in order to cement the alliance, and Margaret insisted that Warwick return to England to prove himself before she followed. He did so, restoring Henry VI briefly to the throne on 3 October 1470.\nFinal defeat at Tewkesbury.\nBy the time Margaret, her son and daughter-in-law Anne were ready to follow Warwick back to England, the tables had again turned in favour of the Yorkists, and the Earl was defeated and killed by the returning King Edward IV in the Battle of Barnet on 14 April 1471. Margaret was forced to lead her own army at the Battle of Tewkesbury on 4 May 1471, at which the Lancastrian forces were defeated and her seventeen-year-old son Edward of Westminster was killed. The circumstances of Edward's death have never been made clear; it is not known whether he was killed in the actual fighting or executed after the battle by the Duke of Clarence. Over the previous ten years, Margaret had gained a reputation for aggression and ruthlessness, but following her defeat at Tewkesbury and the death of her only son, she was completely broken in spirit. After she was taken captive by William Stanley at the end of the battle, Margaret was imprisoned by the order of King Edward. It is said that Stanley informed Margaret of her son's death. Once she learned of this, she \"had to be bodily dragged from the priory where she was hiding.\" She was sent first to Wallingford Castle and then was transferred to the more secure Tower of London. Henry VI was also imprisoned in the Tower in the wake of Tewkesbury and he died there on the night of 21 May; the cause of his death is unknown, though regicide was suspected, specifically smothering in his sleep. In 1472 she was placed in the custody of her former lady-in-waiting Alice Chaucer, Duchess of Suffolk, where she remained until ransomed by Louis XI of France in 1475.\nFinal years and death.\nMargaret lived in France for seven years as a poor relation of the King. She was hosted by Francis de Vignolles and died, impoverished, in his castle of Dampierre-sur-Loire, near Anjou on 25 August 1482 at the age of 52. Although her exact cause of death is unknown while living in poverty, her importance was never doubted. Her inheritance was given to King Louis XI of France. This was a term of agreement when she was ransomed from the English. She was entombed next to her parents in Angers Cathedral, but her remains were removed and scattered by revolutionaries who ransacked the cathedral during the French Revolution.\nLegacy.\nMany letters written by Margaret during her tenure as queen consort are still extant. One was written to the Corporation of London regarding injuries inflicted on her tenants at the manor of Enfield, which comprised part of her dower lands. Another letter was written to the Archbishop of Canterbury. Margaret's letters, which typically began with the words \"By the Quene\", are compiled in a book edited by Cecil Munro published for the Camden Society in 1863.\nElizabeth Woodville (born ca 1437), later Queen of England as the wife of Margaret's husband's rival, King Edward IV, purportedly served Margaret of Anjou as a maid of honour. However, the evidence is too scanty to permit historians to establish this with absolute certainty; several women at Margaret's court bore the name Elizabeth or Isabella Grey.\nDepictions in popular culture.\nIn William Shakespeare.\nMargaret is a major character in William Shakespeare's first tetralogy of History plays. \"Henry VI, Part 1\", \"Part 2\", \"Part 3\" and \"Richard III\". She is the only character to appear alive in all four plays, but due to the length of the plays, many of her lines are usually cut in modern adaptations. Shakespeare portrays Margaret as an intelligent, ruthless woman who easily dominates her husband and fiercely vies for power with her enemies. In \"Henry VI, Part 2\" Margaret has an affair with the Duke of Suffolk and mourns his death by carrying around his severed head. In \"Henry VI, Part 3\" Richard Plantagenet Duke of York famously calls her \"She-wolf of France/ but worse than wolves of France/ Whose tongue more poisons than the adder's tooth!\" Later, she personally stabs the Duke of York on the battlefield after humiliatingly taunting him and becomes suicidal when her son Edward is killed in front of her. Although in reality, Margaret spent the rest of her life outside England after the death of her husband and son, Shakespeare has her return to the court in \"Richard III\". Margaret serves as a Cassandra-like prophetess; in her first appearance she dramatically curses the majority of the nobles for their roles in the downfall of the House of Lancaster. All of her curses come to pass as the noblemen are betrayed and executed by Richard of Gloucester, and each character reflects on her curse before his execution. Shakespeare had famously described Margaret: \"How ill-beseeming is it in thy sex/ To triumph like an Amazonian trull/ Upon their woes whom Fortune captivates\".\nMargaret's prominence in Shakespeare has led many theatre-makers to interpret the story with her at the centre, drawing from the plays she is featured in. Being described as a powerful queen, Shakespeare writes her a crucial role for the action that unfolds in the War of the Roses. An adaptation called \"Margaret of Anjou\" by Elizabeth Schafer and Philippa Kelly was performed in 2016 in London by By Jove Theatre Company and an adaptation of the three Henry VI plays and Richard III entitled \"War of the Roses\" by Eric Ting and Philippa Kelly at California Shakespeare Theatre in 2018 gave Margaret great prominence. In 2018, the Royal Exchange Theatre in Manchester premiered \"Queen Margaret\", using all the lines spoken by Margaret over the four plays with additional material by playwright Jeanie O'Hare.\nIn historical fiction.\nMargaret of Anjou appears in many novels of historical fiction.\nMargaret is the main subject of:\nMargaret also appears as a secondary or minor character in:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47412", "revid": "36987690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47412", "title": "Amperage", "text": ""}
{"id": "47413", "revid": "47238792", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47413", "title": "Amp", "text": "Amp or AMP may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "47418", "revid": "36506559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47418", "title": "Group psychotherapy", "text": "Form of psychotherapy treatment\nGroup psychotherapy or group therapy is a form of psychotherapy in which one or more therapists treat a small group of clients together as a group. The term can legitimately refer to any form of psychotherapy when delivered in a group format, including art therapy, cognitive behavioral therapy or interpersonal therapy, but it is usually applied to psychodynamic group therapy where the group context and group process is explicitly utilized as a mechanism of change by developing, exploring and examining interpersonal relationships within the group.\nThe broader concept of \"group therapy\" can be taken to include any helping process that takes place in a group, including support groups, skills training groups (such as anger management, mindfulness, relaxation training or social skills training), and psychoeducation groups. The differences between psychodynamic groups, activity groups, support groups, problem-solving and psychoeducational groups have been discussed by psychiatrist Charles Montgomery. Other, more specialized forms of group therapy would include non-verbal expressive therapies such as art therapy, dance therapy, or music therapy.\nHistory.\nThe founders of group psychotherapy in the United States were Joseph H. Pratt, Trigant Burrow and Paul Schilder. All three of them were active and working at the East Coast in the first half of the 20th century. In 1932 Jacob L. Moreno presented his work on group psychotherapy to the American Psychiatric Association, and co-authored a monograph on the subject. After World War II, group psychotherapy was further developed by Moreno, Samuel Slavson, Hyman Spotnitz, Irvin Yalom, and Lou Ormont. Yalom's approach to group therapy has been very influential not only in the USA but across the world.\nAn early development in group therapy was the T-group or training group (sometimes also referred to as sensitivity-training group, human relations training group or encounter group), a form of group psychotherapy where participants (typically, between eight and 15 people) learn about themselves (and about small group processes in general) through their interaction with each other. They use feedback, problem solving, and role play to gain insights into themselves, others, and groups. It was pioneered in the mid-1940s by Kurt Lewin and Carl Rogers and his colleagues as a method of learning about human behavior in what became the National Training Laboratories (also known as the NTL Institute) that was created by the Office of Naval Research and the National Education Association in Bethel, Maine, in 1947.\nMoreno developed a specific and highly structured form of group therapy known as psychodrama (although the entry on psychodrama claims it is not a form of group therapy). Another recent development in the theory and method of group psychotherapy based on an integration of systems thinking is Yvonne Agazarian's systems-centered therapy (SCT), which sees groups functioning within the principles of system dynamics. Her method of \"functional subgrouping\" introduces a method of organizing group communication so it is less likely to react counterproductively to differences. SCT also emphasizes the need to recognize the phases of group development and the defenses related to each phase in order to best make sense and influence group dynamics.\nIn the United Kingdom group psychotherapy initially developed independently, with pioneers S. H. Foulkes and Wilfred Bion using group therapy as an approach to treating combat fatigue in the Second World War. Foulkes and Bion were psychoanalysts and incorporated psychoanalysis into group therapy by recognising that transference can arise not only between group members and the therapist but also among group members. Furthermore, the psychoanalytic concept of the unconscious was extended with a recognition of a group unconscious, in which the unconscious processes of group members could be acted out in the form of irrational processes in group sessions. Foulkes developed the model known as group analysis and the Institute of Group Analysis, while Bion was influential in the development of group therapy at the Tavistock Clinic.\nBion's approach is comparable to social therapy, first developed in the United States in the late 1970s by Lois Holzman and Fred Newman, which is a group therapy in which practitioners relate to the group, not its individuals, as the fundamental unit of development. The task of the group is to \"build the group\" rather than focus on problem solving or \"fixing\" individuals.\nIn Argentina an independent school of group analysis stemmed from the work and teachings of Swiss-born Argentine psychoanalyst Enrique Pichon-Rivi\u00e8re. This thinker conceived of a group-centered approach which, although not directly influenced by Foulkes' work, was fully compatible with it.\nTherapeutic principles.\nIrvin Yalom proposed a number of therapeutic factors (originally termed \"curative factors\" but renamed \"therapeutic\" factors in the 5th edition of \"The Theory and Practice of Group Psychotherapy\" (1st edition 1970, 5th edition 2005).\nThe recognition of shared experiences and feelings among group members and that these may be widespread or universal human concerns, serves to remove a group member's sense of isolation, validate their experiences, and raise self-esteem\nThe group is a place where members can help each other, and the experience of being able to give something to another person can lift the member's self esteem and help develop more adaptive coping styles and interpersonal skills.\nIn a mixed group that has members at various stages of development or recovery, a member can be inspired and encouraged by another member who has overcome the problems with which they are still struggling.\nWhile this is not strictly speaking a psychotherapeutic process, members often report that it has been very helpful to learn factual information from other members in the group. For example, about their treatment or about access to services.\nMembers often unconsciously identify the group therapist and other group members with their own parents and siblings in a process that is a form of transference specific to group psychotherapy. The therapist's interpretations can help group members gain understanding of the impact of childhood experiences on their personality, and they may learn to avoid unconsciously repeating unhelpful past interactive patterns in present-day relationships.\nThe group setting provides a safe and supportive environment for members to take risks by extending their repertoire of interpersonal behaviour and improving their social skills\nOne way in which group members can develop social skills is through a modeling process, observing and imitating the therapist and other group members. For example, sharing personal feelings, showing concern, and supporting others.\nIt has been suggested that this is the primary therapeutic factor from which all others flow. Humans are herd animals with an instinctive need to belong to groups, and personal development can only take place in an interpersonal context. A cohesive group is one in which all members feel a sense of belonging, acceptance, and validation.\nLearning that one has to take responsibility for one's own life and the consequences of one's decisions.\nCatharsis is the experience of relief from emotional distress through the free and uninhibited expression of emotion. When members tell their story to a supportive audience, they can obtain relief from chronic feelings of shame and guilt.\nGroup members achieve a greater level of self-awareness through the process of interacting with others in the group, who give feedback on the member's behaviour and impact on others.\nThis factor overlaps with interpersonal learning but refers to the achievement of greater levels of insight into the genesis of one's problems and the unconscious motivations that underlie one's behaviour.\nSettings.\nGroup therapy can form part of the therapeutic milieu of a psychiatric in-patient unit or ambulatory psychiatric partial hospitalization (also known as day hospital treatment).\nIn addition to classical \"talking\" therapy, group therapy in an institutional setting can also include group-based expressive therapies such as drama therapy, psychodrama, art therapy, and non-verbal types of therapy such as music therapy and dance/movement therapy.\nGroup psychotherapy is a key component of milieu therapy in a therapeutic community. The total environment or milieu is regarded as the medium of therapy, all interactions and activities regarded as potentially therapeutic and are subject to exploration and interpretation, and are explored in daily or weekly community meetings. However, interactions between the culture of group psychotherapeutic settings and the more managerial norms of external authorities may create 'organizational turbulence' which can critically undermine a group's ability to maintain a safe yet challenging 'formative space'. Academics at the University of Oxford studied the inter-organizational dynamics of a national democratic therapeutic community over a period of four years; they found external steering by authorities eroded the community's therapeutic model, produced a crisis, and led to an intractable conflict which resulted in the community's closure.\nA form of group therapy has been reported to be effective in psychotic adolescents and recovering addicts. Projective psychotherapy uses an outside text such as a novel or motion picture to provide a \"stable delusion\" for the former cohort and a safe focus for repressed and suppressed emotions or thoughts in the latter. Patient groups read a novel or collectively view a film. They then participate collectively in the discussion of plot, character motivation and author motivation. In the case of films, sound track, cinematography and background are also discussed and processed. Under the guidance of the therapist, defense mechanisms are bypassed by the use of signifiers and semiotic processes. The focus remains on the text rather than on personal issues. It was popularized in the science fiction novel, \"Red Orc's Rage\".\nGroup therapy is now often utilized in private practice settings.\nGroup analysis has become widespread in Europe, and especially the United Kingdom, where it has become the most common form of group psychotherapy. Interest from Australia, the former Soviet Union and the African continent is also growing.\nPsychedelic-assisted group psychotherapy can be more cost-efficient in comparison to individual psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy models, because therapists can split the costs among all participants of the group.\nResearch on effectiveness.\nA 2008 meta-analysis found that individual therapy may be slightly more effective than group therapy initially, but this difference seems to disappear after 6 months. There is clear evidence for the effectiveness of group psychotherapy for depression: a meta-analysis of 48 studies showed an overall effect size of 1.03, which is clinically highly significant. Similarly, a meta-analysis of five studies of group psychotherapy for adult sexual abuse survivors showed moderate to strong effect sizes, and there is also good evidence for effectiveness with chronic traumatic stress in war veterans.\nThere is less robust evidence of good outcomes for patients with borderline personality disorder, with some studies showing only small to moderate effect sizes. The authors comment that these poor outcomes might reflect a need for additional support for some patients, in addition to the group therapy. This is borne out by the impressive results obtained using mentalization-based treatment, a model that combines dynamic group psychotherapy with individual psychotherapy and case management.\nMost outcome research is carried out using time-limited therapy with diagnostically homogenous groups. However, long-term intensive interactional group psychotherapy assumes diverse and diagnostically heterogeneous group membership, and an open-ended time scale for therapy. Good outcomes have also been demonstrated for this form of group therapy.\nComputer-supported group therapy.\nResearch on computer-supported and computer-based interventions has increased significantly since the mid-1990s. For a comprehensive overview of current practices see: Computer-supported psychotherapy.\nSeveral feasibility studies examined the impact of computer-, app- and media-support on group interventions. Most investigated interventions implemented short rationales, which usually were based on principles of cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT). Most research focussed on:\nWhile the evidence base for group therapy is very limited, preliminary research in individual therapy suggests possible increases of treatment efficiency or effectiveness. Further, the use of app- or computer-based monitoring has been investigated several times. Reported advantages of the modern format include improved between-session transfer and patient-therapist-communication, as well as increased treatment transparency and intensity. Negative effects may occur in terms of dissonance due to non-compliance with online tasks, or the constriction of in-session group interaction. Last but not least, group phenomena might influence the motivation to engage with online tasks.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "47419", "revid": "50657842", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47419", "title": "Convenience store", "text": "Small store that stocks a range of everyday items\nA convenience store, convenience shop, bakkal, bodega, corner store, corner shop, superette or mini-mart is a small retail store that stocks a range of everyday items such as convenience food, groceries, beverages, tobacco products, lottery tickets, over-the-counter drugs, toiletries, newspapers and magazines under one roof.\nIn some jurisdictions, convenience stores (such as off-licences in the UK) are licensed to sell alcoholic drinks, although many other jurisdictions limit such beverages to those with relatively low alcohol content, like beer and wine. The stores may also offer money order and wire transfer services, along with the use of a fax machine or photocopier for a small per-copy cost. Some also sell tickets or recharge smart cards, e.g. Opus cards in Montreal, Canada, or include a small deli. They differ from general stores and village shops in that they are not in a rural location and are used as a convenient (hence their common name) supplement to larger stores.\nA convenience store may be part of a gas/petrol station, so customers can purchase goods while refuelling their vehicle. It may be located alongside a busy road, in an urban area, near a railway or railroad station or other transport hub. In some countries, convenience stores have long shopping hours and some remain open 24 hours.\nConvenience stores often charge significantly higher prices than conventional grocery stores or supermarkets, as they buy smaller quantities of inventory at higher per-unit prices from wholesalers. Customers benefit from their longer opening hours, more convenient and greater number of locations and shorter cashier lines.\nTerminology.\nA convenience store may also be called a bodega (New York City), carry out, cold store, corner shop, corner store (many parts of English-speaking Canada and New England), mini-market, mini-mart, party store (Michigan), deli or milk bar (Australia), dairy (New Zealand), superette (France, New Zealand, parts of Canada, and in parts of the US), a sp\u00e4ti (from 'sp\u00e4tkauf' (lit. 'buy-late') in Germany, a bakkal in Turkey, a konbini in Japan, based on the English loanword 'convenience', d\u00e9panneur or dep (used in Canada, primarily Quebec, in both English and French. It is a loanword from the French 'troubleshooter').\nProduct specialization.\nVarious types include, for example, liquor stores (off-licences-offices), mini-markets (mini-marts), general stores or party stores. Typically confectionery (sweets, ice cream, soft drinks), lottery tickets, newspapers and magazines are sold, although merchandise varies widely from store to store. Unless the outlet is a liquor store, the range of alcoholic beverages is likely to be limited (i.e. beer and wine) or non-existent. Most stores sell cigarettes and other tobacco products (e.g. cigarette papers, pipe tobacco, cigars and e-liquid for e-cigarettes). In many North American jurisdictions, tobacco products comprise the greatest portion of gross sales at convenience stores, between 25 percent and 35 percent.\nOnly food-forward convenience stores invest in their foodservice options to target customers wanting breakfast, dinner, fast food, or pizza. The retail strategy of Wawa, Casey's, Buc-ee\u2019s, and Sheetz is considered food-forward. A typical convenience store will sell varying degrees of food and grocery supplies, ranging from household products to prepackaged foods like the triangle \"British Rail sandwich\" and frozen burritos. Many convenience shops offer ready-to-eat food, such as breakfast sandwiches and fry-ups. Throughout Europe, it is now common for convenience stores to sell fresh French bread. A process of freezing parbaked bread allows easy shipment and baking in-store. Some shops have a delicatessen counter, offering custom-made sandwiches and baguettes. Others have racks offering fresh delivered or baked doughnuts. Some convenience stores have a self-service microwave oven for heating purchased food.\nFast food items are often available, with stores offering such food either under its owner banner or in partnership with a fast-food chain maintaining a counter in the store. To save space, food is not prepared in the store. Instead, these counters offer a limited menu of items delivered several times a day from a local branch of the restaurant, with items intended to be served hot either kept hot under a warming device or reheated as ordered.\nConvenience stores may also sell automobile-related items, such as motor oil, maps and car kits. Often toiletries and other hygiene products are stocked, as well as sanitary products and contraception. They are found near gasoline and train stations, but also can be stand-alone stores. Stores may carry apparel, home furnishings, CDs, and DVDs. Some stores offer money orders and wire transfer services. They may carry small appliances, as well as other household items such as coolers and backpacks. Convenience stores have also been known to carry candles, stationery, artwork, and crockery.\nConvenience stores may be combined with other services, such as general stores and pawn shops, a ticket counter for purchasing railway tickets, a post office counter, or gasoline pumps. In Asian countries like Japan or Taiwan, convenience stores are more common because of the higher population density.\nStores often stock fast-moving consumer goods. Items with a high turnover are preferred over items with a lower sales rate. The smaller convenience stores typically have few perishable items because it is not economically viable to rotate perishables frequently with a low number of staff. Smaller convenience stores also do not generate the business needed to sustain food spoilage rates typical of grocery stores or supermarkets. As such, products with a long shelf life are the rule, unless a product is specifically aimed at attracting customers on the chance they may buy something profitable, too.\nDifferences from supermarkets.\nAlthough larger, newer convenience stores may have a wide range of items, the selection is still limited compared to supermarkets, and in many stores only one or two choices are available. Prices in a convenience store are often higher than those at a supermarket, mass merchandise store or auto supply store, as convenience stores order smaller quantities of inventory at higher per-unit prices from wholesalers. Some convenience stores are similar to corner markets, but often have less variety in food.\nProduct containers in a convenience store are often smaller with reduced product quantity to allow more products on the store shelves. This reduces the apparent cost differences between full-size packaging in supermarkets. Reduced packaging also reduces waste when a traveller such as a hotel guest does not want to or cannot carry leftover product with them when they depart.\nThe average U.S. convenience store has a sales area of . New stores average about of sales area and about of non-sales area\u2014a nod to retailers recognising the importance of creating destinations within the store that require additional space\u2014whether coffee islands, food service areas with seating, or financial services kiosks. Convenience stores have expanded their offerings over the last few years, with stores becoming a part-supermarket, restaurant, gas station and even a bank or drug store.\nIn the United States, convenience stores are sometimes the only businesses near an interstate highway exit where drivers can buy any kind of food or drink for miles. Most of the profit margin from these stores comes from beer, liquor and cigarettes. Although those three categories themselves usually yield lower margins per item, the sales volume in them generally compensates for it. Profits per item are much higher on deli items (bags of ice, chicken, etc.), but sales are generally lower. In some countries, convenience stores have longer shopping hours, some being open 24 hours.\nBy country.\nAustralia.\nThe Australasian Association of Convenience Stores (AACS), the peak body for Australian convenience stores, defines a convenience store as a \"retail business with the primary emphasis placed on providing the public with a convenient location to quickly purchase from an array of consumable products, predominantly food and beverages, services as well as petrol.\" The product mix includes: food to go, beverages, dispensed/barista coffee, snacks (including confectionery), tobacco, basic groceries, ice, petrol and carwash. Stores may offer services such as ATMs, \"click &amp; collect\", gas bottle exchange, money transfer and lottery tickets. A key feature of convenience stores is their extended hours of operation. Many are open 24 hours a day, seven days a week.\nThe majority of convenience stores in Australia are small businesses, being either independently owned or operated under franchise or licence agreement. The industry comprises over 6,000 stores and employs well over 40,000 people as of mid-2018. The Australian convenience channel merchandise sales are valued at $8.4 billion (excluding petrol sales) according to the AACS State of the Industry Report 2017. Australia has a flourishing convenience industry with a number of well-known convenience brands including: 7-Eleven, Ampol, NightOwl, Ezymart, BP, APCO, Reddy Express, OTR, Viva Energy, Freedom Fuels and Puma Energy.\nCanada.\nAlimentation Couche-Tard Inc., which operates Couche-Tard, Provi-Soir, D\u00e9panneur 7, Circle K, Mac's, Winks, and Becker's, is the largest convenience store chain in Canada and receives its products through Core-Mark International, a North American distribution company specializing in fresh convenience. Another large chain is Quickie Mart (whose name predates the fictitious \"Kwik-E-Mart\" featured on \"The Simpsons\"). The world's largest convenience retailer, 7-Eleven, has about 500 Canadian locations from British Columbia to Ontario. Worldwide, the highest number of the chain's Slurpee beverages are sold in Winnipeg, Manitoba and the city has been awarded the title of the \"Slurpee Capital of the World\" for many years running. Marketing itself as \"more than just a convenience store\", there are over 260 Hasty Market locations throughout Ontario and one in British Columbia.\nIn addition to chain convenience stores, there are also many independently owned convenience stores in Canada.\nConvenience stores are also commonly referred to as \"corner stores\", \"mini-marts\" or \"variety stores\" in some regions of Canada. In the French-speaking province of Quebec, a convenience store is known as a \"d\u00e9panneur\" or \"dep\" for short, even among some when speaking in English.\nChile.\nChilean convenience stores are typically found at gas stations in most urban and near-urban areas on highways. Examples include Punto/Pronto (owned by Copec), Spacio 1 (Petrobras, formerly called Tigermarket and On The Run before Esso Chile was owned by Petrobras), Va y Ven (Terpel), Upa!, Upita! and Select (from Shell).\nOther brands operating mostly in downtowns and middle- to upper-class neighborhoods are Ok! Market (owned by Unimarc), Big John and Oxxo (owned by FEMSA) and some small-scale \"minisupermercados\" akin to mom and pop stores.\nCosta Rica.\nIn Costa Rica, family-owned and operated convenience stores called \"pulper\u00edas\" have been common since the 1900s, and there are many of those stores in every neighbourhood.\nIn the 2010s, modern convenience stores were introduced, mainly by the AMPM company. Competitors launched brands such as Musmanni Mini Super (a chain of bakery stores promoted to convenience stores), Vindi (operated by AutoMercado supermarket company) and Fresh Market (operated by AMPM in a format appealing to prosperous neighborhoods).\nFinland.\nIn Finland, convenience stores are referred to as kiosks, except for those found inside service stations, which are referred to simply as stores. The biggest convenience store chain is R-Kioski, with over 560 kiosks across the country, which are all franchise-licensed businesses. There are some independent convenience stores that use the word Kymppi or number 10 in their business name, which is reminiscent of a former large convenience store chain called 10-Kioski, which vanished around the early 2000s. Kymppi is a spoken colloquial word for number 10 (\"kymmenen\") in Finnish.\nSmaller towns often have independent kiosks. Convenience stores at service stations are run by either the station's parent oil company such as Shell or by either of the two major retail corporations in Finland, Kesko or S Group. Virtually all staffed service stations have a small convenience store.\nFrance.\nIn France chain convenience stores are referred to as , implying they are mini-supermarkets. Brands include Carrefour City, Casino, Coccimarket, Monop', Franprix, G20, Leader Price Express, March\u00e9 Plus, Sherpa, Sitis, Spar, Utile, and Vival (see \"Magasin de proximit\u00e9\").\nSome other, independent convenience shops are referred to as \"Arabe du coin\" \u2013 (transl.\u2009Arab on the corner) due to many Arabic-speaking immigrants from Northwest Africa who work in this sector of the economy. These shops often stay open later than the or groceries, even on public holidays. Shop owners consider the name improper, especially those who come from other ethnic groups, including Imazighen.\nGermany.\nBerliners lovingly refer to the small neighbourhood shops with late opening times found throughout the city (often operated by families with immigrant roots, akin to France) as \"Sp\u00e4ti\" (translating to \"Lat(e)y\", derived from \"Sp\u00e4tkauf\", \"late purchase\").\nIn North Rhine-Westfalia people call the same kind of shop either \"Kiosk\", like the Finnish, (using the word in a way differing from the rest of Germany, where \"Kiosk\" usually means only stall-like buildings or other very small window-selling shops which are not entered by customers and which sell either newspapers and magazines or snacks and cigarettes, or a combination of these, but no household goods) or \"Trinkhalle\" (\"drinking hall\"), although they are not pubs, as the name might suggest.\nA name used for market stalls and also in some regions for little shops is \"B\u00fcdchen\" (from \"Bude\", \"stall, hut, room\"); where no special local name for them exists, often just the equivalents of \"small shop\" or \"corner shop\" are used (\"der kleine Laden/ das L\u00e4dchen/ das L\u00e4dchen an der Ecke\").\nSnack shops integrated into petrol stations can also have long opening hours, but in contrast to the neighbourhood \"Sp\u00e4ti\"-type shops, petrol station shops nowadays are usually part of large retail chains.\n\"Tante-Emma-Laden\" (aunt-Emma-shop) is used as a nostalgic term for old-fashioned general stores (typically family owned), the historic predecessors of modern discounters and supermarkets which they were replaced by (similar to mom-and-pop stores).\nGreece.\nNew-generation convenience stores in Greece represent a growing retail format that blends elements of traditional mini-markets, kiosks, caf\u00e9s, and supermarkets. These hybrid stores are typically small to medium-sized and offer a wide range of products and services, often operating 24/7. The model has gained significant popularity in urban areas, particularly in cities like Thessaloniki and Athens, and is expanding nationwide.\nHistorically, everyday consumer needs in Greece were met by a combination of small kiosks (peripteron), neighborhood grocery stores, and larger supermarket chains. However, changes in urban lifestyles, consumer preferences for convenience, and increased demand for extended operating hours led to the emergence of a new retail model: the multi-purpose convenience store.\nThese stores typically combine food and beverage retail (snacks, soft drinks, alcohol, cigarettes), coffee and takeaway services, packaged goods and basic groceries, personal care items. Occasionally, services such as parcel pick-up/drop-off or bill payments. Most stores follow a self-service layout, modern branding, and emphasize speed, accessibility, and affordability. Most include in-store coffee stations with branded blends.\nThe rise of this new retail format is best illustrated by brands such as 4all Stores based in Thessaloniki, now operating over 140 locations across Greece. Combines coffee service, mini-market goods, and convenience store items. Known for aggressive franchising and expansion into Athens.\nThe Greek convenience retail sector has grown substantially in recent years, both in terms of store count and revenue. According to industry estimates the small-format retail sector reached an estimated \u20ac5.15 billion turnover in 2023.\nThese stores have become a key part of the daily urban routine, especially for younger consumers and working professionals. They have gradually replaced the role of the traditional kiosk (peripteron) and psilikatzidikon, adapting to new lifestyles while maintaining accessibility and affordability.\nIndia.\nIn India, \"mom-and-pop\" convenience stores are called kirana stores and constitute part of the traditional food retail system. Kirana are typically family-owned stores that operate in fixed locations and carry both basic food and non-food items.\nIndonesia.\nSupermarket-styled convenience stores in Indonesia (commonly known as \"minimarket\") are mostly scattered around the towns. Due to local government restrictions in Indonesia, usually convenience stores may only be built at least from the nearest traditional market. This allows traditional markets to continue selling local goods, but also greatly lowers the opportunities for profit by those who seek to build or own a convenience store by reducing the eligibility of property to be developed into a convenience store. This is especially true in small towns and rural areas. As a result, convenience stores in rural areas are often built side-by-side or at maximum within of each other.\nThe two major national convenience store chains in Indonesia are Indomaret and Alfamart, both of which serve almost all areas within the country with around 22,000 and 18,000 stores in 2023, respectively. Foreign chains like Family Mart, Circle K or Lawson, on the other hand, have their stores in big cities and cater to a specific lifestyle instead of focusing on \"convenience\". To be classified as a convenience store, the store should occupy no more than of service area; in some local residences, the limit is .\nThe Indonesian government also regulates the convenience store license process, so it can only be bought by franchisees, using a different name and different brand, or classifying it as cafeteria. A convenience store with a cafeteria license is only allowed to sell a maximum 10% of its service space for non-food/beverages product. This type of convenience store often puts lawn chairs and a desk as a decoy in front of their stores, while offering the same range of products as a holder of a mini market license.\nThere are also many small neighborhood stores, known as \"toko kelontong\" or \"warung\". Some are sponsored by a network of stores, mostly owned by cigarette companies (such as DRP by Djarum, GGSP by Gudang Garam, KPP by KT&amp;G, or SRC by Sampoerna) or tech companies (such as Mitra Bukalapak or Mitra Tokopedia).\nIndomaret and Alfamart itself are also offered as options for online payment methods, offering conveniences of transactions without needing to use internet banking, ATM, or debit and credit cards. Customers will have to select Alfamart or Indomaret as their payment option, and they will have to complete the payment with the store's cashier\nIsrael.\nIn Israel, a convenience store is often called a makolet (\u05de\u05db\u05dc\u05ea). Many convenience stores in Israel are open 24/6, and are closed on Saturday for Shabbat.\nJapan.\n, often shortened to , developed at a tremendous rate in Japan. 7-Eleven Japan, while struggling to localize their service in the 1970s to 1980s, evolved its point of sale-based business, until ultimately, Seven &amp; I Holdings Co., the parent company of 7-Eleven Japan, acquired 7-Eleven (US) from Southland Corporation in 1991. Japanese-style convenience stores also heavily influenced those stores in other Asian regions or countries, such as Mainland China, Taiwan, Thailand, and South Korea.\nConvenience stores rely heavily on the point of sale. Customers' ages and gender, as well as tomorrow's weather forecast, are important data. Stores place all orders online. As store floor space is limited, they must be careful in choosing what brands to sell. In many cases, several stores from the same chain do business in neighboring areas. This strategy makes distribution to each store cheaper, as well as making multiple deliveries per day possible. Generally, food goods are delivered to each store two to five times a day from factories. Since products are delivered as needed, stores do not need large stock areas.\nAccording to the Japan Franchise Association's data for July 2021, there are 55,931 convenience stores in Japan. 7-Eleven leads the market with 12,467 stores, followed by: Lawson (9,562) and FamilyMart (7,604). Other operators include Circle K Sunkus (acquired by Family Mart in 2016; now defunct), Daily Yamazaki, Ministop, Am/Pm Japan (acquired by Family Mart in 2009; now defunct), Poplar, Coco Store (acquired by Family Mart in 2015; now defunct) and Seicomart. Many items available in larger supermarkets can be found in Japanese convenience stores, though the selection is usually smaller. As well, the following additional services are also commonly available:\nSome stores also sell charging service for electronic money and ATM services for credit card or consumer finance. Items not commonly sold include: Slurpees, lottery tickets, car supplies and gasoline.\nKonbini also offer customers the option of making konbini payments (often also referred to as just konbini), an offline payment solution that allows customers without credit or debit cards to make online purchases. A consumer can buy online services or goods, such as video games on Steam or tickets for events. By selecting konbini as payment method at the checkout, the consumer receives a unique transaction code with an expiration date. Depending on the brand (i.e. 7\u201311 is slightly different from Family Mart), consumers will have to go to any convenience store and finalise the purchase, which can be either at the cashier or at the kiosk. Multiple providers offer konbini as checkout option for foreign companies selling online in Japan, such as Adyen, Degica and Ingenico ePayments.\nIn 1974, Japan had 1,000 convenience stores. In 1996, Japan had 47,000 convenience stores and the number was increasing by 1,500 annually. Peter Landers of the \"Associated Press\" said that the computerised distribution system allows Japanese convenience stores to stock a wider variety of products, allowing them to be more competitive in the marketplace. Because of this technology and the consequent ease of maintaining the right amount of stock, Japan can support one convenience store for every 2,000 people, while in the United States it is one per 8,000 people. Another contributing factor to the widespread proliferation of convenience stores is that, because Japan has a lower crime rate, store owners are not reluctant to keep stores open at late hours in the night and customers are not reluctant to shop during those times.\nKazakhstan.\nIn Kazakhstan, convenience stores are often referred to as (\"dukend\u0435r\"), which translates to \"stores\" or \"shops\" in Kazakh. Specifically, convenience stores offering a wide range of groceries and everyday items can be (\"qosymsha dukender\"), meaning \"daily goods store\".\nMajor convenience store chains like Magnum, Small, Atak, Dostyk, Alser, Ramek, Svetofor, and Maxi dominate the retail landscape, offering a wide variety of products such as groceries, beverages, snacks, and housold essentials. Magnum is one of the largest, known for its affordability and wide selection, with stores across Almaty and Astana. Small provides a quick shopping experience with a focus on fresh food, while Atak is recognized for its budget-friendly prices and broad range of everyday items. Dostyk stands out for its emphasis on quality and local products, attracting loyal customers. Alser offers a convenient shopping experience with competitive pricing, and Ramek has grown in popularity due to its focus on fresh goods. Svetofor and Maxi cater to customers looking for discounted prices and a variety of options, with Svetofor offering large store formats for more extensive product selections.\nMalaysia.\nIn Malaysia, 7-Eleven is the market leader in convenience shops, with over 2,000 shops. Other convenience shops in the country are myNEWS.com, 99 Speedmart, KK Super Mart, Quick and Easy and MyMart (owned by Mydin). FamilyMart is also found in Malaysia and as of July 2020, has opened its 200th store in Malaysia with the goal of opening 1,000 stores by 2025, bringing the 'konbini' concept to Malaysia.\nConvenience stores are very popular among Malaysians, especially urban dwellers in Kuala Lumpur or other populated towns like Penang where the population density is higher. Its 24/7 policy allows Malaysians to have easy access to necessities or as an alternative hang-out area, especially since Malaysians love to go out for midnight supper at mamaks and eateries that also open late at night, as more and more Malaysians are beginning to work or go out late. The availability of fresh hot food or cold premade food is popular among young workers with less time to prepare food for themselves, as many have irregular work hours, especially in the city. It also eases the burden of families. Many Malaysians also enjoy the seasonal food that these stores provide. These stores can be found almost anywhere, especially in areas with a higher population density, such as city centres, condominiums, apartment complexes, office areas, residential areas, shop lots and petrol stations, although the store density is as high as Taiwan or Japan.\nItems sold at such convenience shops usually range from pre-made local food like nasi lemak, onigiri, buns, snacks, toiletries, drinks, a limited amount of alcohol, newspapers, magazines, slushies, cup noodles, ice cream, hot food, oden, game reload and mobile top up cards. Some also have the service of reloading Touch N' Go cards or ATMs. Most have a microwave oven and hot water boiler to heat food. Some have seasonal and limited food, desserts or special imported products and items, like FamilyMart importing strawberry Coca-Cola from Japan.\nMalaysia has sundry shops that sell daily items and perishables at lower prices, but unlike convenience shops, they are not open 24/7. Some of these sundry shops also sell traditional herbs and ingredients.\nMexico.\nOxxo is the largest chain in the country, with more than 15,000 stores around the country. Other convenience stores, such as Tiendas Extra, 7-Eleven, SuperCity, ampm, and Circle K, are also found in Mexico. The first convenience store in the country, Super 7 (now a 7-Eleven), was opened in 1976 in Monterrey, Nuevo Le\u00f3n. There are also some regional chains, like Amigo Express and CB Mas, that operate in Comarca Lagunera, Super Q and El Matador in Queretaro, Coyote in central Mexico, Kiosko in Colima and some locations in nearby states, and JV in northeastern Mexico. Stores sell fast food like coffee, hot dogs, nachos and prepaid cellphones between MXN$20 and MXN$500, mainly Telcel and Movistar, newspapers, magazines, and Panini products and other novelties.\n\"Miscel\u00e1neas\" (literally meaning \"place where miscellaneous items are sold\" and otherwise called \"tiendas de abarrotes\" (grocery store) in some parts of the country) are smaller, family-run convenience stores often found in central and southern Mexico. They operate in many locations, from rural communities to suburban residential neighborhoods, usually located in front of or below the family's residence. They often fulfill the role of neighborhood meeting points and places to disseminate community news. While offering a more limited, and sometimes varied, assortment of items than corporate chains, they fill a void in areas where corporations do not operate. Usually they sell homemade snacks such as tortas and sandwiches, made by the owners. They also provide items in smaller quantities than would be offered for sale in larger stores and markets; for example, selling single cigarettes along with full packs.\nMongolia.\nIn Mongolia, convenience shops (CU, Circle K etc.) are already common and continue to gain popularity, making the market increasingly saturated with retailers. Currently, CU is the market leader, with the largest number of stores and the highest reputation among customers.\nNew Zealand.\nIn New Zealand, convenience shops are commonly referred to as dairies and superettes. Dairies in New Zealand are generally independently owned and operated. The use of the term \"dairy\" to describe convenience shops was common in New Zealand by the late 1930s. Dairies carved out a niche in food retail by keeping longer trading hours than groceries and supermarkets \u2013 dairies were exempt from labour laws restricting trading hours and Saturday trading. With the deregulation of trading hours and in the wake of legislation in 1989 prohibiting sales of alcohol by dairies, the distinction between dairies, superettes and groceries has blurred.\nPeru.\nConvenience stores in Peru are typically independent corner stores called \"bodegas\" that include groceries, alcohol, services and phone booths. Other convenience stores are found at gas stations in urban and connecting areas on highways; examples include Listo! (owned by Primax) and Repshop (Repsol). Recently, Tambo+, owned by Corporaci\u00f3n Lindley S.A., has quickly become the biggest convenience store in the country with 300 stores opened in just two years. Mexican-owned Oxxo has plans to expand to Peru.\nPoland.\n\u017babka is one of the largest convenience stores in Poland. In 2022 Jaros\u0142aw Kaczy\u0144ski, leader of the Law and Justice party, said that the Polish ruling government might buy \u017babka convenience store from CVC Capital Partners.\nPhilippines.\nThere is a local version of convenience store in the Philippines, called the sari-sari store, that is located on almost every street, corner, residential area, and other public places around the country.\nAside from local convenience stores, other popular international convenience stores are present on almost every street, especially in urban areas. 7-Eleven is the largest convenience store chain in the country. It is run by the Philippine Seven Corporation (PSC). Its first store, located in Quezon City, opened in 1984, and has now approximately 2,285 branches.\nThere are also many branches of Uncle John's, operated by Robinsons Convenience Stores, Inc.; FamilyMart, operated and franchised by Udenna Corporation; and All Day Convenience Store, owned by Filipino entrepreneur and former Philippine Senator, Manny Villar. Lawson, Circle-K and Alfamart have also opened stores in the country.\nRussia.\nMajor brands of convenience stores in Russia are \"Pyatyorochka\" (\"little 5\") with over 10,000 shops functioning, \"Monetka\" (\"little coin\"), \"Magnit u doma\", \"Krasnoe i Beloe\" and \"Diksi\". However, Russians may occasionally use the word \"supermarket\": various convenience store chains used to position themselves as \"supermarkets\" throughout 1990's, such as now discontinued \"Sed'moy Kontinent\" (translates as \"the 7th Continent\") company.\n\"Pyatyorochka\" line of stores has self-checkout tills, as well as \"Perekryostok\" line of stores. Both brands belong to X5 Group and even have a mutually compatible \"club card\". However, many discounts/sales in both stores require buyers to have \"loyalty cards\" to unlock the wares' respective discounts.\nSingapore.\nMajor convenience shops in Singapore are 7-Eleven owned by Dairy Farm International Holdings and Cheers owned by NTUC Fairprice. Figures from the Singapore Department of Statistics showed that there are 338 7-Eleven shops and 91 Cheers outlets in 2004. Other convenience shops such as Myshop and One Plus appeared in 1983. Myshop belongs to a Japanese company, and One Plus belongs to Emporium Holdings.\nVarious reasons unique to Singapore have been given for the popularity of convenience shops. Convenience shops sell a wide range of imported goods, whereas minimarts and provision shops sell local products with a limited range of non-Asian products. Convenience shops are situated within housing estates, thus reducing consumers' travel time. Most families in Singapore are dual-income families. Since both spouses work, there is greater need for convenience in shopping for daily necessities. The 24-hour opening policy allows convenience shops to reach out to a larger group of consumers. First, the policy caters to the shopping needs of consumers who work shifts or have irregular working hours. Secondly, the policy caters to the increasing number of Singaporeans who keep late hours. A 2005 economic review by PwC reported that 54% of Singaporeans stayed up past midnight.\n7-Eleven.\n7-Eleven began the trend of convenience shops in Singapore when it opened its first shop in 1982 by Jardines, under a franchise agreement with Southland Corporation of the United States. Dairy Farm International Holdings acquired the chain from Jardines in 1989.\nThe number of 7-Eleven outlets continued to increase in 1984 while other chains were having difficulty expanding. One Plus was unable to expand due to the shortage of good sites. The original owners of the Myshop franchise, which had seven outlets, sold out to one of its suppliers due to a lack of demand.\nIn 1985, 7-Eleven faced difficulty in finding favourable locations and failed to meet its one-shop-a-month target. The situation improved in 1986 with a new Housing &amp; Development Board (HDB) tendering system, which allowed 7-Eleven to secure shops without having to bid too high a price. 7-Eleven shops are open 24 hours a day, seven days a week, including Sundays and public holidays. This 24/7 policy was seen as the reason that gave 7-Eleven its edge over its competitors.\nIn 1990, there was a rise in the number of shop thefts in 7-Eleven. The shoplifters were usually teenagers who stole small items such as chocolates, cigarettes and beer. In response to the increase in the number of thefts, 7-Eleven stepped up security measures, which successfully lowered the crime rate by 60%.\nCheers.\nStarted in 1999, Cheers is owned by local corporation NTUC FairPrice. Cheers has adopted 7-Eleven's 24/7 model and taken similar security measures to prevent cases of shoplifting. Convenience shop owners seeking franchising seem to prefer Cheers over 7-Eleven, probably due to its cheaper franchise fee.\nSouth Africa.\nIn South Africa's black townships \"spaza shops\" sell small goods, often out of the proprietors' homes. However these businesses face competition from large chain stores. Spaza shops owned by immigrants have also become a source of tension in townships.\nIn white, Indian and Coloured areas, the \"corner caf\u00e9,\" (sometimes pronounced as \"\"caffie\",\" also called a \"tea room\" in Durban) is a convenience store. In white areas these were often owned by Southern European migrants. These cafes are being superseded by convenience stores that are part of fuel service stations.\nSouth Korea.\nConvenience stores in the Republic of Korea date to 1982, when Lotte opened a store in Seoul. Stores saw growth after the 1988 Summer Olympics with the first 7-Eleven, and even since the 2010s where department stores and marts have struggled. As of the end of 2023, there are about 55,000 convenience stores in South Korea, and in Seoul, it has increased by about four times compared to 15 years ago as of 2021, expanding to the extent that almost every street has convenience stores. As of 2024, CU and GS25 are competing for the first or second place in market share with a slight gap in sales and number of stores, followed by 7-Eleven.\nConvenience stores in South Korea expanded quickly as the country experienced fast social change and a mix of traditional and modern lifestyles. Their growth was also supported by higher demand for ready-to-eat meals and more frequent use of these stores by younger consumers.Their growth was also supported by changes in consumer behavior in South Korea, especially as people adjusted their shopping habits in response to social and economic pressures.\nTaiwan\\.\nBoasting more than 10,000 convenience stores in an area of 35,980\u00a0km2 and a population of 23 million, Taiwan has Asia Pacific's and the world's second highest density of convenience stores per person after South Korea: one store per 2,065 people. With 4,665 7-Eleven stores, Taiwan also has the world's highest density of 7-Elevens per person: one store per 4,930 people. In Taipei, it is not unusual to see two 7-Elevens across the street or several of them within a few hundred meters of each other.\nTaiwan's second largest convenience store chain is FamilyMart with more than 3,000 locations. Also competing for customers are Hi-Life, a Taiwanese chain, and OK Mart, a local version of Circle K.\nBecause they are found everywhere, convenience stores in Taiwan provide services on behalf of financial institutions and government agencies, such as collection of city parking fees, utility bills, traffic violation fines, and credit card payments. Eighty percent of urban household shoppers in Taiwan visit a convenience store each week.\nTurkey.\nIn Turkey, convenience stores are often referred to as bakkal. Bakkal is a small, traditional retail shop specializing in the sale of non-perishable or semi-fresh food items, canned goods, beverages, and household cleaning products. In addition to food and cleaning supplies, many bakkals also offer basic personal care products, tobacco, and sometimes newspapers or lottery tickets.\nBakkals often serve as neighborhood convenience stores. Bakkals are typically family-owned and operated businesses that provide everyday necessities to residents within a specific neighborhood. Unlike supermarkets, bakkals often allow customers to purchase goods on credit, maintaining informal ledgers known as credit notebooks (veresiye defteri).\nTraditionally, the bakkal has held a central place in Turkish neighborhood life, functioning not only as a point of sale but also as a social hub where neighbors meet, converse, and exchange news. The bakkal is often characterized by personal service, familiarity with regular customers, and a strong presence in community life.\nIn recent decades, the number of bakkals has declined significantly due to the rise of large supermarket chains and discount retailers. These modern competitors benefit from economies of scale, wider product ranges, and lower prices, making it increasingly difficult for small independent bakkals to compete. Urban development, rising rent costs, and changing consumer habits have also contributed to the decline of the traditional bakkal. Despite these challenges, bakkals remain symbolic of Turkey\u2019s small-scale entrepreneurship and continue to operate in many neighborhoods, particularly in less urbanized areas.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe corner shop in the United Kingdom grew from the start of the Industrial Revolution, with large populations moving from the agricultural countryside to newly built model townships and later terraced housing in towns and cities. Corner shops were locally owned small businesses, started by entrepreneurs who often had other careers prior to establishing, such a trading business. Many well-known high street retail brands, such as Marks and Spencer, Sainsbury's and latterly Tesco, originated during the Victorian era as simple, family-owned corner shops.\nThe name corner shop originated because such shops are traditionally located on the corner of an intersection.\nThe reign of the corner shop and the weekly market started to fade post\u2013World War II, with the combination of the personal motor car and the introduction from the 1950s onwards of the American-originated supermarket format. The market shift in price and convenience led to the establishment of common trading brands operating as virtual franchises to win back the consumer, including: Budgens, Costcutter, Londis, Nisa and SPAR. There was also a consolidation of some shops under some larger corporate-owned brands, including One Stop.\nThe primary competition to this privately owned 'corner shop' model came from the network of consumer cooperatives which were created after the success of that created by the Rochdale Society of Equitable Pioneers in 1844. Rather than being owned by individuals, these shops were owned by their customer-members and, owing to their popularity, the number of co-operative shops had reached 1,439 by 1900. Co-operatives came about as a response to the problem of adulterated food which existed at the time, and later they enabled members to buy types of food that they would otherwise be unable to afford. At their peak in the 1950s, consumers' co-operatives accounted for approximately 20% of the UK grocery market; however with increasing competition this has decreased to around 6% in 2015.\nDue to a number of mergers over the years, the grocery co-operative sector in the UK is now predominately composed of the national The Co-operative Group and a few large regional co-operative societies such as the Midcounties Co-operative and Scotmid. Today, the majority of food retailing co-operatives societies brand their convenience shops as Co-op Food, and together they form the second-largest convenience shop chain in the UK and the largest by number of shops, with one in every UK postal code.\nFrom the late-1960s onwards, many such shops started to be owned by expatriate African-born Indians, expelled from their homelands by the newly independent countries' rulers (see Expulsion of Asians from Uganda). Under the Shops Act 1950, Sunday trading had been illegal for most traders, with exceptions only allowed for small shops selling perishable items (i.e. milk, bread, butter, fresh meat and vegetables), and most shops that were not off licences (i.e. selling alcohol) had to close at 20:00. The Sunday Trading Act 1994 allowed large-format shops over in size to open on Sunday for not more than six hours despite several proposals from the citizens to remove restrictions at different times.\nMore recently, due to a combination of competition laws and a lack of large-scale development space, many of the larger retail brands have now developed shop formats based around convenience shop and corner shop scale spaces, including Sainsbury's Local, Little Waitrose and Tesco Express.\nUnited States.\nIn-store convenience store sales grew 2.4%, reaching a record $195.0 billion in 2011. Combined with $486.9 billion in motor fuels sales, total convenience store sales in 2011 were $681.9 billion, or one out of every 22 dollars of the overall $15.04 trillion U.S. gross domestic product. In New York City, \"bodega\" has come to mean any convenience store or deli.\nThe first chain convenience store in the United States was opened in Dallas, Texas in 1927 by the Southland Ice Company, which eventually became 7-Eleven, the largest convenience store chain. Stores connected to a service station developed into a trend, celebrated by some progressive architects:\nIn 1939, a dairy owner named J.J. Lawson started a store at his dairy plant near Akron, Ohio, to sell his milk. The Lawson's Milk Company grew to a chain of stores, primarily in Ohio. Circle K, another large company-owned convenience store chain, was founded in 1951.\nSince that time, many different convenience store brands have developed, and their stores may either be corporate-owned or franchises. The items offered for sale tend to be similar despite store brand, and almost always include chips, milk, coffee, soft drinks, bread, snacks, ice cream, candy, gum, cigarettes, lip balm, condoms, phone cards, maps, magazines, newspapers, small toys, car supplies, feminine hygiene products, cat food, dog food and toilet paper. Other less common items include sandwiches, pizza, and frozen food. Nearly all convenience stores also have an automated teller machine (ATM), though other banking services are usually not available. State lottery tickets are also available at these stores.\nIn 1966, the US convenience store industry first recorded $1 billion in sales. By the end of the decade, the industry had recorded $3.5 billion a year in sales. The first 24-hour store opened in Las Vegas in 1963. By the late 1960s, the number of 24-hour convenience stores increased to meet the needs of a younger population and people who were working late night or early morning shifts.\nSome convenience stores in the US also sell gasoline. Only 2,500 stores had self-serve at the pump by 1969. It was not until the 1970s that retailers realized selling gasoline could be profitable and competitive. At the same time, two energy shortages in the decade had many service station owners stop selling fuel altogether since they made more money off of vehicle maintenance, while others decided to convert their garages into convenience stores, noting that they met a need and in some cases netted more profits than garages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn the gasoline service station may be seen the beginning of an important advance agent of decentralization by way of distribution and also the beginning of the establishment of the Broadacre City. Wherever the service station happens to be naturally located, these now crude and seemingly insignificant units will grow and expand into various distributing centers for merchandise of all sorts. They are already doing so in the Southwest to a great extent.\n Frank Lloyd Wright, \"The Disappearing City\", 1932\nIn 2011, there were approximately 47,195 gas stations with convenience stores that generated $326 billion in revenue. Of the 150,000 convenience stores in the country, 120,000[] of them are located at fuel stations, which sell approximately 80 percent of the fuels purchased in the country.\nPolicies regarding the sale of adult magazines vary, but generally larger chains (such as 7-Eleven and Casey's General Stores) do not sell these items, while smaller independent stores may do so. One notable exception is fast-growing regional chain Sheetz, which until the late 2010s sold some soft-core pornographic material such as \"Playboy\", \"Penthouse\", and \"Playgirl\". Sheetz ended this practice as part of a broader decision to end sales of all print media.\nBecause the laws regarding the sale of alcoholic beverages vary from state to state in the US, the availability of beer, wine, and liquor varies greatly. For example, while convenience stores in Alaska, Pennsylvania, and New Jersey cannot sell any kind of alcohol at all, stores in Nevada, New Mexico, and California may sell alcoholic beverages of any sort, while stores in Virginia, Idaho, or Oregon can sell beer and wine, but not liquor. Similar to grocery stores, convenience stores in New York can sell beer only, not wine or liquor. Altoona, Pennsylvania\u2013based Sheetz tried to find a loophole in 2007 by classifying part of one of their prototype stores in Altoona as a restaurant, which would permit alcohol sales. State courts in Pennsylvania promptly overruled this. State law requires restaurants to have on-site consumption, but Sheetz did not do this. Sheetz continues to sell alcohol in other states. In recent years, Sheetz has begun to sell both beer (in the form of walk-in \"beer caves\") and wine in most of their Pennsylvania stores as well.\nCrime.\nAmerican convenience stores are often targets of armed robbery. In some areas of the US it is not unusual for clerks to work behind bulletproof glass windows, even during daylight hours. Some convenience stores may limit access inside at night, requiring customers to approach a walk-up window to make purchases. The main dangers are that almost all convenience stores only have one person working night shift; most of the transactions are in cash; and easily resold merchandise, such as liquor, lottery tickets and cigarettes, are on site.\nMost convenience stores have a cash drop slot into a time-delay safe to limit the amount of cash on hand. Many have installed security cameras to help deter robberies and shoplifting. Because of their vulnerability to crime, nearly all convenience stores have a friendly relationship with the local police. To reduce burglaries when the store is closed, some convenience stores have bars on the windows.\nSimilar concepts.\nConvenience stores to some extent replaced the old-fashioned general store. They are similar to Australian milk bars, but unlike these are often franchises and not \"Mum and Dad\" small business operations. In Britain, corner shops in towns and village shops in the countryside served similar purposes and were the precursors to the modern European convenience shop (e.g. Spar). In the Canadian province of Quebec, \"d\u00e9panneurs\" (often referred to as \"deps\" in English) are often family-owned neighbourhood shops that serve similar purposes. Truck stops, also known as \"travel centers\", combine a shop offering similar goods with a convenience store with amenities for professional drivers of semi-trailer trucks. This may include fast food restaurants, showers and facilities for buying large quantities of diesel fuel. The equivalent in Europe is the motorway service station.\nNeighborhood grocery stores not big enough to be considered a supermarket often compete with convenience shops. For example, in Los Angeles, a local chain operates neighborhood grocery stores that fill a niche between a traditional supermarket and convenience shop. Because they stock fresh fruit and fresh meat and carry upwards of 5,000 items, they have a lot in common with the supermarket. Due to the relatively small store size, customers can get in and out conveniently or have purchases delivered. In Belgium, convenience shops known as night shops are only permitted to open at night.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
