{"id": "55174", "revid": "48738916", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55174", "title": "Falun Gong", "text": "New religious movement from China\nFalun Gong, also called Falun Dafa, is a new religious movement founded by its leader Li Hongzhi in China in the early 1990s. Falun Gong has its global headquarters in Dragon Springs, a compound in Deerpark, New York, United States, near the residence of Li.\nFalun Gong emerged from the qigong movement in China in 1992, combining meditation, qigong exercises, and moral teachings rooted in Buddhist and Taoist traditions. While supported by some government agencies, Falun Gong's rapid growth and independence from state control led several top officials to perceive it as a threat, resulting in periodic acts of harassment in the late 1990s. On 25 April 1999, over 10,000 Falun Gong practitioners gathered peacefully outside the central government compound in Beijing, seeking official recognition of the right to practice their faith without interference.\nIn July 1999, the government of China implemented a ban on Falun Gong, categorizing it as an \"illegal organization\". Mass arrests, widespread torture and abuses followed. In 2008, U.S. government reports cited estimates that as much as half of China's labor camp population was made up of Falun Gong practitioners. In 2009, human rights groups estimated that at least 2,000 Falun Gong practitioners had died from persecution by that time. A 2022 United States Department of State report on religious freedom in China stated that \"Falun Gong practitioners reported societal discrimination in employment, housing, and business opportunities\". According to the same report: \"Prior to the government's 1999 ban on Falun Gong, the government [of China] estimated there were 70 million adherents. Falun Gong sources claims that tens of millions continue to practice privately, and Freedom House estimates there are between 7 to 20 million practitioners.\"\nLed by Li Hongzhi, who is viewed by adherents as a god-like figure, Falun Gong practitioners operate a variety of organizations in the United States and elsewhere, including the dance troupe Shen Yun. They are known for their opposition to the ruling Chinese Communist Party (CCP), espousing anti-evolutionary views, opposition to homosexuality and feminism, and rejection of modern medicine, among other views described as \"ultra-conservative\".\nThe Falun Gong also operates the Epoch Media Group, which is known for its subsidiaries, New Tang Dynasty Television and \"The Epoch Times\" newspaper. The latter has been broadly noted as a politically far-right media entity, and it has received significant attention in the United States for promoting conspiracy theories, such as QAnon and anti-vaccine misinformation, and producing advertisements for U.S. President Donald Trump. It has also drawn attention in Europe for promoting far-right politicians, primarily in France and Germany.\nBeliefs and practices.\nFalun Gong is based around the teachings of its founder and leader: Li Hongzhi. According to \"NBC News\", to his followers, Li is \"a God-like figure who can levitate, walk through walls and see into the future. His ultra-conservative and controversial teachings include a rejection of modern science, art and medicine, and a denunciation of homosexuality, feminism and general worldliness.\" According to sinologist David Ownby, Li both appreciates \u201cwhat modern science has accomplished\u201d and recognizes \u201cits limitations.\" Ownby also noted that many leadership positions among Falun Gong practitioners are occupied by women. Noah Porter stated in his 2003 ethnographic study that \"[Falun Gong] practitioners are not encouraged to rely on Western medicine, but are not prohibited from using it.\" Li instructs his followers to downplay his controversial teachings when speaking to outsiders. All Li's teachings are freely available on Falun Gong websites in multiple languages.\nCentral teachings.\nAccording to the Falun Gong, the Falun Gong aspires to enable the practitioner to ascend spiritually through moral rectitude and the practice of a set of exercises and meditation. The three stated tenets of the belief are truthfulness (), compassion (), and forbearance (). These principles have been repeated by Falun Gong members to outsiders as a tactic for evading deeper inquiry, and followers have been instructed by Li to lie about the practice. Together these principles are regarded as the fundamental nature of the cosmos, the criteria for differentiating right from wrong, and are held to be the highest manifestations of the Tao. Adherence to and cultivation of these virtues is regarded as a fundamental part of Falun Gong practice. In Zhuan Falun (), the foundational text published in 1995, Li Hongzhi writes, \"It doesn't matter how mankind's moral standard changes[...] The nature of the cosmos doesn't change, and it is the only standard for determining who's good and who's bad. So to be a cultivator you have to take the nature of the cosmos as your guide for improving yourself.\"\nPractice of Falun Gong consists of two features: performance of the exercises, and the refinement of one's (moral character, temperament). In Falun Gong's central text, Li states that \"includes virtue (which is a type of matter), it includes forbearance, it includes awakening to things, it includes giving up things\u2014giving up all the desires and all the attachments that are found in an ordinary person\u2014and you also have to endure hardship, to name just a few things.\" The elevation of one's moral character is achieved, on the one hand, by aligning one's life with truth, compassion, and tolerance; and on the other, by abandoning desires and \"negative thoughts and behaviors, such as greed, profit, lust, desire, killing, fighting, theft, robbery, deception, jealousy, etc.\"\nAmong the central concepts found in the teachings of Falun Gong is the existence of 'Virtue' () and 'Karma' (). The former is generated through doing good deeds and suffering, while the latter is accumulated through doing wrong deeds. A person's ratio of karma to virtue is said to determine their fortunes in this life or the next. While virtue engenders good fortune and enables spiritual transformation, an accumulation of karma results in suffering, illness, and alienation from the nature of the universe. Spiritual elevation is achieved through the elimination of negative karma and the accumulation of virtue. Practitioners believe that through a process of moral cultivation, one can achieve Tao and obtain special powers and a level of divinity.\nFalun Gong's teachings posit that human beings are originally and innately good\u2014even divine\u2014but that they descended into a realm of delusion and suffering after developing selfishness and accruing karma. The practice holds that reincarnation exists, with the cycle of rebirth shaped by the accumulation of karma\u2014a concept somewhat analogous to the Christian notion of \"reaping what one sows.\" This perspective helps explain the perceived unfairness of differences among individuals, such as between the rich and the poor, while also encouraging moral behavior despite these inequalities. To re-ascend and return to the \"original, true self\", Falun Gong practitioners are supposed to assimilate themselves to the qualities of truthfulness, compassion and tolerance, let go of \"attachments and desires\" and suffer to repay karma.\nTraditional Chinese cultural thought and opposition to modernity are two focuses of Li Hongzhi's teachings. Falun Gong echoes traditional Chinese beliefs that humans are connected to the universe through mind and body, and Li seeks to challenge \"conventional mentalities\", concerning the nature and genesis of the universe, time-space, and the human body. The practice draws on East Asian mysticism and traditional Chinese medicine, but claims to have the power to heal incurable illnesses. Falun Gong describes modern science as too limited, and views traditional Chinese research and practice as valid.\nLi says that he is a being who has come to help humankind from the destruction it could face as the result of rampant evil. When asked if he was a human being, Li replied \"You can think of me as a human being.\" According to the founder Li in his book, \"Zhuan Falun\", he claims to have cultivated supernatural powers starting at age eight. According to Radio France International, \"Zhuan Falun\" also promises practitioners supernatural powers such as \"see[ing] through a wall or into a human body\". Meanwhile, it states that these powers are byproducts of virtue cultivation, and should neither be sought after nor misused.\nExercises.\nIn addition to its moral philosophy, Falun Gong consists of four standing exercises and one sitting meditation. The exercises are regarded as secondary to moral elevation, though are still an essential component of Falun Gong cultivation practice.\nThe first exercises, called \"Buddha Stretching a Thousand Arms\", are intended to facilitate the free flow of energy through the body and open up the meridians. The second exercise, \"Falun Standing Stance\", involves holding four static poses\u2014each of which resembles holding a wheel\u2014for an extended period. The objective of this exercise is to \"enhances wisdom, increases strength, raises a person's level, and strengthens divine powers\". The third, \"Penetrating the Cosmic Extremes\", involves three sets of movements, which aim to enable the expulsion of bad energy (e.g., pathogenic or black ) and the absorption of good energy into the body. Through practice of this exercise, the practitioner aspires to cleanse and purify the body. The fourth exercise, \"Falun Cosmic Orbit\", seeks to circulate energy freely throughout the body. Unlike the first through fourth exercises, the fifth exercise is performed in the seated lotus position. Called \"Reinforcing Supernatural Powers\", it is a meditation intended to be maintained as long as possible.\nFalun Gong exercises can be practiced individually or in group settings, and can be performed for varying lengths of time in accordance with the needs and abilities of the individual practitioner. Porter writes that practitioners of Falun Gong are encouraged to read Falun Gong books and practice its exercises on a regular basis, preferably daily. Falun Gong exercises are practiced in group settings in parks, university campuses, and other public spaces in over 70 countries worldwide, and are taught for free by volunteers. In addition to five exercises, in 2001 another meditation activity was introduced called \"sending righteous thoughts\", which is intended to reduce persecution on the spiritual plane.\nDiscussions of supernatural skills also feature prominently within the movement, and the existence of these skills gained a level of mainstream acceptance in China's scientific community in the 1980s.Falun Gong's teachings hold that practitioners can acquire supernatural skills through a combination of moral cultivation, meditation and exercises. These include\u2014but are not limited to\u2014precognition, clairaudience, telepathy, and divine sight (via the opening of the third eye or celestial eye). However, Falun Gong stresses that these powers can be developed only as a result of moral practice, and should not be pursued or casually displayed. According to David Ownby, Falun Gong teaches that \"pride in one's abilities, or the desire to show off, are marks of dangerous attachments\", and Li warns his followers not to be distracted by the pursuit of such powers.\nSocial practices.\nFalun Gong differentiates itself from Buddhist monastic traditions in that it places great importance on participation in the secular world. Falun Gong practitioners are required to maintain regular jobs and family lives, to observe the laws of their respective governments, and are instructed not to distance themselves from society. An exception is made for Buddhist Bhikkhus and Bhikkhun\u012bs, who are permitted to continue a monastic lifestyle while practicing Falun Gong.\nAs part of its emphasis on ethical behavior, Falun Gong's teachings prescribe a strict personal morality for practitioners. They are expected to do good deeds, and conduct themselves with patience and forbearance when encountering difficulties. For instance, Li stipulates that a practitioner of Falun Gong must \"not hit back when attacked, not talk back when insulted.\" In addition, they must \"abandon negative thoughts and behaviors\", such as greed, deception, jealousy, etc. The teachings contain injunctions against smoking and the consumption of alcohol, as these are considered addictions that are detrimental to health and mental clarity. Practitioners of Falun Gong are forbidden to kill living things\u2014including animals for the purpose of obtaining food\u2014though they are not required to adopt a vegetarian diet.\nIn addition to these things, practitioners of Falun Gong must abandon a variety of worldly attachments and desires. In the course of cultivation practice, the student of Falun Gong aims to relinquish the pursuit of fame, monetary gain, sentimentality, and other entanglements. Li's teachings repeatedly emphasize the emptiness of material pursuits; although practitioners of Falun Gong are not encouraged to leave their jobs or eschew money, they are expected to give up the psychological attachments to these things.\nFalun Gong doctrine counsels against participation in political or social issues. Excessive interest in politics is viewed as an attachment to worldly power and influence, and Falun Gong aims for transcendence of such pursuits. According to Hu Ping, \"Falun Gong deals only with purifying the individual through exercise, and does not touch on social or national concerns. It has not suggested or even intimated a model for social change. Many religions[...] pursue social reform to some extent[...] but there is no such tendency evident in Falun Gong.\"\nSexual desire and lust are treated as attachments to be discarded, though Falun Gong students are still generally expected to marry and have families. All sexual relations outside the confines of monogamous, heterosexual marriage are regarded as immoral.\nLi Hongzhi taught that homosexuality makes one \"unworthy of being human\", creates bad karma, and is comparable to organized crime. He also taught that \"disgusting homosexuality shows the dirty abnormal psychology of the gay who has lost his ability of reasoning\", and that homosexuality is a \"filthy, deviant state of mind\". Li additionally stated in a 1998 speech in Switzerland that the gods' \"first target of annihilation would be homosexuals\". Although gay, lesbian, and bisexual people may practice Falun Gong, founder Li stated that they must \"give up the bad conduct\" of all same-sex sexual activity.\nFalun Gong's cosmology includes the belief that different ethnicities each have a correspondence to their own heavens, and that individuals of mixed race lose some aspect of this connection. Falun Gong's teachings include belief in reincarnation and that one's soul (original spirit) always maintains single racial identity despite having a body of mixed race. Investigative journalist Ethan Gutmann noted that interracial marriage is common in the Falun Gong community.\nTexts.\nLi Hongzhi authored the first book of Falun Gong teachings in April 1993; titled \"China Falun Gong\", or simply \"Falun Gong\", it is an introductory text that discusses , Falun Gong's relationship to Buddhism, the principles of cultivation practice, and the improvement of moral character (). The book also provides illustrations and explanations of the exercises and meditation.\nThe main body of teachings is articulated in the book \"Zhuan Falun\", published in Chinese in January 1995. The book is divided into nine \"lectures\", and was based on edited transcriptions of the talks Li gave throughout China in the preceding three years. Falun Gong texts have since been translated into an additional 40 languages.\nThe Falun Gong teachings use numerous untranslated Chinese religious and philosophical terms, and make frequent allusion to characters and incidents in Chinese folk literature and concepts drawn from Chinese popular religion. This, coupled with the literal translation style of the texts, which imitate the colloquial style of Li's speeches, can make Falun Gong scriptures difficult to approach for Westerners.\nSymbols.\nThe main symbol of the practice is the (Dharma wheel, or in Sanskrit). In Buddhism, the represents the completeness of the doctrine. To \"turn the wheel of dharma\" () means to preach the Buddhist doctrine, and is the title of Falun Gong's main text. Despite the invocation of Buddhist language and symbols, the law wheel as understood in Falun Gong has distinct connotations, and is held to represent the universe. It is conceptualized by an emblem consisting of one large and four small (counter-clockwise) swastika symbols, representing the Buddha, and four small Taiji (yin-yang) symbols of the Daoist tradition.\nDharma-ending period.\nLi situates his teaching of Falun Gong amidst the \"Dharma-ending period\" (, ), described in Buddhist scriptures as an age of moral decline when the teachings of Buddhism would need to be rectified. The current era is described in Falun Gong's teachings as the \" rectification\" period (, which might also be translated as \"to correct the dharma\"), a time of cosmic transition and renewal. The process of rectification is necessitated by the moral decline and degeneration of life in the universe, and in the post-1999 context, the persecution of Falun Gong by the Chinese government has come to be viewed as a tangible symptom of this moral decay. Through the process of the rectification, life will be reordered according to the moral and spiritual quality of each, with good people being saved and ascending to higher spiritual planes, and bad ones being eliminated or cast down. In this paradigm, Li assumes the role of rectifying the Dharma by disseminating through his moral teachings.\nSome scholars, such as Maria Hsia Chang and Susan Palmer, have described Li's rhetoric about the \" rectification\" and providing salvation \"in the final period of the Last Havoc\" as apocalyptic. However, Benjamin Penny, a professor of Chinese history at the Australian National University, argues that Li's teachings are better understood in the context of a \"Buddhist notion of the cycle of the Dharma or the Buddhist law\". Richard Gunde wrote that, unlike apocalyptic groups in the West, Falun Gong does not fixate on death or the end of the world, and instead \"has a simple, innocuous ethical message\". Li Hongzhi does not discuss a \"time of reckoning\", and has rejected predictions of an impending apocalypse in his teachings.\nExtraterrestrials.\nLi in the 1990s repeated claims that aliens were responsible for scientific inventions through the manipulation of scientists. For example, in a 1999 interview with \"Time\", Li attributed the invention of computers and airplanes to extraterrestrials, as well as war and violence. However, his position on aliens seemed fairly inconsistent to observers Graeme Lang and Lu Yunfeng. In the \"Time\" interview, Li believed that aliens were attempting to replace humans through a cloning process, in which human bodies would be cloned with no soul, so that the aliens can replace the soul and inhabit human bodies (which to him are perfect).\nLi Hongzhi alleged that extraterrestrials disguise themselves as humans to corrupt and manipulate humanity. According to an ABC investigation, while some practitioners stated that this was metaphorical, a former member said she was taught it as literal truth.\nCategorization.\nScholars describe Falun Gong as a new religious movement. The organization is regularly featured in handbooks describing new religious movements. While commonly described by scholars as a new religious movement, adherents may reject this term. Yuezhi Zhao describes Falun Gong as \"a multifaceted and totalizing movement that means different things to different people, ranging from a set of physical exercises and a praxis of transformation to a moral philosophy and a new knowledge system.\"\nIn the cultural context of China, Falun Gong is generally described either as a system of qigong, or a type of \"cultivation practice\" (\"xiulian\"), a process by which an individual seeks spiritual perfection, often through both physical and moral conditioning. Varieties of cultivation practice are found throughout Chinese history, spanning Buddhist, Daoist, and Confucian traditions. Benjamin Penny writes \"the best way to describe Falun Gong is as a cultivation system. Cultivation systems have been a feature of Chinese life for at least 2,500 years.\" Qigong practices can also be understood as a part of a broader tradition of \"cultivation practice\".\nIn the West, Falun Gong is frequently classified as a religion on the basis of its theological and moral teachings, its concerns with spiritual cultivation and transformation, and its extensive body of scripture. Falun Gong practitioners themselves have sometimes disavowed this classification, however. This rejection reflects the relatively narrow definition of \"religion\" in contemporary China. According to David Ownby, religion in China has been defined since 1912 to refer to \"world-historical faiths\" that have \"well-developed institutions, clergy, and textual traditions\"\u2014namely, Buddhism, Daoism, Islam, Protestantism, and Catholicism. Moreover, if Falun Gong had described itself as a religion in China, it likely would have invited immediate suppression. These historical and cultural circumstances notwithstanding, the practice has often been described as a form of Chinese religion.\nMedia influence operations.\nThe performance arts group Shen Yun and the media organization \"The Epoch Times\" are the major outreach organizations of Falun Gong. Both promote the spiritual and political teachings of Falun Gong. They and a variety of other organizations such as New Tang Dynasty Television (NTD) operate as extensions of Falun Gong. These extensions promote the new religious movement and its teachings. In the case of \"The Epoch Times\", they also promote conspiracy theories such as QAnon and anti-vaccine misinformation and far-right politics in both Europe and the United States. Around the time of the 2016 United States presidential election, \"The Epoch Times\" began running articles supportive of Donald Trump and critical of his opponents. Falun Gong extensions have also been active in promoting the European radical right.\nThe exact financial and structural connections between Falun Gong, Shen Yun and \"The Epoch Times\" remains unclear. According to NBC News:\nThe Epoch Media Group, along with Shen Yun, a dance troupe known for its ubiquitous advertising and unsettling performances, make up the outreach effort of Falun Gong, a relatively new spiritual practice that combines ancient Chinese meditative exercises, mysticism and often ultraconservative cultural worldviews. Falun Gong's founder has referred to Epoch Media Group as \"our media\", and the group's practice heavily informs \"The Epoch Times\"' coverage, according to former employees who spoke with NBC News.\n\"The Epoch Times\", digital production company NTD and the heavily advertised dance troupe Shen Yun make up the nonprofit network that Li calls \"our media\". Financial documents paint a complicated picture of more than a dozen technically separate organizations that appear to share missions, money and executives. Though the source of their revenue is unclear, the most recent financial records from each organization paint a picture of an overall business thriving in the Trump era.\nAccording to scholar James R. Lewis writing in 2018, Falun Gong adherents have attempted to control English Wikipedia articles covering the group and articles related to it. Lewis highlights Falun Gong's extensive internet presence, and how editors who have to date contributed to English Wikipedia entries associated with Falun Gong to the point where \"Falun Gong followers and/or sympathizers de facto control the relevant pages on Wikipedia\", and how this is particularly important for Falun Gong as an organization due to the search engine optimization results of these entries, and how the entries can influence other media entities. Lewis notes also how this fits in as part of Falun Gong's general media strategy, such as Falun Gong media like \"The Epoch Times\", New Tang Dynasty, Sound of Hope Radio, and, as Lewis discusses, the Rachlin media group. Lewis reports that the Rachlin media group is the Falun Gong's de facto PR firm operated by Gail Rachlin, spokesperson for the Falun Dafa Information Centre. Lewis says that Amnesty International does not independently verify its reports from Falun Gong groups, accepting material directly from Falun Gong organizations as fact. According to Lewis, \"[Falun Gong] has thus been able to influence other media via its presence on the web, through its direct press releases, and through its own media.\"\nUltrasurf, Freegate, the Open Technology Fund, and whistleblower allegations.\nIn the early 2000s, Falun Gong adherents in the United States developed Ultrasurf and Freegate, freeware intended to circumvent Chinese government internet censorship. According to NPR:\nAdherents of Falun Gong first developed Ultrasurf nearly two decades ago to get around censors in China and elsewhere. Early on, Ultrasurf seemed a highly promising tool in aiding activists and journalists to talk securely online. It earlier received development money from the State Department and the predecessor agency to USAGM.\nA Berkman Klein Center for Internet and Society report on the circumvention landscape in 2007 found Ultrasurf's performance to be \"the best of any tool tested in filtering countries, the only tool to display okay speed for both image heavy and simple, text oriented sites.\" A Wired article described Ultrasurf as \"one of the most important free-speech tools on the Internet, used by millions from China to Saudi Arabia.\"\nBeyond China, Freegate gained popularity among Iranian protesters soon after its Farsi version was introduced in July 2008. During the Green Movement protests surrounding the 2009 election, its servers were overwhelmed by Iranian Internet users.\nIn 2010, the United States Department of State under the Obama administration offered a $1.5 million grant to the Global Internet Freedom Consortium founded by Falun Gong adherents that developed Ultrasurf and Freegate, drawing opposition from the Chinese government. A 2011 Center for a New American Security report recognized the need for the US government to fund high-performing technologies like Ultrasurf and Freegate, despite the stress it might cause on the U.S.-China relationship, but recommended the US government diversify the technologies it funds.\nIn recent years, Ultrasurf has been a major point of contention in large part because it is not open source, meaning that it cannot be reviewed by outside engineers for vulnerabilities and back doors. Additionally, as reported by \"The Verge\", since the 2000s, the software has drawn criticism \"for its content filtering (which blocks pornography) and its ability to surveil user traffic, which is often impossible by design in competing tools\".\nAlthough it receives public funding, both its creators and owners have rejected attempts at allowing outside parties to review its effectiveness and utility. A 2020 audit by the U.S. State Department concluded that \"censoring Ultrasurf nation-wide would have been trivial for a moderate-budget adversary\".\nAfter conservative documentary filmmaker Michael Pack was appointed CEO of the U.S. Agency for Global Media during the Trump administration in 2020, Pack tied up $19 million in federal funds from other projects for the Ultrasurf project. Numerous other projects, including other secure communication projects, lost funding during this period. Ultrasoft eventually received $249,000 of the allotted funds. Once receiving funding, only \"four people abroad used it to access Voice of America and Radio Free Asia, a key purpose for its subsidy\" during December 2020 and January 2021.\nTwo days before U.S. President Joe Biden's 2021 inauguration, Pack appointed a columnist from the \"Epoch Times\" to the board of directors for the networks his agency oversaw. This columnist had claimed the January 6 insurrection was a \"false flag operation\". During his eight months in office, Pack regularly appeared in the \"Epoch Times\", where he also discussed Ultrasurf.\nAs of 2020, Pack, along with other USAGM officials he did not fire during his time there, faced a criminal inquiry in response to whistleblower allegations that the \"concerted effort to divert funds to the Falun Gong software Ultrasurf was a criminal conspiracy\".\nOrganization.\nSpiritual authority is vested exclusively in the teachings of Li Hongzhi. Volunteer \"assistants\" or \"contact persons\" do not hold authority over other practitioners, regardless of how long they have practiced Falun Gong. Li stipulates that practitioners of Falun Gong cannot collect money or charge fees, conduct healings, or teach or interpret doctrine for others. There is no system of membership within the practice and no rituals of worship. Falun Gong operates through a global, networked, and largely virtual online community. In particular, electronic communications, email lists and a collection of websites are the primary means of coordinating activities and disseminating Li's teachings.\nOutside Mainland China, the organisation stated that they have followers in more than 100 countries. Li's teachings are principally spread through the Internet. In most mid- to large-sized cities, Falun Gong practitioners organize regular group meditation or study sessions in which they practice Falun Gong exercises and read Li's writings. The exercise and meditation sessions are described as informal groups of practitioners who gather in public parks\u2014usually in the morning\u2014for one to two hours. Group study sessions typically take place in the evenings in private residences or university or high school classrooms, and are described by David Ownby as \"the closest thing to a regular 'congregational experience'\" that Falun Gong offers. Individuals who are too busy, isolated, or who simply prefer solitude may elect to practice privately. When there are expenses to be covered (such as for the rental of facilities for large-scale conferences), costs are borne by self-nominated and relatively affluent individual members of the community.\nWithin China.\nIn 1993, the Beijing-based Falun Dafa Research Society was accepted as a branch of the state-run China Qigong Research Society (CQRS), which oversaw the administration of the country's various qigong schools, and sponsored activities and seminars. As per the requirements of the CQRS, Falun Gong was organized into a nationwide network of assistance centers, \"main stations\", \"branches\", \"guidance stations\", and local practice sites, mirroring the structure of the qigong society or even of the CCP itself. Falun Gong assistants were self-selecting volunteers who taught the exercises, organized events, and disseminated new writings from Li Hongzhi. The Falun Dafa Research Society provided advice to students on meditation techniques, translation services, and coordination for the practice nationwide.\nFollowing its departure from the CQRS in 1996, Falun Gong came under increased scrutiny from authorities and responded by adopting a more decentralized and loose organizational structure. In 1997, the Falun Dafa Research Society was formally dissolved, along with the regional \"main stations\". Yet practitioners continued to organize themselves at local levels, being connected through electronic communications, interpersonal networks and group exercise sites. Both Falun Gong sources and Chinese government sources claimed that there were some 1,900 \"guidance stations\" and 28,263 local Falun Gong exercise sites nationwide by 1999, though they disagree over the extent of vertical coordination among these organizational units. In response to the persecution that began in 1999, Falun Gong was driven underground, the organizational structure grew yet more informal within China, and the internet took precedence as a means of connecting practitioners.\nFollowing the persecution of Falun Gong in 1999, Chinese authorities sought to portray Falun Gong as a hierarchical and well-funded organization. James Tong writes that it was in the government's interest to portray Falun Gong as highly organized in order to justify its repression of the group: \"The more organized the Falun Gong could be shown to be, then the more justified the regime's repression in the name of social order was.\" He concluded that Party's claims lacked \"both internal and external substantiating evidence\", and that despite the arrests and scrutiny, the authorities never \"credibly countered Falun Gong rebuttals\".\nDragon Springs compound.\nFalun Gong operates out of Dragon Springs, a compound located in Deerpark, New York. Falun Gong founder and leader Li Hongzhi resides near the compound, along with \"hundreds\" of Falun Gong adherents. Members of Falun Gong extension Shen Yun live and rehearse in the compound, which also contains schools and temples. The compound is registered as a church, Dragon Springs Buddhist, which gives it tax exemptions and greater privacy. Scholar Andrew Junker noted that in 2019, near Dragon Springs, in Middletown, was an office for the Falun Gong media extension \"The Epoch Times\", which published a special local edition.\nThe compound has been a point of controversy among former residents. According to NBC News:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAcquired by Falun Gong in 2000, the site is closed to visitors and features guarded gates, has been a point of contention for some Deer Park residents concerned. In 2019, Falun Gong requested to expand the site, wishing to add a 920-seat concert hall, a new parking garage, a wastewater treatment plant and a conversion of meditation space into residential space large enough to bring the total residential capacity to 500 people. These plans met with opposition from the Delaware Riverkeeper Network regarding the wastewater treatment facility and the elimination of local wetlands, impacting local waterways such as the Basher Kill and Neversink River. Local residents opposed the expansion because it would increase traffic and reduce the rural character of the area. Falun Gong adherents living in the area have claimed that they have experienced discrimination from local residents.\nAfter visiting in 2019, Junker noted that \"the secrecy of Dragon Springs was obvious and a source of tension for the town\". Junker adds that Dragon Springs's website says its restricted access is for security reasons, and that the site claims the compound contains orphans and refugees.\nDemography.\nPrior to July 1999, official Chinese government estimates placed the number of Falun Gong practitioners at 70 million nationwide, rivalling membership in the CCP. By the time of the persecution on 22 July 1999, most Chinese government numbers said the population of Falun Gong was between 2 and 3 million, though some publications maintained an estimate of 40 million. The Falun Gong organization estimated in the same period that the total number of practitioners in China was between 70 and 80 million, though sociologist David A. Palmer notes these numbers were likely highly inflated and gives a more reasonable estimate of 10 million. Other sources have estimated the Falun Gong population in China to have peaked between 10 and 70 million practitioners. The number of Falun Gong practitioners still practicing in China today is difficult to confirm, though the NGO Freedom House estimates that 7 to 20 million continue to practice privately.\nDemographic surveys conducted in China in 1998 found a population that was mostly female and elderly. Of 34,351 Falun Gong practitioners surveyed, 27% were male and 73% female. Only 38% were under 50 years old. Falun Gong attracted a range of other individuals, from young college students to bureaucrats, intellectuals and Party officials. Surveys in China from the 1990s found that between 23 and 40% of practitioners held university degrees at the college or graduate level\u2014several times higher than the general population.\nFalun Gong is practiced by tens, and possibly hundreds, of thousands outside China, with the largest communities found in Taiwan and North American cities with large Chinese populations, such as New York and Toronto. Demographic surveys by Palmer and Ownby in these communities found that 90% of practitioners are ethnic Chinese. The average age was approximately 40. Among survey respondents, 56% were female and 44% male; 80% were married. The surveys found the respondents to be highly educated: 9% held PhDs, 34% had master's degrees, and 24% had a bachelor's degree.\nAs of 2008, the most commonly reported reasons for being attracted to Falun Gong were intellectual content, cultivation exercises, and health benefits. Non-Chinese Falun Gong practitioners tend to fit the profile of \"spiritual seekers\"\u2014people who had tried a variety of qigong, yoga, or religious practices before finding Falun Gong. According to sociologist Richard Madsen, who specializes in studying modern Chinese culture, Chinese scientists with doctorates from prestigious American universities who practice Falun Gong claim that modern physics (for example, superstring theory) and biology (specifically the pineal gland's function) provide a scientific basis for their beliefs. From their point of view, \"Falun Dafa is knowledge rather than religion, a new form of science rather than faith\".\nHistory inside China.\n1992\u20131996.\nLi Hongzhi introduced Falun Gong to the public on 13 May 1992, in Changchun, Jilin Province. Several months later, in September 1992, Falun Gong was admitted as a branch of qigong under the administration of the state-run China Qigong Scientific Research Society (CQRS). Li was recognized as a qigong master, and was authorized to teach his practice nationwide. Like many \"qigong\" masters at the time, Li toured major cities in China from 1992 to 1994 to teach the practice. He was granted a number of awards by PRC governmental organizations.\nAccording to David Ownby, Professor of History and Director of the Center for East Asian Studies at the Universit\u00e9 de Montr\u00e9al, Li became an \"instant star of the qigong movement\", and Falun Gong was embraced by the government as an effective means of lowering health care costs, promoting Chinese culture, and improving public morality. In December 1992, for instance, Li and several Falun Gong students participated in the Asian Health Expo in Beijing, where he reportedly \"received the most praise [of any qigong school] at the fair, and achieved very good therapeutic results\", according to the fair's organizer. The event helped cement Li's popularity, and journalistic reports of Falun Gong's healing powers spread. In 1993, Li received a letter of appreciation from the Ministry of Public Security for providing treatment to around 100 police officers injured while on duty.\nFalun Gong had differentiated itself from other \"qigong\" groups in its emphasis on morality, low cost, and health benefits. It rapidly spread via word-of-mouth, attracting a wide range of practitioners from all walks of life, including numerous members of the Chinese Communist Party.\nFrom 1992 to 1994, Li did charge fees for the seminars he was giving across China, though the fees were considerably lower than those of competing qigong practices, and the local qigong associations received a substantial share. Li justified the fees as being necessary to cover travel costs and other expenses, and on some occasions, he donated the money earned to charitable causes. In 1994, Li ceased charging fees altogether, thereafter stipulating that Falun Gong must always be taught for free, and its teachings made available without charge (including online). Although some observers believe Li continued to earn substantial income through the sale of Falun Gong books, others dispute this, asserting that most Falun Gong books in circulation were bootleg copies.\nWith the publication of the books \"Falun Gong\" and \"Zhuan Falun\", Li made his teachings more widely accessible. \"Zhuan Falun\", published in January 1995 at an unveiling ceremony held in the auditorium of the Ministry of Public Security, became a best-seller in China.\nIn 1995, Chinese authorities began looking to Falun Gong to solidify its organizational structure and ties to the party-state. Li was approached by the Chinese National Sports Committee, Ministry of Public Health, and China Qigong Science Research Association (CQRS) to jointly establish a Falun Gong association. Li declined the offer. The same year, the CQRS issued a new regulation mandating that all qigong denominations establish a Chinese Communist Party branch. Li again refused.\nTensions continued to mount between Li and the CQRS in 1996. In the face of Falun Gong's rise in popularity\u2014a large part of which was attributed to its low cost\u2014competing \"qigong\" masters accused Li of undercutting them. According to Schechter, the \"qigong\" society under which Li and other \"qigong\" masters belonged asked Li to hike his tuition, but Li emphasized the need for the teachings to be free of charge.\nIn March 1996, Falun Gong withdrew from the CQRS in response to mounting disagreements, after which time it operated outside the official sanction of the state. Falun Gong representatives attempted to register with other government entities, but were rebuffed. Li and Falun Gong were then outside the circuit of personal relations and financial exchanges through which masters and their \"qigong\" organizations could find a place within the state system, and also the protections this afforded.\n1996\u20131999.\nFalun Gong's departure from the state-run CQRS corresponded to a wider shift in the government's attitudes towards qigong practices. As qigong's detractors in government grew more influential, authorities began attempting to rein in the growth and influence of these groups, some of which had amassed tens of millions of followers. In the mid-1990s the state-run media began publishing articles critical of qigong.\nFalun Gong was initially shielded from the mounting criticism, but following its withdrawal from the CQRS in March 1996, it lost this protection. On 17 June 1996, the \"Guangming Daily\", an influential state-run newspaper, published a polemic against Falun Gong in which its central text, \"Zhuan Falun\", was described as an example of \"feudal superstition\". The author wrote that the history of humanity is a \"struggle between science and superstition\", and called on Chinese publishers not to print \"pseudo-scientific books of the swindlers\". The article was followed by at least twenty more in newspapers nationwide. Soon after, on 24 July, the Central Propaganda Department banned all publication of Falun Gong books (though the ban was not consistently enforced). The state-administered Buddhist Association of China also began issuing criticisms of Falun Gong, urging lay Buddhists not to take up the practice.\nThe events were an important challenge to Falun Gong, and one that practitioners did not take lightly. Thousands of Falun Gong followers wrote to \"Guangming Daily\" and to the CQRS to complain against the measures, claiming that they violated Hu Yaobang's 1982 'Triple No' directive, which prohibited the media from either encouraging or criticizing qigong practices. In other instances, Falun Gong practitioners staged peaceful demonstrations outside media or local government offices to request retractions of perceived unfair coverage.\nThe polemics against Falun Gong were part of a larger movement opposing qigong organizations in the state-run media. Although Falun Gong was not the only target of the media criticism, nor the only group to protest, theirs was the most mobilized and steadfast response. Many of Falun Gong's protests against negative media portrayals were successful, resulting in the retraction of several newspaper stories critical of the practice. This contributed to practitioners' belief that the media claims against them were false or exaggerated, and that their stance was justified.\nIn June 1998, He Zuoxiu, an outspoken critic of qigong and a fierce defender of Marxism, appeared on a talk show on Beijing Television and openly disparaged \"qigong\" groups, making particular mention of Falun Gong. Falun Gong practitioners responded with peaceful protests and by lobbying the station for a retraction. The reporter responsible for the program was reportedly fired, and a program favorable to Falun Gong was aired several days later. Falun Gong practitioners also mounted demonstrations at 14 other media outlets.\nIn 1997, The Ministry of Public Security launched an investigation into whether Falun Gong should be deemed (, \"heretical teaching\"). The report concluded that \"no evidence has appeared thus far\". The following year, however, on 21 July 1998, the Ministry of Public Security issued Document No. 555, \"Notice of the Investigation of Falun Gong\". The document asserted that Falun Gong is a \"heretical teaching\", and mandated that another investigation be launched to seek evidence in support of the conclusion. Falun Gong practitioners reported having phone lines tapped, homes ransacked and raided, and Falun Gong exercise sites disrupted by public security agents.\nIn this time period, even as criticism of qigong and Falun Gong mounted in some circles, the practice maintained a number of high-profile supporters in the government. In 1998, Qiao Shi, the recently retired chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, initiated his own investigation into Falun Gong. After months of investigations, his group concluded that \"Falun Gong has hundreds of benefits for the Chinese people and China, and does not have one single bad effect.\" In May of the same year, China's National Sports Commission launched its own survey of Falun Gong. Based on interviews with over 12,000 Falun Gong practitioners in Guangdong province, they stated that they were \"convinced the exercises and effects of Falun Gong are excellent. It has done an extraordinary amount to improve society's stability and ethics.\"\nThe practice's founder, Li Hongzhi, was largely absent from the country during the period of rising tensions with the government. In March 1995, Li had left China to first teach his practice in France and then other countries, and in 1998 obtained permanent residency in the United States.\nBy 1999, estimates provided by the State Sports Commission suggested there were 70 million Falun Gong practitioners in China. An anonymous employee of China's National Sports Commission, was at this time quoted in an interview with U.S. News &amp; World Report as speculating that if 100\u00a0million had taken up Falun Gong and other forms of qigong there would be a dramatic reduction of health care costs and that \"Premier Zhu Rongji is very happy about that.\"\nTianjin and Zhongnanhai protests.\nBy the late 1990s, the Chinese government's relationship to the growing Falun Gong movement had become increasingly tense. Reports of discrimination and surveillance by the Public Security Bureau were escalating, and Falun Gong practitioners were routinely organizing sit-in demonstrations responding to media articles they deemed to be unfair. The conflicting investigations launched by the Ministry of the Public Security on one side and the State Sports Commission and Qiao Shi on the other spoke of the disagreements among China's elites on how to regard the growing practice.\nIn April 1999, an article critical of Falun Gong was published in Tianjin Normal University's \"Youth Reader\" magazine. The article was authored by physicist He Zuoxiu who, as Porter and Gutmann indicate, is a relative of Politburo member and public security secretary Luo Gan. The article cast qigong, and Falun Gong in particular, as superstitious and harmful for youth. Falun Gong practitioners responded by picketing the offices of the newspaper requesting a retraction of the article. Unlike past instances in which Falun Gong protests were successful, on 22 April the Tianjin demonstration was broken up by the arrival of three hundred riot police. Some of the practitioners were beaten, and forty-five arrested. Other Falun Gong practitioners were told that if they wished to appeal further, they needed to take the issue up with the Ministry of Public Security and go to Beijing to appeal.\nThe Falun Gong community quickly mobilized a response, and on the morning of 25 April, upwards of 10,000 practitioners gathered near the central appeals office to demand an end to the escalating harassment against the movement, and request the release of the Tianjin practitioners. According to Benjamin Penny, practitioners sought redress from the leadership of the country by going to them and, \"albeit very quietly and politely, making it clear that they would not be treated so shabbily\". They sat or read quietly on the sidewalks surrounding the Zhongnanhai.\nFive Falun Gong representatives met with Premier Zhu Rongji and other senior officials to negotiate a resolution. The Falun Gong representatives were assured that the regime supported physical exercises for health improvements and did not consider the Falun Gong to be anti-government.\nPresident Jiang Zemin was alerted to the demonstration by Luo Gan, and was reportedly angered by the audacity of the demonstration\u2014the largest since the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre. Jiang called for resolute action to suppress the group, and reportedly criticized Premier Zhu for being \"too soft\" in his handling of the situation. That evening, Jiang composed a letter indicating his desire to see Falun Gong \"defeated\". In the letter, Jiang expressed concerns over the size and popularity of Falun Gong, and in particular about the large number of senior CCP members found among Falun Gong practitioners. He believed it possible foreign forces were behind Falun Gong's protests (Li Hongzhi had emigrated to the United States), and expressed concern about their use of the internet to coordinate a large-scale demonstration. Jiang also intimated that Falun Gong's moral philosophy was at odds with the atheist values of Marxist\u2013Leninism, and therefore constituted a form of ideological competition.\nJiang is held by Falun Gong to be personally responsible for this decision to persecute Falun Gong. Peerman cited reasons such as suspected personal jealousy of Li Hongzhi; Saich points to Jiang's anger at Falun Gong's widespread appeal, and ideological struggle as causes for the crackdown that followed. Willy Wo-Lap Lam suggests Jiang's decision to suppress Falun Gong was related to a desire to consolidate his power within the Politburo. According to Human Rights Watch, senior officials were far from unified in their support for the crackdown.\nPersecution.\nOn 20 July 1999, security forces abducted and detained thousands of Falun Gong practitioners who they identified as leaders. Two days later, on 22 July, the PRC Ministry of Civil Affairs outlawed the Falun Dafa Research Society as an illegal organization that was \"engaged in illegal activities, advocating superstition and spreading fallacies, hoodwinking people, inciting and creating disturbances, and jeopardizing social stability\". The same day, the Ministry of Public Security issued a circular forbidding citizens from practicing Falun Gong in groups, possessing Falun Gong's teachings, displaying Falun Gong banners or symbols, or protesting against the ban.\nThe aim of the ensuing campaign was to \"eradicate\" the group through a combination of means which included the publication and distribution of propaganda which denounced it and the imprisonment and coercive thought reform of its practitioners, sometimes resulting in deaths. In October 1999, four months after the imposition of the ban, legislation was passed in order to outlaw \"heterodox religions\" and sentence Falun Gong devotees to prison terms.\nHundreds of thousands of Falun Gong practitioners are estimated to have been extrajudicially imprisoned, and practitioners who are currently in detention are reportedly subjected to forced labor, psychiatric abuse, torture, and other coercive methods of thought reform at the hands of Chinese authorities. The U.S. Department of State and Congressional-Executive Commission on China cite estimates that as much as half of China's reeducation-through-labor camp population is made up of Falun Gong practitioners. Researcher Ethan Gutmann estimates that Falun Gong practitioners represent an average of 15 to 20 percent of the total \"laogai\" population, a population which includes practitioners who are currently being held in re-education through labor camps as well as practitioners who are currently being held in prisons and other forms of administrative detention. Former detainees of the labor camp system have reported that Falun Gong practitioners comprise one of the largest groups of prisoners; in some labor camp and prison facilities, they comprise the majority of the detainees, and they are often said to receive the longest sentences and the worst treatment. A 2013 report on labor reeducation camps by Amnesty International found that in some cases, Falun Gong practitioners \"constituted on average from one third to 100 per cent of the total population\" of certain camps.\nAccording to Johnson, the campaign against Falun Gong extends to many aspects of society, including the media apparatus, the police force, the military, the education system, and workplaces. An extra-constitutional body, the \"610 Office\" was created to \"oversee\" the effort. Human Rights Watch (2002) commented that families and workplace employees were urged to cooperate with the government.\nCauses.\nObservers have attempted to explain the Party's rationale for banning Falun Gong as stemming from a variety of factors. Many of these explanations centre on institutional causes, such as Falun Gong's size and popularity, its independence from the state, and internal politics within the Chinese government. Other scholars have noted that Chinese authorities were troubled by Falun Gong's moral and spiritual content, which put it at odds with aspects of the official Marxist ideology. Still others have pointed to China's history of bloody sectarian revolts as a possible factor leading to the crackdown.\nXinhua News Agency, the official news organization of the Chinese government, declared that Falun Gong is \"opposed to the Communist Party of China and the central government, preaches idealism, theism and feudal superstition\". Xinhua also asserted that \"the so-called 'truth, kindness and forbearance' principle preached by [Falun Gong] has nothing in common with the socialist ethical and cultural progress we are striving to achieve\", and it also argued that it was necessary to crush Falun Gong in order to preserve the \"vanguard role and purity\" of the Chinese Communist Party. Other articles which appeared in the state-run media in the first days and weeks after the ban was imposed posited that Falun Gong must be defeated because its \"theistic\" philosophy was at odds with the Marxist\u2013Leninist paradigm and the secular values of materialism.\nWilly Wo-Lap Lam writes that Jiang Zemin's campaign against Falun Gong may have been used to promote allegiance to himself; Lam quotes one party veteran as saying \"by unleashing a Mao-style movement [against Falun Gong], Jiang is forcing senior cadres to pledge allegiance to his line\". \"The Washington Post\" reported that sources indicated not all of the Politburo Standing Committee shared Jiang's view that Falun Gong should be eradicated, and Jiang alone made the decision of crackdown.\nHuman Rights Watch commented that the crackdown on Falun Gong reflects historical efforts by the CCP to eradicate religion, which the government believes is inherently subversive. The Chinese government protects five \"patriotic\", state-sanctioned religious groups. Unregistered religions that fall outside the state-sanctioned organizations are thus vulnerable to suppression. \"The Globe and Mail\" wrote: \"any group that does not come under the control of the Party is a threat\". Craig S. Smith of \"The New York Times\" wrote that the party feels increasingly threatened by any belief system that challenges its ideology and has an ability to organize itself. That Falun Gong, whose belief system represented a revival of traditional Chinese religion, was being practiced by a large number of Communist Party members and members of the military was seen as particularly disturbing to Jiang; according to Julia Ching, \"Jiang accepts the threat of Falun Gong as an ideological one: spiritual beliefs against militant atheism and historical materialism. He [wished] to purge the government and the military of such beliefs.\"\nYuezhi Zhao points to several other factors that may have led to a deterioration of the relationship between Falun Gong and the Chinese state and media. These included infighting within China's qigong establishment, the influence of qigong opponents among leaders of China, and the struggles from mid-1996 to mid-1999 between Falun Gong and the Chinese power elite over the status and treatment of the movement. According to Zhao, Falun Gong practitioners have established a \"resistance identity\"\u2014one that stands against prevailing pursuits of wealth, power, scientific rationality, and \"the entire value system associated with China's project of modernization\". In China the practice represented an indigenous spiritual and moral tradition, a cultural revitalization movement, and it was a sharp contrast to \"Marxism with Chinese characteristics\".\nVivienne Shue similarly writes that Falun Gong presented a comprehensive challenge to the CCP's legitimacy. Shue argues that Chinese rulers have historically derived their legitimacy from their claim to possess an exclusive connection to the \"Truth\". In imperial China, truth was based on a Confucian and Daoist cosmology, where in the case of the Communist Party, the truth is represented by Marxist\u2013Leninism and historical materialism. Falun Gong challenged the Marxist\u2013Leninism paradigm, reviving an understanding which is based on more traditionally Buddhist or Daoist conceptions. David Ownby contends that Falun Gong also challenged the Communist Party's hegemony over the Chinese nationalist discourse: \"[Falun Gong's] evocation of a different vision of Chinese tradition and its contemporary values are now so threatening to the state and the party because it denies them the sole right to define the meaning of Chinese nationalism, and it even denies them the sole right to define the meaning of Chineseness.\"\nMaria Chang commented that since the overthrow of the Qin dynasty, \"Millenarian movements had exerted a profound impact on the course of Chinese history\", culminating in the Chinese Revolutions of 1949, which brought the Chinese Communists to power. Patsy Rahn (2002) describes a paradigm of conflict between Chinese sectarian groups and the rulers who they often challenge. According to Rahn, the history of this paradigm goes back to the collapse of the Han dynasty: \"The pattern of a ruling power keeping a watchful eye on sectarian groups, at times threatened by them, at times raising campaigns against them, began as early as the second century and continued throughout the dynastic period, through the Mao era and into the present.\"\nConversion program.\nAccording to James Tong, the regime aimed at both coercive dissolution of the Falun Gong denomination and \"transformation\" of the practitioners. By 2000, the Party escalated its campaign by sentencing \"recidivist\" practitioners to \"re-education through labor\" in an effort to have them renounce their beliefs and \"transform\" their thoughts. Terms were also arbitrarily extended by police, while some practitioners had ambiguous charges levied against them, such as \"disrupting social order\", \"endangering national security\", or \"subverting the socialist system\". According to Bejesky, the majority of long-term Falun Gong detainees are processed administratively through this system instead of the criminal justice system. Upon completion of their re-education sentences, those practitioners who refused to recant were then incarcerated in \"legal education centers\" set up by provincial authorities to \"transform minds\".\nMuch of the conversion program relied on Mao-style techniques of indoctrination and thought reform, where Falun Gong practitioners were organized to view anti-Falun Gong television programs and enroll in Marxism and materialism study sessions. Traditional Marxism and materialism were the core content of the sessions.\nThe government-sponsored image of the conversion process emphasizes psychological persuasion and a variety of \"soft-sell\" techniques; this is the \"ideal norm\" in regime reports, according to Tong. Falun Gong reports, on the other hand, depict \"disturbing and sinister\" forms of coercion against practitioners who fail to renounce their beliefs. Among them are cases of severe beatings; psychological torment, corporal punishment and forced intense, heavy-burden hard labor and stress positions; solitary confinement in squalid conditions; \"heat treatment\" including burning and freezing; electric shocks delivered to sensitive parts of the body that may result in nausea, convulsions, or fainting; \"devastative\" forced feeding; sticking bamboo strips into fingernails; deprivation of food, sleep, and use of toilet; rape and gang rape; asphyxiation; and threat, extortion, and termination of employment and student status.\nThe cases appear verifiable, and the great majority identify (1) the individual practitioner, often with age, occupation, and residence; (2) the time and location that the alleged abuse took place, down to the level of the district, township, village, and often the specific jail institution; and (3) the names and ranks of the alleged perpetrators. Many such reports include lists of the names of witnesses and descriptions of injuries, Tong says. The publication of \"persistent abusive, often brutal behavior by named individuals with their official title, place, and time of torture\" suggests that there is no official will to cease and desist such activities.\nDeaths.\nDue to the difficulty in corroborating reports of torture deaths in China, estimates of the number of Falun Gong practitioners who have been killed as a result of the persecution vary widely. In 2009, \"The New York Times\" reported that, according to human rights groups, the repressions had claimed \"at least 2,000\" lives. Amnesty International said at least 100 Falun Gong practitioners had reportedly died in the 2008 calendar year, either in custody or shortly after their release. Investigative journalist Ethan Gutmann estimated 65,000 Falun Gong were killed for their organs from 2000 to 2008 based on extensive interviews, while researchers David Kilgour and David Matas reported, \"the source of 41,500 transplants for the six-year period 2000 to 2005 is unexplained\".\nChinese authorities do not publish statistics on Falun Gong practitioners killed amidst the crackdown. In individual cases, however, authorities have denied that deaths in custody were due to torture.\nOrgan harvesting allegations.\nIn 2006, allegations emerged that a large number of Falun Gong practitioners had been killed to supply China's organ transplant industry. These allegations prompted an investigation by former Canadian Secretary of State David Kilgour and human rights lawyer David Matas.\nThe Kilgour-Matas report was published in July 2006, and concluded that \"the government of China and its agencies in numerous parts of the country, in particular hospitals but also detention centers and 'people's courts', since 1999 have put to death a large but unknown number of Falun Gong prisoners of conscience.\" The report, which was based mainly on circumstantial evidence, called attention to the extremely short wait times for organs in China\u2014one to two weeks for a liver compared with 32.5 months in Canada\u2014implying it was indicative of organs being procured on demand. It also tracked a significant increase in the number of annual organ transplants in China beginning in 1999, corresponding with the onset of the persecution of Falun Gong. Despite very low levels of voluntary organ donation, China performs the second-highest number of transplants per year. Kilgour and Matas also presented self-accusatory material from Chinese transplant center web sites advertising the immediate availability of organs from living donors, and transcripts of interviews in which hospitals told prospective transplant recipients that they could obtain Falun Gong organs.\nIn May 2008 two United Nations Special Rapporteurs reiterated requests for the Chinese authorities to respond to the allegations, and to explain a source for the organs that would account for the sudden increase in organ transplants in China since 2000. Chinese officials have responded by denying the organ harvesting allegations, and insisting that China abides by World Health Organization principles that prohibit the sale of human organs without written consent from donors. Responding to a U.S. House of Representatives Resolution calling for an end to abusing transplant practices against religious and ethnic minorities, a Chinese embassy spokesperson said \"the so-called organ harvesting from death-row prisoners is totally a lie fabricated by Falun Gong.\" In August 2009, Manfred Nowak, the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Torture, said, \"The Chinese government has yet to come clean and be transparent... It remains to be seen how it could be possible that organ transplant surgeries in Chinese hospitals have risen massively since 1999, while there are never that many voluntary donors available.\"\nIn 2014, investigative journalist Ethan Gutmann published the result of his own investigation. Gutmann conducted extensive interviews with former detainees in Chinese labor camps and prisons, as well as former security officers and medical professionals with knowledge of China's transplant practices. He reported that organ harvesting from political prisoners likely began in Xinjiang province in the 1990s, and then spread nationwide. Gutmann estimates that some 64,000 Falun Gong prisoners may have been killed for their organs between 2000 and 2008.\nIn a 2016 report, David Kilgour found that he had underestimated. In the new report he found that the government's official estimates for the volume of organs harvested since the persecution of Falun Gong began to be 150,000 to 200,000. Media outlets have extrapolated from this study a death toll of 1.5 million. Ethan Gutmann estimated from this update that 60,000 to 110,000 organs are harvested in China annually, observing that it is (paraphrasing) \"difficult but plausible to harvest 3 organs from a single body\" and also calls the harvest \"a new form of genocide using the most respected members of society\".\nIn June 2019, the China Tribunal\u2014 a non-governmental tribunal set up by the International Coalition to End Transplant Abuse in China\u2014concluded that detainees including imprisoned followers of the Falun Gong movement are still being killed for organ harvesting. The Tribunal, chaired by British barrister Geoffrey Nice, said it was \"certain that Falun Gong as a source\u2014probably the principal source\u2014of organs for forced organ harvesting\".\nIn June 2021, the Special Procedures of the United Nations Human Rights Council voiced concerns over having \"received credible information that detainees from ethnic, linguistic or religious minorities may be forcibly subjected to blood tests and organ examinations such as ultrasound and x-rays, without their informed consent; while other prisoners are not required to undergo such examinations.\" The press release stated that UN's human rights experts \"were extremely alarmed by reports of alleged 'organ harvesting' targeting minorities, including Falun Gong practitioners, Uyghurs, Tibetans, Muslims and Christians, in detention in China.\"\nMedia campaign.\nThe Chinese government's campaign against Falun Gong was driven by large-scale propaganda through television, newspapers, radio and internet. The propaganda campaign focused on allegations that Falun Gong jeopardized social stability, was deceiving and dangerous, was anti-science and threatened progress, and argued that Falun Gong's moral philosophy was incompatible with a Marxist social ethic.\nChina scholars Daniel Wright and Joseph Fewsmith stated that for several months after Falun Gong was outlawed, China Central Television's evening news contained little but anti-Falun Gong rhetoric, and that the government operation was \"a study in all-out demonization\". Falun Gong was compared to \"a rat crossing the street that everyone shouts out to squash\" by \"Beijing Daily\"; other officials said it would be a \"long-term, complex and serious\" struggle to \"eradicate\" Falun Gong.\nState propaganda initially used the appeal of scientific rationalism to argue that Falun Gong's worldview was in \"complete opposition to science\" and communism. For example, the \"People's Daily\" asserted on 27 July 1999, that the fight against Falun Gong \"was a struggle between theism and atheism, superstition and science, idealism and materialism\". Other editorials declared that Falun Gong's \"idealism and theism\" are \"absolutely contradictory to the fundamental theories and principles of Marxism\", and that the \"'truth, kindness and forbearance' principle preached by [Falun Gong] has nothing in common with the socialist ethical and cultural progress we are striving to achieve.\" Suppressing Falun Gong was presented as a necessary step to maintaining the \"vanguard role\" of the CCP in Chinese society.\nDespite Party efforts, initial charges leveled against Falun Gong failed to elicit widespread popular support for the persecution of the group. In the months following July 1999, the rhetoric in the state-run press escalated to include charges that Falun Gong was colluding with foreign, \"anti-China\" forces. In October 1999, three months after the persecution began, the \"People's Daily\" newspaper claimed Falun Gong as a (). A direct translation of that term is \"heretical teaching\", but during the anti-Falun Gong propaganda campaign was rendered as \"evil cult\" in English. According to a \"Washington Post\" report, it was Jiang Zemin who issued the order to label Falun Gong a \"cult\". In Mainland China, the term has been used to target religious organizations that do not submit to Communist Party authority.\nIan Johnson argued that applying the 'cult' label to Falun Gong effectively \"cloaked the government's crackdown with the legitimacy of the West's anticult movement\". He wrote that Falun Gong does not satisfy common definitions of a cult: \"its members marry outside the group, have outside friends, hold normal jobs, do not live isolated from society, do not believe that the world's end is imminent and do not give significant amounts of money to the organisation... it does not advocate violence and is at heart an apolitical, inward-oriented discipline, one aimed at cleansing oneself spiritually and improving one's health.\" David Ownby similarly wrote that \"the entire issue of the supposed cultic nature of Falun Gong was a red herring from the beginning, cleverly exploited by the Chinese state to blunt the appeal of Falun Gong\". According to John Powers and Meg Y. M. Lee, because the Falun Gong was categorized in the popular perception as an \"apolitical, qigong exercise club\", it was not seen as a threat to the government. The most critical strategy in the Falun Gong suppression campaign, therefore, was to convince people to reclassify the Falun Gong into a number of \"negatively charged religious labels\", like \"evil cult\", \"sect\", or \"superstition\". The group's silent protests were reclassified as creating \"social disturbances\". In this process of relabelling, the government was attempting to tap into a \"deep reservoir of negative feelings related to the historical role of quasi-religious cults as a destabilising force in Chinese political history\".\nA turning point in the propaganda campaign came on the eve of Chinese New Year on 23 January 2001, when five people attempted to set themselves ablaze on Tiananmen Square. The official Chinese press agency, Xinhua News Agency, and other state media asserted that the self-immolators were practitioners, though the Falun Dafa Information Center disputed this, on the grounds that the movement's teachings explicitly forbid suicide and killing, further alleging that the event was \"a cruel (but clever) piece of stunt-work\". The incident received international news coverage, and video footage of the burnings were broadcast later inside China by China Central Television (CCTV). The broadcasts showed images of a 12-year-old girl, Liu Siying, burning, and interviews with the other participants in which they stated a belief that self-immolation would lead them to paradise. But one of the CNN producers on the scene did not even see a child there. Falun Gong sources and other commentators pointed out that the main participants' account of the incident and other aspects of the participants' behavior were inconsistent with Falun Gong's teachings. Media Channel and the International Education Development (IED) agree that the supposed self-immolation incident was staged by CCP to \"prove\" that Falun Gong brainwashes its followers to commit suicide and has therefore to be banned as a threat to the nation. IED's statement at the 53rd UN session describes China's violent assault on Falun Gong practitioners as state terrorism and that the self-immolation \"was staged by the government\". \"Washington Post\" journalist Phillip Pan wrote that the two self-immolators who died were not actually Falun Gong practitioners. On 21 March 2001, Liu Siying suddenly died after appearing very lively and being deemed ready to leave the hospital to go home. \"Time\" reported that prior to the self-immolation incident, many Chinese had felt that Falun Gong posed no real threat, and that the state's crackdown had gone too far. After the event, however, the mainland Chinese media campaign against Falun Gong gained significant traction. As public sympathy for Falun Gong declined, the government began sanctioning \"systematic use of violence\" against the group.\nIn February 2001, the month following the Tiananmen Square self-immolation incident, Jiang Zemin convened a rare Central Work Conference to stress the importance of continuity in the anti-Falun Gong campaign and unite senior party officials behind the effort. Under Jiang's leadership, the crackdown on Falun Gong became part of the Chinese political ethos of \"upholding stability\"\u2014much the same rhetoric employed by the party during 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre. Jiang's message was echoed at the 2001 National People's Congress, where the Falun Gong's eradication was tied to China's economic progress. Though less prominent on the national agenda, the persecution of Falun Gong has carried on after Jiang was retired; successive, high-level \"strike hard\" campaigns against Falun Gong were initiated in both 2008 and 2009. In 2010, a three-year campaign was launched to renew attempts at the coercive \"transformation\" of Falun Gong practitioners.\nIn the education system.\nAnti-Falun Gong propaganda efforts have also permeated the Chinese education system. Following Jiang's 1999 ban of Falun Gong, then-Minister of Education Chen Zhili launched an active campaign to promote the Party's line on Falun Gong within all levels of academic institutions, including graduate schools, universities and colleges, middle schools, primary schools, and kindergartens. Her efforts included a \"Cultural Revolution-like pledge\" in Chinese schools that required faculty members, staff, and students to publicly denounce Falun Gong. Teachers who did not comply with Chen's program were dismissed or detained; uncooperative students were refused academic advancement, expelled from school, or sent to \"transformation\" camps to alter their thinking. Chen also worked to spread the anti-Falun Gong academic propaganda movement overseas, using domestic educational funding to donate aid to foreign institutions, encouraging them to oppose Falun Gong.\nFalun Gong's response to the persecution.\nFalun Gong's response to the persecution in China began in July 1999 with appeals to local, provincial, and central petitioning offices in Beijing. It soon progressed to larger demonstrations, with hundreds of Falun Gong practitioners traveling daily to Tiananmen Square to perform Falun Gong exercises or raise banners in defense of the practice. These demonstrations were invariably broken up by security forces, and the practitioners involved were arrested\u2014sometimes violently\u2014and detained. By 25 April 2000, a total of more than 30,000 practitioners had been arrested on the square; seven hundred Falun Gong followers were arrested during a demonstration in the square on 1 January 2001. Public protests continued well into 2001. Writing for the \"Wall Street Journal\", Ian Johnson wrote that \"Falun Gong faithful have mustered what is arguably the most sustained challenge to authority in 50 years of Communist rule.\"\nBy late 2001, demonstrations in Tiananmen Square had become less frequent, and the practice was driven deeper underground. As public protest fell out of favor, practitioners established underground \"material sites\", which would produce literature and DVDs to counter the portrayal of Falun Gong in the official media. Practitioners then distribute these materials, often door-to-door. Falun Gong sources estimated in 2009 that over 200,000 such sites exist across China today. The production, possession, or distribution of these materials is frequently grounds for security agents to incarcerate or sentence Falun Gong practitioners.\nIn 2002, Falun Gong activists in China tapped into television broadcasts, replacing regular state-run programming with their own content. One of the more notable instances occurred in March 2002, when Falun Gong practitioners in Changchun intercepted eight cable television networks in Jilin Province, and for nearly an hour, televised a program titled \"Self-Immolation or a Staged Act?\". All six of the Falun Gong practitioners involved were captured over the next few months. Two were killed immediately, while the other four were all dead by 2010 as a result of injuries sustained while imprisoned.\nOutside China, Falun Gong practitioners established international media organizations to gain wider exposure for their cause and challenge narratives of the Chinese state-run media. These include \"The Epoch Times\" newspaper, New Tang Dynasty Television, and Sound of Hope radio station. According to Zhao, through \"The Epoch Times\" it can be discerned how Falun Gong is building a \"de facto media alliance\" with China's democracy movements in exile, as demonstrated by its frequent printing of articles by prominent overseas Chinese critics of the PRC government. In 2004, \"The Epoch Times\" published a collection of nine editorials that presented a critical history of the Chinese Communist Party. This catalyzed the Tuidang movement, which encourages Chinese citizens to renounce their affiliations to the Chinese Communist Party, including ex post facto renunciations of the Communist Youth League and Young Pioneers. \"The Epoch Times\" claims that tens of millions have renounced the Chinese Communist Party as part of the movement, though these numbers have not been independently verified.\nIn 2006, Falun Gong practitioners in the United States formed Shen Yun Performing Arts, a dance and music company that tours internationally. During Shen Yun's 2024 season, the company's eight touring troupes performed over 800 shows on five continents. By 2024, Shen Yun accumulated $266 million in assets mainly through ticket sales and by keeping its costs down through numerous volunteer hours and sometimes personal savings of Falun Gong adherents.\nFalun Gong software developers in the United States are also responsible for the creation of several popular censorship-circumvention tools employed by internet users in China.\nFalun Gong practitioners outside China have filed dozens of lawsuits against Jiang Zemin, Luo Gan, Bo Xilai, and other Chinese officials alleging genocide and crimes against humanity. According to International Advocates for Justice, Falun Gong has filed the largest number of human rights lawsuits in the 21st century and the charges are among the most severe international crimes defined by international criminal laws. As of 2006, 54 civil and criminal lawsuits were under way in 33 countries. In many instances, courts have refused to adjudicate the cases on the grounds of sovereign immunity. In late 2009, however, separate courts in Spain and Argentina indicted Jiang and Luo on charges of \"crimes of humanity\" and genocide, and asked for their arrest\u2014the ruling is acknowledged to be largely symbolic and unlikely to be carried out. The court in Spain also indicted Bo Xilai, Jia Qinglin and Wu Guanzheng.\nFalun Gong practitioners and their supporters also filed a lawsuit in May 2011 against the technology company Cisco Systems, alleging that the company helped design and implement a surveillance system for the Chinese government to suppress Falun Gong. Cisco denied customizing their technology for this purpose. The United States District Court for the Northern District of California dismissed the lawsuit in September 2014. In July 2023, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit reversed and ruled the lawsuit may proceed to trial. Cisco filed an appeal with the U.S. Supreme Court in January 2025.\nSociologist Andrew Junker described Falun Gong's nonviolent resistance to the persecution as the \"most well-organized and tenacious grassroots Chinese protest movement ever to challenge the CCP\". He argued that Falun Gong's more effective and enduring mobilization, compared to the pro-democracy movement (), is due in part to its decentralized organizational structure and emphasis on individual initiative.\nFalun Gong outside China.\nLi Hongzhi began teaching Falun Gong internationally in March 1995. His first stop was in Paris where, at the invitation of the Chinese ambassador, he held a lecture seminar at the PRC embassy. This was followed by lectures in Sweden in May 1995. Between 1995 and 1999, Li gave lectures in the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Germany, Switzerland, and Singapore.\nFalun Gong's growth outside China largely corresponded to the migration of students from mainland China to the West in the early-to-mid-1990s. Falun Gong associations and clubs began appearing in Europe, North America and Australia, with activities centered mainly on university campuses.\nTranslations of Falun Gong teachings began appearing in the late 1990s. As the practice began proliferating outside China, Li was beginning to receive recognition in the United States and elsewhere in the western world. In May 1999, Li was welcomed to Toronto with greetings from the city's mayor and the provincial lieutenant governor, and in the two months that followed also received recognition from the cities of Chicago and San Jose.\nAlthough the practice was beginning to attract an overseas constituency in the 1990s, it remained relatively unknown outside China until the Spring of 1999, when tensions between Falun Gong and the CCP became a subject of international media coverage. With the increased attention, the practice gained a greater following outside China. Following the launch of the CCP's suppression campaign against Falun Gong, the overseas presence became vital to the practice's resistance in China and its continued survival. Falun Gong practitioners overseas have responded to the persecution in China through regular demonstrations, parades, and through the creation of media outlets, performing arts companies, and censorship-circumvention software mainly intended to reach mainland Chinese audiences.\nIn its study of transnational repression committed by governments, Freedom House has reported that practitioners of Falun Gong have been targeted by the Chinese government's transnational repression campaign. According to \"The Diplomat\", Xi Jinping reportedly directed CCP officials in 2022 to intensify efforts to \"completely, and on an international scale, suppress Falun Gong's momentum\" by shaping global public opinion and using legal warfare against Falun Gong organizations abroad, including in the United States.\nIn 2023, two unregistered PRC agents, were indicted for bribing an IRS official to manipulate the IRS whistleblower program against Shen Yun Performing Arts in order to strip its tax-exempt status. Both were sentenced in 2024.\nInternational reception.\nSince 1999, numerous Western governments and human rights organizations have expressed condemnation of the Chinese government's suppression of Falun Gong. Since 1999, members of the United States Congress have made public pronouncements and introduced several resolutions in support of Falun Gong. In 2010, U.S. House of Representatives Resolution 605 called for \"an immediate end to the campaign to persecute, intimidate, imprison, and torture Falun Gong practitioners\", condemned the Chinese authorities' efforts to distribute \"false propaganda\" about the practice worldwide, and expressed sympathy to persecuted Falun Gong practitioners and their families.\nAdam Frank writes that in reporting on the Falun Gong, the Western tradition of casting the Chinese as \"exotic\" took dominance, and that while the facts were generally correct in Western media coverage, \"the normalcy that millions of Chinese practitioners associated with the practice had all but disappeared.\" David Ownby wrote that alongside these tactics, the \"cult\" label applied to Falun Gong by the Chinese authorities never entirely went away in the minds of some Westerners, and the stigma still plays a role in wary public perceptions of Falun Gong.\nTo counter the support of Falun Gong in the West, the Chinese government expanded their efforts against the group internationally. This included visits to newspaper officers by diplomats to \"extol the virtues of Communist China and the evils of Falun Gong\", linking support for Falun Gong with \"jeopardizing trade relations\", and sending letters to local politicians telling them to withdraw support for the practice. According to Perry Link, pressure on Western institutions also takes more subtle forms, including academic self-censorship, whereby research on Falun Gong could result in a denial of visa for fieldwork in China; or exclusion and discrimination from business and community groups who have connections with China and fear angering Chinese government.\nAlthough the persecution of Falun Gong has drawn condemnation outside China, some observers assert that Falun Gong has failed to attract the level of sympathy and sustained attention afforded to other Chinese dissident groups.\nEthan Gutmann, a journalist reporting on China since the early 1990s, has attempted to explain this apparent dearth of public sympathy for Falun Gong as stemming, in part, from the group's shortcomings in public relations. Unlike the democracy activists or Tibetans, who have found a comfortable place in Western perceptions, \"Falun Gong marched to a distinctly Chinese drum\", Gutmann writes. Moreover, practitioners' attempts at getting their message across carried some of the uncouthness of Communist Party culture, including a perception that practitioners tended to exaggerate, create \"torture tableaux straight out of a Cultural Revolution opera\", or \"spout slogans rather than facts\". Gutmann also says that media organizations and human rights groups also self-censor on the topic, given the PRC governments vehement attitude toward the practice, and the potential repercussions that may follow for making overt representations on Falun Gong's behalf.\nRichard Madsen writes that Falun Gong lacks robust backing from the American constituencies that usually support religious freedom. For instance, Falun Gong's conservative moral beliefs have alienated some liberal constituencies in the West (e.g. its teachings against promiscuity and homosexual behavior). He also states that Christian conservatives do not support Falun Gong while they do support Chinese Christians. Madsen charges that the American political center does not want to push the human rights issue so hard that it would disrupt commercial and political relations with China. Thus, Falun Gong practitioners have largely had to rely on their own resources in responding to suppression.\nIn August 2007, the newly reestablished Rabbinic Sanhedrin deliberated persecution of the movement by the Chinese government at the request of Falun Gong.\nSociologist Andrew Junker stated that \"secularist biases\" and the risk of \"severe professional sanction\" by the Chinese government are two primary factors that distort Western scholars' understanding of Falun Gong. He wrote: \"The combined result of these two factors is a kind of blindness. As we try to stand outside the historical episode of Falun Gong and peer in, it is as if one of our eyes has been poked out by the Chinese state, whereas we cover the other eye with our own hand.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55175", "revid": "20873141", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55175", "title": "Biotope", "text": "Habitat for communities made up of populations of multiple species\nA biotope is an area of uniform environmental conditions providing a living place for a specific assemblage of plants and animals. \"Biotope\" is almost synonymous with the term \"habitat\", which is more commonly used in English-speaking countries. However, in some countries these two terms are distinguished: the subject of a habitat is a population, the subject of a biotope is a \"biocoenosis\" or \"biological community\". \nIt is an English loanword derived from the German ', which in turn came from the Greek \"bios\" (meaning 'life') and \"topos\" ('place'). (The related word \"geotope\" has made its way into the English language by the same route, from the German '.)\nEcology.\nThe concept of a biotope was first advocated by Ernst Haeckel (1834\u20131919), a German zoologist famous for the recapitulation theory. In his book \"General Morphology\" (1866), which defines the term \"ecology\", he stresses the importance of the concept of habitat as a prerequisite for an organism's existence. Haeckel also explains that with one ecosystem, its biota is shaped by environmental factors (such as water, soil, and geographical features) and interaction among living things; the original idea of a biotope was closely related to evolutional theory. Following this, F. Dahl, a professor at the Berlin Zoological Museum, referred to this ecological system as a \"biotope\" (biotop) (1908).\nBiotope restoration.\nAlthough the term \"biotope\" is considered to be a technical word with respect to ecology, in recent years the term is more generally used in administrative and civic activities. Since the 1970s the term \"biotope\" has received great attention as a keyword throughout Europe (mainly Germany) for the preservation, regeneration, and creation of natural environmental settings. Used in this context, the term \"biotope\" often refers to a smaller and more specific ecology and is very familiar to human life. In Germany especially, activities related to regenerating biotopes are enthusiastically received. These activities include:\nVarious sectors play a part in these activities, including architecture, civil engineering, urban planning, traffic, agriculture, river engineering, limnology, biology, education, landscape gardening, and domestic gardening. In all fields, all sorts of people are seeking a viable way for humans to respect other living things. The term \"biotope\" would include a complete environmental approach.\nCharacteristics.\nThe following four points are the chief characteristics of biotopes.\nMicroscale.\nA biotope is generally not considered to be a large-scale phenomenon. For example, a biotope might be a neighbouring park, a back garden, potted plant, a terrarium or a fish tank on a porch. In other words, the biotope is not a macroscopic but a microscopic approach to preserving the ecosystem and biological diversity. So biotopes fit into ordinary people's daily activities and lives, with more people being able to take part in biotope creation and continuing management.\nBiotope networks.\nIt is commonly emphasised that biotopes should not be isolated (although there are exceptions, such as manmade closed ecological systems which are specifically designed for no exchange of materials with the outside world). Instead biotopes need to be connected to each other and other surrounding life for without these connections to life-forms such as animals and plants, biotopes would not effectively work as a place in which diverse organisms live. So one of the most effective strategies for regenerating biotopes is to plan a \"stretch\" of biotopes, not just a \"point\" where animals and plants come and go. (Such an organic traffic course is called a corridor.) In the stretch method, the centre of the network would be large green tracts of land: a forest, natural park, or cemetery. By connecting parcels of land with smaller biotope areas such as a green belt along the river, small town parks, gardens, or even roadside trees, biotopes can exist in a network. In other words, a biotope is an open, not a closed, system and is a practicable strategy.\nHuman daily life.\nThe term \"biotope\" does not apply to biosphere reserves, which are completely separate from humans and become the object of human admiration. Instead, it is an active part of human daily life. For example, an ornamental flower bed may be considered a biotope (though a rather small one) since it enhances the experience of daily life. An area that has many functions, such as human living space, and is home to other living things, whether plant or animal, can be considered a biosphere reserve.\nArtificial.\nWhen artificial items are introduced to a biotope setting, their design and arrangement is of great importance for biotope regeneration. Tree-planting areas where the surface is uneven results in plants that sprout and the nesting of small insects. A mat or net made from natural fibres will gradually biodegrade as it is exposed to the weather. So there is no binomial opposition between the natural and the artificial in a biotope. Rather, such artificial materials are widely used.\nGermany.\nIt is especially characteristic in Germany, which is the birthplace of the term biotope, that the authorities take the initiative in conserving biotopes, maintaining consistency with urban or rural planning and considering the regions' history and landscape.\nLegal basis.\nSince 1976, the federal nature protection law, \"Bundesnaturschutzgesetz\" (BNUM), requires that wild animals and plants and their community should be protected as part of the ecosystem in the specific diversity that has grown naturally and historically, and their biotope and other living conditions should be protected, preserved, developed, and restored. (Number 9, Clause 1, Article 2). The law also requires that some kinds of biotope that are full of a specific variety should not be harmed by development. So there is a law that mandates the protection of biotopes. There is also a provincial law corresponding to the federal one. Such developments were uncommon in those times.\nLandscape plan.\nMany German states are obliged by law to produce a landscape plan (\"Landschaftsplan\") as part of their urban planning, though these plans vary somewhat from place to place. The purpose of the \"Landschaftsplan\" is to protect the region's environment and landscape. These plans use text and figures to describe the present environmental state and proposed remedies. They consider, for example, the regional lie of the land, climate, wind direction, soil, ground water, type of biotope, distribution of animals and plants, inhabitants' welfare and competition with development projects.\nCitizen welfare.\nBiotope preservation in cities also emphasises recreation and relaxation for citizens and improving the urban environment. For example, in the reserve of Karlsruhe in Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg people can cycle on the bike path or walk the dog, although it is forbidden to gather plants and animals there or walk in the exclusion zone. At the core of biotope preservation is the idea that if civic life is surrounded by a rich profusion of nature whose background is in local history and culture, it is improved by protecting nature and preserving the landscape.\nAquaria.\nThe term \"biotope\" is also often used by aquarium hobbyists to describe an aquarium setup that tries to simulate the natural habitat of a specific assemblage of fish. The idea is to replicate conditions such as water parameters, natural plants, substrate, water type (fresh, saline or brackish), lighting, and to include other native fish which usually live together in nature and as such, represent a particular real-world biotope. An example of one South American biotope type might be \"Forest creek tributary of Rio Negro near Barcelos, Brazil\" with many branches, twigs, roots, dead leaves, light sandy substrate, tannin-stained water and subdued lighting with floating plants, along with \"Nannostomus eques\", \"Paracheirodon axelrodi\", \"Hemigrammus bleheri\", and \"Dicrossus filamentosus\". \"South American\" is not itself a biotope, as South America contains thousands of distinct biotopes in different regions.\nArtificial closed ecological systems.\nThe term \"biotope\" can be also used to describe manmade closed ecological systems, occasionally also referred to as CES systems. Examples of these include the Biosphere 2 project and to a lesser degree the Eden Project, which contain areas of uniform environmental conditions and house numerous species of plants, animals and fungi. Therefore these can be considered biotopes. Homemade ecological systems, often incorrectly referred to as ecospheres (due to the product, known as the EcoSphere) or jarrariums also fall under the definition of biotope. These homemade ecosystems (which also include closed terrariums) are often made by hobbyists in what are often jars (hence the name jarrarium) or sealed glass tanks with the intention of mimicking a larger ecosystem. They are often made by going out and collecting material (including soil, plants, small insects and water if an aquatic ecosystem) from said ecosystem and sealing it in an airtight container. These closed ecosystems are often made by hobbyists who enjoy the idea of having an entire ecosystem on their windowsill, or by those interested in studying the viability of small scale, closed loop ecological systems for the purpose potentially creating life support systems."}
{"id": "55176", "revid": "50674341", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55176", "title": "Motorola 88000", "text": "RISC instruction set architecture\nThe 88000 (m88k for short) is a RISC instruction set architecture developed by Mitch Alsup at Motorola during the 1980s. The MC88100 arrived on the market in 1988, some two years after the competing SPARC and MIPS. Due to the late start and extensive delays releasing the second-generation MC88110, the m88k achieved very limited success outside of the MVME platform and embedded controller environments. When Motorola joined the AIM alliance in 1991 to develop the PowerPC, further development of the 88000 ended.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nMotorola entered the 1980s in a position of strength; the company's recently-introduced Motorola 68000 easily outperformed any other microprocessor on the market, and its 32-bit architecture was naturally suited to the emerging workstation market. Intel was not moving aggressively into the 32-bit space, and the companies that did, notably National Semiconductor, botched their releases and left Motorola in control of everything that was not Intel. At the time, Intel held about 80% of the overall computer market, while Motorola controlled 90% of the rest.\nInto this came the early 1980's introduction of the RISC concept. At first, there was an intense debate within the industry whether the concept would actually improve performance, or if its longer machine language programs would actually slow the execution through additional memory accesses. All such debate was ended by the mid-1980s when the first RISC-based workstations emerged; the latest Sun-3/80 running on a 20\u00a0MHz Motorola 68030 delivered about 3 MIPS, whereas the first SPARC-based Sun-4/260 with a 16\u00a0MHz SPARC delivered 10 MIPS. Hewlett-Packard, DEC and other large vendors all began moving to RISC platforms.\nThis shift in the market had the potential to lock Motorola out of the workstation market, one of its only strongholds and among its most lucrative. Apple remained the company's only large vendor outside the workstation space; other users of the 68000, notably Atari Corporation and Commodore International, were floundering in a market that was rapidly standardizing on IBM PC compatibles.\nMotorola's approach.\nRISC designs were a conscious effort to tailor the processor to the types of operations being called by the compilers on that platform, in the case of Unix workstations, the C programming language. The seminal IBM 801 project had noted that compilers generally did not use the vast majority of the instructions available to them, and instead used the simplest version of the instructions, often because these performed the fastest. Yet the circuitry providing the other versions of these instructions added overhead even to the simplest version. Removing these unused instructions from the CPU eliminated this overhead and freed up significant room on the chip. This gave room to increase the number of processor registers, which had a far greater impact on performance than the removed special-case instructions. For this reason, the RISC concept can be said to be driven by the real-world design of compilers.\nMotorola's articles on the 88000 design speak of single-cycle instructions, large processor register files and other hallmarks of the RISC concept, but don't mention the word \"RISC\" even once. As existing RISC designs had entered the market already, the company decided that it would not attempt to compete with these and would instead produce the world's most powerful processor. To do this, it took design notes from one of the fastest computers of a previous era, the CDC 6600 supercomputer. In particular, it adopted the 6600's concept of a scoreboard. Scoreboarding allowed the CPU to examine the instruction's use of registers and immediately dispatch those that did not rely on previous calculations that were not yet complete; this allowed the instructions to be re-ordered to allow ones that had their required data to run while others had their data loaded from the cache or memory. This instruction reordering could improve usage by as much as 35%.\nThe design also used separate data and instruction address buses. This was costly in terms of pin count; both the instruction and data caches had 32 pins for their address and 32 pins for the data, meaning the complete system used 128 pins on the \"P-bus\". This design was based on the observation that only about one-third of operations were memory-related; the rest were operating on data already read. This strongly favored having a dedicated instruction pathway to an external instruction cache. The caches and associated memory management units (MMU) were initially external, a cache controller could be connected to either the data or instruction buses, and up to four controllers could be used on either bus. Internally there were three 32-bit buses, connected to the internal units in different ways as required for reading and writing data to the registers.\nAnother feature of the new design was its built-in support for specialized co-processors, or \"special function units\", or SFUs. In addition to the internal commands supported out of the box, it set aside blocks of 256 instructions that could be used by co-processors. This was aimed at designers who wished to customize the system; new functional units could be added without affecting the existing instruction set architecture, ensuring software compatibility for the main functionality. Every 88000 came with SFU1 already installed, the floating point unit (FPU). The branch and jump instructions incorporate a delayed branch option (.n), which can be specified to ensure that the subsequent sequential instruction is executed before the branch target instruction, irrespective of the branch condition. Placing branch instruction or other instruction which may change the instruction pointer, in the branch delay slot is deprecated to maintain future compatibility.\nRelease.\nBy 1987 it was widely known that Motorola was designing its own RISC processor. Referred to by the computer industry as the \"78000\", an homage to the earlier 68000, it became the 88000 when it was released in April 1988.\nAs a side-effect of the complexity of the design, the CPU did not fit on a single chip. The 68030, released a year earlier, had 273,000 transistors, including the arithmetic logic unit (ALU) and memory management unit (MMU) on a single chip, with the optional floating point unit (FPU) as a separate chip. In contrast, the 88000 packaged the ALU and FPU together on the 750,000 transistor MC88100, and the memory management unit (MMU) and 16\u00a0KB static RAM cache in the 750,000 transistor MC88200. In contrast to the 68030 where the FPU was truly optional, a practical 88000 system could not be built without at least one MC88200. Systems could include more than one MC88200, producing larger caches and allowing multiple paths to main memory for improved performance.\nAimed at the high-end of the market, it was claimed to be the fastest 32-bit processor in the world when it was released. Running at 20\u00a0MHz, it reached 34,000\u00a0Dhrystones or 17\u00a0VUPS, compared to about 12\u00a0MIPS for a 12.5\u00a0MHz SPARC of the same vintage in the SPARCstation, or around 3.3\u00a0MIPS of the 20\u00a0MHz 68030. It was also available as a 25\u00a0MHz part at 21\u00a0MIPS, 48,387\u00a0Dhrystones.\nAt the time, Motorola marketed the 88000 strictly to the high-end of the market, including \"telecommunications, artificial intelligence, graphics, three-dimensional animation, simulation, parallel processing and supercomputers\", while it suggested the existing 68k series would continue to be used in the workstation market. Instead, most potential customers ignored the 88000, and the system saw little use.\nRe-release.\nAs the original release saw next to no use outside Motorola's own products, and those traditional customers were starting to move to other RISC designs, the company re-launched the design in a single-chip form, the MC88110. In the late 1980s, several companies were actively examining the 88000 series for future use, including NeXT, Apple Computer and Apollo Computer, but all had given up on the design by the time the 88110 was finally available in 1992.\nThere was an attempt to popularize the system with the 88open group, similar to what Sun Microsystems was attempting with its SPARC design. It appears to have failed in any practical sense.\nAbandonment.\nIn the early 1990s Motorola joined the AIM effort to create a new RISC architecture based on the IBM POWER architecture. It worked a few features of the 88000 (such as a compatible bus interface) into the new PowerPC architecture to offer its customer base some sort of upgrade path. At that point the 88000 was dumped as soon as possible.\nArchitecture.\nLike the 68000 before it, the 88000 was considered to be a \"clean\" design. It is a pure 32-bit load/store architecture with separate instruction and data caches (split-cache von Neumann architecture), and separate data and address buses. It has a small, powerful command set and uses a flat address space.\nAn unusual architectural feature is that both integer instructions and floating-point instructions use the same register file.\nImplementations.\nThe first implementation of the 88000 ISA was the MC88100 microprocessor, which included an integrated FPU. Mated to this was the MC88200 MMU and cache controller. The idea behind this splitting of duties was to allow multiprocessor systems to be built more easily; a single MC88200 could support up to four MC88100s. However, this also meant that building the most basic system, with a single processor, required both chips and considerable wiring between them, driving up costs. This was likely to be another major reason for the 88000's limited success.\nThe MC88100 implemented a 'Master/Checker' capability for fault tolerance employing two or more redundant MC88100s:\nIn this application, two processors are wired together. The master processor (PCE negated) operates normally. The checker processor (PCE asserted) places all of its outputs in the high impedance state except ERR; all outputs are monitored as inputs. The checker processor performs the same operations as the master processor and compares its internal results with the results read from the high-impedance pins. If a mismatch occurs between the master and checker, the checker asserts ERR. External logic must then determine the appropriate action for the system.\nThe packaging &amp; cost issue was later addressed by the superscalar MC88110, which combined the CPU, FPU, MMU, and L1 cache into a single package. An additional modification, made at the behest of MIT's *T project, resulted in the MC88110MP, including on-chip communications for use in multi-processor systems. A version capable of speeds up to 100\u00a0MHz was planned as the MC88120, but was never built.\nAn implementation for embedded applications, the MC88300, was under development during the early 1990s, but was eventually canceled. Ford Motor Company had planned to use the chips, which alongside adoption by telecommunications vendors had been viewed as guaranteeing the viability of the architecture indefinitely. Motorola offered a PowerPC design as a replacement, which Ford accepted.\nProducts and applications.\nMotorola released a series of single-board computers, known as the MVME series, for building \"out of the box\" systems based on the 88000, as well as the Series 900 \"stackable\" computers employing these MVME boards. Unlike tower or rack mount systems, the Series 900 sat on top of each other and connected to one another with bus-like cabling. The concept never caught on.\nMajor 3rd party users were limited. The only widespread use would be in the Data General AViiON series. These were fairly popular, and remain in limited use today. For later models, DG moved to Intel. Encore Computer built its Encore-91 machine on the m88k, then introduced a completely ground-up redesign as the Infinity 90 series, but it is unclear how many of these machines were sold. Encore moved to the Alpha. Tektronix introduced its XD88 line of graphics workstations in April 1989.\nGEC Computers used the MC88100 to build the GEC 4310, one of the GEC 4000 series computers, but issues with memory management meant it didn't perform as well as the company's earlier gate array based and Am2900 based GEC 4000 series computers. The BBN Butterfly model TC-2000 used the MC88100 processor, and scaled to 512 CPUs. Linotype-Hell used the 88110 in its \"Power\" workstations running the DaVinci raster graphics editor for image manipulation.\nThe MC88110 made it into some versions of a never released NeXT machine, the NeXT RISC Workstation, but the project was canceled along with all NeXT hardware projects in 1993. The 4-processor OMRON LUNA-88K machines from Japan used the m88k, and were used for a short time on the Mach kernel project at Carnegie Mellon University. In the early 1990s Northern Telecom used the MC88100 and MC88110 as the central processor in its DMS SuperNode family of telephone switches.\nMost other users were much smaller. Alpha Microsystems originally planned to migrate to the 88K architecture from the Motorola 68000, and internally created a machine around it running UNIX System V, but it was later scrapped in favour of later 68K derivatives. NCD used the 88100 (without the 88200) in its 88K X-Terminals. Dolphin Server, a spin-off from the dying Norsk Data, built servers based on the 88k. Around 100 systems were shipped during 1988-1992.\nVirtuality used the MC88110 in the SU2000 virtual reality arcade machine as a graphics processor, with one MC88110 per screen of each virtual reality headset.\nIn the embedded computer space, the \"Tri-channel VMS Computer\" in the F-15 S/MTD used three 88000s in a triply redundant computer.\nOperating system support.\nMotorola released its own UNIX System V derivative, System V/88, for its 88000-based systems. There were two major releases: Release 3.2 Version 3 and Release 4.0 Version 3.&lt;ref name=\"UNIX System V/88\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Data General AViiON systems ran DG/UX. OpenBSD ports exist for the MVME systems,&lt;ref name=\"OpenBSD/mvme88k\"&gt;http://&lt;/ref&gt; LUNA-88K workstations,&lt;ref name=\"OpenBSD/luna88k\"&gt;http://&lt;/ref&gt; and Data General AViiON systems.&lt;ref name=\"OpenBSD/aviion\"&gt;http://&lt;/ref&gt; At least one unofficial experimental NetBSD port exists for the MVME systems.&lt;ref name=\"NetBSD/m88k\"&gt;http:// Unofficial port of NetBSD 3.x&lt;/ref&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55177", "revid": "43744280", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55177", "title": "Restionales", "text": "Order of plants\nRestionales is an order of flowering plants. In the Cronquist system (of 1981) it is used for an order (in subclass \"Commelinidae\") and circumscribed as:\nThe APG II system (2003) assigns the plants involved to the order \"Poales\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55178", "revid": "410906", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55178", "title": "Staff", "text": "Staff may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "55179", "revid": "129409", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55179", "title": "Wannsee Protocol", "text": ""}
{"id": "55180", "revid": "43744280", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55180", "title": "Juncales", "text": "Order of flowering plants\nJuncales is an order of flowering plants. In the Engler system (update, of 1964) and in the Cronquist system (of 1981, which placed this order in subclass Commelinidae) it is circumscribed as:\nHowever, the Thorne system (1992) accepts it as consisting of :\nThe APG II system, used here, assigns the plants involved to the order Poales.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55181", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55181", "title": "Xyridales", "text": ""}
{"id": "55182", "revid": "20468248", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55182", "title": "Jakarta Project", "text": "Umbrella project under the auspices of the Apache Software Foundation\nThe Jakarta Project created and maintained open source software for the Java platform. It operated as an umbrella project under the auspices of the Apache Software Foundation, and all Jakarta products are released under the Apache License. As of December 21, 2011 the Jakarta project was retired because no subprojects were remaining.\nIn 2018 Jakarta EE, a part of the Eclipse Enterprise for Java (EE4J) project, became the new name for the Java EE platform at the Eclipse Foundation.\nSubprojects.\nMajor contributions by the Jakarta Project include tools, libraries and frameworks such as:\nThe following projects were formerly part of Jakarta, but now form independent projects within the Apache Software Foundation:\nProject name.\nJakarta is named after the conference room at Sun Microsystems where the majority of discussions leading to the project's creation took place. At the time, Sun's Java software division was headquartered in a Cupertino building where the conference room names were all coffee references.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55183", "revid": "11677590", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55183", "title": "Hydatellales", "text": ""}
{"id": "55184", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55184", "title": "Hop (telecommunications)", "text": "Step in the journey of a signal\nIn telecommunications, a hop is a portion of a signal's journey from source to receiver. Examples include:\nIn computer networks, a hop is the step from one network segment to the next.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "55185", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55185", "title": "Typhales", "text": "Order of flowering plants\nTyphales is a botanical name for an order of flowering plants. In the Cronquist system the name was used for an order placed in the subclass \"Commelinidae\". The order consisted of (1981):\nThe APG IV system, used here, assigns the plants involved to the order \"Poales\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55186", "revid": "659293331", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55186", "title": "Wing Tsun", "text": ""}
{"id": "55187", "revid": "517", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55187", "title": "Cannales", "text": ""}
{"id": "55188", "revid": "30813012", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55188", "title": "Barbara McClintock", "text": "American scientist and cytogeneticist (1902\u20131992)\nBarbara McClintock (June 16, 1902 \u2013 September 2, 1992) was an American scientist and cytogeneticist who was awarded the 1983 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. McClintock received her PhD in botany from Cornell University in 1927. There she started her career as the leader of the development of maize cytogenetics, the focus of her research for the rest of her life. From the late 1920s, McClintock studied chromosomes and how they change during reproduction in maize. She developed the technique for visualizing maize chromosomes and used microscopic analysis to demonstrate many fundamental genetic ideas. One of those ideas was the notion of genetic recombination by crossing-over during meiosis\u2014a mechanism by which chromosomes exchange information. She is often erroneously credited with producing the first genetic map for maize, linking regions of the chromosome to physical traits. She demonstrated the role of the telomere and centromere, regions of the chromosome that are important in the conservation of genetic information. She was recognized as among the best in the field, awarded prestigious fellowships, and elected a member of the National Academy of Sciences in 1944.\nDuring the 1940s and 1950s, McClintock discovered transposons and used it to demonstrate that genes are responsible for turning physical characteristics on and off. She developed theories to explain the suppression and expression of genetic information from one generation of maize plants to the next. Due to skepticism of her research and its implications, she stopped publishing her data in 1953.\nLater, she made an extensive study of the cytogenetics and ethnobotany of maize races from South America. McClintock's research became well understood in the 1960s and 1970s, as other scientists confirmed the mechanisms of genetic change and protein expression that she had demonstrated in her maize research in the 1940s and 1950s. Awards and recognition for her contributions to the field followed, including the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, awarded to her in 1983 for the discovery of genetic transposition; as of 2025, she remains the only woman who has received an unshared Nobel Prize in that category.\nEarly life.\nBarbara McClintock was born Eleanor McClintock on June 16, 1902, in Hartford, Connecticut, the third of four children born to homeopathic physician Thomas Henry McClintock and Sara Handy McClintock. Thomas McClintock was the child of British immigrants. Marjorie, the oldest child, was born in October 1898; Mignon, the second daughter, was born in November 1900. The youngest, Malcolm Rider (called Tom), was born 18 months after Barbara. When she was a young girl, her parents determined that Eleanor, a \"feminine\" and \"delicate\" name, was not appropriate for her, and chose Barbara instead. McClintock was an independent child beginning at a very young age, a trait she later identified as her \"capacity to be alone\". From the age of three until she began school, McClintock lived with an aunt and uncle in Brooklyn, New York, in order to reduce the financial burden on her parents while her father established his medical practice. She was described as a solitary and independent child. She was close to her father, but had a difficult relationship with her mother, tension that began when she was young.\nThe McClintock family moved to Brooklyn in 1908 and McClintock completed her secondary education there at Erasmus Hall High School; she graduated in 1919. She discovered her love of science and reaffirmed her solitary personality during high school. She wanted to continue her studies at Cornell University's College of Agriculture. Her mother resisted sending McClintock to college for fear that she would be unmarriageable, a common attitude at the time. McClintock was almost prevented from starting college, but her father allowed her to just before registration began, and she matriculated at Cornell in 1919.\nEducation and research at Cornell.\nMcClintock began her studies at Cornell's College of Agriculture in 1919. There, she participated in student government and was invited to join a sorority, but later broke her sorority pledge. Instead, McClintock took up music, specifically jazz. She studied botany, receiving a BSc in 1923. Her interest in genetics began when she took her first course in that field in 1921. The course was based on a similar one offered at Harvard University, and was taught by C. B. Hutchison, a plant breeder and geneticist. Hutchison was impressed by McClintock's interest, and telephoned to invite her to participate in the graduate genetics course at Cornell in 1922. McClintock pointed to Hutchison's invitation as a catalyst for her interest in genetics: \"Obviously, this telephone call cast the die for my future. I remained with genetics thereafter.\" Although it has been reported that women could not major in genetics at Cornell, and therefore her MS and PhD\u2014earned in 1925 and 1927, respectively\u2014were officially awarded in botany, recent research has revealed that women were permitted to earn graduate degrees in Cornell's Plant Breeding Department during the time that McClintock was a student at Cornell.\nDuring her graduate studies and postgraduate appointment as a botany instructor, McClintock was instrumental in assembling a group that studied the new field of cytogenetics in maize. This group brought together plant breeders and cytologists, and included Marcus Rhoades, future Nobel laureate George Beadle, and Harriet Creighton. Rollins A. Emerson, head of the Plant Breeding Department, supported these efforts, although he was not a cytologist himself.\nShe also worked as a research assistant for Lowell Fitz Randolph and then for Lester W. Sharp, both Cornell botanists.\nMcClintock's cytogenetic research focused on developing ways to visualize and characterize maize chromosomes. This particular part of her work influenced a generation of students, as it was included in most textbooks. She also developed a technique using carmine staining to visualize maize chromosomes, and showed for the first time the morphology of the 10 maize chromosomes. This discovery was made because she observed cells from the microspore as opposed to the root tip. By studying the morphology of the chromosomes, McClintock was able to link specific chromosome groups of traits that were inherited together. Marcus Rhoades noted that McClintock's 1929 \"Genetics\" paper on the characterization of triploid maize chromosomes triggered scientific interest in maize cytogenetics, and attributed to her 10 of the 17 significant advances in the field that were made by Cornell scientists between 1929 and 1935.\nIn 1930, McClintock was the first person to describe the cross-shaped interaction of homologous chromosomes during meiosis. The following year, McClintock and Creighton proved the link between chromosomal crossover during meiosis and the recombination of genetic traits. They observed how the recombination of chromosomes seen under a microscope correlated with new traits. Until this point, it had only been hypothesized that genetic recombination could occur during meiosis, although it had not been shown genetically. It is often reported that McClintock published the first genetic map for maize in 1931, showing the order of three genes on maize chromosome 9; however, it was her genetics professor C. B. Hutchison who has published the first genetic linkage maps for Chromosome 9 in 1921 and 1922. Her chromosome map showed that the arrangement of genes was consistent with the linkage map published by Hutchison in 1921. This information provided necessary data for the crossing-over study she published with Creighton; they also showed that crossing-over occurs in sister chromatids as well as homologous chromosomes. In 1938, she produced a cytogenetic analysis of the centromere, describing the organization and function of the centromere, as well as the fact that it can divide.\nMcClintock's breakthrough publications, and support from her colleagues, led to her being awarded several postdoctoral fellowships from the National Research Council. This funding allowed her to continue to study genetics at Cornell, the University of Missouri, and the California Institute of Technology, where she worked with E. G. Anderson. During the summers of 1931 and 1932, she worked at the University of Missouri with geneticist Lewis Stadler, who introduced her to the use of X-rays as a mutagen. Exposure to X-rays can increase the rate of mutation above the natural background level, making it a powerful research tool for genetics. Through her work with X-ray-mutagenized maize, she identified ring chromosomes, which form when the ends of a single chromosome fuse together after radiation damage. McClintock found the first ring chromosome in maize in 1931, but the first ring chromosome was first reported by Michael Navashin, who she cited in her first study with Stadler. From this evidence, McClintock hypothesized that there must be a structure on the chromosome tip that would normally ensure stability. She showed that the loss of ring-chromosomes at meiosis caused variegation in maize foliage in generations subsequent to irradiation resulting from chromosomal deletion. During this period, she demonstrated the presence of the nucleolus organizer region on a region on maize chromosome 6, which is required for the assembly of the nucleolus. In 1933, she established that cells can be damaged when nonhomologous recombination occurs. During this same period, McClintock hypothesized that the tips of chromosomes are protected by telomeres.\nMcClintock received a fellowship from the Guggenheim Foundation that made possible six months of training in Germany during 1933 and 1934. She had planned to work with Curt Stern, who had demonstrated crossing-over in \"Drosophila\" just weeks after McClintock and Creighton had done so; however, Stern emigrated to the United States. Instead, she worked with geneticist Richard B. Goldschmidt, who was a director of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Biology in Berlin. She left Germany early amidst mounting political tension in Europe, returned to Cornell, but found that the university would not hire a woman professor. Legends such as the one cited here are based on undocumented evidence. Kass 2024 has evidence that McClintock worked at Cornell on her return to Cornell after spending only 5 months in Germany. Emerson hired her as his assistant in the Department of Plant Breeding where McClintock conducted independent research which led to a job offer as an assistant professor at the University of Missouri. In 1936, she accepted an Assistant Professorship offered to her by Lewis Stadler in the Department of Botany at the University of Missouri in Columbia. While still at Cornell, she was supported by a two-year Rockefeller Foundation grant obtained for her through Emerson's efforts.\nUniversity of Missouri.\nDuring her time at Missouri, McClintock expanded her research on the effect of X-rays on maize cytogenetics. McClintock observed the breakage and fusion of chromosomes in irradiated maize cells. She was also able to show that, in some plants, spontaneous chromosome breakage occurred in the cells of the endosperm. Over the course of mitosis, she observed that the ends of broken chromatids were rejoined after the chromosome replication. In the anaphase of mitosis, the broken chromosomes formed a chromatid bridge, which was broken when the chromatids moved towards the cell poles. The broken ends were rejoined in the interphase of the next mitosis, and the cycle was repeated, causing massive mutation, which she could detect as variegation in the endosperm. This breakage\u2013rejoining\u2013bridge cycle was a key cytogenetic discovery for several reasons. First, it showed that the rejoining of chromosomes was not a random event, and second, it demonstrated a source of large-scale mutation. For this reason, it remains an area of interest in cancer research today.\nAlthough her research was progressing at Missouri, McClintock was not satisfied with her position at the university. She recalled being excluded from faculty meetings, and was not made aware of positions available at other institutions. In 1940, she wrote to Charles Burnham, \"I have decided that I must look for another job. As far as I can make out, there is nothing more for me here. I am an assistant professor at $3,000 and I feel sure that that is the limit for me.\" Initially, McClintock's position was created especially for her by Stadler, and might have depended on his presence at the university. McClintock believed she would not gain tenure at Missouri, even though according to some accounts, she knew she would be offered a promotion from Missouri in the spring of 1942. Recent evidence reveals that McClintock more likely decided to leave Missouri because she had lost trust in her employer and in the university administration, after discovering that her job would be in jeopardy if Stadler were to leave for Caltech, as he had considered doing. The university's retaliation against Stadler amplified her sentiments.\nIn early 1941, she took a leave of absence from Missouri in hopes of finding a position elsewhere. She accepted a visiting professorship at Columbia University, where her former Cornell colleague Marcus Rhoades was a professor. Rhoades also offered to share his research field at Cold Spring Harbor on Long Island. In December 1941, she was offered a temporary research position by Milislav Demerec, the newly appointed acting director of the Carnegie Institution of Washington's Department of Genetics at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory. Although hesitant to make a long-term commitment, McClintock accepted the invitation and became a permanent member of the staff in 1943.\nCold Spring Harbor.\nAfter her year-long temporary appointment, McClintock accepted a full-time research position at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory. There, she was highly productive and continued her work with the breakage-fusion-bridge cycle, using it to substitute for X-rays as a tool for mapping new genes. In 1944, in recognition of her prominence in the field of genetics during this period, McClintock was elected to the National Academy of Sciences\u2014only the third woman to be elected. The following year she became the first female president of the Genetics Society of America; she had been elected its vice-president in 1939. In 1944 she undertook a cytogenetic analysis of \"Neurospora crassa\" at the suggestion of George Beadle, who used the fungus to demonstrate the one gene\u2013one enzyme relationship. He invited her to Stanford to undertake the study. She successfully described the number of chromosomes, or karyotype, of \"N. crassa\" and described the entire life cycle of the species. Beadle said, \"Barbara, in two months at Stanford, did more to clean up the cytology of \"Neurospora\" than all other cytological geneticists had done in all previous time on all forms of mold.\" \"N. crassa\" has since become a model species for classical genetic analysis.\nDiscovery of controlling elements.\nIn the summer of 1944 at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, McClintock began systematic studies on the mechanisms of the mosaic color patterns of maize seed and the unstable inheritance of this mosaicism. She identified two new dominant and interacting genetic loci that she named \"Dissociation\" (\"Ds\") and \"Activator\" (\"Ac\"). She found that the \"Dissociation\" did not just dissociate or cause the chromosome to break, it also had a variety of effects on neighboring genes when the \"Activator\" was also present, which included making certain stable mutations unstable. In early 1948, she made the surprising discovery that both \"Dissociation\" and \"Activator\" could transpose, or change position, on the chromosome.\nShe observed the effects of the transposition of \"Ac\" and \"Ds\" by the changing patterns of coloration in maize kernels over generations of controlled crosses, and described the relationship between the two loci through intricate microscopic analysis. She concluded that \"Ac\" controls the transposition of the \"Ds\" from chromosome\u00a09, and that the movement of \"Ds\" is accompanied by the breakage of the chromosome. When \"Ds\" moves, the aleurone-color gene is released from the suppressing effect of the \"Ds\" and transformed into the active form, which initiates the pigment synthesis in cells. The transposition of \"Ds\" in different cells is random, it may move in some but not others, which causes color mosaicism. The size of the colored spot on the seed is determined by stage of the seed development during dissociation. McClintock also found that the transposition of \"Ds\" is determined by the number of \"Ac\" copies in the cell.\nBetween 1948 and 1950, she developed a theory by which these mobile elements regulated the genes by inhibiting or modulating their action. She referred to \"Dissociation\" and \"Activator\" as \"controlling units\"\u2014later, as \"controlling elements\"\u2014to distinguish them from genes. She hypothesized that gene regulation could explain how complex multicellular organisms made of cells with identical genomes have cells of different function. McClintock's discovery challenged the concept of the genome as a static set of instructions passed between generations. In 1950, she reported her work on \"Ac/Ds\" and her ideas about gene regulation in a paper entitled \"The origin and behavior of mutable loci in maize\" published in the journal \"Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences\". In summer 1951, she reported her work on the origin and behavior of mutable loci in maize at the annual symposium at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, presenting a paper of the same name. The paper delved into the instability caused by \"Ds\" and \"Ac\" or just \"Ac\" in four genes, along with the tendency of those genes to unpredictably revert to the wild phenotype. She also identified \"families\" of transposons, which did not interact with one another.\nHer work on controlling elements and gene regulation was conceptually difficult and was not immediately understood or accepted by her contemporaries; she described the reception of her research as \"puzzlement, even hostility\". Nevertheless, McClintock continued to develop her ideas on controlling elements. She published a paper in \"Genetics\" in 1953, where she presented all her statistical data, and undertook lecture tours to universities throughout the 1950s to speak about her work. She continued to investigate the problem and identified a new element that she called \"Suppressor-mutator\" (\"Spm\"), which, although similar to \"Ac/Ds\", acts in a more complex manner. Like \"Ac/Ds\", some versions could transpose on their own and some could not; unlike \"Ac/Ds\", when present, it fully suppressed the expression of mutant genes when they normally would not be entirely suppressed. Based on the reactions of other scientists to her work, McClintock felt she risked alienating the scientific mainstream, and from 1953 was forced to stop publishing accounts of her research on controlling elements.\nThe origins of maize.\nIn 1957, McClintock received funding from the National Academy of Sciences to start research on indigenous strains of maize in Central America and South America. She was interested in studying the evolution of maize through chromosomal changes, and being in South America would allow her to work on a larger scale. McClintock explored the chromosomal, morphological, and evolutionary characteristics of various races of maize. After extensive work in the 1960s and 1970s, McClintock and her collaborators published the seminal study \"The Chromosomal Constitution of Races of Maize\", leaving their mark on paleobotany, ethnobotany, and evolutionary biology. See Kass (2024, Chapter 9), for extensive details of McClintock's research and influence on the cytogenetics of the Races of Maize in Mexico and South America.\nRediscovery.\nMcClintock officially retired from her position at the Carnegie Institution in 1967, and was made a Distinguished Service Member of the Carnegie Institution of Washington. This honor allowed her to continue working with graduate students and colleagues in the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory as \"scientist emerita\"; she lived in the town. In reference to her decision 20 years earlier to stop publishing detailed accounts of her work on controlling elements, she wrote in 1973:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Over the years I have found that it is difficult if not impossible to bring to consciousness of another person the nature of his tacit assumptions when, by some special experiences, I have been made aware of them. This became painfully evident to me in my attempts during the 1950s to convince geneticists that the action of genes had to be and was controlled. It is now equally painful to recognize the fixity of assumptions that many persons hold on the nature of controlling elements in maize and the manners of their operation. One must await the right time for conceptual change.\nThe importance of McClintock's contributions was revealed in the 1960s, when the work of French geneticists Fran\u00e7ois Jacob and Jacques Monod described the genetic regulation of the \"lac\" operon, a concept she had demonstrated with \"Ac/Ds\" in 1951. Following Jacob and Monod's 1961 \"Journal of Molecular Biology\" paper \"Genetic regulatory mechanisms in the synthesis of proteins\", McClintock wrote an article for \"American Naturalist\" comparing the \"lac\" operon and her work on controlling elements in maize. Even late in the twentieth century, McClintock's contribution to biology was still not widely acknowledged as amounting to the discovery of genetic regulation. See Kass (2024, pp.\u00a0189\u2013191) for clarification of this legend.\nMcClintock was widely credited with discovering transposition after other researchers finally discovered the process in bacteria, yeast, and bacteriophages in the late 1960s and early 1970s. During this period, molecular biology had developed significant new technology, and scientists were able to show the molecular basis for transposition. In the 1970s, \"Ac\" and \"Ds\" were cloned by other scientists and were shown to be class II transposons. \"Ac\" is a complete transposon that can produce a functional transposase, which is required for the element to move within the genome. \"Ds\" has a mutation in its transposase gene, which means that it cannot move without another source of transposase. Thus, as McClintock observed, \"Ds\" cannot move in the absence of \"Ac\". \"Spm\" has also been characterized as a transposon. Subsequent research has shown that transposons typically do not move unless the cell is placed under stress, such as by irradiation or the breakage-fusion-bridge cycle, and thus their activation during stress can serve as a source of genetic variation for evolution. McClintock understood the role of transposons in evolution and genome change well before other researchers grasped the concept. Nowadays, \"Ac/Ds\" is used as a tool in plant biology to generate mutant plants used for the characterization of gene function.\nHonors and recognition.\nIn 1947, McClintock received the Achievement Award from the American Association of University Women. She was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1959. In 1967, McClintock was awarded the Kimber Genetics Award; three years later, she was given the National Medal of Science by Richard Nixon in 1970. She was the first woman to be awarded the National Medal of Science.\nCold Spring Harbor named a building in her honor in 1973. She received the Louis and Bert Freedman Foundation Award and the Lewis S. Rosensteil Award in 1978. In 1981, she became the first recipient of the MacArthur Foundation Grant, and was awarded the Albert Lasker Award for Basic Medical Research, the Wolf Prize in Medicine and the Thomas Hunt Morgan Medal by the Genetics Society of America. In 1982, she was awarded the Louisa Gross Horwitz Prize from Columbia University for her research in the \"evolution of genetic information and the control of its expression.\"\nMost notably, she received the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine in 1983, the first woman to win that prize unshared, and the first American woman to win any unshared Nobel Prize in the sciences. It was given to her by the Nobel Foundation for discovering \"mobile genetic elements\"; this was more than 30 years after she initially described the phenomenon of controlling elements. She was compared to Gregor Mendel in terms of her scientific career by the Swedish Academy of Sciences when she was awarded the Prize. Nobel Prize awards and their limitations, and the rationale for delayed awards are detailed in Kass (2024, pp.\u00a0236\u2013247).\nShe was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 1989. McClintock received the Benjamin Franklin Medal for Distinguished Achievement in the Sciences of the American Philosophical Society in 1993. She had been previously elected to the APS in 1946. She was awarded 14 Honorary Doctor of Science degrees and an Honorary Doctor of Humane Letters. In 1986 she was inducted into the National Women's Hall of Fame. During her final years, McClintock led a more public life, especially after Evelyn Fox Keller's 1983 biography of her, \"A Feeling for the Organism,\" brought McClintock's story to the public. She remained a regular presence in the Cold Spring Harbor community, and gave talks on mobile genetic elements and the history of genetics research for the benefit of junior scientists. An anthology of her 43 publications \"The Discovery and Characterization of Transposable Elements: The Collected Papers of Barbara McClintock\" was published in 1987.\nThe McClintock Prize is named in her honor. Laureates of the award include David Baulcombe, Detlef Weigel, Robert A. Martienssen, Jeffrey D. Palmer and Susan R. Wessler.\nIn May 2005 the U.S. Postal Service issued a panel of first-class stamps honoring Barbara McClintock, along with Richard Feynman, Josiah Willard Gibbs, and John von Neumann.\nIn May 2024, a plant species, \"Stellaria mcclintockiae,\" was named after her.\nLater years.\nMcClintock spent her later years, post Nobel Prize, as a key leader and researcher in the field at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory on Long Island, New York. McClintock died of natural causes in Huntington, New York, on September 2, 1992, at the age of 90; she never married or had children.\nLegacy.\nMcClintock was the subject of a 1983 biography by physicist Evelyn Fox Keller, titled \"A Feeling for the Organism\". Keller argued that because McClintock felt like an outsider within her field, (in part, because of her sex) she was able to look at her scientific subjects from a perspective different from the dominant one, leading to several important insights. Keller shows how this led many of her colleagues to reject her ideas and undermine her abilities for many years. For example, when McClintock presented her findings that the genetics of maize did not conform to Mendelian distributions, geneticist Sewall Wright expressed the belief that she did not understand the underlying mathematics of her work, a belief he had also expressed towards other women at the time. In addition, geneticist Lotte Auerbach recounted that Joshua Lederberg returned from a visit to McClintock's lab with the remark: 'By God, that woman is either crazy or a genius.' \" As Auerbach recounts, McClintock had thrown Lederberg and his colleagues out after half an hour 'because of their arrogance. She was intolerant of arrogance\u00a0... She felt she had crossed a desert alone and no one had followed her.'\"\nIn 2001, a second biography, science historian Nathaniel C. Comfort's \"The Tangled Field: Barbara McClintock's Search for the Patterns of Genetic Control\" challenged this narrative. Comfort's biography contests the claim that McClintock was marginalized by other scientists, which he calls the \"McClintock Myth\" and argues was perpetuated both by McClintock herself as well as in the earlier biography by Keller. Comfort, however, asserts that McClintock was not discriminated against because of her gender, citing that she was well regarded by her professional peers, even in the early years of her career.\nIn 2024, \"From Chromosomes to Mobile Genetic Elements: The Life and Work of Nobel Laureate Barbara McClintock\", a biography by Lee B. Kass, was released.\nMany recent biographical works on women in science feature accounts of McClintock's work and experience. She is held up as a role model for girls in such works of children's literature as Edith Hope Fine's \"Barbara McClintock, Nobel Prize Geneticist\", Deborah Heiligman's \"Barbara McClintock: Alone in Her Field\" and Mary Kittredge's \"Barbara McClintock\". A recent biography for young adults by Naomi Pasachoff, \"Barbara McClintock, Genius of Genetics\", provides a new perspective, based on the current literature.\nOn May 4, 2005, the United States Postal Service issued the \"American Scientists\" commemorative postage stamp series, a set of four 37-cent self-adhesive stamps in several configurations. The scientists depicted were Barbara McClintock, John von Neumann, Josiah Willard Gibbs, and Richard Feynman. McClintock was also featured in a 1989 four-stamp issue from Sweden which illustrated the work of eight Nobel Prize-winning geneticists. A laboratory building at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory was named for her. A street has been named after her in the new \"Adlershof Development Society\" science park in Berlin. \nA 103,835 square-foot residence hall at Cornell University was named for McClintock in 2022.\nSome of McClintock's personality and scientific achievements were referred to in Jeffrey Eugenides's 2011 novel \"The Marriage Plot,\" which tells the story of a yeast geneticist named Leonard who has bipolar disorder. He works at a laboratory loosely based on Cold Spring Harbor. The character reminiscent of McClintock is a reclusive geneticist at the fictional laboratory, who makes the same discoveries as her factual counterpart.\nJudith Pratt wrote a play about McClintock, called MAIZE, which was read at Artemesia Theatre in Chicago in 2015, and was produced in Ithaca NY, the home of Cornell University, in February\u2013March 2018.\nMcClintock\u2019s life continue to inspire novels and essays that reinterpret her life through imaginative storytelling, reflecting her enduring influence on both science and culture., including Rachel Pastan\u2019s novel \"In the Field\" (2021), which the author describes as an imaginative re-creation of the scientist\u2019s solitude, dedication, and unconventional career.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55189", "revid": "234689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55189", "title": "Habitat (disambiguation)", "text": "A habitat is the type of natural environment in which a particular species of organism lives.\nHabitat may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "55190", "revid": "185951936", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55190", "title": "Distributed processing", "text": ""}
{"id": "55192", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55192", "title": "Albula Alps", "text": "Swiss mountain range\nThe Albula Alps are a mountain range in the Alps of eastern Switzerland. They are considered to be part of the Central Eastern Alps, more specifically the Western Rhaetian Alps. They are named after the river Albula. According to AVE (see map), the Albula Alps are separated from the Oberhalbstein Alps in the west by the Septimer Pass and the valley of the Surs\u00e9s; from the Plessur Alps in the north-west by the Landwasser valley; from the Silvretta group in the north-east by the Fl\u00fcela Pass; from the Sesvenna Alps in the east by the Inn valley (Engadine); from the Livigno Alps in the south-east by the Inn valley; from the Bernina Range in the south by the Maloja Pass and the Inn valley.\nThe chief summit of the Albula Alps is Piz Kesch, which is also the highest summit of the Eastern Alps north of the Inn. Other mountains with both a high elevation and a high prominence are Piz Calderas, Piz Ela, Piz Ot and Piz Vadret. The Albula Alps are drained by the rivers Albula, Gelgia, Landwasser and Inn and Mera. Near the Lunghin Pass is the tripoint between the Gelgia, Inn and Mera. This is the tripoint between the basins of the North Sea, Black Sea and Mediterranean Sea.\nThe main road passes crossing the Albula Alps (from central Graub\u00fcnden to Engadin) are the Julier Pass and the Albula Pass. On the margin are also the Fl\u00fcela Pass and the Septimer Pass (bridle path only). The Albula Pass, in the middle of the range, is also an important axis of the Rhaetian Railway, connecting Chur to St. Moritz through the Albula Tunnel. Both pass road and railway traverse the locality of Berg\u00fcn on the river Albula, the most central town within the Albula Alps.\nPeaks.\nThe main peaks of the Albula Alps are:\nPasses.\nThe Albula Alps are crossed by one railway tunnel, under the Albula Pass. The main mountain passes of the Albula Alps are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55193", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55193", "title": "Lombard Alps", "text": ""}
{"id": "55194", "revid": "96340", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55194", "title": "Tirolean Alps", "text": ""}
{"id": "55195", "revid": "110304", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55195", "title": "Ortler, Oetzthal and Stubai Ranges", "text": ""}
{"id": "55196", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55196", "title": "Lepontine Alps", "text": "Mountain range in southern Switzerland and northern Italy\nThe Lepontine Alps (, , ) are a mountain range in the north-western part of the Alps. They are located in Switzerland (Valais, Ticino, Uri and Graub\u00fcnden) and Italy (Piedmont and Lombardy).\nThe Simplon rail tunnel (from Brig to Domodossola), the Gotthard rail (from Erstfeld to Bodio) and Gotthard road tunnels (from Andermatt to Airolo) and the San Bernardino road tunnel are important transport arteries.\nThe eastern portion of the Lepontine Alps, from the St Gotthard Pass to the Spl\u00fcgen Pass, is named the Adula Alps, while the western part is historically referred to as the Ticino Alps.\nEtymology.\nThe designation \"Lepontine Alps\", derived from the Latin name of the Valle Leventina, has long been somewhat vaguely applied to the Alpine ranges that enclose it, before being used for the whole range.\nGeography.\nFollowing the line marking the division of the waters that flow into the Po from those that feed the Rhone or the Rhine, the main ridge of the Lepontine Alps describes a somewhat irregular curve, convex to the north, from the Simplon Pass to the Spl\u00fcgen Pass. With the single exception of the Monte Leone, overlooking the Simplon Pass, the summits of this portion of the chain are much inferior in height to those of the neighbouring chains; but two peaks of the Adula group, culminating at the Rheinwaldhorn, exceed in height.\nThe extensive region lying south of the main ridge is occupied by mountain ranges whose summits sometimes rival in height those of the dividing ridge, and which are cut through by deep valleys, three of which converge in the basins of Lake Maggiore and Lake Como, the deepest of all the lakes on the south side of the Alps. The most important of these valleys is the Valle Leventina, or the upper valley of the Ticino. This has been known from a remote antiquity because it leads to the St Gotthard Pass, one of the easiest lines of communication between northern and southern Europe.\nThe Lepontine Alps are drained by the rivers Rh\u00f4ne in the west, Reuss in the north, Rhine (Anterior and Posterior Rhine) in the east and Ticino and Toce in the south.\nList of peaks.\nThe chief peaks of the Lepontine Alps are:\nGlaciers.\nMain glaciers :\nList of passes.\nThe chief passes of the Lepontine Alps are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55197", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55197", "title": "Adula Alps", "text": "Mountain range in Switzerland and Italy\nThe Adula Alps, also known as the West Graub\u00fcnden and Misox Alps, are a western Alpine mountain group, the part of the Lepontine Alps from the Lukmanier and St Gotthard Passes to the Spl\u00fcgen Pass.\nThey lie mostly in Switzerland, in the Cantons of Ticino, Graub\u00fcnden, and Uri, and partly in Italy, in the province of Sondrio in Lombardy, stretching south to Lake Como. They form subsection 10B of the Alps, according to the \"Partizione delle Alpi\", and subsection 10 III, according to the unified orographic classification of the Alps by (SOIUSA).\nA string of mountains of the Adula stand on the international border between Switzerland and Italy, including Pizzo Tamb\u00f2, \nPiz di Pian, Cima de Pian Guarnei (Pizzo Quadro), Cime di Val Loga, Piz Tamborello, Piz della Forcola, Pizzaccio, and Cima dello Stagn, while Pizzo Ferr\u00e9 is near the border on the Italian side.\nThe mountain guides of the Swiss Alpine Club do not lead climbers in groups for the Adula Alps, but attach parts of them to other sections.\nThe highest peak is the Rheinwaldhorn (), which in Italian is called the Adula, giving the range its name.\nThe main valleys are Val Malvaglia, which drains into the lower Blenio Valley, and three others draining south out of the Adula Alps, which are, from west to east, Val Calanca, Valle Mesolcina, and Valle Spluga (or San Giacomo).\nThe creation of an Adula National Park was planned by Switzerland for sixteen years, from 2000. It would have become only the second in the country, after the Swiss National Park, but in November 2016 the inhabitants voted against it.\nTowns and villages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPeaks.\nThe following peaks of the Adela Alps are sorted by height in metres (m) above sea level, called \"Meter \u00fcber Meer\" (m\u00a0\u00fc.\u00a0M.) in Switzerland:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55198", "revid": "239435", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55198", "title": "The Alps of Bavaria, the Vorarlberg, and Salzburg", "text": ""}
{"id": "55199", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55199", "title": "M\u00f6ssbauer effect", "text": "Resonant and recoil-free emission and absorption of gamma radiation by atomic nuclei\nThe M\u00f6ssbauer effect, or recoilless nuclear resonance fluorescence, is a physical phenomenon discovered by Rudolf M\u00f6ssbauer in 1958. It involves the resonant and recoil-free emission and absorption of gamma radiation by atomic nuclei bound in a solid. Its main application is in M\u00f6ssbauer spectroscopy.\nIn the M\u00f6ssbauer effect, a narrow resonance for nuclear gamma emission and absorption results from the momentum of recoil being delivered to a surrounding crystal lattice rather than to the emitting or absorbing nucleus alone. When this occurs, no gamma energy is lost to the kinetic energy of recoiling nuclei at either the emitting or absorbing end of a gamma transition: emission and absorption occur at the same energy, resulting in strong, resonant absorption.\nHistory.\nThe interaction of X-rays with gases, particularly their attenuation and scattering, had been studied since the early years of X-ray research, and element-specific X-ray absorption phenomena had been established in the early 20th century. It was expected that a similar phenomenon would be found for gamma rays, which are created by nuclear transitions (as opposed to X-rays, which are typically produced by electronic transitions). However, attempts to observe nuclear resonance produced by gamma rays in gases failed due to energy being lost to recoil, preventing resonance (the Doppler effect also broadens the gamma-ray spectrum). M\u00f6ssbauer observed resonance in nuclei of solid iridium, which raised the question of why gamma-ray resonance was possible in solids but not in gases. M\u00f6ssbauer proposed that, for the case of atoms bound into a solid, a fraction of the nuclear events could occur essentially without recoil under certain circumstances. He attributed the observed resonance to this recoil-free fraction of nuclear events.\nThe M\u00f6ssbauer effect was one of the last major discoveries in physics to be originally reported in the German language. The first reports in English were a pair of letters describing independent repetitions of the experiment.\nThe discovery was rewarded with the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1961, together with Robert Hofstadter's research of electron scattering in atomic nuclei.\nDescription.\nIn general, gamma rays are produced by nuclear transitions from an unstable high-energy state to a stable low-energy state. The energy of the emitted gamma ray corresponds to the energy of the nuclear transition, minus an amount of energy that is lost as recoil to the emitting atom. If the lost recoil energy is small compared with the energy linewidth of the nuclear transition, then the gamma-ray energy still corresponds to the energy of the nuclear transition and the gamma ray can be absorbed by a second atom of the same type as the first. This emission and subsequent absorption is called resonant fluorescence. Additional recoil energy is also lost during absorption, so in order for resonance to occur, the recoil energy must actually be less than half the linewidth for the corresponding nuclear transition.\nThe amount of energy in the recoiling body (\"E\") can be found from momentum conservation:\n formula_1\nwhere \"P\" is the momentum of the recoiling matter, and \"P\"\u03b3 the momentum of the gamma ray. Substituting energy into the equation gives:\n formula_2\nwhere \"E\" ( for Fe) is the energy lost as recoil, \"E\"\u03b3 is the energy of the gamma ray ( for Fe), \"M\" ( for Fe) is the mass of the emitting or absorbing body, and \"c\" is the speed of light. In the case of a gas, the emitting and absorbing bodies are atoms, so the mass is relatively small, resulting in a large recoil energy, which prevents resonance. (The same equation applies for recoil energy losses in X-rays, but the photon energy is much less, resulting in a lower energy loss, which is why gas-phase resonance could be observed with X-rays.)\nIn a solid, the nuclei are bound to the lattice and do not recoil as in a gas. The lattice as a whole recoils, but the recoil energy is negligible because the \"M\" in the above equation is the mass of the entire lattice. However, the energy in a decay can be taken up or supplied by lattice vibrations. The energy of these vibrations is quantised in quasiparticles known as phonons. The M\u00f6ssbauer effect occurs because there is a finite probability of a decay involving no phonons. Thus in a fraction of the nuclear events (the recoil-free fraction, given by the Lamb\u2013M\u00f6ssbauer factor), the entire crystal acts as the recoiling body, and these events are essentially recoil-free. In these cases, since the recoil energy is negligible, the emitted gamma rays have the appropriate energy and resonance can occur.\nIn general (depending on the half-life of the decay), gamma rays have very narrow line widths. This means they are very sensitive to small changes in the energies of nuclear transitions. In fact, gamma rays can be used as a probe to observe the effects of interactions between a nucleus and its electrons and those of its neighbors. This is the basis for M\u00f6ssbauer spectroscopy, which combines the M\u00f6ssbauer effect with the Doppler effect to monitor such interactions.\nZero-phonon optical transitions, a process closely analogous to the M\u00f6ssbauer effect, can be observed in lattice-bound chromophores at low temperatures.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55200", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55200", "title": "Passes of the Silvretta and R\u00e4tikon Ranges", "text": "Mountain passes of the Alps\nThe chief passes of the Silvretta and Rhatikon Ranges, from the Fuela Pass to the Reschen Scheideck and the Arlberg Pass, are:\n\"Note: road status as of 1911[ [update]].\""}
{"id": "55201", "revid": "110304", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55201", "title": "South-Eastern Alps", "text": ""}
{"id": "55202", "revid": "30162703", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55202", "title": "Dolomites", "text": "Mountain range in the Italian Alps\n \nThe Dolomites ( ), also known as the Dolomite Mountains, Dolomite Alps or Dolomitic Alps, are a mountain range in northeastern Italy. They form part of the Southern Limestone Alps and extend from the River Adige in the west to the Piave Valley (Pieve di Cadore) in the east. The northern and southern borders are defined by the Puster Valley and the Sugana Valley (). The Dolomites are in the regions of Veneto, Trentino-Alto Adige/S\u00fcdtirol and Friuli-Venezia Giulia, covering an area shared between the provinces of Belluno, Vicenza, Verona, Trentino, South Tyrol, Udine and Pordenone.\nOther mountain groups of similar geological structure are spread along the River Piave to the east\u2014; and far away over the Adige River to the west\u2014\"Dolomiti di Brenta\" (Western Dolomites). A smaller group is called (Little Dolomites), between the provinces of Trentino, Verona and Vicenza.\nThe Dolomiti Bellunesi National Park and many other regional parks are in the Dolomites. On 26 June 2009, the Dolomites were declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The Adamello-Brenta UNESCO Global Geopark is also in the Dolomites. The Geological Museum of the Dolomites (in Italian \"Museo Geologico delle Dolomiti\") is located in Predazzo, Fiemme Valley.\nEtymology.\nThe Dolomites, also known as the \"Pale Mountains\", take their name from the carbonate rock dolomite. This was named after the 18th-century French mineralogist D\u00e9odat Gratet de Dolomieu (1750\u20131801), who was the first to describe the mineral.\nHistory.\nFor millennia, hunters and gatherers had advanced into the highest rocky regions and had probably also climbed some peaks. There is evidence that the Jesuit priest Franz von Wulfen from Klagenfurt climbed the Lungkofel and the D\u00fcrrenstein in the 1790s. In 1857 Irishman John Ball was the first known person to climb Monte Pelmo. Paul Grohmann later climbed numerous peaks such as the Antelao, Marmolada, Tofana, Monte Cristallo and the Bo\u00e8. Around 1860 the Agordin mountaineer Simone de Silvestro was the first person to stand on the Civetta. Michael Innerkofler was one of the climbers of the Tre Cime di Lavaredo. Later very important local mountaineers, known for many first ascents, were Angelo Dibona and Giovanni Piaz.\nDuring the First World War, the front line between the Italian and Austro-Hungarian Army ran through the Dolomites, where both sides used mines extensively. Open-air war museums are at Cinque Torri (Five Towers), Monte Piana and Mount Lagazuoi. Many people visit the Dolomites to climb the vie ferrate, protected paths through the rock walls that were created during the war.\nA number of long-distance footpaths traverse the Dolomites. They are called ( \u2013 high paths), and are numbered 1 to 10. The trails take about a week to walk, and are served by numerous (huts). The first and the most renowned is the Alta Via 1. Radiocarbon dating has been used in the Alta Badia region to demonstrate a connection between landslide activity and climate change.\nGeography.\nThe region is commonly divided into the Western and Eastern Dolomites, separated by a line following the Val Badia\u2013Campolongo Pass\u2013Cordevole Valley (Agordino) axis.\nCurrent classification.\nThe Dolomites may be divided into the following ranges:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTourism and sports.\nThe Dolomites are renowned for skiing in the winter months and mountain climbing, hiking, cycling and BASE jumping, as well as paragliding and hang gliding in summer and late spring/early autumn. Free climbing has been a tradition in the Dolomites since 1887, when 17-year-old Georg Winkler soloed the first ascent of the pinnacle of the Vajolet Towers. The main centres include: Rocca Pietore alongside the Marmolada Glacier, which lies on the border of Trentino and Veneto, the small towns of Alleghe, Falcade, Auronzo, Cortina d'Ampezzo and the villages of Arabba, Urtij\u00ebi and San Martino di Castrozza, as well as the whole of the Fassa, Gardena and Badia valleys.\nThe \"Maratona dles Dolomites\", an annual single-day road bicycle race covering seven mountain passes of the Dolomites, occurs in the first week of July.\nOther characteristic places are:\nMajor parks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55203", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55203", "title": "Dauphin\u00e9 Alps", "text": "Group of mountain ranges in France\nThe Dauphin\u00e9 Alps () are a group of mountain ranges in Southeastern France, west of the main chain of the Alps. Mountain ranges within the Dauphin\u00e9 Alps include the Massif des \u00c9crins in \u00c9crins National Park, Belledonne, Le Taillefer range and the mountains of Matheysine.\nEtymology.\nThe \"Dauphin\u00e9\" () is a former French province whose area roughly corresponded to that of the present departments of :Is\u00e8re, :Dr\u00f4me, and :Hautes-Alpes.\nGeography.\nThey are separated from the Cottian Alps in the east by the Col du Galibier and the upper Durance valley; from the western Graian Alps (Vanoise Massif) in the north-east by the river Arc; from the lower ranges Vercors Plateau and Chartreuse Mountains in the west by the rivers Drac and Is\u00e8re. Many peaks rise to more than , with Barre des \u00c9crins (4,102 m) the highest.\nAdministratively the French part of the range belongs to the French departments of Is\u00e8re, Hautes-Alpes and Savoie.\nThe whole range is drained by the Rhone through its tributaries.\nIt has been proposed that the height of mountains in the Dauphin\u00e9 Alps is limited by the erosion caused by small glaciers, causing a topographic effect called the glacial buzzsaw.\nPeaks.\nThe chief peaks of the Dauphin\u00e9 Alps are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPasses.\nThe chief passes of the Dauphin\u00e9 Alps are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55204", "revid": "3094146", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55204", "title": "Bernina Alps", "text": ""}
{"id": "55205", "revid": "45911552", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55205", "title": "Swiss Alps", "text": "Portion of the Alps that lies within Switzerland\nThe Alpine region of Switzerland, conventionally referred to as the Swiss Alps, represents a major natural feature of the country and is, along with the Swiss Plateau and the Swiss portion of the Jura Mountains, one of its three main physiographic regions. The Swiss Alps extend over both the Western Alps and the Eastern Alps, encompassing an area sometimes called Central Alps. While the northern ranges from the Bernese Alps to the Appenzell Alps are entirely in Switzerland, the southern ranges from the Mont Blanc massif to the Bernina massif are shared with other countries such as France, Italy, Austria and Liechtenstein.\nThe Swiss Alps comprise almost all the highest mountains of the Alps, such as Dufourspitze (), the Dom (), the Liskamm (), the Weisshorn () and the Matterhorn (). The other following major summits can be found in this list of mountains of Switzerland.\nSince the Middle Ages, transit across the Alps played an important role in history. The region north of St Gotthard Pass became the nucleus of the Swiss Confederacy in the early 14th century.\nGeography.\nThe Alps cover 60% of Switzerland's total surface area, making it one of the most \"alpine\" countries. Despite the fact that Switzerland covers only 14% of the Alps total area, 48 out of 82 alpine four-thousanders are located in the Swiss Alps and practically all of the remaining 34 are within of the country's border.\nThe glaciers of the Swiss Alps cover an area of \u2014 3% of the Swiss territory, representing 44% of the total glaciated area in the Alps i.e. .\nThe Swiss Alps are situated south of the Swiss Plateau and north of the national border. The limit between the Alps and the plateau runs from Vevey on the shores of Lake Geneva to Rorschach on the shores of Lake Constance, passing close to the cities of Thun and Lucerne. The not well defined regions in Switzerland that lie on the margin of the Alps, especially those on the north side, are called the \"Swiss Prealps\" (Alpine foothills) (, , ). The Swiss Prealps are mainly made of limestone and they generally do not exceed .\nThe Alpine cantons (from highest to lowest) are Valais, Bern, Grisons (), Uri, Glarus, Ticino, St. Gallen, Vaud, Obwalden, Nidwalden, Schwyz, Appenzell Innerrhoden, Appenzell Ausserrhoden, Fribourg, Lucerne and Zug. The countries with which Switzerland shares mountain ranges of the Alps are (from west to east): France (French Alps), Italy, Austria, Liechtenstein and Germany (Bavarian Alps).\nRanges.\nThe Alps are usually divided into two main parts, the Western Alps and Eastern Alps, whose division is along the Rhine from Lake Constance to the Spl\u00fcgen Pass. The western ranges occupy the greatest part of Switzerland while the more numerous eastern ranges are much smaller and are all situated in the canton of Graub\u00fcnden. The latter is part of the Central Eastern Alps, except the Ortler Alps which belong to the Southern Limestone Alps. The Pennine, Bernese and Bernina Range are the highest ranges of the country, they contain respectively 38, 9 and 1 summit over . The lowest range is the Appenzell Alps culminating at .\nWestern Alps\nEastern Alps\nHydrography.\nRivers.\nThe north side of the Swiss Alps is drained by the Rh\u00f4ne, Rhine and Inn (which is part of the Danube basin) while the south side is mainly drained by the Ticino (Po basin). The rivers on the north empty into the Mediterranean, North and Black Sea, on the south the Po empty in the Adriatic Sea. The major triple watersheds in the Alps are located within the country, they are: Piz Lunghin, Witenwasserenstock and Monte Forcola. Between the Witenwasserenstock and Piz Lunghin runs the European Watershed separating the basin of the Atlantic (the North Sea) and the Mediterranean Sea (Adriatic and the Black Sea). The European watershed lies only partially on the main chain. Switzerland possesses 6% of Europe's freshwater, and is sometimes referred to as the \"water tower of Europe\".\nLakes.\nSince the highest dams are located in Alpine regions, many large mountain lakes are artificial and are used as hydroelectric reservoirs. Some large artificial lakes can be found above , but natural lakes larger than are generally below , with the exceptions of lakes in the Engadin such as Lake Sils, and Oeschinen in the Bernese Oberland. The melting of low-altitude glaciers can generate new lakes, such as the large Triftsee which formed between 2002 and 2003.\nGlaciers.\nThe last glaciations greatly transformed Switzerland's landscape. Many valleys of the Swiss Alps are U-shaped due to glacial erosion. During the maximum extension of the W\u00fcrm glaciation (18,000 years ago) the glaciers completely covered the Swiss Plateau, before retreating and leaving remnants only in high mountain areas. In modern times the Aletsch Glacier in the western Bernese Alps is the largest and longest in the Alps, reaching a maximum depth of 900 meters at Konkordiaplatz. Along with the Fiescher and Aar Glaciers, the region became a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2001. An effect of the retreat of the Rhine Glacier some 10,000 years ago was the Flims Rockslide, the biggest still visible landslide worldwide.\nMonitoring glacial changes over time.\nPERMOS (The Swiss Permafrost Monitoring Network) is an operational monitoring service, and its main goal is to create long-term scientific documentation of the permafrost changes in the Swiss Alps. To accurately represent the current conditions of the Alps, the network records permafrost temperatures and thermal changes in boreholes, the bottom temperature of the snow cover, ground surface temperature, and the development of snow cover. The network additionally takes air photos periodically from selected areas. These monitoring strategies continue to develop as new research and data are recorded over time. The glaciers in the Swiss Alps have lost around half their volume during the last 90\u2013120 years.\nHydroelectricity Impacts due to Glacial Melting.\nSwitzerland has been using this concerning transition in climate as a positive opportunity to develop new innovations and to change the ways that energy is being produced in the country. Switzerland depends on the use of hydroelectricity to power nearby communities, but as glaciers melt and stop refreezing, the melting that creates the energy ceases to exist. Researchers have been evaluating how the topography will change as the glaciers begin to decrease and they are looking more deeply into potential construction costs, energy production, and future problems they might encounter with these new developments. Switzerland is one of many countries that need to begin to think about the future of energy production in response to climate change. Switzerland is paving the way for a new wave of innovation and creative problem solving that the rest of the world will eventually need to follow.\nLand elevation by canton.\nThe following table gives the surface area above , respectively, and the respective percentage on the total area of each canton whose high point is above 2000 metres.\nGeology.\nThe composition of the great tectonic units reflects the history of the formation of the Alps. The rocks from the Helvetic zone on the north and the Austroalpine nappes \u2013 Southern Alps on the south come originally from the European and African continent respectively. The rocks of the Penninic nappes belong to the former area of the Brian\u00e7onnais microcontinent and the Tethys Ocean. The closure of the latter by subduction under the African plate (Piemont Ocean first and Valais Ocean later) preceded the collision between the two plates and the so-called alpine orogeny. The major thrust fault of the Tectonic Arena Sardona in the eastern Glarus Alps gives a visible illustration of mountain-building processes and was therefore declared a UNESCO World Heritage. Another fine example gives the Alpstein area with several visible upfolds of Helvetic zone material.\nWith some exceptions, the Alps north of Rh\u00f4ne and Rhine are part of the Helvetic Zone and those on the south side are part of the Penninic nappes. The Austroalpine zone concerns almost only the Eastern Alps, with the notable exception of the Matterhorn.\nEnvironment and climate.\nTo protect endangered species some sites have been brought under protection. The Swiss National Park in Graub\u00fcnden was established in 1914 as the first alpine national park. The Entlebuch area was designated a biosphere reserve in 2001. The largest protected area in the country is the Parc Ela, opened in 2006, which covers an area of 600 square kilometres. The Jungfrau-Aletsch Protected Area is the first World Heritage Site in the Alps.\nClimate zones.\nAs the temperature decreases with altitude ( per on yearly average), three different altitudinal zones, each having distinct climate, are found in the Swiss Alps:\nThe Subalpine zone is the region that lies below the tree line. It is the most important region as it is the largest of the three and contains almost all human settlements as well as the productive areas. The forests are mainly composed of conifers above , the deciduous tree forest is confined to lower elevations. The upper limit of the Subalpine zone is located at about on the north side of the Alps and about on the south side. It can, however, differ in some regions such as the Appenzell Alps () or the Engadin valley ().\nThe Alpine zone is situated above the tree line and is clear of trees due to low average temperatures. It contains mostly grass and small plants along with mountain flowers. Below the permafrost limit (at about ), the alpine meadows are often used as pastures. Some villages can still be found on the lowest altitudes such as Riederalp () or Juf (). The extent of the Alpine zone is limited by the first permanent snow, its altitude greatly varies depending on the location (and orientation), it comprises between .\nThe glacial zone is the area of permanent snow and ice. When the steepness of the slope is not too high it results in an accumulation and compaction of snow, which transforms into ice. The glacier-formed then flows down the valley and can reach as far down as (the Upper Grindelwald Glacier). Where the slopes are too steep, the snow accumulates to form overhanging seracs, which periodically fall off due to the downward movement of the glacier and cause ice avalanches. The Bernese Alps, Pennine Alps, and Mont Blanc Massif contain most of the glaciated areas in the Alps. Except for research stations such as the Sphinx Observatory, no settlements are to be found in those regions.\nImpact of glacial melting.\nDue to the change in weather patterns, the summers are expected to continue getting warmer and drier, while the winters are expected to become moister. This change in the weather increases the chances of flooding with heavier rainfall, the melting of permafrost zones, a change in the geography and wildlife, and the occurrence of more deadly rock slides. Furthermore, natural hazards are occurring more frequently, such as floods, avalanches, and landslides. Additionally, the water supply that the glaciers originally provided is on the decline, which is problematic for producing energy, agricultural practices, and other human use. Finally, the glacial melting puts the economy at risk because there will be less incoming financial revenue from the tourism and recreation services that these glaciers and ecosystems typically provide. All of these impacts will disrupt the nearby communities and require that updated infrastructure and safety measures be put into place to prevent mass destruction. \nTravel and tourism.\nTourism in the Swiss Alps began with the first ascents of the main peaks of the Alps (Jungfrau in 1811, Piz Bernina in 1850, Monte Rosa in 1855, Matterhorn in 1856, Dom in 1858, Weisshorn in 1861) mostly by British mountain climbers accompanied by the local guides. The construction of facilities for tourists started in the mid-nineteenth century with the building of hotels and mountain huts (creation of the Swiss Alpine Club in 1863) and the opening of mountain train lines (Rigi in 1873, Pilatus in 1889, Gornergrat in 1898). The Jungfraubahn opened in 1912; it leads to the highest railway station in Europe, the Jungfraujoch.\nSummer tourism.\nSwitzerland enjoys a network of well-maintained trails with a total length of , of which 23,000 are located in mountainous areas. Many mountains attract a large number of alpinists from around the world, especially the summits and the great north faces (Eiger, Matterhorn and Piz Badile). The large winter resorts are also popular destinations in summer, as most of aerial tramways operate through the year, enabling hikers and mountaineers to reach high altitudes without much effort. The Klein Matterhorn is the highest summit of the European continent to be served by cable car.\nWinter tourism.\nThe major destinations for skiing and other winter sports are located in Valais, Bernese Oberland and Grisons (). Some villages are car-free and can be accessed only with public transports such as Riederalp and Bettmeralp. Zermatt and Saas-Fee have both summer ski areas. The ski season starts from as early as November and runs to as late as May; however, the majority of ski resorts in Switzerland tend to open in December and run through to April. The most visited places are:\nOther important destinations on the regional level are Engelberg-Titlis (Central Switzerland / OW) and Gotthard Oberalp Arena with Andermatt (Central Switzerland / UR) and Sedrun (GR), Leysin-Les Mosses, Villars-sur-Ollon, Les Diablerets-Glacier 3000 (all VD), Leukerbad (VS), Savognin, Scuol, Obersaxen, Breil/Brigels (all GR), Meiringen \u2013 Hasliberg (BE), S\u00f6renberg (LU), Klewenalp with Beckenried and Emmetten (both NW), Melchsee-Frutt (OW), Flumserberg and Pizol (both Sarganserland in SG), Toggenburg with Wildhaus \u2013 Unterwasser \u2013 Alt St. Johann (SG), Hoch-Ybrig and Stoos (all SZ), Braunwald and Elm (GL), Airolo and Bosco/Gurin (TI) and many more.\nThe first person to ski in Grindelwald, Switzerland was Englishmen Gerald Fox (a resident of Tone Dale House in England) who put his skis on in his hotel bedroom in 1881 and walked out through the hotel Bar to the slopes wearing them.\nSnow activities.\nSome major sporting activities include: \nClimate change.\nClimate change is impacting European Alpine tourism due to the increasing number and intensity of natural hazards, and it is endangering the accessibility and infrastructure of tourism destinations. Melting glaciers are affecting the attractiveness of the Alpine landscape, increasing winter temperatures will result in a shorter skiing season, and these climate changes are limiting the amount of snow coverage produced. All of these climate and geographical factors are leading to a smaller number of visitors and reduced revenues which can have an intense economic impact on winter tourism. In response to these changes, Switzerland has turned to the production of artificial snow to match the demand for these tourist destinations and to uphold the structure and well-being of the economy.\nTransport.\nThe Swiss Alps and Switzerland enjoy an extensive transport network. Virtually every mountain village can be reached by public transport, either by rail, bus, funicular, cable car, or usually a combination of them. The main companies of the coherently integrated public transport system are:\nIn addition, many mountans and summits are accessible by public transport.\nMost of the mountain regions are within 1 to 3 hours travel of Switzerland's main cities and their respective airport. The Engadine in Graub\u00fcnden is between 3 and 6 hours away from the large cities; the train journey itself, with the panoramic Glacier Express or Bernina Express, is popular with tourists. Most tourism-oriented trains run under the Panorama Express (PE) category.\nThe Engadin Airport near St. Moritz at an altitude of is the highest in Europe.\nThe crossing of the Alps is a key issue at national and international levels, as the European continent is at places divided by the range. Since the beginning of industrialisation Switzerland has improved its transalpine network; it began in 1882, by building the Gotthard Rail Tunnel, followed in 1906 by the Simplon Tunnel and 1913 by the L\u00f6tschberg Tunnel, and more recently, in 2007, by the L\u00f6tschberg Base Tunnel. The long Gotthard Base Tunnel, the longest railway tunnel of the world, opened in 2016 and provides a direct flat rail link through the Alps.\nToponymy.\nThe different names of the mountains and other landforms are named in the four national languages. The table below gives the most recurrent names.\nAlthough not a common practice in Switzerland, a few mountains and summits are named after people.\nAlso, a large number of peaks outside the Alps were named or nicknamed after Swiss mountains, such as the Wetterhorn Peak in Colorado or the Matterhorn Peak in California (see the Matterhorn article for a list of \"Matterhorns in the world\").\nThe confluence of the Baltoro Glacier and the Godwin-Austen Glacier south of K2 in the Karakoram range was named after the Konkordiaplatz by European explorers.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55206", "revid": "202276", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55206", "title": "Maritime Alps", "text": "Mountain range in France and Italy\nThe Maritime Alps ( ; ) are a mountain range in the southwestern part of the Alps. They form the border between the French region of Provence-Alpes-C\u00f4te d'Azur and the Italian regions of Piedmont and Liguria. They are the southernmost part of the Alps.\nGeography.\nAdministratively the range is divided between the Italian provinces of Cuneo and Imperia (eastern slopes) and the French department of Alpes-Maritimes (western slopes).\nThe Maritime Alps are drained by the rivers Roya, Var and Verdon and their tributaries on the French side; by the Stura di Demonte and other tributaries of the Tanaro and Po on the Italian side. There are many attractive perched villages, such as Belv\u00e9d\u00e8re at the entrance to the spectacular Gordolasque valley, some concealing unexpected architectural riches (for example in the south there are numerous churches decorated with murals and altarpieces by primitive Ni\u00e7ois painters).\nBorders.\nThe borders of the Maritime Alps are as follows (clockwise):\nPeaks.\nThe main peaks of the Maritime Alps are:\nMountain passes.\nThe chief passes of the Maritime Alps are:\nNature conservation.\nThe French Mercantour National Park (central area:68,500 ha + peripheral area:140,000 ha) is part of the Maritime Alps as well as the Maritime Alps Natural Park, an Italian regional nature park of 28,455 ha.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55207", "revid": "49124855", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55207", "title": "Glarus Alps", "text": "Mountain range in central Switzerland\nThe Glarus Alps () are a mountain range in central Switzerland. They are bordered by the Uri Alps and the Schwyz Alps to the west, the Lepontine Alps to the south, the Appenzell Alps to the northeast. The eastern part of the Glarus Alps contains a major thrust fault that was declared a geologic UNESCO World Heritage Site (the Swiss Tectonic Arena Sardona).\nThe Glarus Alps extend well beyond the canton of Glarus, including parts of the cantons of Uri, Graub\u00fcnden, and St Gallen. Conversely, not all the mountains in the canton of Glarus are part of the Glarus Alps, with those to the north of the Urner Boden and to the west of the valley of the river Linth considered to be part of the Schwyz Alps.\nGeography.\nThe main chain of the Glarus Alps can be divided into six minor groups, separated from each other by passes, the lowest of which exceeds 7,500\u00a0ft. The westernmost of these is the Crispalt, a rugged range including many peaks of nearly equal height. The highest of these are the Piz Giuv (3,096 m) and Piz Nair. The name \"Crispalt\" is given to a southern, but secondary, peak of Piz Giuv, measuring 3,070 m. West of the main group is the Rienzenstock, while a northern outlier culminates in the Bristen. East of the Crispalt, the Chr\u00fczli Pass separates this from the rather higher mass of the Oberalpstock (3,328 m).\nHere occurs a partial break in the continuity of the chain. The crest of the snowy range connecting the Oberalpstock with the T\u00f6di nowhere sinks to 9,000 feet, but makes a sweep convex to the north, forming a semicircular recess, whose numerous torrents are all poured into the Rhine through the Val Russein below Disentis. Two glacier passes lead over this part of the chain \u2014 one to west, over the Brunnigletscher to the Maderanertal; the other to the north-east, over the Sand Glacier, to the Linthal.\nThe T\u00f6di, the highest of the range and of north-eastern Switzerland (3,614 m), is attended by numerous secondary peaks that arise from the extensive snow-fields surrounding the central mountain. A very considerable outlyer, whose chief summits are the Sch\u00e4rhorn and the Gross Windg\u00e4llen, belonging to the canton of Uri, is connected with the T\u00f6di by the range of the Clariden Grat, north to the H\u00fcfi Glacier. A less important branch encloses the Biferten Glacier, and terminates in the Selbsanft, south of Tierfehd. Towards the valley of the Vorderrhein a high promontory stretches nearly due south from the central peaks of the T\u00f6di, and is crowned by the summit of the Piz Posta Biala. Another considerable ramification of the same mass terminates farther to the east in the peak of the Cavistrau.\nThe Kisten Pass separates the T\u00f6di group from the Hausstock, whose summit attains 3,158 m; a branch of this latter group forms the range of the K\u00e4rpf in the canton of Glarus. The Hausstock is cut off from the rather lower but more extended mass of the Vorab by the Panixer Pass (7,907\u00a0ft). Numerous summits, of which the Vorab proper and Piz Grisch are the most important, approach very near, but do not quite attain to 10,000 feet.\nThe eastern limit of the latter group is marked by the Segnas Pass \u2014 the most frequented of those connecting the Canton Glarus with the Vorderrhein \u2014 beyond which arises a wide-stretching mass of rock and glacier, which is part of the Glarus thrust and culminates at Piz Sardona. This mass is cleft by a deep valley \u2014 the Calfeisental: one branch, culminating in the Pizol (2,844 m), extends east over Pf\u00e4fers, while another, including the highest peak of the canton of St. Gallen, the Ringelspitz (3,247 m), runs due east to the low Kunkels Pass (1,357 m), separating this range from the Calanda.\nGlaciers.\nMain glaciers :\nPasses.\nThe chief passes of the T\u00f6di Range, from the Oberalp Pass to the Klausen Pass, are:\n\"Note: road status as of 1911[ [update]].\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55208", "revid": "43682752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55208", "title": "Cottian Alps", "text": "Mountain range on the France\u2013Italy border\nThe Cottian Alps (; ; ) are a mountain range in the southwestern part of the Alps. They form the border between France (Hautes-Alpes and Savoie) and Italy (Piedmont). The Fr\u00e9jus Road Tunnel and Fr\u00e9jus Rail Tunnel between Modane and Susa are important transportation arteries between France (Lyon, Grenoble) and Italy (Turin).\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Cottian\" comes from \"Marcus Julius Cottius\", a king of the tribes inhabiting that mountainous region in the 1st century BC. Under his father Donnus, these tribes had previously opposed but later made peace with Julius Caesar. Cottius was succeeded by his son Gaius Julius Donnus II (reigned 3 BC-4 AD), and his grandson Marcus Julius Cottius II (reigned 5-63 AD), who was granted the title of king by the emperor Claudius. On his death, Nero annexed his kingdom as the province of Alpes Cottiae.\nHistory.\nFor a long part of the Middle Ages the Cottian Alps were divided between the Duchy of Savoy, which controlled their northern part and the easternmost slopes, and the Dauphin\u00e9, which at the time was independent from France. The \"Dauphins\" also held, in addition to the southwestern slopes of the range (Brian\u00e7on and Queyras, now on the French side), the upper part of some of the valleys that were tributaries of the Po River (Valle di Susa, Chisone valley, Varaita Valley). The Alpine territory of Dauphin\u00e9, known as \"Escartons\", used to have a limited autonomy and elected its own parliament. This semi-autonomous status lasted also after the annexation of the Dauphin\u00e9 to France (1349), and was only abolished in 1713 due to the Treaty of Utrecht, which assigned to the House of Savoy all the mountainous area on the eastern side of the Cottian Alps.\nAfter the treaty annexing Nice and Savoy to France, signed in Turin in March 1860 (Treaty of Turin), the north-western slopes of the range became part of the French republic.\nTwo eastern valleys of the Cottian Alps (Pellice and Germanasca) have been for centuries a kind of sanctuary for the Waldensians, a Christian movement that was persecuted as heretical from the 12th century onwards by the catholic church.\nGeography.\nAdministratively the range is divided between the Italian province of Cuneo and the Metropolitan City of Turin (the eastern slopes), and the French departments of Savoie, Hautes-Alpes, and Alpes-de-Haute-Provence (the western slopes).\nThe Cottian Alps are drained by the rivers Durance and Arc and their tributaries on the French side; and by the Dora Riparia and other tributaries of the Po on the Italian side.\nBorders.\nThe borders of the Cottian Alps are (clockwise):\nPeaks.\nThe chief peaks of the Cottian Alps are:\nPasses.\nThe chief passes of the Cottian Alps are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55209", "revid": "19540414", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55209", "title": "Pennine Alps", "text": "Mountain range in the western Alps within Italy and Switzerland\nThe Pennine Alps (, , , ), sometimes referred to as the Valais Alps (which are just the Northern Swiss part of the Pennine Alps), are a mountain range in the western part of the Alps. They are located in Italy (the Aosta Valley and Piedmont) and Switzerland (Valais).\nThe Pennine Alps are amongst the three highest major subranges of the Alps, together with the Bernese Alps and the Graian Alps that include the Mont Blanc massif.\nGeography.\nThe Italian side is drained by the rivers Dora Baltea, Sesia and Toce, tributaries of the Po. The Swiss side is drained by the Rh\u00f4ne.\nThe Great St Bernard Tunnel, under the Great St Bernard Pass, leads from Martigny, Switzerland to Aosta.\nMorphology.\nThe main chain (watershed between the Mediterranean Sea and the Adriatic Sea) runs from west to east on the border between Italy (south) and Switzerland (north). From Mont V\u00e9lan, the first high summit east of St Bernard Pass, the chain rarely goes below 3000 metres and contains many four-thousanders such as Matterhorn or Monte Rosa. The valleys are quite similar on both side of the border, being generally oriented perpendicular to the main chain and descending progressively into the Rh\u00f4ne Valley on the north and the Aosta Valley on the south. Unlike many other mountain ranges, the higher peaks are often located outside the main chain and found themselves between the northern valleys (Grand Combin, Weisshorn, Mischabel, Weissmies).\nPeaks.\nThe chief peaks of the Pennine Alps are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGlaciers.\nMain glaciers:\nPasses.\nThe chief passes of the Pennine Alps are:\nNature conservation.\nSome regional nature parks, like the \"Parco Naturale Alta Valsesia\" (6,511 ha - Piedmont, IT), the \"Mont Mars Nature Reserve\" (390 ha - Aosta Valley, IT) and the \"Regional park of Binn valley\" (15,891 ha - Valais, CH), have been established on both sides of the main water divide.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55210", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55210", "title": "Bernese Alps", "text": "Part of the Alps mountain range in Switzerland\nThe Bernese Alps are a mountain range of the Alps located in western Switzerland. Although the name suggests that they are located in the Berner Oberland region of the canton of Bern, portions of the Bernese Alps are in the adjacent cantons of Valais, Fribourg and Vaud, the latter being usually named \"Fribourg Alps\" and \"Vaud Alps\" respectively. The highest mountain in the range, the Finsteraarhorn, is also the highest point in the canton of Bern.\nThe Rh\u00f4ne valley separates them from the Chablais Alps in the west and from the Pennine Alps in the south; the upper Rh\u00f4ne valley separates them from the Lepontine Alps to the southeast; the Grimsel Pass and the Aare valley separates them from the Uri Alps in the east, and from the Emmental Alps in the north; their northwestern edge is not well defined, describing a line roughly from Lake Geneva to Lake Thun. The Bernese Alps are drained by the river Aare and its tributary the Saane in the north, the Rh\u00f4ne in the south, and the Reuss in the east.\nThe Bernese Alps are amongst the three highest major subranges of the Alps, together with the Pennine Alps and the Mont Blanc massif.\nGeography.\nOne of the most prominent Alpine ranges, the Bernese Alps extend from the gorge of Saint-Maurice, through which the Rh\u00f4ne finds its way to Lake Geneva, to the Grimsel Pass or, depending on the definition, to the river Reuss (thus including the Uri Alps). The principal ridge, a chain that runs from west (Dent de Morcles) to east (Sidelhorn), whose highest peak is the Finsteraarhorn, forms the watershed between the cantons of Bern and Valais. Except for the westernmost part, it is also the watershed between the Rhine (North Sea) and the Rh\u00f4ne (Mediterranean Sea). This chain is not centered inside the range but lies close (10 to 15\u00a0km) to the Rh\u00f4ne on the south. This makes a large difference between the south, where the lateral short valleys descend abruptly into the deep trench forming the valley of the Rh\u00f4ne and the north, where the Bernese Alps extends through a great part of the canton of Bern (Bernese Oberland), throwing out branches to the west into the adjoining cantons of Vaud and Fribourg. There the mountains progressively become lower and disappear into the hilly Swiss Plateau. The Bernese Alps have a large influence on the climate of Switzerland: while their north side is very exposed to weather, their south side is protected from it. As a consequence, agriculture consists essentially of dairy farming and cattle breeding on the northern foothills, while on the sunnier southern foothills (Rhone Valley) it also consists of vineyards.\nGemmi Pass is the most central of the major passes through the main chain. It also marks the separation between two distinct sections of the Bernese Alps: the chain west of Gemmi Pass, consisting mainly of foothills with a few large glacier-covered mountains (notably Dent de Morcles, Grand Muveran, Diablerets, Wildhorn and Wildstrubel) around , and the chain east of Gemmi Pass, consisting mainly of summits around on several subranges, with large valley glaciers between them. The latter section, contrary to the former, has very few foothills and is the most glaciated part of the Alps.\nA characteristic in the orography of the Bernese Alps is, that whereas the western portion of that chain consists of a single series of summits with comparatively short projecting buttresses, the higher group presents a series of longitudinal ridges parallel to the axis of the main chain, and separated from each other by deep valleys that form the channels of great glaciers. Thus the Tschingel Glacier and the Kander Glacier, separate the portion of the main range lying between the Gemmi Pass and the Mittaghorn from the equally high parallel range of the Doldenhorn and Bl\u00fcmlisalp on its northern side. To the south, the same portion of the main range is divided from the still higher parallel range whose summits are the Aletschhorn and the Bietschhorn by the L\u00f6tschental and the L\u00f6tschenl\u00fccke. To this again succeeds the deep trench through which the lower part of the Aletsch Glacier flows down to the Rh\u00f4ne, enclosed by the minor ridge that culminates at the Eggishorn.\nIt is in the central and eastern portions of the range only that crystalline rocks make their appearance; the western part is composed almost exclusively of sedimentary deposits, and the secondary ridges extending through Bern and the adjoining cantons are formed of jurassic, cretaceous, or eocene strata.\nExploration.\nThe beauty of the scenery and the facilities offered to travellers by the general extension of mountain railways make the northern side of the range, the Bernese Oberland, one of the portions of the Alps most visited by tourists. Since strangers first began to visit the Alps, the names of Grindelwald, Lauterbrunnen, and Interlaken have become famous. But unlike many other Alpine regions, which have been left to be explored by strangers, this region has been long visited by Swiss travellers and men of science. Among them were the brother Meyer of Aarau and Franz Joseph Hugi. They have explored most of the mountain ranges not very difficult to access, and have climbed most of the higher summits. In 1841, Louis Agassiz, with several scientific friends, established a temporary station on the Unteraar Glacier, and, along with scientific observations on the glaciers, started a series of expeditions. Several mountains in the area are named after Agassiz and the other explorers. The works of Desor and Gottlieb Studer have been followed by several other publications that bear testimony to Swiss mountaineering activity. Notwithstanding the activity of their predecessors, the members of the English Alpine Club have found scope for further exploits, amongst which may be reckoned the first ascents of the Aletschhorn and the Schreckhorn, and the still more arduous enterprise of crossing the range bypasses, such as the Jungfraujoch and Eigerjoch, which are considered among the most difficult in the Alps.\nJungfrau-Aletsch area.\nThe Jungfrau-Aletsch area is located in the eastern Bernese Alps in the most glaciated region of the Alps. It was inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site (\"Swiss Alps Jungfrau-Aletsch\") in 2001 and further expanded in 2007. Its name comes from the Aletsch Glacier and the two summits of the Jungfrau and Bietschhorn, which constitute some of the most impressive features of the site. The actual site (after the extension) includes other large glacier valleys such as the Fiescher Glacier and the Aar Glaciers.\nList of peaks.\nThe chief peaks of the Bernese Alps are:\nGlaciers.\nMain glaciers:\nList of passes.\nThe chief passes of the Bernese Alps are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55211", "revid": "47614224", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55211", "title": "Graian Alps", "text": "Mountain range in the western part of the Alps\nThe Graian Alps (Latin:: \"Alpes Grai\u00e6\" ; ; ) are a mountain range in the western part of the Alps, and the name of an Ancient Roman province.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Graie\" comes from the \"Graioceli\" Celtic tribe, which dwelled in the area surrounding the Mont Cenis pass and the Vi\u00f9 valley.\nOther sources claim that the name comes from the Celtic \"Graig\" meaning \"rock\" or \"stone\", literally the Rocky Mountains. \nThe name of the Antic Rome province comes from the local celtic god Graius. \nGeography.\nThe Graian Alps are located in France (Auvergne-Rh\u00f4ne-Alpes), Italy (Piedmont and the Aosta Valley), and Switzerland (western Valais).\nThe French side of the Graian Alps is drained by the river Is\u00e8re (Tarentaise valley) and its tributary Arc (Maurienne valley), and by the Arve. The Italian side is drained by the rivers Dora Riparia, Dora Baltea, Orco and Stura di Lanzo, tributaries of the Po.\nThe Graian Alps can also be divided into the following four groups:\nPeaks.\nThe main peaks of the Graian Alps are:\nCentral group.\nIt also includes Roche Michel at 3429 m.\nPasses.\nThe main passes of the Graian Alps are shown in the table below. The group in which the pass is located is indicated with \"MB\" for Mont Blanc group, \"C\" for Central group, \"E\" for Eastern group, and \"W\" for Western group.\nNature conservation.\nThe western group contains the Vanoise National Park, established in 1972 and covering the eastern group contains the Gran Paradiso National Park, the oldest Italian national park.\nAlso on the Italian side is located the \"Parco Regionale del Monte Avic\", a nature park of 5,747 ha established by Regione Valle d'Aosta.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55212", "revid": "32791795", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55212", "title": "Newton's laws of motion", "text": "Laws in physics about force and motion\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNewton's laws of motion are three physical laws that describe the relationship between the motion of an object and the forces acting on it. These laws, which provide the basis for Newtonian mechanics, can be paraphrased as follows:\nThe three laws of motion were first stated by Isaac Newton in his \"Philosophi\u00e6 Naturalis Principia Mathematica\" (\"Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy\"), originally published in 1687. Newton used them to investigate and explain the motion of many physical objects and systems. In the time since Newton, new insights, especially around the concept of energy, built the field of classical mechanics on his foundations. In modern times, limitations to Newton's laws have been discovered; new theories were consequently developed, such as quantum mechanics and relativity to address the physics of objects in more extreme cases.\nPrerequisites.\nNewton's laws are often stated in terms of \"point\" or \"particle\" masses, that is, bodies whose volume is negligible. This is a reasonable approximation for real bodies when the motion of internal parts can be neglected, and when the separation between bodies is much larger than the size of each. For instance, the Earth and the Sun can both be approximated as pointlike when considering the orbit of the former around the latter, but the Earth is not pointlike when considering activities on its surface.\nThe mathematical description of motion, or kinematics, is based on the idea of specifying positions using numerical coordinates. Movement is represented by these numbers changing over time: a body's trajectory is represented by a function that assigns to each value of a time variable the values of all the position coordinates. The simplest case is one-dimensional, that is, when a body is constrained to move only along a straight line. Its position can then be given by a single number, indicating where it is relative to some chosen reference point. For example, a body might be free to slide along a track that runs left to right, and so its location can be specified by its distance from a convenient zero point, or origin, with negative numbers indicating positions to the left and positive numbers indicating positions to the right. If the body's location as a function of time is formula_1, then its average velocity over the time interval from formula_2 to formula_3 is formula_4Here, the Greek letter formula_5 (delta) is used, per tradition, to mean \"change in\". A positive average velocity means that the position coordinate formula_6 increases over the interval in question, a negative average velocity indicates a net decrease over that interval, and an average velocity of zero means that the body ends the time interval in the same place as it began. Calculus gives the means to define an \"instantaneous\" velocity, a measure of a body's speed and direction of movement at a single moment of time, rather than over an interval. One notation for the instantaneous velocity is to replace formula_5 with the symbol formula_8, for example,formula_9This denotes that the instantaneous velocity is the derivative of the position with respect to time. It can roughly be thought of as the ratio between an infinitesimally small change in position formula_10 to the infinitesimally small time interval formula_11 over which it occurs. More carefully, the velocity and all other derivatives can be defined using the concept of a limit. A function formula_12 has a limit of formula_13 at a given input value formula_2 if the difference between formula_15 and formula_13 can be made arbitrarily small by choosing an input sufficiently close to formula_2. One writes, formula_18Instantaneous velocity can be defined as the limit of the average velocity as the time interval shrinks to zero:formula_19 \"Acceleration\" is to velocity as velocity is to position: it is the derivative of the velocity with respect to time. Acceleration can likewise be defined as a limit:formula_20Consequently, the acceleration is the \"second derivative\" of position, often written formula_21.\nPosition, when thought of as a displacement from an origin point, is a vector: a quantity with both magnitude and direction.1 Velocity and acceleration are vector quantities as well. The mathematical tools of vector algebra provide the means to describe motion in two, three or more dimensions. Vectors are often denoted with an arrow, as in formula_22, or in bold typeface, such as formula_23. Often, vectors are represented visually as arrows, with the direction of the vector being the direction of the arrow, and the magnitude of the vector indicated by the length of the arrow. Numerically, a vector can be represented as a list; for example, a body's velocity vector might be formula_24, indicating that it is moving at 3 metres per second along the horizontal axis and 4 metres per second along the vertical axis. The same motion described in a different coordinate system will be represented by different numbers, and vector algebra can be used to translate between these alternatives.4\nThe study of mechanics is complicated by the fact that household words like \"energy\" are used with a technical meaning. Moreover, words which are synonymous in everyday speech are not so in physics: \"force\" is not the same as \"power\" or \"pressure\", for example, and \"mass\" has a different meaning than \"weight\". The physics concept of \"force\" makes quantitative the everyday idea of a push or a pull. Forces in Newtonian mechanics are often due to strings and ropes, friction, muscle effort, gravity, and so forth. Like displacement, velocity, and acceleration, force is a vector quantity.\n\"Corpus omne perseverare in statu suo quiescendi vel movendi uniformiter in directum, nisi quatenus a viribus impressis cogitur statum illum mutare.\"\n\"Every object perseveres in its state of rest, or of uniform motion in a right line, unless it is compelled to change that state by forces impressed thereon.\"\nLaws.\nFirst law.\nNewton's first law expresses the principle of \"inertia\": the natural behavior of a body is to move in a straight line at constant speed. A body's motion preserves the status quo, but external forces can perturb this.\nThe modern understanding of Newton's first law is that no inertial observer is privileged over any other. The concept of an inertial observer makes quantitative the everyday idea of feeling no effects of motion. For example, a person standing on the ground watching a train go past is an inertial observer. If the observer on the ground sees the train moving smoothly in a straight line at a constant speed, then a passenger sitting on the train will also be an inertial observer: the train passenger \"feels\" no motion. The principle expressed by Newton's first law is that there is no way to say which inertial observer is \"really\" moving and which is \"really\" standing still. One observer's state of rest is another observer's state of uniform motion in a straight line, and no experiment can deem either point of view to be correct or incorrect. There is no absolute standard of rest. Newton himself believed that absolute space and time existed, but that the only measures of space or time accessible to experiment are relative.\n\"Mutationem motus proportionalem esse vi motrici impress\u00e6, &amp; \ufb01eri secundum lineam rectam qua vis illa imprimitur.\"\n\"The change of motion of an object is proportional to the force impressed; and is made in the direction of the straight line in which the force is impressed.\"114\nSecond law.\nBy \"motion\", Newton meant the quantity now called momentum, which depends upon the amount of matter contained in a body, the speed at which that body is moving, and the direction in which it is moving. In modern notation, the momentum of a body is the product of its mass and its velocity:\nformula_25\nwhere all three quantities can change over time.\nIn common cases the mass formula_26 does not change with time and the derivative acts only upon the velocity. Then force equals the product of the mass and the time derivative of the velocity, which is the acceleration:\nformula_27\nAs the acceleration is the second derivative of position with respect to time, this can also be written\nformula_28\nNewton's second law, in modern form, states that the time derivative of the momentum is the force:4.1\nformula_29\nWhen applied to systems of variable mass, the equation above is valid only for a fixed set of particles. Applying the derivative as in \nformula_30\ncan lead to incorrect results. For example, the momentum of a water jet system must include the momentum of the ejected water:\nformula_31\n The forces acting on a body add as vectors, and so the total force on a body depends upon both the magnitudes and the directions of the individual forces. When the net force on a body is equal to zero, then by Newton's second law, the body does not accelerate, and it is said to be in mechanical equilibrium. A state of mechanical equilibrium is \"stable\" if, when the position of the body is changed slightly, the body remains near that equilibrium. Otherwise, the equilibrium is \"unstable.\"\nA common visual representation of forces acting in concert is the free body diagram, which schematically portrays a body of interest and the forces applied to it by outside influences. For example, a free body diagram of a block sitting upon an inclined plane can illustrate the combination of gravitational force, \"normal\" force, friction, and string tension.\nNewton's second law is sometimes presented as a \"definition\" of force, i.e., a force is that which exists when an inertial observer sees a body accelerating. This is sometimes regarded as a potential tautology \u2014 acceleration implies force, force implies acceleration. To go beyond tautology, an equation detailing the force might also be specified, like Newton's law of universal gravitation. By inserting such an expression for formula_32 into Newton's second law, an equation with predictive power can be written. Newton's second law has also been regarded as setting out a research program for physics, establishing that important goals of the subject are to identify the forces present in nature and to catalogue the constituents of matter.13412-2\n\"Actioni contrariam semper &amp; \u00e6qualem esse reactionem: sive corporum duorum actiones in se mutuo semper esse \u00e6quales &amp; in partes contrarias dirigi.\"\n\"To every action, there is always opposed an equal reaction; or, the mutual actions of two bodies upon each other are always equal, and directed to contrary parts.\"116\nThird law.\nIn other words, if one body exerts a force on a second body, the second body is also exerting a force on the first body, of equal magnitude in the opposite direction. Overly brief paraphrases of the third law, like \"action equals reaction\" might have caused confusion among generations of students: the \"action\" and \"reaction\" apply to different bodies. For example, consider a book at rest on a table. The Earth's gravity pulls down upon the book. The \"reaction\" to that \"action\" is \"not\" the support force from the table holding up the book, but the gravitational pull of the book acting on the Earth.\nNewton's third law relates to a more fundamental principle, the conservation of momentum. The latter remains true even in cases where Newton's statement does not, for instance when force fields as well as material bodies carry momentum, and when momentum is defined properly, in quantum mechanics as well. In Newtonian mechanics, if two bodies have momenta formula_33 and formula_34 respectively, then the total momentum of the pair is formula_35, and the rate of change of formula_36 is formula_37 By Newton's second law, the first term is the total force upon the first body, and the second term is the total force upon the second body. If the two bodies are isolated from outside influences, the only force upon the first body can be that from the second, and vice versa. By Newton's third law, these forces have equal magnitude but opposite direction, so they cancel when added, and formula_36 is constant. Alternatively, if formula_36 is known to be constant, it follows that the forces have equal magnitude and opposite direction.\nCandidates for additional laws.\nVarious sources have proposed elevating other ideas used in classical mechanics to the status of Newton's laws. For example, in Newtonian mechanics, the total mass of a body made by bringing together two smaller bodies is the sum of their individual masses. Frank Wilczek has suggested calling attention to this assumption by designating it \"Newton's Zeroth Law\". Another candidate for a \"zeroth law\" is the fact that at any instant, a body reacts to the forces applied to it at that instant. Likewise, the idea that forces add like vectors (or in other words obey the superposition principle), and the idea that forces change the energy of a body, have both been described as a \"fourth law\".\nMoreover, some texts organize the basic ideas of Newtonian mechanics into different postulates, other than the three laws as commonly phrased, with the goal of being more clear about what is empirically observed and what is true by definition.9\nExamples.\nThe study of the behavior of massive bodies using Newton's laws is known as Newtonian mechanics. Some example problems in Newtonian mechanics are particularly noteworthy for conceptual or historical reasons.\nUniformly accelerated motion.\nIf a body falls from rest near the surface of the Earth, then in the absence of air resistance, it will accelerate at a constant rate. This is known as free fall. The speed attained during free fall is proportional to the elapsed time, and the distance traveled is proportional to the square of the elapsed time. Importantly, the acceleration is the same for all bodies, independently of their mass. This follows from combining Newton's second law of motion with his law of universal gravitation. The latter states that the magnitude of the gravitational force from the Earth upon the body is\nformula_40\nwhere formula_26 is the mass of the falling body, formula_42 is the mass of the Earth, formula_43 is Newton's constant, and formula_44 is the distance from the center of the Earth to the body's location, which is very nearly the radius of the Earth. Setting this equal to formula_45, the body's mass formula_26 cancels from both sides of the equation, leaving an acceleration that depends upon formula_43, formula_42, and formula_44, and formula_44 can be taken to be constant. This particular value of acceleration is typically denoted formula_51:\nformula_52\nIf the body is not released from rest but instead launched upwards and/or horizontally with nonzero velocity, then free fall becomes projectile motion. When air resistance can be neglected, projectiles follow parabola-shaped trajectories, because gravity affects the body's vertical motion and not its horizontal. At the peak of the projectile's trajectory, its vertical velocity is zero, but its acceleration is formula_51 downwards, as it is at all times. Setting the wrong vector equal to zero is a common confusion among physics students.\nUniform circular motion.\nWhen a body is in uniform circular motion, the force on it changes the direction of its motion but not its speed. For a body moving in a circle of radius formula_44 at a constant speed formula_55, its acceleration has a magnitudeformula_56and is directed toward the center of the circle. The force required to sustain this acceleration, called the centripetal force, is therefore also directed toward the center of the circle and has magnitude formula_57. Many orbits, such as that of the Moon around the Earth, can be approximated by uniform circular motion. In such cases, the centripetal force is gravity, and by Newton's law of universal gravitation has magnitude formula_58, where formula_42 is the mass of the larger body being orbited. Therefore, the mass of a body can be calculated from observations of another body orbiting around it.130\nNewton's cannonball is a thought experiment that interpolates between projectile motion and uniform circular motion. A cannonball that is lobbed weakly off the edge of a tall cliff will hit the ground in the same amount of time as if it were dropped from rest, because the force of gravity only affects the cannonball's momentum in the downward direction, and its effect is not diminished by horizontal movement. If the cannonball is launched with a greater initial horizontal velocity, then it will travel farther before it hits the ground, but it will still hit the ground in the same amount of time. However, if the cannonball is launched with an even larger initial velocity, then the curvature of the Earth becomes significant: the ground itself will curve away from the falling cannonball. A very fast cannonball will fall away from the inertial straight-line trajectory at the same rate that the Earth curves away beneath it; in other words, it will be in orbit (imagining that it is not slowed by air resistance or obstacles).\nHarmonic motion.\nConsider a body of mass formula_26 able to move along the formula_61 axis, and suppose an equilibrium point exists at the position formula_62. That is, at formula_62, the net force upon the body is the zero vector, and by Newton's second law, the body will not accelerate. If the force upon the body is proportional to the displacement from the equilibrium point, and directed to the equilibrium point, then the body will perform simple harmonic motion. Writing the force as formula_64, Newton's second law becomes\nformula_65\nThis differential equation has the solution\nformula_66\nwhere the frequency formula_67 is equal to formula_68, and the constants formula_69 and formula_70 can be calculated knowing, for example, the position and velocity the body has at a given time, like formula_71.\nOne reason that the harmonic oscillator is a conceptually important example is that it is good approximation for many systems near a stable mechanical equilibrium. For example, a pendulum has a stable equilibrium in the vertical position: if motionless there, it will remain there, and if pushed slightly, it will swing back and forth. Neglecting air resistance and friction in the pivot, the force upon the pendulum is gravity, and Newton's second law becomes formula_72where formula_13 is the length of the pendulum and formula_74 is its angle from the vertical. When the angle formula_74 is small, the sine of formula_74 is nearly equal to formula_74 (see small-angle approximation), and so this expression simplifies to the equation for a simple harmonic oscillator with frequency formula_78.\nA harmonic oscillator can be \"damped,\" often by friction or viscous drag, in which case energy bleeds out of the oscillator and the amplitude of the oscillations decreases over time. Also, a harmonic oscillator can be \"driven\" by an applied force, which can lead to the phenomenon of resonance.\nObjects with variable mass.\nNewtonian physics treats matter as being neither created nor destroyed, though it may be rearranged. It can be the case that an object of interest gains or loses mass because matter is added to or removed from it. In such a situation, Newton's laws can be applied to the individual pieces of matter, keeping track of which pieces belong to the object of interest over time. For instance, if a rocket of mass formula_79, moving at velocity formula_80, ejects matter at a velocity formula_81 relative to the rocket, then\nformula_82\nwhere formula_32 is the net external force (e.g., a planet's gravitational pull).\nFan and sail.\nThe fan and sail example is a situation studied in discussions of Newton's third law. In the situation, a fan is attached to a cart or a sailboat and blows on its sail. From the third law, one would reason that the force of the air pushing in one direction would cancel out the force done by the fan on the sail, leaving the entire apparatus stationary. However, because the system is not entirely enclosed, there are conditions in which the vessel will move; for example, if the sail is built in a manner that redirects the majority of the airflow back towards the fan, the net force will result in the vessel moving forward.\nWork and energy.\nThe concept of energy was developed after Newton's time, but it has become an inseparable part of what is considered \"Newtonian\" physics. Energy can broadly be classified into kinetic, due to a body's motion, and potential, due to a body's position relative to others. Thermal energy, the energy carried by heat flow, is a type of kinetic energy not associated with the macroscopic motion of objects but instead with the movements of the atoms and molecules of which they are made. According to the work-energy theorem, when a force acts upon a body while that body moves along the line of the force, the force does \"work\" upon the body, and the amount of work done is equal to the change in the body's kinetic energy. In many cases of interest, the net work done by a force when a body moves in a closed loop \u2014 starting at a point, moving along some trajectory, and returning to the initial point \u2014 is zero. If this is the case, then the force can be written in terms of the gradient of a function called a scalar potential:303\nformula_84\nThis is true for many forces including that of gravity, but not for friction; indeed, almost any problem in a mechanics textbook that does not involve friction can be expressed in this way.19 The fact that the force can be written in this way can be understood from the conservation of energy. Without friction to dissipate a body's energy into heat, the body's energy will trade between potential and (non-thermal) kinetic forms while the total amount remains constant. Any gain of kinetic energy, which occurs when the net force on the body accelerates it to a higher speed, must be accompanied by a loss of potential energy. So, the net force upon the body is determined by the manner in which the potential energy decreases.\nRigid-body motion and rotation.\nA rigid body is an object whose size is too large to neglect and which maintains the same shape over time. In Newtonian mechanics, the motion of a rigid body is often understood by separating it into movement of the body's center of mass and movement around the center of mass.\nCenter of mass.\nSignificant aspects of the motion of an extended body can be understood by imagining the mass of that body concentrated to a single point, known as the center of mass. The location of a body's center of mass depends upon how that body's material is distributed. For a collection of pointlike objects with masses formula_85 at positions formula_86, the center of mass is located at formula_87 where formula_42 is the total mass of the collection. In the absence of a net external force, the center of mass moves at a constant speed in a straight line. This applies, for example, to a collision between two bodies. If the total external force is not zero, then the center of mass changes velocity as though it were a point body of mass formula_42. This follows from the fact that the internal forces within the collection, the forces that the objects exert upon each other, occur in balanced pairs by Newton's third law. In a system of two bodies with one much more massive than the other, the center of mass will approximately coincide with the location of the more massive body.\nRotational analogues of Newton's laws.\nWhen Newton's laws are applied to rotating extended bodies, they lead to new quantities that are analogous to those invoked in the original laws. The analogue of mass is the moment of inertia, the counterpart of momentum is angular momentum, and the counterpart of force is torque.\nAngular momentum is calculated with respect to a reference point. If the displacement vector from a reference point to a body is formula_90 and the body has momentum formula_36, then the body's angular momentum with respect to that point is, using the vector cross product, formula_92 Taking the time derivative of the angular momentum gives formula_93 The first term vanishes because formula_94 and formula_95 point in the same direction. The remaining term is the torque, formula_96 When the torque is zero, the angular momentum is constant, just as when the force is zero, the momentum is constant. The torque can vanish even when the force is non-zero, if the body is located at the reference point (formula_97) or if the force formula_32 and the displacement vector formula_90 are directed along the same line.\nThe angular momentum of a collection of point masses, and thus of an extended body, is found by adding the contributions from each of the points. This provides a means to characterize a body's rotation about an axis, by adding up the angular momenta of its individual pieces. The result depends on the chosen axis, the shape of the body, and the rate of rotation.28\nMulti-body gravitational system.\nNewton's law of universal gravitation states that any body attracts any other body along the straight line connecting them. The size of the attracting force is proportional to the product of their masses, and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them. Finding the shape of the orbits that an inverse-square force law will produce is known as the Kepler problem. The Kepler problem can be solved in multiple ways, including by demonstrating that the Laplace\u2013Runge\u2013Lenz vector is constant, or by applying a duality transformation to a 2-dimensional harmonic oscillator. However it is solved, the result is that orbits will be conic sections, that is, ellipses (including circles), parabolas, or hyperbolas. The eccentricity of the orbit, and thus the type of conic section, is determined by the energy and the angular momentum of the orbiting body. Planets do not have sufficient energy to escape the Sun, and so their orbits are ellipses, to a good approximation; because the planets pull on one another, actual orbits are not exactly conic sections.\nIf a third mass is added, the Kepler problem becomes the three-body problem, which in general has no exact solution in closed form. That is, there is no way to start from the differential equations implied by Newton's laws and, after a finite sequence of standard mathematical operations, obtain equations that express the three bodies' motions over time. Numerical methods can be applied to obtain useful, albeit approximate, results for the three-body problem. The positions and velocities of the bodies can be stored in variables within a computer's memory; Newton's laws are used to calculate how the velocities will change over a short interval of time, and knowing the velocities, the changes of position over that time interval can be computed. This process is looped to calculate, approximately, the bodies' trajectories. Generally speaking, the shorter the time interval, the more accurate the approximation.\nChaos and unpredictability.\nNonlinear dynamics.\nNewton's laws of motion allow the possibility of chaos. That is, qualitatively speaking, physical systems obeying Newton's laws can exhibit sensitive dependence upon their initial conditions: a slight change of the position or velocity of one part of a system can lead to the whole system behaving in a radically different way within a short time. Noteworthy examples include the three-body problem, the double pendulum, dynamical billiards, and the Fermi\u2013Pasta\u2013Ulam\u2013Tsingou problem.\nNewton's laws can be applied to fluids by considering a fluid as composed of infinitesimal pieces, each exerting forces upon neighboring pieces. The Euler momentum equation is an expression of Newton's second law adapted to fluid dynamics. A fluid is described by a velocity field, i.e., a function formula_100 that assigns a velocity vector to each point in space and time. A small object being carried along by the fluid flow can change velocity for two reasons: first, because the velocity field at its position is changing over time, and second, because it moves to a new location where the velocity field has a different value. Consequently, when Newton's second law is applied to an infinitesimal portion of fluid, the acceleration formula_101 has two terms, a combination known as a \"total\" or \"material\" derivative. The mass of an infinitesimal portion depends upon the fluid density, and there is a net force upon it if the fluid pressure varies from one side of it to another. Accordingly, formula_102 becomes\nformula_103\nwhere formula_104 is the density, formula_105 is the pressure, and formula_106 stands for an external influence like a gravitational pull. Incorporating the effect of viscosity turns the Euler equation into a Navier\u2013Stokes equation:\nformula_107\nwhere formula_108 is the kinematic viscosity.\nSingularities.\nIt is mathematically possible for a collection of point masses, moving in accord with Newton's laws, to launch some of themselves away so forcefully that they fly off to infinity in a finite time. This unphysical behavior, known as a \"noncollision singularity\", depends upon the masses being pointlike and able to approach one another arbitrarily closely, as well as the lack of a relativistic speed limit in Newtonian physics.\nIt is not yet known whether or not the Euler and Navier\u2013Stokes equations exhibit the analogous behavior of initially smooth solutions \"blowing up\" in finite time. The question of existence and smoothness of Navier\u2013Stokes solutions is one of the Millennium Prize Problems.\nRelation to other formulations of classical physics.\nClassical mechanics can be mathematically formulated in multiple different ways, other than the \"Newtonian\" description (which itself, of course, incorporates contributions from others both before and after Newton). The physical content of these different formulations is the same as the Newtonian, but they provide different insights and facilitate different types of calculations. For example, Lagrangian mechanics helps make apparent the connection between symmetries and conservation laws, and it is useful when calculating the motion of constrained bodies, like a mass restricted to move along a curving track or on the surface of a sphere. Hamiltonian mechanics is convenient for statistical physics, leads to further insight about symmetry, and can be developed into sophisticated techniques for perturbation theory. Due to the breadth of these topics, the discussion here will be confined to concise treatments of how they reformulate Newton's laws of motion.\nLagrangian.\nLagrangian mechanics differs from the Newtonian formulation by considering entire trajectories at once rather than predicting a body's motion at a single instant.109 It is traditional in Lagrangian mechanics to denote position with formula_109 and velocity with formula_110. The simplest example is a massive point particle, the Lagrangian for which can be written as the difference between its kinetic and potential energies:\nformula_111\nwhere the kinetic energy is\nformula_112\nand the potential energy is some function of the position, formula_113. The physical path that the particle will take between an initial point formula_114 and a final point formula_115 is the path for which the integral of the Lagrangian is \"stationary\". That is, the physical path has the property that small perturbations of it will, to a first approximation, not change the integral of the Lagrangian. Calculus of variations provides the mathematical tools for finding this path.485 Applying the calculus of variations to the task of finding the path yields the Euler\u2013Lagrange equation for the particle,\nformula_116\nEvaluating the partial derivatives of the Lagrangian gives\nformula_117\nwhich is a restatement of Newton's second law. The left-hand side is the time derivative of the momentum, and the right-hand side is the force, represented in terms of the potential energy.737\nLandau and Lifshitz argue that the Lagrangian formulation makes the conceptual content of classical mechanics more clear than starting with Newton's laws. Lagrangian mechanics provides a convenient framework in which to prove Noether's theorem, which relates symmetries and conservation laws. The conservation of momentum can be derived by applying Noether's theorem to a Lagrangian for a multi-particle system, and so, Newton's third law is a theorem rather than an assumption.124\nHamiltonian.\nIn Hamiltonian mechanics, the dynamics of a system are represented by a function called the Hamiltonian, which in many cases of interest is equal to the total energy of the system.742 The Hamiltonian is a function of the positions and the momenta of all the bodies making up the system, and it may also depend explicitly upon time. The time derivatives of the position and momentum variables are given by partial derivatives of the Hamiltonian, via Hamilton's equations.203 The simplest example is a point mass formula_26 constrained to move in a straight line, under the effect of a potential. Writing formula_109 for the position coordinate and formula_120 for the body's momentum, the Hamiltonian is\nformula_121\nIn this example, Hamilton's equations are\nformula_122\nand\nformula_123\nEvaluating these partial derivatives, the former equation becomes\nformula_124\nwhich reproduces the familiar statement that a body's momentum is the product of its mass and velocity. The time derivative of the momentum is\nformula_125\nwhich, upon identifying the negative derivative of the potential with the force, is just Newton's second law once again.742\nAs in the Lagrangian formulation, in Hamiltonian mechanics the conservation of momentum can be derived using Noether's theorem, making Newton's third law an idea that is deduced rather than assumed.251\nAmong the proposals to reform the standard introductory-physics curriculum is one that teaches the concept of energy before that of force, essentially \"introductory Hamiltonian mechanics\".\nHamilton\u2013Jacobi.\nThe Hamilton\u2013Jacobi equation provides yet another formulation of classical mechanics, one which makes it mathematically analogous to wave optics.284 This formulation also uses Hamiltonian functions, but in a different way than the formulation described above. The paths taken by bodies or collections of bodies are deduced from a function formula_126 of positions formula_127 and time formula_128. The Hamiltonian is incorporated into the Hamilton\u2013Jacobi equation, a differential equation for formula_129. Bodies move over time in such a way that their trajectories are perpendicular to the surfaces of constant formula_129, analogously to how a light ray propagates in the direction perpendicular to its wavefront. This is simplest to express for the case of a single point mass, in which formula_129 is a function formula_132, and the point mass moves in the direction along which formula_129 changes most steeply. In other words, the momentum of the point mass is the gradient of formula_129:\nformula_135\nThe Hamilton\u2013Jacobi equation for a point mass is\nformula_136\nThe relation to Newton's laws can be seen by considering a point mass moving in a time-independent potential formula_137, in which case the Hamilton\u2013Jacobi equation becomes\nformula_138\nTaking the gradient of both sides, this becomes\nformula_139\nInterchanging the order of the partial derivatives on the left-hand side, and using the power and chain rules on the first term on the right-hand side,\nformula_140\nGathering together the terms that depend upon the gradient of formula_129,\nformula_142\nThis is another re-expression of Newton's second law. The expression in brackets is a \"total\" or \"material\" derivative as mentioned above, in which the first term indicates how the function being differentiated changes over time at a fixed location, and the second term captures how a moving particle will see different values of that function as it travels from place to place:\nformula_143\nRelation to other physical theories.\nThermodynamics and statistical physics.\nIn statistical physics, the kinetic theory of gases applies Newton's laws of motion to large numbers (typically on the order of the Avogadro number) of particles. Kinetic theory can explain, for example, the pressure that a gas exerts upon the container holding it as the aggregate of many impacts of atoms, each imparting a tiny amount of momentum.62\nThe Langevin equation is a special case of Newton's second law, adapted for the case of describing a small object bombarded stochastically by even smaller ones.235 It can be writtenformula_144where formula_145 is a drag coefficient and formula_146 is a force that varies randomly from instant to instant, representing the net effect of collisions with the surrounding particles. This is used to model Brownian motion.\nElectromagnetism.\nNewton's three laws can be applied to phenomena involving electricity and magnetism, though subtleties and caveats exist.\nCoulomb's law for the electric force between two stationary, electrically charged bodies has much the same mathematical form as Newton's law of universal gravitation: the force is proportional to the product of the charges, inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them, and directed along the straight line between them. The Coulomb force that a charge formula_147 exerts upon a charge formula_148 is equal in magnitude to the force that formula_148 exerts upon formula_147, and it points in the exact opposite direction. Coulomb's law is thus consistent with Newton's third law.\nElectromagnetism treats forces as produced by \"fields\" acting upon charges. The Lorentz force law provides an expression for the force upon a charged body that can be plugged into Newton's second law in order to calculate its acceleration.85 According to the Lorentz force law, a charged body in an electric field experiences a force in the direction of that field, a force proportional to its charge formula_109 and to the strength of the electric field. In addition, a \"moving\" charged body in a magnetic field experiences a force that is also proportional to its charge, in a direction perpendicular to both the field and the body's direction of motion. Using the vector cross product,formula_152\nIf the electric field vanishes (formula_153), then the force will be perpendicular to the charge's motion, just as in the case of uniform circular motion studied above, and the charge will circle (or more generally move in a helix) around the magnetic field lines at the cyclotron frequency formula_154.222 Mass spectrometry works by applying electric and/or magnetic fields to moving charges and measuring the resulting acceleration, which by the Lorentz force law yields the mass-to-charge ratio.\nCollections of charged bodies do not always obey Newton's third law: there can be a change of one body's momentum without a compensatory change in the momentum of another. The discrepancy is accounted for by momentum carried by the electromagnetic field itself. The momentum per unit volume of the electromagnetic field is proportional to the Poynting vector.\nThere is subtle conceptual conflict between electromagnetism and Newton's first law: Maxwell's theory of electromagnetism predicts that electromagnetic waves will travel through empty space at a constant, definite speed. Thus, some inertial observers seemingly have a privileged status over the others, namely those who measure the speed of light and find it to be the value predicted by the Maxwell equations. In other words, light provides an absolute standard for speed, yet the principle of inertia holds that there should be no such standard. This tension is resolved in the theory of special relativity, which revises the notions of \"space\" and \"time\" in such a way that all inertial observers will agree upon the speed of light in vacuum.\nSpecial relativity.\nIn special relativity, the rule that Wilczek called \"Newton's Zeroth Law\" breaks down: the mass of a composite object is not merely the sum of the masses of the individual pieces.33 Newton's first law, inertial motion, remains true. A form of Newton's second law, that force is the rate of change of momentum, also holds, as does the conservation of momentum. However, the definition of momentum is modified. Among the consequences of this is the fact that the more quickly a body moves, the harder it is to accelerate, and so, no matter how much force is applied, a body cannot be accelerated to the speed of light. Depending on the problem at hand, momentum in special relativity can be represented as a three-dimensional vector, formula_155, where formula_26 is the body's rest mass and formula_145 is the Lorentz factor, which depends upon the body's speed. Alternatively, momentum and force can be represented as four-vectors.107\nNewton's third law must be modified in special relativity. The third law refers to the forces between two bodies at the same moment in time, and a key feature of special relativity is that simultaneity is relative. Events that happen at the same time relative to one observer can happen at different times relative to another. So, in a given observer's frame of reference, action and reaction may not be exactly opposite, and the total momentum of interacting bodies may not be conserved. The conservation of momentum is restored by including the momentum stored in the field that describes the bodies' interaction.\nNewtonian mechanics is a good approximation to special relativity when the speeds involved are small compared to that of light.131\nGeneral relativity.\nGeneral relativity is a theory of gravity that advances beyond that of Newton. In general relativity, the gravitational force of Newtonian mechanics is reimagined as curvature of spacetime. A curved path like an orbit, attributed to a gravitational force in Newtonian mechanics, is not the result of a force deflecting a body from an ideal straight-line path, but rather the body's attempt to fall freely through a background that is itself curved by the presence of other masses. A remark by John Archibald Wheeler that has become proverbial among physicists summarizes the theory: \"Spacetime tells matter how to move; matter tells spacetime how to curve.\" Wheeler himself thought of this reciprocal relationship as a modern, generalized form of Newton's third law. The relation between matter distribution and spacetime curvature is given by the Einstein field equations, which require tensor calculus to express.43\nThe Newtonian theory of gravity is a good approximation to the predictions of general relativity when gravitational effects are weak and objects are moving slowly compared to the speed of light.327\nQuantum mechanics.\nQuantum mechanics is a theory of physics originally developed in order to understand microscopic phenomena: behavior at the scale of molecules, atoms or subatomic particles. Generally and loosely speaking, the smaller a system is, the more an adequate mathematical model will require understanding quantum effects. The conceptual underpinning of quantum physics is very different from that of classical physics. Instead of thinking about quantities like position, momentum, and energy as properties that an object \"has\", one considers what result might \"appear\" when a measurement of a chosen type is performed. Quantum mechanics allows the physicist to calculate the probability that a chosen measurement will elicit a particular result. The expectation value for a measurement is the average of the possible results it might yield, weighted by their probabilities of occurrence.\nThe Ehrenfest theorem provides a connection between quantum expectation values and Newton's second law, a connection that is necessarily inexact, as quantum physics is fundamentally different from classical. In quantum physics, position and momentum are represented by mathematical entities known as Hermitian operators, and the Born rule is used to calculate the expectation values of a position measurement or a momentum measurement. These expectation values will generally change over time; that is, depending on the time at which (for example) a position measurement is performed, the probabilities for its different possible outcomes will vary. The Ehrenfest theorem says, roughly speaking, that the equations describing how these expectation values change over time have a form reminiscent of Newton's second law. However, the more pronounced quantum effects are in a given situation, the more difficult it is to derive meaningful conclusions from this resemblance.\nHistory.\nThe concepts invoked in Newton's laws of motion \u2014 mass, velocity, momentum, force \u2014 have predecessors in earlier work, and the content of Newtonian physics was further developed after Newton's time. Newton combined knowledge of celestial motions with the study of events on Earth and showed that one theory of mechanics could encompass both.\nAntiquity and medieval background.\nAristotle and \"violent\" motion.\nThe subject of physics is often traced back to Aristotle, but the history of the concepts involved is obscured by multiple factors. An exact correspondence between Aristotelian and modern concepts is not simple to establish: Aristotle did not clearly distinguish what we would call speed and force, used the same term for density and viscosity, and conceived of motion as always through a medium, rather than through space. In addition, some concepts often termed \"Aristotelian\" might better be attributed to his followers and commentators upon him. These commentators found that Aristotelian physics had difficulty explaining projectile motion. Aristotle divided motion into two types: \"natural\" and \"violent\". The \"natural\" motion of terrestrial solid matter was to fall downwards, whereas a \"violent\" motion could push a body sideways. Moreover, in Aristotelian physics, a \"violent\" motion requires an immediate cause; separated from the cause of its \"violent\" motion, a body would revert to its \"natural\" behavior. Yet, a javelin continues moving after it leaves the thrower's hand. Aristotle concluded that the air around the javelin must be imparted with the ability to move the javelin forward.\nPhiloponus and impetus.\nJohn Philoponus, a Byzantine Greek thinker active during the sixth century, found this absurd: the same medium, air, was somehow responsible both for sustaining motion and for impeding it. If Aristotle's idea were true, Philoponus said, armies would launch weapons by blowing upon them with bellows. Philoponus argued that setting a body into motion imparted a quality, impetus, that would be contained within the body itself. As long as its impetus was sustained, the body would continue to move. In the following centuries, versions of impetus theory were advanced by individuals including Nur ad-Din al-Bitruji, Avicenna, Abu'l-Barak\u0101t al-Baghd\u0101d\u012b, John Buridan, and Albert of Saxony. In retrospect, the idea of impetus can be seen as a forerunner of the modern concept of momentum. The intuition that objects move according to some kind of impetus persists in many students of introductory physics.\nInertia and the first law.\nThe French philosopher Ren\u00e9 Descartes introduced the concept of inertia by way of his \"laws of nature\" in \"The World\" (\"Trait\u00e9 du monde et de la lumi\u00e8re\") written 1629\u201333. However, \"The World\" purported a heliocentric worldview, and in 1633 this view had given rise a great conflict between Galileo Galilei and the Roman Catholic Inquisition. Descartes knew about this controversy and did not wish to get involved. \"The World\" was not published until 1664, ten years after his death.\nThe modern concept of inertia is credited to Galileo. Based on his experiments, Galileo concluded that the \"natural\" behavior of a moving body was to keep moving, until something else interfered with it. In \"Two New Sciences\" (1638) Galileo wrote:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Imagine any particle projected along a horizontal plane without friction; then we know, from what has been more fully explained in the preceding pages, that this particle will move along this same plane with a motion which is uniform and perpetual, provided the plane has no limits.Galileo recognized that in projectile motion, the Earth's gravity affects vertical but not horizontal motion. However, Galileo's idea of inertia was not exactly the one that would be codified into Newton's first law. Galileo thought that a body moving a long distance inertially would follow the curve of the Earth. This idea was corrected by Isaac Beeckman, Descartes, and Pierre Gassendi, who recognized that inertial motion should be motion in a straight line. Descartes published his laws of nature (laws of motion) with this correction in \"Principles of Philosophy\" (\"Principia Philosophiae\") in 1644, with the heliocentric part toned down.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;First Law of Nature: Each thing when left to itself continues in the same state; so any moving body goes on moving until something stops it.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Second Law of Nature: Each moving thing if left to itself moves in a straight line; so any body moving in a circle always tends to move away from the centre of the circle.\nAccording to American philosopher Richard J. Blackwell, Dutch scientist Christiaan Huygens had worked out his own, concise version of the law in 1656. It was not published until 1703, eight years after his death, in the opening paragraph of \"De Motu Corporum ex Percussione\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Hypothesis I: Any body already in motion will continue to move perpetually with the same speed and in a straight line unless it is impeded.\nAccording to Huygens, this law was already known by Galileo and Descartes among others.\nForce and the second law.\nChristiaan Huygens, in his \"Horologium Oscillatorium\" (1673), put forth the hypothesis that \"By the action of gravity, whatever its sources, it happens that bodies are moved by a motion composed both of a uniform motion in one direction or another and of a motion downward due to gravity.\" Newton's second law generalized this hypothesis from gravity to all forces.\nOne important characteristic of Newtonian physics is that forces can act at a distance without requiring physical contact. For example, the Sun and the Earth pull on each other gravitationally, despite being separated by millions of kilometres. This contrasts with the idea, championed by Descartes among others, that the Sun's gravity held planets in orbit by swirling them in a vortex of transparent matter, \"aether\". Newton considered aetherial explanations of force but ultimately rejected them. The study of magnetism by William Gilbert and others created a precedent for thinking of \"immaterial\" forces, and unable to find a quantitatively satisfactory explanation of his law of gravity in terms of an aetherial model, Newton eventually declared, \"I feign no hypotheses\": whether or not a model like Descartes's vortices could be found to underlie the \"Principia\"'s theories of motion and gravity, the first grounds for judging them must be the successful predictions they made. And indeed, since Newton's time every attempt at such a model has failed.\nMomentum conservation and the third law.\nJohannes Kepler suggested that gravitational attractions were reciprocal \u2014 that, for example, the Moon pulls on the Earth while the Earth pulls on the Moon \u2014 but he did not argue that such pairs are equal and opposite. In his \"Principles of Philosophy\" (1644), Descartes introduced the idea that during a collision between bodies, a \"quantity of motion\" remains unchanged. Descartes defined this quantity somewhat imprecisely by adding up the products of the speed and \"size\" of each body, where \"size\" for him incorporated both volume and surface area. Moreover, Descartes thought of the universe as a plenum, that is, filled with matter, so all motion required a body to displace a medium as it moved.\nDuring the 1650s, Huygens studied collisions between hard spheres and deduced a principle that is now identified as the conservation of momentum. Christopher Wren would later deduce the same rules for elastic collisions that Huygens had, and John Wallis would apply momentum conservation to study inelastic collisions. Newton cited the work of Huygens, Wren, and Wallis to support the validity of his third law.\nNewton arrived at his set of three laws incrementally. In a 1684 manuscript written to Huygens, he listed four laws: the principle of inertia, the change of motion by force, a statement about relative motion that would today be called Galilean invariance, and the rule that interactions between bodies do not change the motion of their center of mass. In a later manuscript, Newton added a law of action and reaction, while saying that this law and the law regarding the center of mass implied one another. Newton probably settled on the presentation in the \"Principia,\" with three primary laws and then other statements reduced to corollaries, during 1685.\nAfter the \"Principia\".\nNewton expressed his second law by saying that the force on a body is proportional to its change of motion, or momentum. By the time he wrote the \"Principia,\" he had already developed calculus (which he called \"the science of fluxions\"), but in the \"Principia\" he made no explicit use of it, perhaps because he believed geometrical arguments in the tradition of Euclid to be more rigorous.15 Consequently, the \"Principia\" does not express acceleration as the second derivative of position, and so it does not give the second law as formula_158. This form of the second law was written (for the special case of constant force) at least as early as 1716, by Jakob Hermann; Leonhard Euler would employ it as a basic premise in the 1740s. Euler pioneered the study of rigid bodies and established the basic theory of fluid dynamics. Pierre-Simon Laplace's five-volume \"Trait\u00e9 de m\u00e9canique c\u00e9leste\" (1798\u20131825) forsook geometry and developed mechanics purely through algebraic expressions, while resolving questions that the \"Principia\" had left open, like a full theory of the tides.\nThe concept of energy became a key part of Newtonian mechanics in the post-Newton period. Huygens' solution of the collision of hard spheres showed that in that case, not only is momentum conserved, but kinetic energy is as well (or, rather, a quantity that in retrospect we can identify as one-half the total kinetic energy). The question of what is conserved during all other processes, like inelastic collisions and motion slowed by friction, was not resolved until the 19th century. Debates on this topic overlapped with philosophical disputes between the metaphysical views of Newton and Leibniz, and variants of the term \"force\" were sometimes used to denote what we would call types of energy. For example, in 1742, \u00c9milie du Ch\u00e2telet wrote, \"Dead force consists of a simple tendency to motion: such is that of a spring ready to relax; living force is that which a body has when it is in actual motion.\" In modern terminology, \"dead force\" and \"living force\" correspond to potential energy and kinetic energy respectively. Conservation of energy was not established as a universal principle until it was understood that the energy of mechanical work can be dissipated into heat. With the concept of energy given a solid grounding, Newton's laws could then be derived within formulations of classical mechanics that put energy first, as in the Lagrangian and Hamiltonian formulations described above.\nModern presentations of Newton's laws use the mathematics of vectors, a topic that was not developed until the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Vector algebra, pioneered by Josiah Willard Gibbs and Oliver Heaviside, stemmed from and largely supplanted the earlier system of quaternions invented by William Rowan Hamilton.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55214", "revid": "7436027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55214", "title": "Tim Brooke-Taylor", "text": "English actor and comedian (1940\u20132020)\nTimothy Julian Brooke-Taylor (17 July 1940\u00a0\u2013 12 April 2020) was an English actor and comedian. He was best known as a member of The Goodies.\nBrooke-Taylor became active in performing in comedy sketches while at the University of Cambridge and became president of the Footlights, touring internationally with its revue in 1964. Becoming more widely known to the public for his work on BBC Radio with \"I'm Sorry, I'll Read That Again\", he moved into television with \"At Last the 1948 Show\", working together with old Cambridge friends John Cleese and Graham Chapman. With Graeme Garden and Bill Oddie, he starred in \"The Goodies\" (1970\u20131982), picking up international recognition in Australia, Canada and New Zealand. He appeared as an actor in various sitcoms and was a panellist on BBC Radio's \"I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue\" for almost 50 years.\nEarly life and education.\nTimothy Julian Brooke-Taylor was born on 17 July 1940 in Buxton, Derbyshire, son of Edward Brooke-Taylor, a solicitor and games teacher and international lacrosse player and Rachel, daughter of Francis Pawson, a parson who played centre forward for the English football team in the 1880s. He was expelled from primary school at the early age of five and a half. Brooke-Taylor was then schooled at Thorn Leigh Pre-Preparatory School, Holm Leigh Preparatory School (where he won a cup for his prowess as a bowler in the school cricket team) and Winchester College which he left with seven O-levels and two A-levels in English and history.\nAfter teaching for a year at Lockers Park School, a preparatory school in Hemel Hempstead and a term back at Holm Leigh School as a teacher, he studied at Pembroke College, Cambridge. There he read economics and politics before changing to read law and mixed with other budding comedians, including John Cleese, Graham Chapman, Bill Oddie, Graeme Garden and Jonathan Lynn in the Cambridge University Footlights Club (of which Brooke-Taylor became president in 1963).\nThe Footlights Club revue, \"A Clump of Plinths\", was so successful during its Edinburgh Festival Fringe run that the show was renamed as \"Cambridge Circus\" and transferred to the West End in London before being taken to both New Zealand and Broadway in the United States in September 1964. Brooke-Taylor was also active in the Pembroke College drama society, the Pembroke Players.\nCareer.\nBrooke-Taylor moved swiftly into BBC Radio with the fast-paced comedy show \"I'm Sorry, I'll Read That Again\" which he performed in and co-wrote. As the screeching eccentric Lady Constance de Coverlet, he could be relied upon to generate the loudest audience response of many programmes in this long-running series merely with her unlikely catchphrase \"Did somebody call?\" uttered after a comic and transparent feed-line, as their adventure story reached its climax or cliffhanger ending. Other members of \"I'm Sorry, I'll Read That Again\" were John Cleese, Bill Oddie, Graeme Garden, David Hatch and Jo Kendall.\nIn the mid-1960s, Brooke-Taylor performed in the television series \"On the Braden Beat\" with Canadian Bernard Braden, taking over the slot recently vacated by Peter Cook in his guise as E. L. Wisty. Brooke-Taylor played a reactionary City gent who believed he was the soul of tolerance.\nIn 1967, Brooke-Taylor became a writer/performer on the television comedy series \"At Last the 1948 Show\", with John Cleese, Graham Chapman and Marty Feldman. The \"Four Yorkshiremen\" sketch was co-written by the four writers and performers of the series. The sketch appears on the DVD of \"At Last the 1948 Show\". Footage of Brooke-Taylor and Cleese from \"At Last the 1948 Show\" was shown on the documentary special \"\". The sketch has since become known for its satirical depiction of Britain's class system and North-South divide.\nBrooke-Taylor also took part in David Frost's pilot programme \"How to Irritate People\" in 1968, designed to sell what would later be recognised as the Monty Python style of comedy to the American market. Many of the sketches were later revived in the Monty Python TV series, such as the job interview sketch in which Brooke-Taylor played a nervous interviewee tormented by interviewer John Cleese. The programme was also the first collaboration between Cleese and Michael Palin. One of the sketches referred to Cleese's character dating a promiscuous woman named \"Christine Wheadon\", which was the name of Brooke-Taylor's wife.\nAlso in 1968, Brooke-Taylor made an unexpected and uninvited guest appearance in an episode of \"Do Not Adjust Your Set\", filling in for Michael Palin who was ill that week. The episode he was in still survives and has been included in DVD compilation sets.\nIn 1968\u201369, Brooke-Taylor was also a cast member and writer on the television comedy series \"Marty\" starring Marty Feldman, with John Junkin and Roland MacLeod. A compilation of the two series of \"Marty\" has been released on a BBC DVD entitled \"The Best of Marty Feldman\". During this period Brooke-Taylor appeared as two characters in the film \"One Man Band\" directed by Orson Welles; however, the project was never completed and remains unreleased.\nAt around the same time, Brooke-Taylor made two series of \"Broaden Your Mind\" with Garden (and Oddie joining for the second series). Describing itself as \"An Encyclopedia of the Air\", the show was a string of comedy sketches (often lifted from \"I'm Sorry I'll Read That Again\"), linked (loosely) by a weekly running theme.\nThe success of \"Broaden Your Mind\" led to the commissioning of \"The Goodies\", also with Oddie and Garden. First transmitted on BBC2 in November 1970, \"The Goodies\" was a television success, broadcast for over a decade by both the BBC and (in its final year) by ITV contractor London Weekend Television, spawning many spin-off books and successful records.\nDuring the run of \"The Goodies\", Brooke-Taylor took part in the BBC radio series \"Hello Cheeky\", a bawdy stand-up comedy show also starring Barry Cryer and John Junkin. The series transferred to television briefly, produced for ITV by the commercial franchise Yorkshire Television.\nHe appeared on television in British sitcoms, including \"You Must Be the Husband\" with Diane Keen, \"His and Hers\" with Madeline Smith and \"Me and My Girl\" with Richard O'Sullivan. He also starred in the Radio 4 comedy series \"Tell Me Where It Hurts\" in 1979. Brooke-Taylor also appeared regularly in advertisements, including the Christmas commercials for the Brentford Nylons chain of fabric stores and in a public information film for the now-defunct E111 form, since replaced by the European Health Insurance Card.\nIn 1971, he played the short, uncredited role of a computer scientist in the film \"Willy Wonka &amp; the Chocolate Factory\"; his scene was the final one filmed for the movie. After \"The Goodies\" on UK television, Brooke-Taylor also worked again with Garden and Oddie on the television animated comedy series \"Bananaman\", in which Brooke-Taylor was the narrator, as well as voicing the characters of King Zorg of the Nurks, Eddie the Gent, Auntie and Appleman. He also lent his voice to the children's TV series \"Gideon\".\nBrooke-Taylor appeared in Amnesty International shows: in \"A Poke in the Eye (With a Sharp Stick)\" he, Oddie and Garden, sang their hit song \"Funky Gibbon\", whilst in \"The Secret Policeman's Other Ball\" he took part in the sketches \"Top of the Form\" (with Cleese, Chapman, John Bird, John Fortune, Rowan Atkinson and Griff Rhys Jones), and \"Cha Cha Cha\" (with Cleese and Chapman). Brooke-Taylor, Garden and Oddie also appeared on \"Top of the Pops\" to perform \"Funky Gibbon\". Garden joined Brooke-Taylor in the theatre production of \"The Unvarnished Truth\".\nOther BBC radio programmes in which Brooke-Taylor played a part include the self-styled \"antidote to panel games\" \"I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue\", which started in 1972; he took part regularly for over 40 years. On 18 February 1981, Brooke-Taylor, was the subject of Thames Television's \"This Is Your Life\".\nIn 1997, he appeared in a special episode of \"One Foot in the Grave\".\nIn 1998, Brooke-Taylor appeared as a guest in one episode of the political satire game show \"If I Ruled the World\".\nIn 2004, Brooke-Taylor and Garden were co-presenters of Channel 4's daytime game show, \"Beat the Nation\", in which they indulged in typical game show \"banter\", but took the quiz itself seriously. He appeared on stage in Australia and England, usually as a middle class Englishman. In the early 1980s, he branched out into pantomime as the Dame in \"Dick Whittington\". He was also the author (and co-author) of several humorous books, based mainly on his radio and television work, and the sports of golf and cricket. His interest in golf came to the fore when he took part in the \"Pro-Celebrity Golf\" television series (opposite Bruce Forsyth), and appeared in the premiere episode of the BBC's golf-based game show \"Full Swing\".\nIn 2008, Brooke-Taylor was heard in the \"Doctor Who\" audio story \"The Zygon Who Fell To Earth\", made by Big Finish Productions. Paul McGann played the Eighth Doctor and Brooke-Taylor played the part of Mims, a Zygon taking the shape of a human.\nBrooke-Taylor made his final public appearance when he attended the Bristol slapstick festival in January 2020, 3 months before his death.\nLord Rector of the University of St Andrews.\nBrooke-Taylor was elected Lord Rector by the students of the University of St Andrews and held office between 1979 and 1982. In this role he represented the students, chaired the University Court and presided over the General Council in the absence of the Chancellor. At his installation he arrived by helicopter, rode a motorbike and was hauled in an open carriage as part of The Drag. His installation speech included a mother-in-law joke in Latin and a suggestion his successor should be a woman; he was succeeded by Katherine Whitehorn who was elected unopposed as the university's first female rector in 1982. Brooke-Taylor is remembered as an effective Rector who visited the town frequently, took the role seriously, wore a Saltire waistcoat while there and is said to have remarked that St Andrews was \"the happiest university\" he had been to. \nPersonal life and death.\nBrooke-Taylor married Christine Wheadon in 1968 and they had two sons. He lived in Cookham Dean, Berkshire and was involved in local events. A keen golfer, he was a member of Temple Golf Club. He was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 2011 Birthday Honours for services to light entertainment.\nBrooke-Taylor died of complications from COVID-19 on 12 April 2020, aged 79, in Cookham, Berkshire. In tribute to Brooke-Taylor, the flag of his alma mater, Pembroke College, Cambridge, was lowered to half-mast the following day.\nBibliography.\nAs sole author\n*\"Rule Britannia\" \n*\"Tim Brooke-Taylor's Golf Bag\" \n*\"Tim Brooke-Taylor's Cricket Box\" \nAs co-author\n*\"The Goodies File\" \n*\"The Goodies Book of Criminal Records\" \n*\"The Making of The Goodies Disaster Movie\" \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55215", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55215", "title": "Great Artesian Basin", "text": "Large artesian aquifer in Australia\nThe Great Artesian Basin (GAB) of Australia is the largest and deepest artesian basin in the world, extending over . Measured water temperatures range from . The basin provides the only source of fresh water through much of inland Australia.\nThe basin underlies 22% of the Australian continent, including most of Queensland, the south-east corner of the Northern Territory, north-eastern South Australia, and northern New South Wales. It is deep in places and is estimated to contain of groundwater. The Great Artesian Basin Coordinating Committee (GABCC) coordinates activity between federal, state/territory, and local levels of government and community organisations.\nPhysiography.\nThis area is one of the distinct physiographic provinces of the larger East Australian Basins division, and includes the smaller Wilcannia Threshold physiographic section.\nGeology.\nThe water of the Great Artesian Basin is held in a sandstone layer laid down by continental erosion of higher ground during the Triassic, Jurassic, and early Cretaceous periods. During a time when much of what is now inland Australia was below sea level, the sandstone was covered by a layer of marine sedimentary rock, which formed a confining layer that trapped water in the sandstone aquifer. The eastern edge of the basin was uplifted when the Great Dividing Range formed. The other side was created from the landforms of the Central Eastern Lowlands and the Great Western Plateau to the west.\nMost recharge water enters the rock formations from relatively high ground near the eastern edge of the basin (in Queensland and New South Wales) and very gradually flows toward the south and west. A much smaller amount enters along the western margin in arid central Australia, flowing to the south and east through the permeable sandstone, at a rate of one to five metres per year.\nDischarge water eventually exits through a number of springs and seeps, mostly in the southern part of the basin. The age of the groundwater, determined by carbon-14 and chlorine-36 measurements combined with hydraulic modelling, ranges from several thousand years for the recharge areas in the north to nearly 2\u00a0million years in the south-western discharge zones.\nWater source.\nPrior to the arrival of Europeans, waters of the Great Artesian Basin (GAB) discharged through mound springs, many in arid South Australia, such as Witjira-Dalhousie Springs. These springs sustained a variety of endemic invertebrates, such as molluscs, and supported extensive Aboriginal communities and trade routes. After the arrival of Europeans, the springs facilitated exploration, and allowed the provision of faster communications between south-eastern Australia and Europe, via the Australian Overland Telegraph Line. The Great Artesian Basin became an important water supply for cattle stations, irrigation, and livestock and domestic purposes, and is a vital life line for rural Australia. To tap it, boreholes are drilled down to a suitable rock layer, and the pressure of the water often forces it up without the need for pumps.\nThe discovery and use of the water in the Great Artesian Basin allowed the settlement of thousands of square kilometres of country away from rivers in inland New South Wales, Queensland, and South Australia, that would otherwise have been unavailable for pastoral activities. European discovery of the basin dates from 1878 when a shallow bore near Bourke produced flowing water. There were similar discoveries in 1886 at Back Creek east of Barcaldine, and in 1887 near Cunnamulla.\nIn essence, water extraction from the GAB is a mining operation, with recharge much less than current extraction rates. In 1915, there were 1,500 bores providing of water per day, but today the total output has dropped to per day. This included just under 2,000 freely-flowing bores and more than 9,000 that required mechanical power to bring water to the surface. Many bores are unregulated or abandoned, resulting in considerable water wastage. These problems have existed for many decades, and in January 2007 the Australian Commonwealth Government announced additional funding in an attempt to bring them under control. However, many of the mound springs referred to above have dried up due to a drop in water pressure, probably resulting in extinction of several invertebrate species.\nThe Olympic Dam mine in South Australia is permitted to extract up to of water daily from the Great Artesian Basin under the \"Roxby Downs (Indenture Ratification) Act 1982\". The underground copper and uranium mine commenced operations in 1988 and is expected to continue operating until approximately 2060.\nIn addition, the Basin provides water, via a bore, for a geothermal power station at Birdsville. Water emerges from the bore at and provides 25% of the town's electricity needs. After being cooled, the water is also the source of the town's drinking water.\nWhole of Basin management.\nThe Great Artesian Basin underlies parts of Queensland, New South Wales, South Australia and the Northern Territory, which each operate under different legislative frameworks, policies, and resource management approaches. In 2020 the Australian government Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water published the Great Artesian Basin Strategic Management Plan, which was prepared together with the individual governments and in consultation with the GABCC, stakeholders, and public feedback.\nThe Great Artesian Basin Coordinating Committee (GABCC) provides advice from community organisations and agencies to state, territory, and Australian government ministers on efficient, effective, sustainable whole-of-Basin resource management and to coordinate activity between stakeholders.\nMembership of the Committee comprises all state, territory, and Australian government agencies with responsibilities for management of parts of the Great Artesian Basin, community representatives nominated by agencies; and sector representatives.\nEnvironmental concerns.\nIn 2011, ABC TV's public affairs program \"Four Corners\" revealed that significant concerns were being expressed about depletion and chemical damage to the Basin as a result of coal seam gas extraction. In one incident, reported in the program, the Queensland Gas Company (QGC) \"fracked\" its Myrtle 3 well connecting the Springbok aquifer to the coal seam below (the Walloon Coal Measures) in 2009. A local farmer was concerned that the process might have released of a potentially toxic chemical into the Basin. QGC admitted the incident, but \"did not alert authorities or nearby water users about the problem until thirteen months after the incident\".&lt;ref name=\"abc.net.au-2011-02-21/farmers-count1951670\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The safety data sheet QGC had submitted for the hydraulic fracturing chemical was derived from the United States, incomplete and ten years out of date.\nOver thirty chemicals may be used in the process of hydraulic fracturing and their long-term impact on aquifers, agriculture, and people supported by them has been quantifiable and verified for quite some time. Lead, aluminium, arsenic, barium, boron, nickel, and uranium have all been found beyond recommended levels in the groundwater contaminated by coal seam gas. Instances of groundwater being contaminated and by extension poisoning the ecosystems sustained by the availability of groundwater have been widely documented, and are an exacerbating factor in regards to the population's capability to cope with drought through usage of groundwater sources in Australia.\nGlencore planned to inject up to 110,000 tonnes of carbon dioxide per year into a groundwater formation in the basin. Hydrogeologist Ned Hamer stated that the carbon dioxide would increase the acidity of the water to the extent that it would dissolve the rock, releasing heavy metals into the water and making it unusable. After producer advocacy group AgForce took the Federal Government along with Glencore to court, the Queensland Government rejected the proposal in May 2024, and subsequently banned carbon capture and storage using the Great Artesian Basin.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55216", "revid": "2102840", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55216", "title": "Anders Hejlsberg", "text": "Danish software engineer (born 1960)\nAnders Hejlsberg (; ; born 2 December 1960) is a Danish software engineer who co-designed several programming languages and development tools. He was the original author of Turbo Pascal and the chief architect of Delphi. He currently works for Microsoft as the lead architect of C# and core developer on TypeScript.\nEarly life.\nHejlsberg was born in Copenhagen, Denmark, and studied Electrical Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark. While at the university in 1980, he began writing programs for the Nascom microcomputer, including a Pascal compiler which was initially marketed as the \"Blue Label Software Pascal\" for the Nascom-2. However, he soon rewrote it for CP/M and DOS, marketing it first as \"Compas Pascal\" and later as \"PolyPascal\". Later the product was licensed to Borland, and integrated into an IDE to become the Turbo Pascal system. Turbo Pascal competed with PolyPascal. The compiler itself was largely inspired by the \"Tiny Pascal\" compiler in Niklaus Wirth's \"Algorithms + Data Structures = Programs\", one of the most influential computer science books of the time.\nAt Borland.\nIn Borland's hands, Turbo Pascal became one of the most commercially successful Pascal compilers. Hejlsberg remained with PolyData until the company came under financial stress and in 1989 he moved to California to become Chief Engineer at Borland. During this time, he developed Turbo Pascal further and became the chief architect for the team that produced Borland Delphi, which replaced Turbo Pascal.\nAt Microsoft.\nIn 1996, Hejlsberg left Borland and joined Microsoft. One of his first achievements was the J++ programming language and the Windows Foundation Classes; he also became a Microsoft Distinguished Engineer and Technical Fellow. Since 2000, he has been the lead architect of the team developing the C# language. In 2012 Hejlsberg announced a new Microsoft project, TypeScript, a superset of JavaScript.\nAwards.\nHejlsberg received the 2001 Dr. Dobb's Excellence in Programming Award for his work on Turbo Pascal, Delphi, C# and the Microsoft .NET Framework.\nTogether with Shon Katzenberger, Scott Wiltamuth, Todd Proebsting, Erik Meijer, Peter Hallam, and Peter Sollich, Anders was awarded a Technical Recognition Award for Outstanding Technical Achievement for their work on the C# language in 2007.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55217", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55217", "title": "GRE physics test", "text": ""}
{"id": "55219", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55219", "title": "Modified Newtonian Dynamics", "text": ""}
{"id": "55221", "revid": "254243", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55221", "title": "Mossbauer Spectroscopy", "text": ""}
{"id": "55222", "revid": "38427", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55222", "title": "Buckminsterfullerene", "text": "Cage-like allotrope of carbon\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nBuckminsterfullerene is a type of fullerene with the formula C60. It has a cage-like fused-ring structure (truncated icosahedron) made of twenty hexagons and twelve pentagons, and resembles a football. Each of its 60 carbon atoms is bonded to its three neighbors. \nBuckminsterfullerene is a black solid that dissolves in hydrocarbon solvents to produce a purple solution. The substance was discovered in 1985 and has received intense study, although few real world applications have been found.\nMolecules of buckminsterfullerene (or of fullerenes in general) are commonly nicknamed buckyballs.\nOccurrence.\nBuckminsterfullerene is the most common naturally occurring fullerene. Small quantities of it can be found in soot. \nIt also exists in space. Neutral C60 has been observed in planetary nebulae and several types of star. The ionised form, C60+, has been identified in the interstellar medium, where it is the cause of several absorption features known as diffuse interstellar bands in the near-infrared. \nHistory.\nTheoretical predictions of buckminsterfullerene molecules appeared in the late 1960s and early 1970s. It was first generated in 1984 by Eric Rohlfing, Donald Cox, and Andrew Kaldor, using a laser to vaporize carbon in a supersonic helium beam, although the group did not realize that buckminsterfullerene had been produced. In 1985 their work was repeated by Harold Kroto, James R. Heath, Sean C. O'Brien, Robert Curl, and Richard Smalley at Rice University, who recognized the structure of C60 as buckminsterfullerene.\nConcurrent but unconnected to the Kroto-Smalley work, astrophysicists were working with spectroscopists to study infrared emissions from giant red carbon stars. Smalley and team were able to use a laser vaporization technique to create carbon clusters which could potentially emit infrared at the same wavelength as had been emitted by the red carbon star. Hence, the inspiration came to Smalley and team to use the laser technique on graphite to generate fullerenes.\nUsing laser evaporation of graphite the Smalley team found C\"n\" clusters (where \"n\" &gt; 20 and even) of which the most common were C60 and C70. A solid rotating graphite disk was used as the surface from which carbon was vaporized using a laser beam creating hot plasma that was then passed through a stream of high-density helium gas. The carbon species were subsequently cooled and ionized resulting in the formation of clusters. Clusters ranged in molecular masses, but Kroto and Smalley found predominance in a C60 cluster that could be enhanced further by allowing the plasma to react longer. They also discovered that C60 is a cage-like molecule, a regular truncated icosahedron.\nThe experimental evidence, a strong peak at 720 daltons, indicated that a carbon molecule with 60 carbon atoms was forming, but provided no structural information. The research group concluded after reactivity experiments, that the most likely structure was a spheroidal molecule. The idea was quickly rationalized as the basis of an icosahedral symmetry closed cage structure.\nKroto, Curl, and Smalley were awarded the 1996 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for their roles in the discovery of buckminsterfullerene and the related class of molecules, the fullerenes.\nIn 1989 physicists Wolfgang Kr\u00e4tschmer, Konstantinos Fostiropoulos, and Donald R. Huffman observed unusual optical absorptions in thin films of carbon dust (soot). The soot had been generated by an arc-process between two graphite electrodes in a helium atmosphere where the electrode material evaporates and condenses forming soot in the quenching atmosphere. Among other features, the IR spectra of the soot showed four discrete bands in close agreement to those proposed for C60.\nAnother paper on the characterization and verification of the molecular structure followed on in the same year (1990) from their thin film experiments, and detailed also the extraction of an evaporable as well as benzene-soluble material from the arc-generated soot. This extract had TEM and X-ray crystal analysis consistent with arrays of spherical C60 molecules, approximately 1.0\u00a0nm in van der Waals diameter as well as the expected molecular mass of 720\u00a0Da for C60 (and 840\u00a0Da for C70) in their mass spectra. The method was simple and efficient to prepare the material in gram amounts per day (1990) which has boosted the fullerene research and is even today applied for the commercial production of fullerenes.\nThe discovery of practical routes to C60 led to the exploration of a new field of chemistry involving the study of fullerenes.\nEtymology.\nThe discoverers of the allotrope named the newfound molecule after American architect R. Buckminster Fuller, who designed many geodesic dome structures that look similar to C60 and who had died in 1983, the year before discovery. Another common name for buckminsterfullerene is \"buckyballs\".\nSynthesis.\nSoot is produced by laser ablation of graphite or pyrolysis of aromatic hydrocarbons. Fullerenes are extracted from the soot with organic solvents using a Soxhlet extractor. This step yields a solution containing up to 75% of C60, as well as other fullerenes. These fractions are separated using chromatography. Generally, the fullerenes are dissolved in a hydrocarbon or halogenated hydrocarbon and separated using alumina columns.\nSynthesis using the techniques of \"classical organic chemistry\" is possible, but not economic.\nStructure.\nBuckminsterfullerene is a truncated icosahedron with 60 vertices, 32 faces (20 hexagons and 12 pentagons where no pentagons share a vertex), and 90 edges (60 edges between 5-membered &amp; 6-membered rings and 30 edges are shared between 6-membered &amp; 6-membered rings), with a carbon atom at the vertices of each polygon and a bond along each polygon edge. The van der Waals diameter of a C60 molecule is about 1.01\u00a0nanometers (nm). The nucleus to nucleus diameter of a C60 molecule is about 0.71\u00a0nm. The C60 molecule has two bond lengths. The 6:6 ring bonds (between two hexagons) can be considered \"double bonds\" and are shorter than the 6:5 bonds (between a hexagon and a pentagon). Its average bond length is 0.14\u00a0nm. Each carbon atom in the structure is bonded covalently with 3 others. A carbon atom in the C60 can be substituted by a nitrogen or boron atom yielding a C59N or C59B respectively.\nProperties.\nFor a time buckminsterfullerene was the largest known molecule observed to exhibit wave\u2013particle duality. In 2020 the dye molecule phthalocyanine exhibited the duality that is more famously attributed to light, electrons and other small particles and molecules.\nSolution.\nFullerenes are sparingly soluble in aromatic solvents and carbon disulfide, but insoluble in water. Solutions of pure C60 have a deep purple color which leaves a brown residue upon evaporation. The reason for this color change is the relatively narrow energy width of the band of molecular levels responsible for green light absorption by individual C60 molecules. Thus individual molecules transmit some blue and red light resulting in a purple color. Upon drying, intermolecular interaction results in the overlap and broadening of the energy bands, thereby eliminating the blue light transmittance and causing the purple to brown color change.\nC60 crystallises with some solvents in the lattice (\"solvates\"). For example, crystallization of C60 from benzene solution yields triclinic crystals with the formula . Like other solvates, this one readily releases benzene to give the usual face-centred cubic C60. Millimeter-sized crystals of C60 and C70 can be grown from solution both for solvates and for pure fullerenes.\nSolid.\nIn solid buckminsterfullerene, the C60 molecules adopt the fcc (face-centered cubic) motif. They start rotating at about \u221220\u00a0\u00b0C. This change is associated with a first-order phase transition to an fcc structure and a small, yet abrupt increase in the lattice constant from 1.411 to 1.4154\u00a0nm.\nC60 solid is as soft as graphite, but when compressed to less than 70% of its volume it transforms into a superhard form of diamond (see aggregated diamond nanorod). C60 films and solution have strong non-linear optical properties; in particular, their optical absorption increases with light intensity (saturable absorption).\nC60 forms a brownish solid with an optical absorption threshold at \u22481.6\u00a0eV. It is an n-type semiconductor with a low activation energy of 0.1\u20130.3\u00a0eV; this conductivity is attributed to intrinsic or oxygen-related defects. Fcc C60 contains voids at its octahedral and tetrahedral sites which are sufficiently large (0.6 and 0.2\u00a0nm respectively) to accommodate impurity atoms. When alkali metals are doped into these voids, C60 converts from a semiconductor into a conductor or even superconductor.\nChemical reactions and properties.\nC60 undergoes six reversible, one-electron reductions, ultimately generating C606-. Its oxidation is irreversible. The first reduction occurs at \u2248\u22121.0\u00a0V (Fc/Fc+), showing that C60 is a reluctant electron acceptor. C60 tends to avoid having double bonds in the pentagonal rings, which makes electron delocalization poor, and results in C60 not being \"superaromatic\". C60 behaves like an electron deficient alkene. For example, it reacts with some nucleophiles.\nHydrogenation.\nC60 exhibits a small degree of aromatic character, but it still reflects localized double and single C\u2013C bond characters. Therefore, C60 can undergo addition with hydrogen to give polyhydrofullerenes. C60 also undergoes Birch reduction. For example, C60 reacts with lithium in liquid ammonia, followed by \"tert\"-butanol to give a mixture of polyhydrofullerenes such as , , , with being the dominating product. This mixture of polyhydrofullerenes can be re-oxidized by 2,3-dichloro-5,6-dicyano-1,4-benzoquinone to give C60 again.\nA selective hydrogenation method exists. Reaction of C60 with 9,9\u2032,10,10\u2032-dihydroanthracene under the same conditions, depending on the time of reaction, gives and respectively and selectively.\nHalogenation.\nAddition of fluorine, chlorine, and bromine occurs for C60. Fluorine atoms are small enough for a 1,2-addition, while Cl2 and Br2 add to remote C atoms due to steric factors. For example, in and , the Br atoms are in 1,3- or 1,4-positions with respect to each other. Under various conditions a vast number of halogenated derivatives of C60 can be produced, some with an extraordinary selectivity on one or two isomers over the other possible ones. Addition of fluorine and chlorine usually results in a flattening of the C60 framework into a drum-shaped molecule.\nAddition of oxygen atoms.\nSolutions of C60 can be oxygenated to the epoxide . Ozonation of C60 in 1,2-xylene at 257K gives an intermediate ozonide , which can be decomposed into 2 forms of . Decomposition of at 296\u00a0K gives the epoxide, but photolysis gives a product in which the O atom bridges a 5,6-edge.\nCycloadditions.\nThe Diels\u2013Alder reaction is commonly employed to functionalize C60. Reaction of C60 with appropriate substituted diene gives the corresponding adduct.\nThe Diels\u2013Alder reaction between C60 and 3,6-diaryl-1,2,4,5-tetrazines affordsC62. The C62 has the structure in which a four-membered ring is surrounded by four six-membered rings.\nThe C60 molecules can also be coupled through a [2+2] cycloaddition, giving the dumbbell-shaped compound C120. The coupling is achieved by high-speed vibrating milling of C60 with a catalytic amount of KCN. The reaction is reversible as C120 dissociates back to two C60 molecules when heated at . Under high pressure and temperature, repeated [2+2] cycloaddition between C60 results in polymerized fullerene chains and networks. These polymers remain stable at ambient pressure and temperature once formed, and have remarkably interesting electronic and magnetic properties, such as being ferromagnetic above room temperature.\nFree radical reactions.\nReactions of C60 with free radicals readily occur. When C60 is mixed with a disulfide RSSR, the radical forms spontaneously upon irradiation of the mixture.\nStability of the radical species depends largely on steric factors of Y. When \"tert\"-butyl halide is photolyzed and allowed to react with C60, a reversible inter-cage C\u2013C bond is formed:\nCyclopropanation (Bingel reaction).\nCyclopropanation (the Bingel reaction) is another common method for functionalizing C60. Cyclopropanation of C60 mostly occurs at the junction of 2 hexagons due to steric factors.\nThe first cyclopropanation was carried out by treating the \u03b2-bromomalonate with C60 in the presence of a base. Cyclopropanation also occur readily with diazomethanes. For example, diphenyldiazomethane reacts readily with C60 to give the compound . Phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester derivative prepared through cyclopropanation has been studied for use in organic solar cells.\nRedox reactions.\nC60 anions.\nThe LUMO in C60 is triply degenerate, with the HOMO\u2013LUMO separation relatively small. This small gap suggests that reduction of C60 should occur at mild potentials leading to fulleride anions, (\"n\"\u00a0=\u00a01\u20136). The midpoint potentials of 1-electron reduction of buckminsterfullerene and its anions is given in the table below:\nC60 forms a variety of charge-transfer complexes, for example with tetrakis(dimethylamino)ethylene:\nThis salt exhibits ferromagnetism at 16\u00a0K.\nC60 cations.\nC60 oxidizes with difficulty. Three reversible oxidation processes have been observed by using cyclic voltammetry with ultra-dry methylene chloride and a supporting electrolyte with extremely high oxidation resistance and low nucleophilicity, such as .\nMetal complexes.\nC60 forms complexes akin to the more common alkenes. Complexes have been reported molybdenum, tungsten, platinum, palladium, iridium, and titanium. The pentacarbonyl species are produced by photochemical reactions.\n (M = Mo, W)\nIn the case of platinum complex, the labile ethylene ligand is the leaving group in a thermal reaction:\nTitanocene complexes have also been reported:\nCoordinatively unsaturated precursors, such as Vaska's complex, for adducts with C60:\nOne such iridium complex, has been prepared where the metal center projects two electron-rich 'arms' that embrace the C60 guest.\nEndohedral fullerenes.\nMetal atoms or certain small molecules such as H2 and noble gas can be encapsulated inside the C60 cage. These endohedral fullerenes are usually synthesized by doping in the metal atoms in an arc reactor or by laser evaporation. These methods gives low yields of endohedral fullerenes, and a better method involves the opening of the cage, packing in the atoms or molecules, and closing the opening using certain organic reactions. This method, however, is still immature and only a few species have been synthesized this way.\nEndohedral fullerenes show distinct and intriguing chemical properties that can be completely different from the encapsulated atom or molecule, as well as the fullerene itself. The encapsulated atoms have been shown to perform circular motions inside the C60 cage, and their motion has been followed using NMR spectroscopy.\nPotential applications in technology.\nThe optical absorption properties of C60 match the solar spectrum in a way that suggests that C60-based films could be useful for photovoltaic applications. Because of its high electronic affinity it is one of the most common electron acceptors used in donor/acceptor based solar cells. Conversion efficiencies up to 5.7% have been reported in C60\u2013polymer cells.\nPotential applications in health.\nIngestion and risks.\nC60 is sensitive to light, so leaving C60 under light exposure causes it to degrade, becoming dangerous. The ingestion of C60 solutions that have been exposed to light could lead to developing cancer (tumors). So the management of C60 products for human ingestion requires cautionary measures such as: elaboration in very dark environments, encasing into bottles of great opacity, and storing in dark places, and others like consumption under low light conditions and using labels to warn about the problems with light.\nSolutions of C60 dissolved in olive oil or water, as long as they are preserved from light, have been found nontoxic to rodents.\nOtherwise, a study found that C60 remains in the body for a longer time than usual, especially in the liver, where it tends to be accumulated, and therefore has the potential to induce detrimental health effects.\nOils with C60 and risks.\nAn experiment in 2011\u20132012 administered a solution of C60 in olive oil to rats, achieving a 90% prolongation of their lifespan. C60 in olive oil administered to mice resulted in no extension in lifespan. C60 in olive oil administered to beagle dogs resulted in a large reduction of C-reactive protein, which is commonly elevated in cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease. \nMany oils with C60 have been sold as antioxidant products, but it does not avoid the problem of their sensitivity to light, that can turn them toxic. A later research confirmed that exposure to light degrades solutions of C60 in oil, making it toxic and leading to a \"massive\" increase of the risk of developing cancer (tumors) after its consumption.\nTo avoid the degradation by effect of light, C60 oils must be made in very dark environments, encased into bottles of great opacity, and kept in darkness, consumed under low light conditions and accompanied by labels to warn about the dangers of light for C60.\nSome producers have been able to dissolve C60 in water to avoid possible problems with oils, but that would not protect C60 from light, so the same cautions are needed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55223", "revid": "43252809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55223", "title": "Magnetic Resonance Imaging", "text": ""}
{"id": "55225", "revid": "66", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55225", "title": "Buckytube", "text": ""}
{"id": "55227", "revid": "14135516", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55227", "title": "Baire category theorem", "text": "On topological spaces where the intersection of countably many dense open sets is dense\nThe Baire category theorem (BCT) is an important result in general topology and functional analysis. The theorem has two forms, each of which gives sufficient conditions for a topological space to be a Baire space (a topological space such that the intersection of countably many dense open sets is still dense). It is used in the proof of results in many areas of analysis and geometry, including some of the fundamental theorems of functional analysis.\nVersions of the Baire category theorem were first proved independently in 1897 by Osgood for the real line formula_1 and in 1899 by Baire for Euclidean space formula_2. The more general statement for completely metrizable spaces was first shown by Hausdorff in 1914.\nStatement.\nA Baire space is a topological space formula_3 in which every countable intersection of open dense sets is dense in formula_4 See the corresponding article for a list of equivalent characterizations, as some are more useful than others depending on the application.\nNeither of these statements directly implies the other, since there are complete metric spaces that are not locally compact (the irrational numbers with the metric defined below; also, any Banach space of infinite dimension), and there are locally compact Hausdorff spaces that are not metrizable (for instance, any uncountable product of non-trivial compact Hausdorff spaces; also, several function spaces used in functional analysis; the uncountable Fort space).\nSee Steen and Seebach in the references below.\nRelation to the axiom of choice.\nThe proof of BCT1 for arbitrary complete metric spaces requires some form of the axiom of choice; and in fact BCT1 is equivalent over ZF to the axiom of dependent choice, a weak form of the axiom of choice.\nA restricted form of the Baire category theorem, in which the complete metric space is also assumed to be separable, is provable in ZF with no additional choice principles.\nThis restricted form applies in particular to the real line, the Baire space formula_5 the Cantor space formula_6 and a separable Hilbert space such as the formula_7-space formula_8.\nUses.\nIn functional analysis, BCT1 can be used to prove the open mapping theorem, the closed graph theorem and the uniform boundedness principle.\nBCT1 also shows that every nonempty complete metric space with no isolated point is uncountable. (If formula_3 is a nonempty countable metric space with no isolated point, then each singleton formula_10 in formula_3 is nowhere dense, and formula_3 is meagre in itself.) In particular, this proves that the set of all real numbers is uncountable.\nBCT1 shows that each of the following is a Baire space:\nBy BCT2, every finite-dimensional Hausdorff manifold is a Baire space, since it is locally compact and Hausdorff. This is so even for non-paracompact (hence nonmetrizable) manifolds such as the long line.\nBCT is used to prove Hartogs's theorem, a fundamental result in the theory of several complex variables.\nBCT1 is used to prove that a Banach space cannot have countably infinite dimension.\nProof.\n(BCT1) The following is a standard proof that a complete pseudometric space formula_3 is a Baire space.\nLet formula_19 be a countable collection of open dense subsets. We want to show that the intersection formula_20 is dense.\nA subset is dense if and only if every nonempty open subset intersects it. Thus to show that the intersection is dense, it suffices to show that any nonempty open subset formula_21 of formula_3 has some point formula_16 in common with all of the formula_24.\nBecause formula_25 is dense, formula_21 intersects formula_27 consequently, there exists a point formula_28 and a number formula_29 such that:\nformula_30\nwhere formula_31 and formula_32 denote an open and closed ball, respectively, centered at formula_16 with radius formula_34\nSince each formula_24 is dense, this construction can be continued recursively to find a pair of sequences formula_36 and formula_37 such that:\nformula_38\nThe sequence formula_40 is Cauchy because formula_41 whenever formula_42 and hence formula_40 converges to some limit formula_16 by completeness.\nIf formula_15 is a positive integer then formula_46 (because this set is closed). \nThus formula_47 and formula_48 for all formula_49 formula_50\nThere is an alternative proof using Choquet's game.\n(BCT2) The proof that a locally compact regular space formula_3 is a Baire space is similar. It uses the facts that (1) in such a space every point has a local base of closed compact neighborhoods; and (2) in a compact space any collection of closed sets with the finite intersection property has nonempty intersection. The result for locally compact Hausdorff spaces is a special case, as such spaces are regular.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55229", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55229", "title": "Bushranger", "text": "Australian outlaws active during the 19th century\nBushrangers were armed robbers and outlaws who resided in the Australian bush between the 1780s and the early 20th century. The original use of the term dates back to the early years of the British colonisation of Australia, and applied to transported convicts who had escaped into the bush to hide from the authorities. By the 1820s, the term had evolved to refer to those who took up \"robbery under arms\" as a way of life, using the bush as their base.\nBushranging thrived during the mid-19th century gold rushes, with many bushrangers roaming the goldfields and country districts of New South Wales and Victoria, and to a lesser extent Queensland. As the outbreak worsened in the mid-1860s, colonial governments outlawed many of the most notorious bushrangers, including the Gardiner\u2013Hall gang, Dan Morgan, and the Clarke gang. These \"Wild Colonial Boys\", mostly Australian-born sons of convicts, were roughly analogous to British highwaymen and outlaws of the American Old West, and their crimes included robbing small-town banks, bailing up coach services and raiding stations (pastoral estates). They also engaged in many shootouts with the police.\nThe number of bushrangers declined in the 1870s due to better policing and improvements in rail transport and communication technology, such as telegraphy. The last major phase of bushranging peaked towards the end of the decade, epitomised by the Kelly gang, led by Ned Kelly, Australia's best-known bushranger and outlaw. Although bushrangers appeared sporadically into the early 20th century, most historians regard Kelly's capture and execution in 1880 as effectively representing the end of the bushranging era.\nBushranging's origins in a convict system bred a unique kind of desperado, most frequently with an Irish political background. Native-born bushrangers also expressed nascent Australian nationalist views and have been described as \"the first distinctively Australian characters to gain general recognition.\" As such, a number of bushrangers became folk heroes and symbols of rebellion, admired for their bravery, rough chivalry and colourful personalities. However, in stark contrast to romantic portrayals in the arts and popular culture, bushrangers often led lives that were \"nasty, brutish and short\", with some earning notoriety for their cruelty and bloodthirst. Australian attitudes toward bushrangers remain complex and ambivalent.\nEtymology.\nThe earliest documented use of the term appears in a February 1805 issue of \"The Sydney Gazette\", which reports that a cart had been stopped between Sydney and Hawkesbury by three men \"whose appearance sanctioned the suspicion of their being bush-rangers\". John Bigge described bushranging in 1821 as \"absconding in the woods and living upon plunder and the robbery of orchards.\" Charles Darwin likewise recorded in 1835 that a bushranger was \"an open villain who subsists by highway robbery, and will sooner be killed than taken alive\".\nHistory.\nOver 2,000 bushrangers are estimated to have roamed the Australian countryside, beginning with the convict bolters and drawing to a FAR after Ned Kelly's last stand at Glenrowan.\nConvict era (1780s\u20131840s).\nBushranging began soon after British settlement with the establishment of New South Wales as a penal colony in 1788. The majority of early bushrangers were convicts who had escaped prison, or from the properties of landowners to whom they had been assigned as servants. These bushrangers, also known as \"bolters\", preferred the hazards of wild, unexplored bushland surrounding Sydney to the deprivation and brutality of convict life. The first notable bushranger, African convict John Caesar, robbed settlers for food, and had a brief, tempestuous alliance with Aboriginal resistance fighters during Pemulwuy's War. While other bushrangers would go on to fight alongside Indigenous Australians in frontier conflicts with the colonial authorities, the Government tried to bring an end to any such collaboration by rewarding Aboriginal peoples for returning convicts to custody. Aboriginal trackers would play a significant role in the hunt for bushrangers.\nColonel Godfrey Mundy described convict bushrangers as \"desperate, hopeless, fearless; rendered so, perhaps, by the tyranny of a gaoler, of an overseer, or of a master to whom he has been assigned.\" Edward Smith Hall, editor of early Sydney newspaper \"The Monitor\", agreed that the convict system was a breeding-ground for bushrangers due to its savagery, with starvation and acts of torture being rampant. \"Liberty or Death!\" was the cry of convict bushrangers, and in large numbers they roamed beyond Sydney, some hoping to reach China, which was commonly believed to be connected by an overland route. Some bolters seized boats and set sail for foreign lands, but most were hunted down and brought back to Australia. Others attempted to inspire an overhaul of the convict system, or simply sought revenge on their captors. This latter desire found expression in the convict ballad \"Jim Jones at Botany Bay\", in which Jones, the narrator, plans to join bushranger Jack Donahue and \"gun the floggers down\".\nDonahue was the most notorious of the early New South Wales bushrangers, terrorising settlements outside Sydney from 1827 until he was fatally shot by a trooper in 1830. That same year, west of the Blue Mountains, convict Ralph Entwistle sparked a bushranging insurgency known as the Bathurst Rebellion. He and his gang raided farms, liberating assigned convicts by force in the process, and within a month, his personal army numbered 80 men. Following gun battles with vigilante posses, mounted policemen and soldiers of the 39th and 57th Regiment of Foot, he and nine of his men were captured and executed.\nConvict bushrangers were particularly prevalent in the penal colony of Van Diemen's Land (now the state of Tasmania), established in 1803. The island's most powerful bushranger, the self-styled \"Lieutenant Governor of the Woods\", Michael Howe, led a gang of up to one hundred members \"in what amounted to a civil war\" with the colonial government. His control over large swathes of the island prompted elite squatters from Hobart and Launceston to collude with him, and for six months in 1815, Lieutenant-Governor Thomas Davey, fearing a convict uprising, declared martial law in an effort to suppress Howe's influence. Most of the gang had either been captured or killed by 1818, the year Howe was clubbed to death by a soldier. Vandemonian bushranging peaked in the 1820s with hundreds of bolters at large, among the most notorious being Matthew Brady's gang, cannibal serial killers Alexander Pearce and Thomas Jeffrey, and tracker-turned-resistance leader Musquito. Jackey Jackey (alias of William Westwood) was sent from New South Wales to Van Diemen's Land in 1842 after attempting to escape Cockatoo Island. In 1843, he escaped Port Arthur, and took up bushranging in Tasmania's mountains, but was recaptured and sent to Norfolk Island, where, as leader of the 1846 Cooking Pot Uprising, he murdered three constables, and was hanged along with sixteen of his men.\nThe era of convict bushrangers gradually faded with the decline in penal transportations to Australia in the 1840s. It had ceased by the 1850s to all colonies except Western Australia, which accepted convicts between 1850 and 1868. The best-known convict bushranger of the colony was the prolific escapee Moondyne Joe.\nGold rush era (1850s\u20131860s).\nThe Australian gold rushes of the 1850s and 1860s marked the next distinct phase of bushranging, as the discovery of gold gave bushrangers access to great wealth that was portable and easily converted to cash. Their task was assisted by the isolated location of the goldfields and the decimation of the police force with many troopers abandoning their duties to join the gold rush.\nIn Victoria, several major gold robberies occurred in 1852\u201353. Three bushrangers, including George Melville, were hanged in front of a large crowd for their role in the 1853 McIvor Escort Robbery near Castlemaine. Bushranging numbers also flourished in New South Wales with the rise of the colonial-born sons of poor ex-convicts who were drawn to a more glamorous life than mining or farming. Much of the activity in the colony was in the Lachlan Valley, around Forbes, Yass and Cowra.\nThe Gardiner\u2013Hall gang, led by Frank Gardiner and Ben Hall and counting John Dunn, John Gilbert and Fred Lowry among its members, was responsible for some of the most daring robberies of the 1860s, including the 1862 Escort Rock robbery, Australia's largest ever gold heist. The gang also engaged in many shootouts with the police, resulting in deaths on both sides. Other bushrangers active in New South Wales during this period, such as Dan Morgan, and the Clarke brothers and their associates, murdered multiple policemen.\nAs bushranging continued to escalate in the 1860s, the Parliament of New South Wales passed a bill, the \"Felons Apprehension Act 1865\", that effectively allowed anyone to shoot outlawed bushrangers on sight. By the time that the Clarke brothers were captured and hanged in 1867, organised gang bushranging in New South Wales had effectively ceased.\nCaptain Thunderbolt (alias of Frederick Ward) robbed inns and mail-coaches across northern New South Wales for six and a half years, one of the longest careers of any bushranger. He sometimes operated alone; at other times, he led gangs, and was accompanied by his Aboriginal 'wife', Mary Ann Bugg, who is credited with helping extend his career.\nDecline and the Kelly gang (1870s\u20131880s).\nThe increasing push of settlement, increased police efficiency, improvements in rail transport and communications technology, such as telegraphy, made it more difficult for bushrangers to evade capture. In 1870, Captain Thunderbolt was fatally shot by a policeman, and with his death, the New South Wales bushranging epidemic that began in the early 1860s came to an end.\nThe scholarly, but eccentric Captain Moonlite (alias of Andrew George Scott) worked as an Anglican lay reader before turning to bushranging. Imprisoned in Ballarat for an armed bank robbery on the Victorian goldfields, he escaped, but was soon recaptured and received a ten-year sentence in HM Prison Pentridge. Within a year of his release in 1879, he and his gang held up the town of Wantabadgery in the Riverina. Two of the gang (including Moonlite's \"soulmate\" and alleged lover, James Nesbitt) and one trooper were killed when the police attacked. Scott was found guilty of murder and hanged along with one of his accomplices on 20 January 1880.\nAmong the last bushrangers was the Kelly gang in Victoria, led by Ned Kelly, Australia's most famous bushranger. After murdering three policemen in a shootout in 1878, the gang was outlawed, and after raiding towns and robbing banks into 1879, earned the distinction of having the largest reward ever placed on the heads of bushrangers. In 1880, after failing to derail and ambush a police train, the gang, clad in bulletproof armour they had devised, engaged in a shootout with the police. Ned Kelly, the only gang member to survive, was hanged at the Melbourne Gaol on 11 November 1880.\nIsolated outbreaks (1890s\u20131900s).\nBushranging was largely considered a bygone era by the 1890s. There were however a few major cases from this point on, including the Governor gang\u2014a trio consisting of Aboriginal fencing contractor Jimmy Governor, his brother Joe Governor, and associate Jack Underwood. In July 1900 they perpetrated the Breelong Massacre, killing four members of the Mawbey family and a schoolteacher. The Governor brothers proceeded to engage in a crime spree across northern New South Wales, murdering an additional four people and triggering one of the largest manhunts in Australian history. After three months, Jimmy was arrested by a group of armed locals in Bobin, and his brother Joe was fatally shot near Singleton a few days later. Jack Underwood (who had been caught shortly after the Breelong Massacre) was hanged in Dubbo Gaol on 14 January 1901, and Jimmy Governor was hanged in Darlinghurst Gaol on 18 January 1901.\nThe Kenniff brothers, Patrick and James, were notorious stock thieves who operated in western Queensland. In March 1902, they murdered constables George Doyle and Albert Dahlke, who were sent to apprehend them. Three months later, the brothers were captured on 23 June at now-named Arrest Creek. Both brothers were convicted of murder, with Patrick sentenced to hang, and James initially sentenced to death, but his sentence was commuted to life imprisonment.\n\"Boy bushrangers\" (1910s\u20131920s).\nThe final phase of bushranging was sustained by the so-called \"boy bushrangers\"\u2014youths who sought to commit crimes, mostly armed robberies, modelled on the exploits of their bushranging \"heroes\". The majority were captured alive; a few died in shootouts with the police.\nWomen Bushrangers.\nWhile women bushrangers were not as widely known as men, there are a number of women bushrangers that were reported on in the newspapers. These include:\nMrs Winter, a bushranger in early nineteenth-century New South Wales, was briefly associated with John Tennant.\nSarah Webb, arrested with her husband William for bushranging in 1826.\nMary Williams, a known Tasmanian bushranger. There is a passing mention of her in a court case article from 1833.\nMary Ann Bugg (7 May 1834 \u2013 22 April 1905) was a Worimi bushranger in mid nineteenth century New South Wales who was Captain Thunderbolt's partner.\nBet Neen, a notorious female bushranger in New South Wales, associated with a man named Hunt.\nKitty Morgan, touted as \"one of the most notorious and wicked females that ever lived\", was active in the mid nineteenth century around Victoria. She was accused of affairs, murder, robbery and bushranging and was shot and killed by a shepherd as she entered his hut in disguise.\nJessie Hickman (n\u00e9e Hunt; 6 September 1890 \u2013 1936) was an Australian bushranger. She had multiple aliases but is often referred to as The Lady Bushranger. In the 1920s she established herself as leader of a gang of cattle thieves in the area that is now Wollemi National Park.\nPublic perception.\nIn Australia, bushrangers often attract public sympathy (cf. the concept of social bandits). In Australian history and iconography bushrangers are held in some esteem in some quarters due to the harshness and anti-Catholicism of the colonial authorities whom they embarrassed, and the romanticism of the lawlessness they represented. Some bushrangers, most notably Ned Kelly in his Jerilderie letter, and in his final raid on Glenrowan, explicitly represented themselves as political rebels. Attitudes to Kelly, by far the most well-known bushranger, exemplify the ambivalent views of Australians regarding bushranging.\nLegacy.\nThe impact of bushrangers upon the areas in which they roamed is evidenced in the names of many geographical features in Australia, including Brady's Lookout, Moondyne Cave, the township of Codrington, Mount Tennent, Thunderbolts Way and Ward's Mistake. The districts of North East Victoria are unofficially known as Kelly Country.\nSome bushrangers made a mark on Australian literature. While running from soldiers in 1818, Michael Howe dropped a knapsack containing a self-made book of kangaroo skin and written in kangaroo blood. In it was a dream diary and plans for a settlement he intended to found in the bush. Sometime bushranger Francis MacNamara, also known as Frank the Poet, wrote some of the best-known poems of the convict era. Several convict bushrangers also wrote autobiographies, including Jackey Jackey, Martin Cash and Owen Suffolk.\nCultural depictions.\nJack Donahue was the first bushranger to have inspired bush ballads, including \"Bold Jack Donahue\" and \"The Wild Colonial Boy\". Ben Hall and his gang were the subject of several bush ballads, including \"Streets of Forbes\".\nMichael Howe inspired the earliest play set in Tasmania, \"Michael Howe, The Terror of Van Diemen's Land\", which premiered at The Old Vic in London in 1821. Other early plays about bushrangers include David Burn's \"The Bushrangers\" (1829), William Leman Rede's \"Faith and Falsehood; or, The Fate of the Bushranger\" (1830), William Thomas Moncrieff's \"Van Diemen's Land: An Operatic Drama\" (1831), \"The Bushrangers; or, Norwood Vale\" (1834) by Henry Melville, and \"The Bushrangers; or, The Tregedy of Donohoe\" (1835) by Charles Harpur.\nIn the late 19th century, E. W. Hornung and Hume Nisbet created popular bushranger novels within the conventions of the European \"noble bandit\" tradition. First serialised in \"The Sydney Mail\" in 1882\u201383, Rolf Boldrewood's bushranging novel \"Robbery Under Arms\" is considered a classic of Australian colonial literature. It also cited as an important influence on the American writer Owen Wister's 1902 novel \"The Virginian\", widely regarded as the first Western.\nBushrangers were a favoured subject of colonial artists such as S. T. Gill, Frank P. Mahony and William Strutt. Tom Roberts, one of the leading figures of the Heidelberg School (also known as Australian Impressionism), depicted bushrangers in some of his history paintings, including \"In a corner on the Macintyre\" (1894) and \"Bailed Up\" (1895), both set in Inverell, the area where Captain Thunderbolt was once active.\nFilm.\nAlthough not the first Australian film with a bushranging theme, \"The Story of the Kelly Gang\" (1906)\u2014the world's first feature-length narrative film\u2014is regarded as having set the template for the genre. On the back of the film's success, its producers released one of two 1907 film adaptations of Boldrewood's \"Robbery Under Arms\" (the other being Charles MacMahon's version). Entering the first \"golden age\" of Australian cinema (1910\u201312), director John Gavin released two fictionalised accounts of real-life bushrangers: \"Moonlite\" (1910) and \"Thunderbolt\" (1910). The genre's popularity with audiences led to a spike of production unprecedented in world cinema. \"Dan Morgan\" (1911) is notable for portraying its title character as an insane villain rather than a figure of romance. Ben Hall, Frank Gardiner, Captain Starlight, and numerous other bushrangers also received cinematic treatments at this time.\nAlarmed by what they saw as the glorification of outlawry, state governments imposed a ban on bushranger films in 1912, effectively removing \"the entire folklore relating to bushrangers ... from the most popular form of cultural expression.\" It is seen as a major reason for the collapse of a booming Australian film industry. One of the few Australian films to escape the ban before it was lifted in the 1940s is the 1920 adaptation of \"Robbery Under Arms\". Also during this lull appeared American takes on the bushranger genre, including \"The Bushranger\" (1928), \"Stingaree\" (1934) and \"Captain Fury\" (1939).\n\"Ned Kelly\" (1970) starred Mick Jagger in the title role. Dennis Hopper portrayed Dan Morgan in \"Mad Dog Morgan\" (1976). More recent bushranger films include \"Ned Kelly\" (2003), starring Heath Ledger, \"The Proposition\" (2005), written by Nick Cave, \"The Outlaw Michael Howe\" (2013), and \"The Legend of Ben Hall\" (2016).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55231", "revid": "15949517", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55231", "title": "Seattle World Exposition", "text": ""}
{"id": "55233", "revid": "12530063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55233", "title": "High-energy astronomy", "text": "Study of astronomical objects that release highly energetic electromagnetic radiation\nHigh-energy astronomy is the study of astronomical objects that release electromagnetic radiation of highly energetic wavelengths. It includes X-ray astronomy, gamma-ray astronomy, extreme UV astronomy, neutrino astronomy, and studies of cosmic rays. The physical study of these phenomena is referred to as high-energy astrophysics.\nAstronomical objects commonly studied in this field may include black holes, neutron stars, active galactic nuclei, supernovae, kilonovae, supernova remnants, and gamma-ray bursts.\nMissions.\nSome space and ground-based telescopes that have studied high energy astronomy include the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55234", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55234", "title": "Gamblers", "text": ""}
{"id": "55235", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55235", "title": "Larrea tridentata", "text": "Species of plant\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLarrea tridentata, also called creosote bush, greasewood, and chaparral is a medicinal herb. In Sonora, it is more commonly called \"hediondilla\"; Spanish \"hediondo\" = \"smelly\". It is a flowering plant in the family Zygophyllaceae. The specific name \"tridentata\" refers to its three-toothed leaves.\nDistribution.\n\"Larrea tridentata\" is a prominent species in the Mojave, Sonoran, and Chihuahuan Deserts of western North America, and its range includes those and other regions in portions of southeastern California, Arizona, southern Nevada, southwestern Utah, New Mexico, and Texas in the United States, and Chihuahua, Sonora, Coahuila, Nuevo Le\u00f3n, Zacatecas, Durango and San Luis Potos\u00ec in Mexico. The species grows as far east as Zapata County, Texas, along the Rio Grande southeast of Laredo near the 99th meridian west.\nDescription.\n\"Larrea tridentata\" is an evergreen shrub growing to tall, rarely . The light gray stems of the plant bear resinous, dark green leaves with two opposite lanceolate leaflets joined at the base, with a deciduous awn between them, each leaflet long and broad. The flowers are up to in diameter, with five yellow petals. The fruit is a brown-burgundy spherical, fuzzy capsule, which separates into five individual carpels each containing one seed. Galls may form by the activity of the creosote gall midge. The whole plant exhibits a characteristic odor of creosote, from which the common name derives. In the regions where it grows, its smell is often associated with the \"smell of rain\", as the scent of its resinous leaves intensifies in rain.\nEcology.\nThese animals eat these parts of the creosote bush:\nThe Arabian camel, brought to the area by the United States Camel Corps, readily ate creosote bush. It is thought that this meeting reestablished a biological relationship that was broken when the American camels became extinct in the Quaternary Extinction Event, making it an evolutionary anachronism.\nOldest plants.\nAs the creosote bush grows older, its oldest branches eventually die and its crown splits into separate crowns. This normally happens when the plant is 30 to 90 years old. Eventually, the old crown dies and the new ones become a clonal colony from the previous plant, composed of many separate stems all from the same seed. The cloned individuals sometimes form a \"ring\" around the original plant, which may no longer be visible.\nKing Clone.\nThe \"King Clone\" creosote ring is one of the oldest living organisms on Earth. It has been alive an estimated 11,700 years, in the central Mojave Desert near present-day Lucerne Valley, California. This single clonal colony plant of \"L. tridentata\" reaches up to in diameter, with an average diameter of .\nKing Clone was identified and its age estimated by Frank Vasek, a professor at the University of California, Riverside. Measurements of the plant, as well as radiocarbon dating of wood fragments, were used to determine the plant's mean annual growth rate outward from the center of the ring. By measuring the diameter of the ring, its total age could be estimated. It is within the Creosote Rings Preserve of the Lucerne Valley and Johnson Valley.\nHabitat.\nCreosote bush is most common on the well-drained soils of alluvial fans and flats. In parts of its range, it may cover large areas in practically pure stands, though it usually occurs in association with \"Ambrosia dumosa\" (burro bush or bur-sage). Chemicals found in creosote bush roots have been shown to inhibit the growth of burro bush roots, but as of 2013, much of their relationship remains unexplained.\nCreosote bush stands tend to display an evenly spaced distribution of plants. Originally, it was assumed that the plant produced a water-soluble inhibitor that prevented the growth of other bushes near mature, healthy bushes. Now, however, it has been shown that the root systems of mature creosote plants are simply so efficient at absorbing water that fallen seeds nearby cannot accumulate enough water to germinate, effectively creating dead zones around every plant.\nDesert adaptation.\nOwing to the harshness of the germination environment above mature root systems, young creosote bushes are much more susceptible to drought stress than established plants. Germination is quite active during wet periods, but most of the young plants die very quickly unless water conditions are optimal. Ground heat compounds the young plants' susceptibility to water stress, and ground temperatures can reach upwards of 70\u00a0\u00b0C (160\u00a0\u00b0F). To become established, the young plant apparently must experience three to five years of abnormally cool and moist weather during and after germination. From this, it can be inferred that all the plants inside a stand are of equal age.\nMature plants, however, can tolerate extreme drought stress. In terms of negative water potential, creosote bushes can operate fully at \u221250 bars of water potential and have been found living down to \u2212120 bars, although the practical average floor is around \u221270 bars, where the plant's need for cellular respiration generally exceeds the level that the water-requiring process of photosynthesis can provide. Cell division can occur during these times of water stress, and new cells commonly quickly absorb water after rainfall. This rapid uptake causes branches to grow several centimeters at the end of a wet season.\nWater loss is reduced by the resinous waxy coating of the leaves, and by their small size, which prevents them from heating above air temperature (which would increase the vapor pressure deficit between the leaf and the air, thus increasing water loss). Plants drop some leaves heading into summer, but if all leaves are lost, the plant will not recover. Accumulation of fallen leaves, as well as other detritus caught from the passing wind, creates an ecological community specific to the creosote bush canopy, including beetles, millipedes, pocket mice, and kangaroo rats.\nUses.\nNative American medicinals.\nNative Americans in the Southwest held beliefs that it treated many maladies, including sexually transmitted diseases, tuberculosis, chicken pox, dysmenorrhea, and snakebite. The Coahuilla Indians used the plant for intestinal complaints and tuberculosis. The Pima drank a decoction of the leaves as an emetic, and applied the boiled leaves as poultices to wounds or sores. Tohono O'odham Indians prepared it medicinally for stiff limbs, snake bites, and menstrual cramps. The shrub is still widely used as an herbal medicine in Mexico.\nIn other uses, the reddish-colored lac that exudes from the plant was used by the Tohono O'odham, after boiling, to make a mending glue on broken pottery.\nHerbal supplements and toxicity.\n\"Larrea tridentata\" is often referred to as \"chaparral\" when used as a herbal remedy and supplement; however, it does not grow in the synonymous plant community chaparral. The United States Food and Drug Administration has issued warnings about the health hazards of ingesting \"chaparral\" or using it as an internal medicine, and discourages its use internally. In 2005, Health Canada issued a warning to consumers to avoid using the leaves of \"Larrea\" species because of the risk of damage to the liver and kidneys.\nCancer Research UK states: \"We don't recommend that you take chaparral to treat or prevent any type of cancer.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"photo links\""}
{"id": "55236", "revid": "44220063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55236", "title": "Compton scattering", "text": "Scattering of photons off charged particles\nCompton scattering (or the Compton effect) is the quantum theory of scattering of a high-frequency photon through an interaction with a charged particle, usually an electron. Specifically, when the photon interacts with a loosely bound electron, it releases the electron from an outer valence shell of an atom or molecule.\nThe effect was discovered in 1923 by Arthur Holly Compton while researching the scattering of X-rays by light elements, which earned him the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1927. The Compton effect significantly deviated from dominating classical theories, using both special relativity and quantum mechanics to explain the interaction between high frequency photons and charged particles.\nPhotons can interact with matter at the atomic level (e.g. photoelectric effect and Rayleigh scattering), at the nucleus, or with only an electron. Pair production and the Compton effect occur at the level of the electron. When a high-frequency photon scatters due to an interaction with a charged particle, the photon's energy is reduced, and thus its wavelength is increased. This trade-off between wavelength and energy in response to the collision is the Compton effect. Because of conservation of energy, the energy that is lost by the photon is transferred to the recoiling particle (such an electron would be called a \"Compton recoil electron\").\nThis implies that if the recoiling particle initially carried more energy than the photon has, the reverse would occur. This is known as inverse Compton scattering, in which the scattered photon increases in energy.\nIntroduction.\nIn Compton's original experiment (see Fig.\u00a01), the energy of the X-ray photon (\u2248\u00a017\u00a0keV) was significantly larger than the binding energy of the atomic electron, so the electrons could be treated as being free after scattering. The amount by which the light's wavelength changes is called the Compton shift. Although Compton scattering from a nucleus exists, Compton scattering usually refers to the interaction involving only the electrons of an atom. The Compton effect was observed by Arthur Holly Compton in 1923 at Washington University in St. Louis and further verified by his graduate student Y. H. Woo in the years following. Compton was awarded the 1927 Nobel Prize in Physics for the discovery.\nThe effect is significant because it demonstrates that light cannot be explained purely as a wave phenomenon. Thomson scattering, the classical theory of an electromagnetic wave scattered by charged particles, cannot explain shifts in wavelength at low intensity: classically, light of sufficient intensity for the electric field to accelerate a charged particle to a relativistic speed will cause radiation-pressure recoil and an associated Doppler shift of the scattered light, but the effect would become arbitrarily small at sufficiently low light intensities \"regardless of wavelength\". Thus, if we are to explain low-intensity Compton scattering, light must behave as if it consists of particles. Or the assumption that the electron can be treated as free is invalid resulting in the effectively infinite electron mass equal to the nuclear mass (see e.g. the comment below on elastic scattering of X-rays being from that effect). Compton's experiment convinced physicists that light can be treated as a stream of particle-like objects (quanta called photons), whose energy is proportional to the light wave's frequency.\nAs shown in Fig. 2, the interaction between an electron and a photon results in the electron being given part of the energy (making it recoil), and a photon of the remaining energy being emitted in a different direction from the original, so that the overall momentum of the system is also conserved. If the scattered photon still has enough energy, the process may be repeated. In this scenario, the electron is treated as free or loosely bound. Experimental verification of momentum conservation in individual Compton scattering processes by Bothe and Geiger as well as by Compton and Simon has been important in disproving the BKS theory.\nCompton scattering is commonly described as inelastic scattering. This is because, unlike the more common Thomson scattering that happens at the low-energy limit, the energy in the scattered photon in Compton scattering is less than the energy of the incident photon. As the electron is typically weakly bound to the atom, the scattering can be viewed from either the perspective of an electron in a potential well, or as an atom with a small ionization energy. In the former perspective, energy of the incident photon is transferred to the recoil particle, but only as kinetic energy. The electron gains no internal energy, respective masses remain the same, the mark of an elastic collision. From this perspective, Compton scattering could be considered elastic because the internal state of the electron does not change during the scattering process. In the latter perspective, the atom's state is changed, constituting an inelastic collision. Whether Compton scattering is considered elastic or inelastic depends on which perspective is being used, as well as the context.\nCompton scattering is one of four competing processes when photons interact with matter. At energies of a few eV to a few keV, corresponding to visible light through soft X-rays, a photon can be completely absorbed and its energy can eject an electron from its host atom, a process known as the photoelectric effect. High-energy photons of and above may bombard the nucleus and cause an electron and a positron to be formed, a process called pair production; even-higher-energy photons (beyond a threshold energy of at least , depending on the nuclei involved), can eject a nucleon or alpha particle from the nucleus in a process called photodisintegration. Compton scattering is the most important interaction in the intervening energy region, at photon energies greater than those typical of the photoelectric effect but less than the pair-production threshold.\nDescription of the phenomenon.\nBy the early 20th century, research into the interaction of X-rays with matter was well under way. It was observed that when X-rays of a known wavelength interact with atoms, the X-rays are scattered through an angle formula_1 and emerge at a different wavelength related to formula_1. Although classical electromagnetism predicted that the wavelength of scattered rays should be equal to the initial wavelength, multiple experiments had found that the wavelength of the scattered rays was longer (corresponding to lower energy) than the initial wavelength.\nIn 1923, Compton published a paper that explained the X-ray shift by attributing particle-like momentum to light quanta (Albert Einstein had proposed light quanta in 1905 in explaining the photo-electric effect, but Compton did not build on Einstein's work). The energy of light quanta depends only on the frequency of the light. In his paper, Compton derived the mathematical relationship between the shift in wavelength and the scattering angle of the X-rays by assuming that each scattered X-ray photon interacted with only one electron. His paper concludes by reporting on experiments which verified his derived relation:\nformula_3\nwhere\nThe quantity is known as the Compton wavelength of the electron; it is equal to . The wavelength shift \"\u03bb\"\u2032 \u2212 \"\u03bb\" is at least zero (for \"\u03b8\" = 0\u00b0) and at most twice the Compton wavelength of the electron (for \"\u03b8\" = 180\u00b0).\nCompton found that some X-rays experienced no wavelength shift despite being scattered through large angles; in each of these cases the photon failed to eject an electron. Thus the magnitude of the shift is related not to the Compton wavelength of the electron, but to the Compton wavelength of the entire atom, which can be upwards of 10000 times smaller. This is known as \"coherent\" scattering off the entire atom since the atom remains intact, gaining no internal excitation.\nIn Compton's original experiments the wavelength shift given above was the directly measurable observable. In modern experiments it is conventional to measure the energies, not the wavelengths, of the scattered photons. For a given incident energy formula_10, the outgoing final-state photon energy, formula_11, is given by\nformula_12\nDerivation of the scattering formula.\nA photon \u03b3 with wavelength \u03bb collides with an electron e in an atom, which is treated as being at rest. The collision causes the electron to recoil, and a new photon \"\u03b3\"\u2032 with wavelength \"\u03bb\"\u2032 emerges at angle \u03b8 from the photon's incoming path. Let e\u2032 denote the electron after the collision. Compton allowed for the possibility that the interaction would sometimes accelerate the electron to speeds sufficiently close to the velocity of light as to require the application of Einstein's special relativity theory to properly describe its energy and momentum.\nAt the conclusion of Compton's 1923 paper, he reported results of experiments confirming the predictions of his scattering formula, thus supporting the assumption that photons carry momentum as well as quantized energy. At the start of his derivation, he had postulated an expression for the momentum of a photon from equating Einstein's already established mass-energy relationship of \"E\" = \"mc\"2 to the quantized photon energies of \"hf\", which Einstein had separately postulated. If \"mc\"2 = \"hf\", the equivalent photon mass must be \"hf\"/\"c\"2. The photon's momentum is then simply this effective mass times the photon's frame-invariant velocity c. For a photon, its momentum formula_13, and thus \"hf\" can be substituted for \"pc\" for all photon momentum terms which arise in course of the derivation below. The derivation which appears in Compton's paper is more terse, but follows the same logic in the same sequence as the following derivation.\nThe conservation of energy \"E\" merely equates the sum of energies before and after scattering.\n formula_14\nCompton postulated that photons carry momentum; thus from the conservation of momentum, the momenta of the particles should be similarly related by\n formula_15\nin which pe is omitted as being negligible.\nThe photon energies are related to the frequencies by\n formula_16\n formula_17\nwhere \"h\" is the Planck constant.\nBefore the scattering event, the electron is treated as sufficiently close to being at rest that its total energy consists entirely of the mass\u2013energy equivalence of its rest mass \"m\"e,\n formula_18\nAfter scattering, the possibility that the electron might be accelerated to a significant fraction of the speed of light, requires that its total energy be represented using the relativistic energy\u2013momentum relation\n formula_19\nSubstituting these quantities into the expression for the conservation of energy gives\n formula_20\nThis expression can be used to find the magnitude of the momentum of the scattered electron,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNote that this magnitude of the momentum gained by the electron (formerly zero) exceeds the energy/\"c\" lost by the photon,\n formula_21\nEquation (1) relates the various energies associated with the collision. The electron's momentum change involves a relativistic change in the energy of the electron, so it is not simply related to the change in energy occurring in classical physics. The change of the magnitude of the momentum of the photon is not just related to the change of its energy; it also involves a change in direction.\nSolving the conservation of momentum expression for the scattered electron's momentum gives\n formula_22\nMaking use of the scalar product yields the square of its magnitude,\n formula_23\nIn anticipation of formula_24 being replaced with \"hf\", multiply both sides by \"c\"2,\n formula_25\nAfter replacing the photon momentum terms with \"hf\"/\"c\", we get a second expression for the magnitude of the momentum of the scattered electron,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEquating the alternate expressions for this momentum gives\n formula_26\nwhich, after evaluating the square and canceling and rearranging terms, further yields\n formula_27\nDividing both sides by 2\"hff\"\u2032\"m\"e\"c\" yields\n formula_28\nFinally, since \"f\u03bb\" = \"f\"\"\u03bb\"\u2032 = c,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIt can further be seen that the angle \u03c6 of the outgoing electron with the direction of the incoming photon is specified by \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nApplications.\nCompton scattering.\nCompton scattering is of prime importance to radiobiology, as it is the most probable interaction of gamma rays and high energy X-rays with atoms in living beings and is applied in radiation therapy.\nCompton scattering is an important effect in gamma spectroscopy which gives rise to the Compton edge, as it is possible for the gamma rays to scatter out of the detectors used. Compton suppression is used to detect stray scatter gamma rays to counteract this effect.\nMagnetic Compton scattering.\nMagnetic Compton scattering is an extension of the previously mentioned technique which involves the magnetisation of a crystal sample hit with high energy, circularly polarised photons. By measuring the scattered photons' energy and reversing the magnetisation of the sample, two different Compton profiles are generated (one for spin up momenta and one for spin down momenta). Taking the difference between these two profiles gives the magnetic Compton profile (MCP), given by formula_29 \u2013 a one-dimensional projection of the electron spin density.\nformula_30\nwhere formula_31 is the number of spin-unpaired electrons in the system, formula_32 and formula_33 are the three-dimensional electron momentum distributions for the majority spin and minority spin electrons respectively.\nSince this scattering process is incoherent (there is no phase relationship between the scattered photons), the MCP is representative of the bulk properties of the sample and is a probe of the ground state. This means that the MCP is ideal for comparison with theoretical techniques such as density functional theory.\nThe area under the MCP is directly proportional to the spin moment of the system and so, when combined with total moment measurements methods (such as SQUID magnetometry), can be used to isolate both the spin and orbital contributions to the total moment of a system.\nThe shape of the MCP also yields insight into the origin of the magnetism in the system.\nInverse Compton scattering.\nInverse Compton scattering is important in astrophysics. In X-ray astronomy, the accretion disk surrounding a black hole is presumed to produce a thermal spectrum. The lower energy photons produced from this spectrum are scattered to higher energies by relativistic electrons in the surrounding corona. This is surmised to cause the power law component in the X-ray spectra (0.2\u201310\u00a0keV) of accreting black holes.\nThe effect is also observed when photons from the cosmic microwave background (CMB) move through the hot gas surrounding a galaxy cluster. The CMB photons are scattered to higher energies by the electrons in this gas, resulting in the Sunyaev\u2013Zel'dovich effect. Observations of the Sunyaev\u2013Zel'dovich effect provide a nearly redshift-independent means of detecting galaxy clusters.\nSome synchrotron radiation facilities scatter laser light off the stored electron beam.\nThis Compton backscattering produces high energy photons in the MeV to GeV range subsequently used for nuclear physics experiments.\nNon-linear inverse Compton scattering.\nNon-linear inverse Compton scattering (NICS) is the scattering of multiple low-energy photons, given by an intense electromagnetic field, in a high-energy photon (X-ray or gamma ray) during the interaction with a charged particle, such as an electron. It is also called non-linear Compton scattering and multiphoton Compton scattering. It is the non-linear version of inverse Compton scattering in which the conditions for multiphoton absorption by the charged particle are reached due to a very intense electromagnetic field, for example the one produced by a laser.\nNon-linear inverse Compton scattering is an interesting phenomenon for all applications requiring high-energy photons since NICS is capable of producing photons with energy comparable to the charged particle rest energy and higher. As a consequence NICS photons can be used to trigger other phenomena such as pair production, Compton scattering, nuclear reactions, and can be used to probe non-linear quantum effects and non-linear QED.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55237", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55237", "title": "Compton effect", "text": ""}
{"id": "55240", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55240", "title": "Confocal laser scanning microscopy", "text": ""}
{"id": "55242", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55242", "title": "Fanfic", "text": ""}
{"id": "55244", "revid": "32425104", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55244", "title": "Hypersonic speed", "text": "Speed that exceeds five times the speed of sound (Mach 5 and above)\nIn aerodynamics, hypersonic speed refers to speeds much faster than the speed of sound, usually more than approximately Mach 5.\nThe precise Mach number at which a craft can be said to be flying at hypersonic speed varies, since individual physical changes in the airflow (like molecular dissociation and ionization) occur at different speeds; these effects collectively become important around Mach 5\u201310. The hypersonic regime can also be alternatively defined as speeds where specific heat capacity changes with the temperature of the flow as kinetic energy of the moving object is converted into heat.\nHypersonic weapons are typically boost-glide vehicles or cruise missiles designed to aerodynamic flight and maneuvering above Mach 5.\nHigh hypersonic speeds are experienced during atmospheric entry. Spaceplanes are designed to be capable of flight in this regime. The North American X-15 and the Space Shuttle orbiter are the only crewed vehicles to fly above Mach 5.\nCharacteristics of flow.\nWhile the definition of hypersonic flow can be quite vague a hypersonic flow may be characterized by certain physical phenomena at very fast supersonic flow.\nThe peculiarities in hypersonic flows are as follows:\nSmall shock stand-off distance.\nAs a body's Mach number increases, the density behind a bow shock generated by the body also increases, which corresponds to a decrease in volume behind the shock due to conservation of mass. Consequently, the distance between the bow shock and the body decreases at higher Mach numbers.\nEntropy layer.\nAs Mach numbers increase, the entropy change across the shock also increases, which results in a strong entropy gradient and highly vortical flow that mixes with the boundary layer.\nViscous interaction.\nA portion of the large kinetic energy associated with flow at high Mach numbers transforms into internal energy in the fluid due to viscous effects. The increase in internal energy is realized as an increase in temperature. Since the pressure gradient normal to the flow within a boundary layer is approximately zero for low to moderate hypersonic Mach numbers, the increase of temperature through the boundary layer coincides with a decrease in density. This causes the bottom of the boundary layer to expand, so that the boundary layer over the body grows thicker and can often merge with the shock wave near the body leading edge.\nHigh-temperature flow.\nHigh temperatures due to a manifestation of viscous dissipation cause non-equilibrium chemical flow properties such as vibrational excitation and dissociation and ionization of molecules resulting in convective and radiative heat-flux.\nClassification of Mach regimes.\nAlthough \"subsonic\" and \"supersonic\" usually refer to speeds below and above the local speed of sound respectively, aerodynamicists often use these terms to refer to particular ranges of Mach values. When an aircraft approaches transonic speeds (around Mach 1), it enters a special regime. The usual approximations based on the Navier\u2013Stokes equations, which work well for subsonic designs, start to break down because, even in the freestream, some parts of the flow locally exceed Mach 1. So, more sophisticated methods are needed to handle this complex behavior.\nThe \"supersonic regime\" usually refers to the set of Mach numbers for which linearised theory may be used; for example, where the (air) flow is not chemically reacting and where heat transfer between air and vehicle may be reasonably neglected in calculations. Generally, NASA defines \"high\" hypersonic as any Mach number from 10 to 25, and re-entry speeds as anything greater than Mach 25. Among the spacecraft operating in these regimes are returning Soyuz and Dragon space capsules; the previously-operated Space Shuttle; various reusable spacecraft in development such as SpaceX Starship and Rocket Lab Electron; and (theoretical) spaceplanes.\nIn the following table, the \"regimes\" or \"ranges of Mach values\" are referenced instead of the usual meanings of \"subsonic\" and \"supersonic\".\nSimilarity parameters.\nThe categorization of airflow relies on a number of similarity parameters, which allow the simplification of a nearly infinite number of test cases into groups of similarity. For transonic and compressible flow, the Mach and Reynolds numbers alone allow good categorization of many flow cases.\nHypersonic flows, however, require other similarity parameters. First, the analytic equations for the oblique shock angle become nearly independent of Mach number at high (~&gt;10) Mach numbers. Second, the formation of strong shocks around aerodynamic bodies means that the freestream Reynolds number is less useful as an estimate of the behavior of the boundary layer over a body (although it is still important). Finally, the increased temperature of hypersonic flow mean that real gas effects become important. Research in hypersonics is therefore often called aerothermodynamics, rather than aerodynamics.\nThe introduction of real gas effects means that more variables are required to describe the full state of a gas. Whereas a stationary gas can be described by three variables (pressure, temperature, adiabatic index), and a moving gas by four (flow velocity), a hot gas in chemical equilibrium also requires state equations for the chemical components of the gas, and a gas in nonequilibrium solves those state equations using time as an extra variable. This means that for nonequilibrium flow, something between 10 and 100 variables may be required to describe the state of the gas at any given time. Additionally, rarefied hypersonic flows (usually defined as those with a Knudsen number above 0.1) do not follow the Navier\u2013Stokes equations.\nHypersonic flows are typically categorized by their total energy, expressed as total enthalpy (MJ/kg), total pressure (kPa-MPa), stagnation pressure (kPa-MPa), stagnation temperature (K), or flow velocity (km/s).\nWallace D. Hayes developed a similarity parameter, similar to the Whitcomb area rule, which allowed similar configurations to be compared. In the study of hypersonic flow over slender bodies, the product of the freestream Mach number formula_1 and the flow deflection angle formula_2, known as the hypersonic similarity parameter:formula_3is considered to be an important governing parameter. The slenderness ratio of a vehicle formula_4, where formula_5 is the diameter and formula_6 is the length, is often substituted for formula_2.\nRegimes.\nHypersonic flow can be approximately separated into a number of regimes. The selection of these regimes is rough, due to the blurring of the boundaries where a particular effect can be found.\nPerfect gas.\nIn this regime, the gas can be regarded as an ideal gas. Flow in this regime is still Mach number dependent. Simulations start to depend on the use of a constant-temperature wall, rather than the adiabatic wall typically used at lower speeds. The lower border of this region is around Mach 5, where ramjets become inefficient, and the upper border around Mach 10\u201312.\nTwo-temperature ideal gas.\nThis is a subset of the perfect gas regime, where the gas can be considered chemically perfect, but the rotational and vibrational temperatures of the gas must be considered separately, leading to two temperature models. See particularly the modeling of supersonic nozzles, where vibrational freezing becomes important.\nDissociated gas.\nIn this regime, diatomic or polyatomic gases (the gases found in most atmospheres) begin to dissociate as they come into contact with the bow shock generated by the body. Surface catalysis plays a role in the calculation of surface heating, meaning that the type of surface material also has an effect on the flow. The lower border of this regime is where any component of a gas mixture first begins to dissociate in the stagnation point of a flow (which for nitrogen is around 2000 K). At the upper border of this regime, the effects of ionization start to have an effect on the flow.\nIonized gas.\nIn this regime the ionized electron population of the stagnated flow becomes significant, and the electrons must be modeled separately. Often the electron temperature is handled separately from the temperature of the remaining gas components. This region occurs for freestream flow velocities around 3\u20134\u00a0km/s. Gases in this region are modeled as non-radiating plasmas.\nRadiation-dominated regime.\nAbove around 12\u00a0km/s, the heat transfer to a vehicle changes from being conductively dominated to radiatively dominated. The modeling of gases in this regime is split into two classes:\nThe modeling of optically thick gases is extremely difficult, since, due to the calculation of the radiation at each point, the computation load theoretically expands exponentially as the number of points considered increases.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55245", "revid": "41651886", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55245", "title": "Lockheed SR-71 Blackbird", "text": "US Air Force supersonic aircraft, 1964\u20131998\nThe Lockheed SR-71 \"Blackbird\" is a retired long-range, high-altitude, Mach\u00a03+ strategic reconnaissance aircraft that was developed and manufactured by the American aerospace company Lockheed Corporation. Its nicknames include \"Blackbird\" and \"Habu\".\nThe SR-71 was developed in the 1960s as a black project by Lockheed's Skunk Works division. American aerospace engineer Clarence \"Kelly\" Johnson was responsible for many of the SR-71's innovative concepts. Its shape was based on the Lockheed A-12, a pioneer in stealth technology with its reduced radar cross section, but the SR-71 was longer and heavier to carry more fuel and a crew of two in tandem cockpits. The SR-71 was revealed to the public in July 1964 and entered service in the United States Air Force (USAF) in January 1966.\nDuring missions, the SR-71 operated at high speeds and altitudes (Mach\u00a03.2 at ), allowing it to evade or outrace threats. If a surface-to-air missile launch was detected, the standard evasive action was to accelerate and outpace the missile. Equipment for the plane's aerial reconnaissance missions included signals-intelligence sensors, side-looking airborne radar, and a camera. On average, an SR-71 could fly just once per week because of the lengthy preparations needed. A total of 32 aircraft were built; 12 were lost in accidents, none to enemy action.\nFrom 1968, reconnaissance missions were flown from Kadena AB, Okinawa, first over North Vietnam and Laos during the Vietnam War, and later over North Korea. From 1976, missions were flown from RAF Mildenhall, UK, along the Soviet Union's Baltic and Barents Sea coastlines. Missions were also flown over Cuba, Nicaragua, Libya, and to probe nuclear weapons installations in Israel and South Africa. Unlike previous aircraft that were under the Central Intelligence Agency, SR-71 missions were flown overtly, with USAF markings, and never overflew the Warsaw Pact or China. \nIn 1974, the SR-71 set the record for the quickest flight between London and New York at 1 hour, 54 minutes and 56 seconds. In 1976, it became the fastest airbreathing manned aircraft, previously held by its predecessor, the closely related Lockheed YF-12. As of 2025[ [update]], the Blackbird still holds all three world records.\nIn 1989, the USAF retired the SR-71, largely for political reasons, although several were briefly reactivated before their second retirement in 1998. NASA was the final operator of the Blackbird, using it as a research platform, until it was retired again in 1999. Since its retirement, the SR-71's role has been taken up by a combination of reconnaissance satellites and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). As of 2018, Lockheed Martin was developing a proposed UAV successor, the SR-72, with plans to fly it in 2025.\nDevelopment.\nBackground.\nLockheed's previous reconnaissance aircraft was the relatively slow U-2, designed for the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). In late 1957, the CIA approached the defense contractor Lockheed to build an undetectable spy plane. The project, named Archangel, was led by Kelly Johnson, head of Lockheed's Skunk Works unit in Burbank, California. The work on project Archangel began in the second quarter of 1958, with aim of flying higher and faster than the U-2. Of 11 successive designs drafted in a span of 10 months, \"A-10\" was the front-runner, although its shape made it vulnerable to radar detection. After a meeting with the CIA in March 1959, the design was modified to reduce its radar cross-section by 90%. On 11 February 1960, the CIA approved a US$96\u00a0million (~$ in 2024) contract for Skunk Works to build a dozen A-12 spy planes. Three months later, the May 1960 downing of Francis Gary Powers's U-2 underscored the need for less vulnerable reconnaissance aircraft.\nThe A-12 first flew at Groom Lake (Area 51), Nevada, on 25 April 1962. Thirteen were built, plus five more of two variants: three of the YF-12 interceptor prototype and two of the M-21 drone carrier. The aircraft was to be powered by the Pratt &amp; Whitney J58 engine, but J58 development was taking longer than scheduled, so it was initially equipped with the lower-thrust Pratt &amp; Whitney J75 to enable flight testing to begin. The J58s were retrofitted as they became available, and became the standard engine for all subsequent aircraft in the series (A-12, YF-12, M-21), as well as the SR-71. The A-12 flew missions over Vietnam and North Korea before its retirement in 1968. The program's cancellation was announced on 28 December 1966, due both to budget concerns and because of the forthcoming SR-71, a derivative of the A-12.\nDesignation as SR-71.\nThe SR-71 designation is a continuation of the pre-1962 bomber series; the last aircraft built using the series was the XB-70 Valkyrie. However, a bomber variant of the Blackbird was briefly given the B-71 designator, which was retained when the type was changed to SR-71.\nDuring the later stages of its testing, the B-70 was proposed for a reconnaissance/strike role, with an \"RS-70\" designation. When the A-12's performance potential was clearly found to be much greater, the USAF ordered a variant of the A-12 in December 1962, which was originally named R-12 by Lockheed. This USAF version was longer and heavier than the original A-12 because it had a longer fuselage to hold more fuel. The R-12 also had a crew of two in tandem cockpits, and reshaped fuselage chines. Reconnaissance equipment included signals intelligence sensors, a side-looking airborne radar, and a photo camera. The CIA's A-12 was a better photo-reconnaissance platform than the USAF's R-12: since the A-12 flew higher and faster, and with only a pilot, it had room to carry a better camera and more instruments. The A-12 flew covert missions while the SR-71 flew overt missions; the latter had USAF markings and pilots carried Geneva Conventions Identification Cards.\nDuring the 1964 campaign, Republican presidential nominee Barry Goldwater repeatedly criticized President Lyndon B. Johnson and his administration for falling behind the Soviet Union in developing new weapons. Johnson decided to counter this criticism by revealing the existence of the YF-12A USAF interceptor, which also served as cover for the still-secret A-12 and the USAF reconnaissance model since July 1964. USAF Chief of Staff General Curtis LeMay preferred the SR (Strategic Reconnaissance) designation and wanted the RS-71 to be named SR-71. Before the July speech, LeMay lobbied to modify Johnson's speech to read \"SR-71\" instead of \"RS-71\". The media transcript given to the press at the time still had the earlier RS-71 designation in places, creating the story that the president had misread the aircraft's designation. To conceal the A-12's existence, Johnson referred only to the A-11, while revealing the existence of a high-speed, high-altitude reconnaissance aircraft.\nIn 1968, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara canceled the F-12 interceptor program. The specialized tooling used to manufacture both the YF-12 and the SR-71 was also ordered destroyed. Production of the SR-71 totaled 32 aircraft: 29 SR-71As, two SR-71Bs, and one SR-71C.\nDesign.\nOverview.\nThe SR-71 was designed for flight at over Mach\u00a03 with tandem cockpits for a crew of two: a pilot; and a reconnaissance systems officer who navigated and operated the surveillance systems. It was extremely important for the pilot and RSO to work well together as a crew. The SR-71 was designed with the smallest radar cross-section that Lockheed could achieve, an early attempt at stealth design. Aircraft were painted black. This color radiated heat from the surface more effectively than the bare metal, reducing the temperature of the skin and thermal stresses on the airframe. The appearance of the painted aircraft gave it the nickname \"Blackbird\".\nAirframe, canopy, and landing gear.\nTitanium was used for 85% of the structure, with much of the rest being polymer composite materials. To control costs, Lockheed used a more easily worked titanium alloy, which softened at a lower temperature. The challenges posed led Lockheed to develop new fabrication methods, which have since been used in the manufacture of other aircraft. Lockheed found that washing welded titanium requires distilled water, as the chlorine present in tap water is corrosive; cadmium-plated tools could not be used, as they also caused corrosion. Metallurgical contamination was another problem; at one point, 80% of the delivered titanium for manufacture was rejected on these grounds.\nThe high temperatures generated in flight required special design and operating techniques. Major sections of the skin of the inboard wings were corrugated, not smooth.\nFuselage panels were manufactured to fit only loosely with the aircraft on the ground. Proper alignment was achieved as the airframe heated up, with thermal expansion of several inches. Because of this, and the lack of a fuel-sealing system that could remain leak-free with the extreme temperature cycles during flight, the aircraft leaked JP-7 fuel on the ground prior to takeoff, annoying ground crews.\nThe outer windscreen of the cockpit was made of three layers of glass with cooling sections between them. The ANS navigation window was made of solid quartz and was fused ultrasonically to the titanium frame. The temperature of the exterior of the windscreen could reach during a mission.\nThe Blackbird's tires, manufactured by B.F. Goodrich, contained aluminum and were inflated with nitrogen. They cost $2,300 each and generally required replacing within 20 missions. The Blackbird landed at more than and deployed a drag parachute to reduce landing roll and brake and tire wear.\nShape and threat avoidance.\nThe SR-71 was the second operational aircraft, after the Lockheed A-12, designed to be hard to spot on radar. Early studies in stealth technology indicated that a shape with flattened, tapering sides would reflect most radar energy away from a beam's place of origin, so Lockheed's engineers added chines and canted the vertical control surfaces inward. Special radar-absorbing materials were incorporated into sawtooth-shaped sections of the aircraft's skin. Cesium-based fuel additives were used to somewhat reduce the visibility of exhaust plumes to radar, although exhaust streams remained quite apparent. Ultimately, engineers produced an aircraft with a wing area of about but a radar cross-section (RCS) of around . Johnson later conceded that Soviet radar technology advanced faster than the stealth technology employed against it.\nWhile the SR-71 carried radar countermeasures to evade interception efforts, its greatest protection was its combination of high altitude and very high speed, which made it invulnerable at the time. Along with its low radar cross-section, these qualities gave a very short time for an enemy surface-to-air missile (SAM) site to acquire and track the aircraft on radar. By the time the SAM site could track the SR-71, it was often too late to launch a SAM, and the SR-71 would be out of range before the SAM could catch up to it. If the SAM site could track the SR-71 and fire a SAM in time, the SAM would expend nearly all of the delta-v of its boost and sustainer phases just reaching the SR-71's altitude; at this point, out of thrust, it could do little more than follow its ballistic arc. Merely accelerating would typically be enough for an SR-71 to evade a SAM; changes by the pilots in the SR-71's speed, altitude, and heading were also often enough to spoil any radar lock on the plane by SAM sites or enemy fighters. At sustained speeds of more than Mach 3.2, the plane was faster than the Soviet Union's fastest interceptor, the Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-25, which also could not reach the SR-71's altitude. No SR-71 was ever shot down.\nThe SR-71 featured chines, a pair of sharp edges leading aft from either side of the nose along the fuselage. These were not a feature on the early A-3 design; Frank Rodgers, a doctor at the Scientific Engineering Institute, a CIA front organization, discovered that a cross-section of a sphere had a greatly reduced radar reflection, and adapted a cylindrical-shaped fuselage by stretching out the sides of the fuselage. After the advisory panel provisionally selected Convair's FISH design over the A-3 on the basis of RCS, Lockheed adopted chines for its A-4 through A-6 designs.\nAerodynamicists discovered that the chines generated powerful vortices and created additional lift, leading to unexpected aerodynamic performance improvements. For example, they allowed a reduction in the wings' angle of incidence, which added stability and reduced drag at high speeds, allowing more weight to be carried, such as fuel. Landing speeds were also reduced, as the chines' vortices created turbulent flow over the wings at high angles of attack, making it harder to stall. The chines also acted like leading-edge extensions, which increase the agility of fighters such as the F-5, F-16, F/A-18, MiG-29, and Su-27. The addition of chines also allowed the removal of the planned canard foreplanes.\nPropulsion system or powerplant.\nComplete powerplant.\nThe SR-71 used the same powerplant as the A-12 and YF-12. It consists of three main parts: inlet, J58 engine and its nacelle, and ejector nozzle. \"Typical for any supersonic powerplant the engine cannot be considered separately from the rest of the powerplant. Rather, it may be regarded as the heat pump in the over-all system of inlet, engine, and nozzle. The net thrust available to propel the aircraft may be to a large extent controlled by the performance of the inlet and nozzle rather than by the physical potentialities of the engine alone.\" This is illustrated for the Blackbird by the thrust contributions from each component at Mach 3+ with maximum afterburner: inlet 54%, engine 17.6%, ejector nozzle 28.4%.\nWhen stationary and at low speeds the inlet caused a loss in engine thrust. This was due to the flow restriction through the inlet when stationary. Thrust was recovered with ram pressure as flight speed increased (uninstalled thrust , installed at zero airspeed rising through at 210\u00a0knots, unstick speed).\nAt supersonic speeds not all the airflow approaching the inlet capture area entered the inlet. At supersonic speeds an intake always adapts to the engine requirements, rather than forcing air into the engine, and the unwanted air flows around the outside of the cowl, causing spillage drag. More than half the air approaching the capture area had to be spilled at low supersonic speeds and the amount reduced as the design speed was approached because the inlet airflow had been designed to match the engine demand at that speed and the chosen design point ambient temperature. At this speed the spike shock touched the cowl lip and there was minimal spillage (with its attendant drag) as shown by Campbell. The inlet and engine matching was also shown by Brown, who emphasized the benefit of increased engine airflow at higher Mach numbers that came with the introduction of the bleed bypass cycle. These two authors show the disparity between inlet and engine for the Blackbird in terms of airflow and it is further explained in more general terms by Oates.\nEngine operation was adversely affected when operating behind an unstarted inlet. In this condition the inlet behaved like a subsonic inlet design (known as a pitot type) at high supersonic speeds, with very low airflow to the engine. Fuel was automatically diverted, by the fuel derich system, from the combustor to prevent turbine over-temperature.\nAll three parts were linked by the secondary airflow. The inlet needed the boundary layers removed from its spike and cowl surfaces. The one with the higher pressure recovery, the cowl shock-trap bleed, was chosen as secondary air to ventilate and cool the outside of the engine. It was assisted from the inlet by the pumping action of the engine exhaust in the ejector nozzle, cushioning the engine exhaust as it expanded over a wide range of pressure ratios which increased with flight speed.\nMach\u00a03.2 in a standard day atmosphere was the design point for the aircraft. However, in practice the SR-71 was more efficient at even faster speeds and colder temperatures. The specific range charts showed for a standard day temperature, and a particular weight, that Mach\u00a03.0 cruise used of fuel. At Mach\u00a03.15 the fuel flow was . Flying in colder temperatures (known as temperature deviations from the standard day) would also reduce the fuel used, e.g. with a temperature the fuel flow was . During one mission, SR-71 pilot Brian Shul flew faster than usual to avoid multiple interception attempts. It was discovered after the flight that this had reduced the fuel consumption. It is possible to match the powerplant for optimum performance at only one ambient temperature because the airflows for a supersonic inlet and engine vary differently with ambient temperature. For an inlet, the airflow varies inversely with the square root of the temperature, and for the engine, it varies with the direct inverse.\nInlet.\nThe engine inlets needed so-called mixed external/internal compression with internal supersonic diffusion since all-external compression used on slower aircraft caused too much drag at Blackbird speeds. Their features included a centerbody or spike, spike boundary-layer bleed slots where normal shock was located, a cowl boundary layer bleed \"shock trap\" entrance, streamlined bodies known as \"mice\", forward bypass bleed ports between the \"mice\", rear bypass ring, louvers on external surface for spike boundary layer overboard, and louvers on external surface for front bypass overboard. Venting this bypass overboard produced high drag: at cruise with 50% door opening, compared to the total aircraft drag of . Designer David Campbell holds a patent on the inlet's aerodynamic features and functioning, which are explained in the \"A-12 Utility Flight Manual\" and in a 2014 presentation by Lockheed Technical Fellow Emeritus Tom Anderson.\nWhen an inlet was operating as an efficient supersonic compressor\u2014a status called \"started\"\u2014supersonic diffusion took place in front of the cowl and internally in a converging passage as far as a terminal shock where the passage area began to increase and subsonic diffusion takes place. An analog control system was designed to hold the terminal shock in position.\nBut in the early years of operation, the analog computers could not always keep up with rapidly changing inputs from the nose boom. If the duct back pressure became too great and the spike was incorrectly positioned, the shock wave become unstable and would shoot quickly forward to a stable position outside the cowl. This \"inlet unstart\" would often extinguish the engine's afterburner. The asymmetrical thrust from the other engine would cause the aircraft to yaw violently. SAS, autopilot, and manual control inputs would attempt to regain controlled flight, but extreme yaw would often reduce airflow in the opposite engine and stimulate \"sympathetic stalls\". This generated a rapid counter-yawing, often coupled with loud \"banging\" noises, and a rough ride during which crews' helmets would sometimes strike their cockpit canopies. One response to a single unstart was unstarting both inlets to prevent yawing, then restarting them both. After wind-tunnel testing and computer modeling by NASA Dryden test center, Lockheed installed an electronic control to detect unstart conditions and perform this reset action without pilot intervention.\nDuring troubleshooting of the unstart issue, NASA discovered that the vortices from the nose chines were entering the engine and reducing engine efficiency. To fix this, the agency developed a computer to control the engine bypass doors. Beginning in 1980, the analog inlet control system was replaced by a digital system, Digital Automatic Flight and Inlet Control System (DAFICS), which reduced unstarts.\nEngine and nacelle.\nThe engine was an extensively re-designed version of the J58-P2, an existing supersonic engine which had run 700 development hours in support of proposals to power various aircraft for the US Navy. Only the compressor and turbine aerodynamics were retained. New design requirements for cruise at Mach 3.2 included:\nThe engine was an afterburning turbojet for take-off and transonic flight (bleed bypass closed) and a low bypass augmented turbofan for supersonic acceleration (bleed bypass open). It approximated a ramjet during high speed supersonic cruise (with a pressure loss, compressor to exhaust, of 80% which was typical of a ramjet). It was a low bypass turbofan for subsonic loiter (bleed bypass open).\nAnalysis of the J58-P2 supersonic performance showed the high compressor inlet temperature would have caused stalling, choking and blade breakages in the compressor as a result of operating at low corrected speeds on the compressor map. These problems were resolved by Pratt &amp; Whitney engineer Robert Abernethy and are explained in his patent, \"Recover Bleed Air Turbojet\". His solution was to 1) incorporate six air-bleed tubes, prominent on the outside of the engine, to transfer 20% of the compressor air to the afterburner, and 2) to modify the inlet guide vanes with a 2-position, trailing edge flap. The compressor bleed enabled the compressor to operate more efficiently and with the resulting increase in engine airflow matched the inlet design flow with an installed thrust increase of 47%. A continuous turbine temperature of was enabled with air-cooled first stage turbine vane and blades. Continuous operation of maximum afterburning was enabled by passing relatively cool air from the compressor along the inner surface of the duct and nozzle. Ceramic thermal barrier coatings were also used.\nThe secondary airflow through the nacelle comes from the cowl boundary layer bleed system which is oversized (flows more than boundary layer) to give a high enough pressure recovery to support the ejector pumping action. Additional air comes from the rear bypass doors and, for low speed operation with negligible inlet ram, from suck-in doors by the compressor case.\n&lt;gallery widths=\"220px\" heights=\"165px\" mode=\"packed\" class=\"center\" caption=\"Engine/nacelle\"&gt;\nFile:Pratt &amp; Whitney J58-JT11D-20K turbojet engine, 1962 - Lockheed SR-71A Blackbird, 1966 - Evergreen Aviation &amp; Space Museum - McMinnville, Oregon - DSC01037.jpg|View of J58 engine shows some features required for flight at Mach 3.2: titanium inlet guide vanes and first stage compressor blades for lighter weight at high ram temperatures, transonic first stage compressor blades and low hub/tip ratio compressor entry, both scaled from the bigger Mach-3 J91 engine compressor, 2-position flaps on the inlet guide vanes and three of the six bypass tubes.\nFile:Pratt &amp; Whitney J58 18.jpg|The afterburner was rated for continuous operation at made possible with ceramic coatings (colored white) on duct liner and flame holders and compressor bleed air cooling the duct and nozzle (above Mach 2.1 when the bleed was flowing). The nozzle is fully open, the maximum afterburning position. The main purpose of the variable nozzle area was to control engine operation which it did in conjunction with varying heat release in the afterburner.\nFile:Lockheed SR-71A Blackbird at Evergreen Aviation &amp; Space Museum (6586637067).jpg|The inlet at left was depressed when the engine ran at high power settings with inadequate inlet ram (stationary and low flight speeds). The lower-than-ambient pressure in the inlet brought in extra air through the spike bleed and forward bypass louvers shown on the inlet external surface. Adequate secondary cooling air came in through the suck-in doors (shown open on the hinged nacelle).\n&lt;/gallery&gt;\nEjector Nozzle.\nThe nozzle had to operate efficiently over a wide range of pressure ratios from low, with no inlet ram with a stationary aircraft, to 31 times the external pressure at . A blow-in door ejector nozzle had been invented by Pratt &amp; Whitney engineer Stuart Hamilton in the late 1950s and described in his patent \"Variable Area Exhaust Nozzle\". In this description the nozzle is an integral part of the engine (as it was in the contemporary Mach 3 General Electric YJ93. For the Blackbird powerplant the nozzle was more efficient structurally (lighter) by incorporating it as part of the airframe because it carried fin and wing loads through the ejector shroud. The nozzle used secondary air from two sources, the inlet cowl boundary layer and rear bypass from immediately in front of the compressor. It used external flow on the nacelle through the tertiary blow-in doors until ram closed them at Mach 1.5. Only secondary air was used at higher speeds with the blow-in doors closed.\nAt low flight speeds the engine exhaust pressure at the primary nozzle exit was greater than ambient so tended to over-expand to lower than ambient in the shroud causing impingement shocks. Secondary and blow-in door air surrounding the exhaust cushioned it preventing over-expansion. Inlet ram pressure increased with flight speed and the higher pressure in the exhaust system closed, first the blow-in doors and then started to open the nozzle flaps until they were fully open at Mach 2.4. The final nozzle area did not increase with further increase in flight speed (for complete expansion to ambient and greater internal thrust) because its external diameter, greater than nacelle diameter would cause too much drag.\nFuel.\nJP-7 fuel was used. It was difficult to ignite. To start the engines, triethylborane (TEB), which ignites on contact with air, was injected to produce temperatures high enough to ignite the JP-7. The TEB produced a characteristic green flame, which could often be seen during engine ignition. The fuel was used as a heat sink for the rest of the aircraft to cool the pilot and the electronics. An electric starting system was not possible due to the limited capacity of the cooling system, so the chemical ignition system was used.\nOn a typical mission, the SR-71 took off with a partial fuel load to reduce stress on the brakes and tires during takeoff and also ensure it could successfully take off should one engine fail. Within 20 seconds, the aircraft traveled , reached , and lifted off. It reached of altitude in less than two minutes, and the typical cruising altitude in another 17 minutes, having used one third of its fuel. It is a common misconception that the planes refueled shortly after takeoff because the fuel tanks, which formed the outer skin of the aircraft, leaked on the ground. It was not possible to prevent leaks when the aircraft skin was cold and the tanks only sealed when the skin warmed as the aircraft speed increased. The ability of the sealant to prevent leaks was compromised by the expansion and contraction of the skin with each flight. However, the amount of fuel that leaked, measured as drops per minute on the ground from specific locations, was not enough to make refueling necessary.\nThe SR-71 also required in-flight refueling to replenish fuel during long-duration missions. Supersonic flights generally lasted no more than 90 minutes before the pilot had to find a tanker.\nSpecialized KC-135Q tankers were required to refuel the SR-71. The KC-135Q had a modified high-speed boom, which would allow refueling of the Blackbird at near the tanker's maximum airspeed. The tanker also had special fuel systems for moving JP-4 (for the KC-135Q itself) and JP-7 (for the SR-71) between different tanks. As an aid to the pilot when refueling, the cockpit was fitted with a peripheral vision horizon display. This unusual instrument projected a barely visible artificial horizon line across the top of the entire instrument panel, which gave the pilot subliminal cues on aircraft attitude. If a KC-135Q was not available any tanker with JP-4 or JP-5 could be used in an emergency to avoid losing the aircraft, but with a Mach 1.5 speed limit.\nOn hot days, when approaching the maximum fuel load of , the left engine had to be run with minimum afterburner to maintain probe contact.\nAstro-inertial navigation system.\nNortronics, Northrop Corporation's electronics development division, had developed an astro-inertial guidance system (ANS), which could correct inertial navigation system errors with celestial observations, for the SM-62 Snark missile, and a separate system for the ill-fated AGM-48 Skybolt missile, the latter of which was adapted for the SR-71.\nBefore takeoff, a primary alignment brought the ANS's inertial components to a high degree of accuracy. In flight, the ANS, which sat behind the reconnaissance systems officer's (RSO's), position, tracked stars through a circular quartz glass window on the upper fuselage. Its \"blue light\" source star tracker, which could see stars during both day and night, would continuously track a variety of stars as the aircraft's changing position brought them into view. The system's digital computer ephemeris contained data on a list of stars used for celestial navigation: the list first included 56 stars and was later expanded to 61. The ANS could supply altitude and position to flight controls and other systems, including the mission data recorder, automatic navigation to preset destination points, automatic pointing and control of cameras and sensors, and optical or SLR sighting of fixed points loaded into the ANS before takeoff. According to Richard Graham, a former SR-71 pilot, the navigation system was good enough to limit drift to off the direction of travel at Mach\u00a03.\nSensors and payloads.\nThe SR-71 originally included optical/infrared imagery systems; side-looking airborne radar (SLAR); electronic intelligence (ELINT) gathering systems; defensive systems for countering missile and airborne fighters; and recorders for SLAR, ELINT, and maintenance data. The SR-71 carried a Fairchild tracking camera and an infrared camera, both of which ran during the entire mission.\nAs the SR-71 had a second cockpit behind the pilot for the RSO, it could not carry the A-12's principal sensor, a single large-focal-length optical camera that sat in the \"Q-Bay\" behind the A-12's single cockpit. Instead, the SR-71's camera systems could be located either in the fuselage chines or the removable nose/chine section. Wide-area imaging was provided by two of Itek's Operational Objective Cameras, which provided stereo imagery across the width of the flight track, or an Itek Optical Bar Camera, which gave continuous horizon-to-horizon coverage. A closer view of the target area was given by the HYCON Technical Objective Camera (TEOC), which could be directed up to 45\u00b0 left or right of the centerline. Initially, the TEOCs could not match the resolution of the A-12's larger camera, but rapid improvements in both the camera and film improved this performance.\nSLAR, built by Goodyear Aerospace, could be carried in the removable nose. In later life, the radar was replaced by Loral's Advanced Synthetic Aperture Radar System (ASARS-1). Both the first SLAR and ASARS-1 were ground-mapping imaging systems, collecting data either in fixed swaths left or right of centerline or from a spot location for higher resolution. ELINT-gathering systems, called the Electro Magnetic Reconnaissance System, built by AIL could be carried in the chine bays to analyze electronic signal fields being passed through, and were programmed to identify items of interest.\nOver its operational life, the Blackbird carried various electronic countermeasures (ECMs), including warning and active electronic systems built by several ECM companies and called Systems A, A2, A2C, B, C, C2, E, G, H, and M. On a given mission, an aircraft carried several of these frequency/purpose payloads to meet the expected threats. Major Jerry Crew, an RSO, told \"Air &amp; Space/Smithsonian\" that he used a jammer to try to confuse surface-to-air missile sites as their crews tracked his airplane, but once his threat-warning receiver told him a missile had been launched, he switched off the jammer to prevent the missile from homing in on its signal. After landing, information from the SLAR, ELINT gathering systems, and the maintenance data recorder were subjected to postflight ground analysis. In the later years of its operational life, a datalink system could send ASARS-1 and ELINT data from about of track coverage to a suitably equipped ground station.\nLife support.\nFlying at meant that crews could not use standard masks, which could not provide enough oxygen above . Specialized protective pressurized suits were produced for crew members by the David Clark Company for the A-12, YF-12, M-21 and SR-71. Furthermore, an emergency ejection at Mach\u00a03.2 would subject crews to temperatures of about ; thus, during a high-altitude ejection scenario, an onboard oxygen supply would keep the suit pressurized during the descent.\nThe cockpit could be pressurized to an altitude of during flight. The cabin needed a heavy-duty cooling system, as cruising at Mach\u00a03.2 would heat the aircraft's external surface well beyond &lt;ref name=\"PM06/91\"&gt;\"Popular Mechanics\", June 1991, p.\u00a028.&lt;/ref&gt; and the inside of the windshield to . An air conditioner used a heat exchanger to dump heat from the cockpit into the fuel prior to combustion. The same air-conditioning system was also used to keep the front (nose) landing gear bay cool, thereby eliminating the need for the special aluminum-impregnated tires similar to those used on the main landing gear.\nBlackbird pilots and RSOs were provided with food and drink for the long reconnaissance flights. Water bottles had long straws which crewmembers guided into an opening in the helmet by looking in a mirror. Food was contained in sealed containers similar to toothpaste tubes which delivered food to the crewmember's mouth through the helmet opening.\nOperational history.\nMain era.\nThe first flight of an SR-71 took place on 22 December 1964, at USAF Plant 42 in Palmdale, California, piloted by Bob Gilliland. The SR-71 reached a top speed of Mach 3.4 during flight testing, with pilot Major Brian Shul reporting a speed in excess of Mach 3.5 on an operational sortie while evading a missile over Libya. The first SR-71 to enter service was delivered to the 4200th (later, 9th) Strategic Reconnaissance Wing at Beale Air Force Base, California, in January 1966.\nSR-71s first arrived at the 9th SRW's Operating Location (OL-8) at Kadena Air Base, Okinawa, Japan on 8 March 1968. These deployments were code-named \"Glowing Heat\", while the program as a whole was code-named \"Senior Crown\". Reconnaissance missions over North Vietnam were code-named \"Black Shield\" and then renamed \"Giant Scale\" in late 1968. On 21 March 1968, Major (later General) Jerome F. O'Malley and Major Edward D. Payne flew the first operational SR-71 sortie in SR-71 serial number 61-7976 from Kadena AFB, Okinawa. During its career, this aircraft (976) accumulated 2,981 flying hours and flew 942 total sorties (more than any other SR-71), including 257 operational missions, from Beale AFB; Palmdale, California; Kadena Air Base, Okinawa, Japan; and RAF Mildenhall, UK. The aircraft was flown to the National Museum of the United States Air Force near Dayton, Ohio in March 1990.\nThe USAF could fly each SR-71 on average once per week because of the extended turnaround required after mission recovery. Very often an aircraft would return with rivets missing, delaminated panels, or other broken parts such as inlets requiring repair or replacement. There were cases of the aircraft not being ready to fly again for a month due to the repairs needed. Rob Vermeland, Lockheed Martin's manager of Advanced Development Program, said in an interview in 2015 that high-tempo operations were not realistic for the SR-71. \"If we had one sitting in the hangar here and the crew chief was told there was a mission planned right now, then 19 hours later it would be safely ready to take off.\"\nFrom the beginning of the Blackbird's reconnaissance missions over North Vietnam and Laos in 1968, the SR-71s averaged approximately one sortie a week for nearly two years. By 1970, the SR-71s were averaging two sorties per week, and by 1972, they were flying nearly one sortie every day. Two SR-71s were lost during these missions, one in 1970 and the second aircraft in 1972, both due to mechanical malfunctions. Over the course of its reconnaissance missions during the Vietnam War, the North Vietnamese fired approximately 800 SAMs at SR-71s, none of which managed to score a hit. Pilots did report that missiles launched without radar guidance and no launch detection, had passed as close as from the aircraft.\nWhile deployed at Okinawa, the SR-71s and their aircrew members gained the nickname Habu (as did the A-12s preceding them) after a pit viper indigenous to Japan, which the Okinawans thought the plane resembled.\nOperational highlights for the entire Blackbird family (YF-12, A-12, and SR-71) as of about 1990 included:\nOnly one crew member, Jim Zwayer, a Lockheed flight-test reconnaissance and navigation systems specialist, was killed in a flight accident. The rest of the crew members ejected safely or evacuated their aircraft on the ground.\nAn SR-71 was used domestically in 1971 to assist the FBI in their manhunt for the skyjacker D.B. Cooper. The Blackbird was to retrace and photograph the flightpath of the hijacked 727 from Seattle to Reno and attempt to locate any of the items that Cooper was known to have parachuted with from the aircraft. Five flights were attempted but on each occasion no photographs of the flight path were obtained due to low visibility.\nEuropean flights.\nEuropean operations were flown from RAF Mildenhall, England, with two weekly routes. One was along the Norwegian west coast and up the Kola Peninsula, monitoring several large naval bases belonging to the Soviet Navy's Northern Fleet. Over the years, there were several emergency landings in Norway, four in Bod\u00f8 and two of them in 1981, flying from Beale, in 1985. Rescue parties were sent in to repair the planes before leaving. On one occasion, one complete wing with engine was replaced as the easiest way to get the plane airborne again.\nThe other route was known as the \"Baltic Express\", which started from Mildenhall and went through Jutland and the Danish straits before going out over the Baltic Sea. At the time, the USSR controlled the airspace from the DDR to the Gulf of Finland, with Finland and Sweden pursuing neutrality in the Cold War. This meant that NATO aircraft entering the Baltic Sea had to fly through a narrow corridor of international airspace between Scania and Western Pomerania, which was monitored by both the Swedish and Soviet Air Forces. Starting a counter-clockwise 30-minute loop, the Blackbirds would then reconnoiter along the Soviet Union's coastal border, before slowing down to Mach 2.54 to make a left turn south of \u00c5land, and then follow the Swedish coast back towards Denmark. If the SR-71s attempted the turn at Mach 3, they could end up violating Swedish airspace, and the Swedes would direct fighters to intercept the offending aircraft.\nThe combination of a monitored entry point and a fixed route allowed the Swedes and the Soviets a chance to scramble interceptors. Swedish radar stations would observe the 15th Air Army dispatch Su-15s from Latvia, and MiG-21s and MiG-23s from Estonia, although only the Sukhois would have even a slim chance of successfully intercepting the American aircraft. The greater Soviet threat came from the MiG-25s stationed at Finow-Eberswalde in the DDR. The Swedes noted that the Soviets usually would send a single MiG-25 \"Foxbat\" from Finow to intercept the SR-71 on their way back out of the Baltic Sea. With the Blackbird flying at , the Foxbat would regularly close to an altitude of , precisely behind the SR-71, before disengaging. The Swedes interpreted this regularity as a sign that the MiG-25 had successfully simulated a shoot-down.\nThe Swedes themselves would typically assert their neutrality by dispatching JA37 Viggens from \u00c4ngelholm, Norrk\u00f6ping or Ronneby. Limited by a top speed of Mach\u00a02.1 and a service ceiling of , the Viggen pilots would line up for a frontal attack, and rely on their state-of-the-art avionics to climb at the right time and attain a missile lock on the SR-71. Precise timing and target illumination would be maintained with target location data supplied to the Viggen's fire-control computer from ground-based radars, with the most common site for the lock-on being the thin stretch of international airspace between \u00d6land and Gotland. Out of 322 recorded Baltic Express sorties between 1977 and 1988, the Swedish Air Force claims that they succeeded in attaining missile lock on the SR-71 in 51 of them. However, with a combined closing speed of Mach 5, the Swedes were reliant on the Blackbird not changing course.\nOn 29 June 1987, an SR-71 was on a mission around the Baltic Sea to spy on Soviet postings when one of the engines exploded. The aircraft, which was at altitude, quickly lost altitude and turned 180\u00b0 to the left and turned over Gotland to search for the Swedish coast. Thus, Swedish airspace was violated, whereupon two unarmed Saab JA 37 Viggens on an exercise at the height of V\u00e4stervik were ordered there. The mission was to do an incident preparedness check and identify an aircraft of high interest. It was found that the plane was in obvious distress and a decision was made that the Swedish Air Force would escort the plane out of the Baltic Sea. A second round of armed JA-37s from \u00c4ngelholm replaced the first pair and completed the escort to Danish airspace. The event had been classified for over 30 years, and when the report was unsealed, data from the NSA showed that multiple MiG-25s with the order to shoot down the SR-71 or force it to land, had started right after the engine failure. A MiG-25 had locked a missile on the damaged SR-71, but as the aircraft was under escort, no missiles were fired. On 28 November 2018, the four Swedish pilots involved were awarded medals from the USAF.\nInitial retirement.\nThe two most widely proposed reasons for the SR-71's retirement in 1989, offered by the Air Force to Congress, were that the plane was too expensive to build and maintain, and had been rendered redundant by other evolving reconnaissance methods, such as unmanned vehicles (UAVs) and satellites. Another view held by officers and legislators is that the SR-71 was terminated due to Pentagon politics.\nIn 1996, a former 1st-SRS and 9th-SRW commander, Graham, presented a strongly supported opinion that the SR-71 provided some intelligence capabilities that none of its alternatives could provide in the 1990s, when the SR-71 was retired. Opinion remained divided as to how crucial, or disposable, those unique advantages properly were.\nGraham noted that in the 1970s and early 1980s, to be selected into the SR-71 program, a pilot or navigator (RSO) had to be a top-quality USAF officer, so SR-71 squadron and wing commanders often pursued career advancement with promotion into higher positions within the USAF and the Pentagon. These generals were adept at communicating the value of the SR-71 to a USAF command staff and a Congress who often lacked a basic understanding of how the SR-71 worked and what it did. However, by the mid-1980s, these \"SR-71 generals\" all had retired, and a new generation of USAF generals had come to believe that the SR-71 had become redundant, and wanted to pursue newer, top secret programs like the new B-2 Spirit strategic bomber program. Graham said that the last-mentioned one was only a sales pitch, not a fact, at the time in the 1990s.\nThe USAF may have seen the SR-71 as a bargaining chip to ensure the survival of other priorities. Also, the SR-71 program's \"product\", which was operational and strategic intelligence, was not seen by these generals as being very valuable to the USAF. The primary consumers of this intelligence were the CIA, NSA, and DIA. A general misunderstanding of the nature of aerial reconnaissance and a lack of knowledge about the SR-71 in particular (due to its secretive development and operations) was used by detractors to discredit the aircraft, with the assurance given that a replacement was under development. Dick Cheney told the Senate Appropriations Committee that the SR-71 cost $85,000 per hour to operate. Opponents estimated the aircraft's support cost at $400 to $700\u00a0million per year, though the cost was actually closer to $300\u00a0million.\nThe SR-71, while much more capable than the Lockheed U-2 in terms of range, speed, and survivability, suffered the lack of a data link, which the U-2 had been upgraded to carry. This meant that much of the SR-71's imagery and radar data could not be used in real time, but had to wait until the aircraft returned to base. This lack of immediate real-time capability was used as one of the justifications to close down the program. The counterargument was that the longer the SR-71 was not upgraded as aggressively as it ought to have been, the more people could say that it was obsolescent, which was in their interest as champions of other programs (a self-fulfilling bias). Attempts to add a datalink to the SR-71 were stymied early on by the same factions in the Pentagon and Congress who were already set on the program's demise, even in the early 1980s. These same factions also forced expensive sensor upgrades to the SR-71, which did little to increase its mission capabilities, but could be used as justification for complaining about the cost of the program.\nIn 1988, Congress was convinced to allocate $160,000 to keep six SR-71s and a trainer model in flyable storage that could become flightworthy within 60 days. However, the USAF refused to spend the money. While the SR-71 survived attempts to retire it in 1988, partly due to the unmatched ability to provide high-quality coverage of the Kola Peninsula for the US Navy, the decision to retire the SR-71 from active duty came in 1989, with the last missions flown in October that year. Four months after the plane's retirement, General Norman Schwarzkopf Jr., was told that the expedited reconnaissance, which the SR-71 could have provided, was unavailable during Operation Desert Storm.\nThe SR-71 program's main operational capabilities came to a close at the end of fiscal year 1989 (October 1989). The 1st Strategic Reconnaissance Squadron (1 SRS) kept its pilots and aircraft operational and active, and flew some operational reconnaissance missions through the end of 1989 and into 1990, due to uncertainty over the timing of the final termination of funding for the program. The squadron finally closed in mid-1990, and the aircraft were distributed to static display locations, with a number kept in reserve storage.\nReactivation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;From the operator's perspective, what I need is something that will not give me just a spot in time but will give me a track of what is happening. When we are trying to find out if the Serbs are taking arms, moving tanks or artillery into Bosnia, we can get a picture of them stacked up on the Serbian side of the bridge. We do not know whether they then went on to move across that bridge. We need the [data] that a tactical, an SR-71, a U-2, or an unmanned vehicle of some sort, will give us, in addition to, not in replacement of, the ability of the satellites to go around and check not only that spot but a lot of other spots around the world for us. It is the integration of strategic and tactical.\nDue to unease over political situations in the Middle East and North Korea, the US Congress re-examined the SR-71 beginning in 1993. Rear Admiral Thomas F. Hall addressed the question of why the SR-71 was retired, saying it was under \"the belief that, given the time delay associated with mounting a mission, conducting a reconnaissance, retrieving the data, processing it, and getting it out to a field commander, that you had a problem in timelines that was not going to meet the tactical requirements on the modern battlefield. And the determination was that if one could take advantage of technology and develop a system that could get that data back real time... that would be able to meet the unique requirements of the tactical commander.\" Hall also stated they were \"looking at alternative means of doing [the job of the SR-71].\"\nMacke told the committee that they were \"flying U-2s, RC-135s, [and] other strategic and tactical assets\" to collect information in some areas. Senator Robert Byrd and other senators complained that the \"better than\" successor to the SR-71 had yet to be developed at the cost of the \"good enough\" serviceable aircraft. They maintained that, in a time of constrained military budgets, designing, building, and testing an aircraft with the same capabilities as the SR-71 would be impossible.\nCongress's disappointment with the lack of a suitable replacement for the Blackbird was cited concerning whether to continue funding imaging sensors on the U-2. Congressional conferees stated the \"experience with the SR-71 serves as a reminder of the pitfalls of failing to keep existing systems up-to-date and capable in the hope of acquiring other capabilities.\" It was agreed to add $100\u00a0million to the budget to return three SR-71s to service, but it was emphasized that this \"would not prejudice support for long-endurance UAVs\" such as the Global Hawk. The funding was later cut to $72.5\u00a0million. The Skunk Works was able to return the aircraft to service under budget at $72\u00a0million.\nRetired USAF Colonel Jay Murphy was made the Program Manager for Lockheed's reactivation plans. Retired USAF Colonels Don Emmons and Barry MacKean were put under government contract to remake the plane's logistic and support structure. Still-active USAF pilots and Reconnaissance Systems Officers (RSOs) who had worked with the aircraft were asked to volunteer to fly the reactivated planes. The aircraft was under the command and control of the 9th Reconnaissance Wing at Beale Air Force Base and flew out of a renovated hangar at Edwards Air Force Base. Modifications were made to provide a data-link with \"near real-time\" transmission of the Advanced Synthetic Aperture Radar's imagery to sites on the ground.\nFinal retirement.\nThe reactivation met much resistance: the USAF had not budgeted for the aircraft, and UAV developers worried that their programs would suffer if money was shifted to support the SR-71s. Also, with the allocation requiring yearly reaffirmation by Congress, long-term planning for the SR-71 was difficult. In 1996, the USAF claimed that specific funding had not been authorized, and moved to ground the program. Congress reauthorized the funds, but, in October 1997, President Bill Clinton attempted to use the line-item veto to cancel the $39\u00a0million (~$ in 2024) allocated for the SR-71. In June 1998, the US Supreme Court ruled that the line-item veto was unconstitutional. All this left the SR-71's status uncertain until September 1998, when the USAF called for the funds to be redistributed; the USAF permanently retired it in 1998.\nNASA operated the two last airworthy Blackbirds until 1999. All other Blackbirds have been moved to museums except for the two SR-71s and a few D-21 drones retained by the NASA Dryden Flight Research Center (later renamed the Armstrong Flight Research Center).\nRecords.\nThe SR-71 was the world's fastest and highest-flying air-breathing operational manned aircraft throughout its career and it still holds that record. On 28 July 1976, SR-71 serial number 61-7962, piloted by then Captain Robert Helt, broke the world record: an \"absolute altitude record\" of . Several aircraft have exceeded this altitude in zoom climbs, but not in sustained flight. That same day SR-71 serial number 61-7958 set an absolute speed record of , approximately Mach\u00a03.3. SR-71 pilot Brian Shul states in his book \"The Untouchables\" that he flew in excess of on 15 April 1986 over Libya to evade a missile.\nThe SR-71 also holds the \"speed over a recognized course\" record for flying from New York to London\u2014distance , , and an elapsed time of 1 hour 54 minutes and 56.4 seconds\u2014set on 1 September 1974, while flown by USAF pilot James V. Sullivan and Noel F. Widdifield, reconnaissance systems officer (RSO). This equates to an average speed of about Mach\u00a02.72, including deceleration for in-flight refueling. Peak speeds during this flight were likely closer to the declassified top speed of over Mach\u00a03.2. For comparison, the best commercial Concorde flight time was 2 hours 52 minutes and the Boeing 747 averages 6 hours 15 minutes.\nOn 26 April 1971, 61\u20137968, flown by majors Thomas B. Estes and Dewain C. Vick, flew over in 10 hours and 30 minutes. This flight was awarded the 1971 Mackay Trophy for the \"most meritorious flight of the year\" and the 1972 Harmon Trophy for \"most outstanding international achievement in the art/science of aeronautics\".\nWhen the SR-71 was retired in 1990, one Blackbird was flown from its birthplace at USAF Plant 42 in Palmdale, California, to go on exhibit at what is now the Smithsonian Institution's Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center in Chantilly, Virginia. On 6 March 1990, Lt. Col. Raymond E. Yeilding and Lt. Col. Joseph T. Vida piloted SR-71 S/N 61-7972 on its final Senior Crown flight and set four new speed records in the process:\nThese four speed records were accepted by the National Aeronautic Association (NAA), the recognized body for aviation records in the United States. Additionally, \"Air &amp; Space/Smithsonian\" reported that the USAF clocked the SR-71 at one point in its flight reaching . After the Los Angeles\u2013Washington flight, on 6 March 1990, Senator John Glenn addressed the United States Senate, chastising the Department of Defense for not using the SR-71 to its full potential:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Mr. President, the termination of the SR-71 was a grave mistake and could place our nation at a serious disadvantage in the event of a future crisis. Yesterday's historic transcontinental flight was a sad memorial to our short-sighted policy in strategic aerial reconnaissance.\nSuccessor.\nSpeculation existed regarding a replacement for the SR-71, including a rumored aircraft codenamed Aurora. The limitations of reconnaissance satellites, which take up to 24 hours to arrive in the proper orbit to photograph a particular target, make them slower to respond to demand than reconnaissance planes. The fly-over orbit of spy satellites may also be predicted and can allow assets to be hidden when the satellite passes, a drawback not shared by aircraft. Thus, there are doubts that the US has abandoned the concept of spy planes to complement reconnaissance satellites. Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) are also used for aerial reconnaissance in the 21st century, being able to overfly hostile territory without putting human pilots at risk, as well as being smaller and harder to detect than manned aircraft.\nOn 1 November 2013, media outlets reported that Skunk Works has been working on an unmanned reconnaissance airplane it has named SR-72, which would fly twice as fast as the SR-71, at Mach 6. However, the USAF is officially pursuing the Northrop Grumman RQ-180 UAV to assume the SR-71's strategic ISR role.\nAir Force Systems Command\n4786th Test Squadron 1965\u20131970\nSR-71 Flight Test Group 1970\u20131990\nStrategic Air Command\n1st Strategic Reconnaissance Squadron 1966\u20131990\n99th Strategic Reconnaissance Squadron 1966\u20131971\nDetachment 1, Kadena Air Base, Japan 1968\u20131990\nDetachment 4, RAF Mildenhall. England 1976\u20131990\nAir Combat Command\n(Forward Operating Locations at Eielson AFB, Alaska; Griffis AFB, New York; Seymour-Johnson AFB, North Carolina; Diego Garcia and Bodo, Norway 1973\u20131990)\nAccidents and aircraft disposition.\nTwelve SR-71s were lost and one pilot died in accidents during the aircraft's service career. Eleven of these accidents happened between 1966 and 1972.\nSome secondary references use incorrect 64-series aircraft serial numbers (\"e.g.\" SR-71C 64-17981)\nAfter completion of all USAF and NASA SR-71 operations at Edwards AFB, the SR-71 Flight Simulator was moved in July 2006 to the Frontiers of Flight Museum at Love Field Airport in Dallas, Texas.\nSpecifications (SR-71A).\n\"Data from\" Lockheed SR-71 BlackbirdGeneral characteristics* Crew: 2; Pilot and reconnaissance systems officer (RSO)* Aspect ratio: 1.7* Fuel capacity: in 6 tank groups (9 tanks)\nPerformance* Maximum speed: Mach 3.3* Endurance: * g limits: * Roll rate: * Maximum glide ratio: * Thrust/weight: 0.44\nAvionics\n of mission equipment\n* Itek KA-102A camera\n*Signals and Electronic Intelligence equipment in the following compartments\n* A \u2013 nose radar\n* D \u2013 right chine bay\n* E \u2013 electronics bay\n* K \u2013 left forward mission bay\n* L \u2013 right forward mission bay\n* M \u2013 left forward mission bay\n* N \u2013 right forward mission bay\n* P \u2013 left aft mission bay\n* Q \u2013 right aft mission bay\n* R \u2013 radio equipment bay\n* S \u2013 left aft mission bay\n* T \u2013 right aft mission bay\nSee also.\nRelated development\nAircraft of comparable role, configuration, and era\nRelated lists\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55246", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55246", "title": "U.S. Air Force", "text": ""}
{"id": "55247", "revid": "3867343", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55247", "title": "Utah Phillips", "text": "American labor organizer, folk singer, and poet (1935\u20132008)\nBruce Duncan \"Utah\" Phillips (May 15, 1935\u00a0\u2013 May 23, 2008) was an American labor organizer, folk singer, storyteller and poet. He described the struggles of labor unions and the power of direct action, self-identifying as an anarchist. He often promoted the Industrial Workers of the World in his music, actions, and words.\nEarly years.\nPhillips was born in Cleveland to Edwin Deroger Phillips and Frances Kathleen Coates. His father, Edwin Phillips, was a labor organizer, and his parents' activism influenced much of his life's work. Phillips was a card-carrying member of the Industrial Workers of the World (Wobblies), which are headquartered in Chicago. His parents divorced and his mother remarried. Phillips was adopted at the age of five by his stepfather, Syd Cohen, who managed the Hippodrome Theater in Cleveland, one of the last vaudeville houses in the city. Cohen moved the family to Salt Lake City, Utah, where he managed the Lyric Theater, another vaudeville house. Phillips attributes his early exposure to vaudeville through his stepfather as being an important influence on his later career.\nPhillips attended East High School in Salt Lake City, where he was involved in the arts and plays. He served in the United States Army for three years in the 1950s. Witnessing the devastation of post-war Korea greatly influenced his social and political thinking. After discharge from the army, Phillips rode the railroads, and wrote songs.\nCareer.\nWhile riding the rails and tramping around the west, Phillips returned to Salt Lake City, where he met Ammon Hennacy from the Catholic Worker Movement. He gave credit to Hennacy for saving him from a life of drifting to one dedicated to using his gifts and talents toward activism and public service. Phillips assisted him in establishing a mission house of hospitality named after the activist Joe Hill. Phillips worked at the Joe Hill House for the next eight years, then ran for the U.S. Senate as a candidate of Utah's Peace and Freedom Party in 1968. He received 2,019 votes (0.5%) in an election won by Republican Wallace F. Bennett. He also ran for president of the United States in 1976 for the Do-Nothing Party.\nHe adopted the name U. Utah Phillips in keeping with the hobo tradition of adopting a moniker that included an initial and the state of origin, and in emulation of country vocalist T. Texas Tyler.\nPhillips met folk singer Rosalie Sorrels in the early 1950s, and remained a close friend of hers. Sorrels started playing the songs that Phillips wrote, and through her his music began to spread. After leaving Utah in the late 1960s, he went to Saratoga Springs, New York, where he was befriended by the folk community at the Caff\u00e8 Lena coffee house. He became a staple performer there for a decade, and would return throughout his career.\nPhillips was a member of the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW or Wobblies). His views of unions and politics were shaped by his parents, especially his mother who was a labor organizer for the CIO. But Phillips was more of a Christian anarchist and a pacifist, so found the modern-day Wobblies to be the perfect fit for him, an iconoclast and artist. In recent years, perhaps no single person did more to spread the Wobbly gospel than Phillips, whose countless concerts were, in effect, organizing meetings for the cause of labor, unions, anarchism, pacifism, and the Wobblies. He was a tremendous interpreter of classic Wobbly tunes including \"Hallelujah, I'm a Bum,\" \"The Preacher and the Slave,\" and \"Bread and Roses.\"\nAn avid trainhopper, Phillips recorded several albums of music related to the railroads, especially the era of steam locomotives. His 1973 album, \"Good Though!\", is an example, and contains such songs as \"Daddy, What's a Train?\" and \"Queen of the Rails\" as well as what may be his most famous composition, \"Moose Turd Pie\" wherein he tells a tall tale of his work as a gandy dancer repairing track in the Southwestern United States desert.\nIn 1991 Phillips recorded, in one take, an album of song, poetry and short stories entitled \"I've Got To Know\", inspired by his anger at the first Gulf War. The album includes \"Enola Gay,\" his first composition written about the United States' atomic attack on Hiroshima and Nagasaki.\nPhillips was a mentor to folk singer Kate Wolf. In 1998, he was the first recipient of the Kate Wolf Memorial Award from the World Folk Music Association. He recorded songs and stories with Rosalie Sorrels on a CD called \"The Long Memory\" (1996), originally a college project \"Worker's Doxology\" for 1992 'cold-drill Magazine' Boise State University. His admirer, Ani DiFranco, recorded two CDs, \"The Past Didn't Go Anywhere\" (1996) and \"Fellow Workers\" (1999), with him. He was nominated for a Grammy Award for his work with DiFranco. His \"Green Rolling Hills\" was made into a country hit by Emmylou Harris, and \"The Goodnight-Loving Trail\" became a classic as well, being recorded by Ian Tyson, Tom Waits, and others.\nLater years and death.\nThough known primarily for his work as a concert performer and labor organizer, Phillips also worked as an archivist, dishwasher, and warehouse-man.\nPhillips was a member of various socio-political organizations and groups throughout his life. A strong supporter of labor struggles, he was a member of the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW), the International Union of Mine, Mill, and Smelter Workers (Mine Mill), and the Travelling Musician's Union AFM Local 1000. In solidarity with the poor, he was also an honorary member of Dignity Village, a homeless community. A pacifist, he was a member of Veterans for Peace and the Peace Center of Nevada County.\nIn his personal life, Phillips enjoyed varied hobbies and interests. These included Egyptology; amateur chemistry; linguistics; history (Asian, African, Mormon and world); futhark; debate; and poetry. He also enjoyed culinary hobbies, such as pickling, cooking and gardening.\nHe married Joanna Robinson on July 31, 1989, in Nevada City.\nPhillips became an elder statesman for the folk music community, and a keeper of stories and songs that might otherwise have passed into obscurity. He was also a member of the great Traveling Nation, the community of hobos and railroad bums that populates the Midwest United States along the rail lines, and was an important keeper of their history and culture. He also became an honorary member of numerous folk societies in the US and Canada.\nWhen Kate Wolf grew ill and was forced to cancel concerts, she asked Phillips to fill in. Suffering from an ailment which makes it more difficult to play guitar, Phillips hesitated, citing his declining guitar ability. \"Nobody ever came just to hear you play,\" she said. Phillips told this story as a way of explaining how his style over the years became increasingly based on storytelling instead of just songs. He was a gifted storyteller and monologist, and his concerts generally had an even mix of spoken word and sung content. He attributed much of his success to his personality. \"It is better to be likeable than talented,\" he often said, self-deprecatingly.\nFrom 1997 to 2001, Phillips hosted his own weekly radio show, \"Loafer's Glory: The Hobo Jungle of the Mind,\" originating on KVMR and nationally syndicated. The show was suspended after 100 episodes due to lack of funding.\nPhillips lived in Nevada City, California, for 21 years where he worked on the start-up of the Hospitality House, a homeless shelter, and the Peace and Justice Center. \"It's my town. Nevada City is a primary seed-bed for community organizing.\"\nIn August 2007, Phillips announced that he would undergo catheter ablation to address his heart problems. Later that autumn, Phillips announced that due to health problems he could no longer tour. By January 2008, he decided against a heart transplant.\nPhillips died May 23, 2008, in Nevada City, California, from complications of heart disease, eight days after his 73rd birthday, and is buried in Forest View Cemetery in Nevada City.\nPersonal papers.\nArchival materials related to Phillips' personal and professional life are open for research at the Walter P. Reuther Library in Detroit, Michigan. The papers include correspondence, interviews, writings, notes, contracts, flyers, publications, articles, clippings, photographs, audiovisual recordings, and other materials.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55248", "revid": "50795996", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55248", "title": "Kalamazoo College", "text": "Private liberal arts college in Michigan, US\nKalamazoo College is a private liberal arts college in Kalamazoo, Michigan. Founded in 1833 by Baptist ministers as the Michigan and Huron Institute, Kalamazoo is the oldest private college in Michigan. From 1840 to 1850, the institute operated as the Kalamazoo Branch of the University of Michigan. After receiving its charter from the state in 1855, the institute changed its name to Kalamazoo College.\nKalamazoo is a member of the Consortium of Liberal Arts Colleges (CLAC) and the Great Lakes Colleges Association. The college's sports teams are nicknamed the Hornets and compete in the NCAA Division III Michigan Intercollegiate Athletic Association.\nHistory.\nKalamazoo College was founded in 1833 by a group of Baptist ministers as the Michigan and Huron Institute. Its charter was granted on April 22, 1833, the first school chartered by the Legislative Council of the Territory of Michigan. Instruction at the Institute began in fall 1836. In 1837, the name of the fledgling college was changed to the Kalamazoo Literary Institute and school officials made their first attempt to secure recognition as a college from the state of Michigan. In 1838, however, the University of Michigan opened the Kalamazoo Branch of the University of Michigan, providing a local competitor to the Literary Institute. In 1840, the two schools merged, and from 1840 to 1850, the college operated as the Kalamazoo Branch of the University of Michigan. In 1850, the Kalamazoo Literary Institute name was restored and in 1855 the school finally received an educational charter from the State of Michigan; it was now officially a college. The school changed its name to Kalamazoo College.\nJames Stone, the first president of Kalamazoo College, led the school from 1842 through 1863 and was responsible for instituting the high academic standards that allowed the college to receive its charter. Shortly after becoming president, Stone proposed the addition of a theological seminary to increase the supply of ministers in the region. With the support of the Baptist church, classes at the Kalamazoo Theological Seminary began in 1848 with 11 students. At the same time, the Female Department continued to expand under the watchful eye of Lucinda Hinsdale Stone. In 1845\u201346, almost half of the 90 students enrolled in Kalamazoo were women. Kalamazoo College also served as a pioneer in coed education, granting its first degree to a woman, Catherine V. Eldred, in 1870.\nIn 1877, Kalamazoo College students published the first edition of \"The Index\", a student-run newspaper that continues to publish today. The college also publishes \"The Cauldron\", an annual literary-arts journal, and \"The Passage\", an annual compilation of students' work from study abroad.\nKalamazoo College's reputation was built during the presidency of Weimer Hicks, who served from 1954 to 1971. Hicks conceived of the \"K Plan\" program under which most Kalamazoo students spend at least one term abroad and spend at least one term working in an academic internship.\nOn January 3, 2006, Kalamazoo College opened the new Upjohn Library Commons which includes the completely renovated skeleton of the older library, and an extension which adds to its volume capacity.\nA marker designating the college as a Michigan Historic Site was erected in 1983 by the Michigan History Division, Department of State. The inscription reads:\nThe first classroom building for the Michigan and Huron Institute, now Kalamazoo College, was erected on this site between June and September of 1836. The charter bill for the school had been introduced in the Michigan Territorial Legislative Council on January 18, 1833, and signed into law by Governor George B. Porter on April 22, 1833. Village pledges supplied funds for the two-story frame classroom structure, which was the start of Michigan\u2019s first church-related college.\nAcademics.\nAdmissions.\nKalamazoo is considered \"more selective\" by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\". For the Class of 2024 (enrolled fall 2020), Kalamazoo received 3,456 applications and accepted 2,569 (74.3%). Of those accepted, 384 enrolled, a yield rate (the percentage of accepted students who choose to attend the university) of 14.9%. Kalamazoo's freshman retention rate is 83%, with 79% going on to graduate within six years.\nOf the 44% of enrolled freshmen in 2020 who submitted SAT scores; the middle 50 percent Composite scores were 1150\u20131360. Of the 20% of the incoming freshman class who submitted ACT scores; the middle 50 percent Composite score was between 25 and 30.\nTogether with Michigan State University, Michigan Technological University, Wayne State University, Hillsdale College, Calvin University, and Hope College, Kalamazoo College is one of the seven college-sponsors of the National Merit Scholarship Program in the state. The college sponsored 2 Merit Scholarship awards in 2020. In the 2020\u20132021 academic year, 2 first-year students were National Merit Scholars.\nAcademic distinctions.\nKalamazoo offers 30 majors spread across the fields of Fine Arts, Humanities, Modern and Classical Languages and Literature, Natural Sciences and Mathematics, and Social Sciences. Additionally, the college offers 22 minors, 5 special programs, and 13 concentrations. It is listed in Loren Pope's \"Colleges That Change Lives\". Its most popular majors, in terms of 2021 graduates, were:\nBiology/Biological Sciences (70)\nBusiness/Commerce (55)\nChemistry (44)\nPsychology (36)\nSocial Sciences (27)\nEnglish Language &amp; Literature (24)\nA 2017 study by Higher Education Data Sharing lists Kalamazoo College in the top 2 percent of four-year liberal arts colleges in the United States whose graduates go on to earn a Ph.D. According to this study, Kalamazoo College is ranked number seventeen among all private liberal arts colleges and \u2014 when compared with all academic institutions \u2014 it ranks number thirty-three in Ph.D.s per capita. Among all undergraduate institutions, Kalamazoo College was first per capita in 2005 for recruitment of Peace Corps volunteers.\n96 percent of full-time faculty hold a Ph.D. or the terminal degree in their field.\nThe K Plan.\nKalamazoo College emphasizes the importance of experiential education. The academic plan \u2014 known as the \"K plan\" \u2014 consists of a rigorous liberal arts education supplemented by experience abroad and in the Kalamazoo community.\nStudents at Kalamazoo College must fulfill specific degree requirements in order to graduate, as well as completion of three Shared Passages Seminars during the first, sophomore, and senior years at Kalamazoo. First-year seminars focus on developing writing and communication skills, sophomore seminars emphasize international culture and experience in preparation for study abroad, and senior seminars focus on major specific or interdisciplinary topics to cap a student's education experience. Upon graduation, students must demonstrate a proficiency in a second language at an intermediate level, satisfy a quantitative reasoning requirement, and complete a senior individualized project which may take the form of a thesis, an artistic performance, or any other work-intensive project of a student's choosing. These experiences are supplemented by one or more terms abroad, service-learning projects during school terms, and internship opportunities during the summer.\nService-learning.\nKalamazoo College initiated the service-learning program in 1997. In 2001, Trustee Ronda Stryker dedicated to her grandmother the Mary Jane Underwood Stryker Institute for Service learning. This Institute was created to house several service-Learning programs in the school. The current director of the Mary Jane Underwood Stryker Institute is Alison Geist. In 2008, Kalamazoo College had twenty-three on-going service-learning programs. Several courses in the college incorporate service-learning into their curricula. Programs in service-learning include Community Advocates for Parents and Students, Helping Youth through Personal Empowerment, Academic Mentorship In Giants On-going Success, the Woodward School, Keeping the Doors Open, and Farms to K.\nStudy abroad.\nAbout 70% of Kalamazoo College students spend at least one term abroad and the college maintains partnerships with over 45 programs and 22 countries on six continents. One of the programs is the International Sustainable Development Studies Institute in Thailand. Students at Kalamazoo College typically study abroad during their third (junior) Year, and each academic department designs its requirements in a way that assumes majors will study abroad for all or part of junior year though some students may choose to do a short-term study abroad during their second (sophomore) or fourth (senior) year.\nCenter for Career and Professional Development.\nIn 2009, the Center Career Development merged with the Guilds of Kalamazoo College to create the Center for Career and Professional Development. Opportunities through the CCPD include the Discovery Externship Program and the Field Experience Program\nStudent life and traditions.\nStudent organizations are one of the main sources of entertainment for the student body. They routinely bring in speakers as well as stage performances, dances, and movie showings.\nDuring the fall quarter, there are three main events: K Fest, the Homecoming dance, and Cafsgiving. At K Fest, student organizations provide activities for the students, such as pumpkin carving and bobbing for apples. Cafsgiving is a highly anticipated one-day celebration of Thanksgiving in the last week of the academic term, where the cafeteria hosts the entire student body for a large feast. \nDuring the winter quarter, the college holds the annual Monte Carlo night, on which the student body raises money by gambling in a makeshift casino where the professors are the dealers. They play for scrip redeemable for prizes.\nPride Ball (formerly Crystal Ball).\nKaleidoscope (formerly known as the Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, Transgender, and Ally Student Organization, GLBTSO) hosted the Crystal Ball each spring. Crystal Ball was a college-sponsored dance in which attendees would dress in drag or unusual costumes. A long-standing tradition at Kalamazoo, this event was created to educate the campus about GLBT issues and celebrate the persons who make up the GLBT community. In Spring of 2016 the Crystal Ball was renamed Pride Ball. The tradition continues in most other aspects; it is still hosted by the same club and attendees are still encouraged to don attire that thoughtfully represents or challenges their gender identity. This popular event features live music, dancing, and contests.\nThe Quad.\nThe campus is built around a grassy hill known as \"The Quad.\" The Quad is also the site of numerous large-scale events throughout the year, including Homecoming, Spring Fling, Convocation, and Commencement. At the top of the hill sits Stetson Chapel, a favorite location for alumni wedding services. The bell tower holds the only peal of change ringing bells in Michigan. They were all cast in 1983 at Whitechapel.\nThe Quad is home to another popular Kalamazoo College student tradition, \"streaking the Quad,\" a noisy, late-night descent in the nude from the chapel, down the hill, and back to the top again. Tradition dictates that students must touch the school sign before returning to the top. There is a mass streak after the spring performance by Frelon, the Kalamazoo College dance group, and also during the day by the senior class. This often coincides with a wedding.\nDay of Gracious Living.\nSince 1974, the college has upheld a springtime tradition of canceling all classes for a \"Day of Gracious Living\" (DOGL). While it was originally instituted (despite the Student Commission's rejection) as a day for students to relax and have fun, the 1980 Kalamazoo tornado prompted students to spend that year's DOGL helping clean up after the storm and giving back to their community. Many students enjoy the day at the North Beach in South Haven, Michigan. The date is determined by the president of the Student Commission and kept secret from the student body, though it is usually on a Wednesday during weeks 7\u20139. On the morning of the Day of Gracious Living, the bells of Stetson Chapel ring, announcing the day to the student body.\nRecycling program.\nKalamazoo College has become a leading institution in the area of recycling and environmental awareness. A crew of student workers operates one of the nation's most successful recycling programs and organizes the school's participation in the annual RecycleMania event, a competition among over 400 colleges and universities across the United States. In 2005, Kalamazoo College came to national prominence with a 3rd-place finish in the Grand Champion category. While annually placing in the top five in a variety of categories, in 2008 Kalamazoo College placed first in both the Grand Champion and Stephen K. Gaski Per Capita Classic competitions.\nSustainability.\nKalamazoo College signed the President's Climate Commitment in 2007 and has completed a greenhouse gas emission inventory. The college's Hicks Student Center is partially powered by wind and solar energy, and the student group D.I.R.T. (Digging in Renewable Turf) maintains an organic garden on campus. The spring 2009 Energy Sting competition encouraged students to reduce their energy consumption. Kalamazoo received a B on the 2010 College Sustainability Report Card.\nBeginning Band Methods.\nOne of Kalamazoo's most popular courses is \"Beginning Band Methods\", with over 100 students enrolling annually. Open to all students, including those with no musical experience, the courses train them to play brass and woodwind instruments. At the end of the term, the students perform a public concert.\nPresidents of Kalamazoo College.\nIn January 2016, Jorge Gonzalez was announced as Kalamazoo College's 18th president. He was scheduled to take office on July 1, 2016, and has declared that he will host multiple new interdisciplinary programmes, such as Latin American studies and public health.\nIn 2005, Eileen Wilson-Oyelaran became Kalamazoo College's 17th president and first female president, as well as the first African-American president of the school. She is the 22nd president overall, including interim and acting presidents. Her immediate predecessors are Bernard Palchick, who served as interim president and returned to the administration; and James F. Jones, who departed to become president of Trinity College in Connecticut.\nAthletics.\nThe college's sports teams are known as the Hornets. They compete in the NCAA's Division III and the Michigan Intercollegiate Athletic Association (MIAA). As of 2016[ [update]], the Hornet men's tennis squad has won its conference's championship 78 consecutive years. The Kalamazoo Hornets compete in the following sports:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55249", "revid": "4967956", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55249", "title": "Skunk Works", "text": "Aerospace research facility in the United States\nSkunk Works is an official pseudonym for Lockheed Martin's Advanced Development Programs (ADP), the company's tactical research and development arm. It is responsible for a number of aircraft designs, highly classified development programs, and exotic aircraft platforms. Although locations for this group are typically classified, publicly-known locations have been reported on United States Air Force manufacturing bases: Plant 42 (Palmdale), Plant 4 (Fort Worth), and Plant 6 (Marietta).\nSkunk Works' history dates back to the original Lockheed Corporation and started with the P-38 Lightning in 1939 and the P-80 Shooting Star in 1943. During this time, the egroup was called Lockheed Advanced Development Projects. Skunk Works engineers subsequently developed the U-2, SR-71 Blackbird, F-117 Nighthawk, F-22 Raptor, and F-35 Lightning II, the latter being used in the air forces of several countries. \nThe Skunk Works name was taken from the \"Skonk Oil\" factory in the comic strip \"Li'l Abner\". The modern term \"skunkworks\" is widely used in American business, engineering, and technical fields to describe a group within an organization given a high degree of autonomy and unhampered by bureaucracy, with the task of working on advanced or secret projects.\nHistory.\nThere are conflicting observations about the birth of Skunk Works. Engineer Ben Rich sets the origin as June 1943 in Burbank, California. Kelly Johnson has made contradictory statements, some agreeing with Rich, and others putting the origin earlier, in 1939. The official Lockheed Skunk Works story states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Air Tactical Service Command (ATSC) of the Army Air Force met with Lockheed Aircraft Corporation to express its need for a jet fighter. A rapidly growing German jet threat gave Lockheed an opportunity to develop an airframe around the most powerful jet engine that the allied forces had access to, the British Goblin. Lockheed was chosen to develop the jet because of its past interest in jet development and its previous contracts with the Air Force. One month after the ATSC and Lockheed meeting, the young engineer Clarence L. \"Kelly\" Johnson and other associate engineers hand delivered the initial XP-80 proposal to the ATSC. Two days later the go-ahead was given to Lockheed to start development and the Skunk Works was born, with Kelly Johnson at the helm.\nThe formal contract for the XP-80 did not arrive at Lockheed until October 16, 1943; some four months after work had already begun. This would prove to be a common practice within the Skunk Works. Many times a customer would come to the Skunk Works with a request and on a handshake the project would begin, with no contracts in place, no official submittal process. Kelly Johnson and his Skunk Works team designed and built the XP-80 in only 143 days, seven fewer than was required.\nWarren M. Bodie, journalist, historian, and Skunk Works engineer from 1977 to 1984, wrote that engineering independence, elitism and secrecy of the Skunk Works variety were demonstrated earlier when Lockheed was asked by Lieutenant Benjamin S. Kelsey (later air force brigadier general) to build for the United States Army Air Corps a high speed, high altitude fighter to compete with German aircraft. In July 1938, while the rest of Lockheed was busy tooling up to build Hudson reconnaissance bombers to fill a British contract, a small group of engineers was assigned to fabricate the first prototype of what would become the P-38 Lightning. Kelly Johnson set them apart from the rest of the factory in a walled-off section of one building, off limits to all but those involved directly. Secretly, a number of advanced features were being incorporated into the new fighter including a significant structural revolution in which the aluminum skin of the aircraft was joggled, fitted and flush-riveted, a design innovation not called for in the army's specification but one that would yield less aerodynamic drag and give greater strength with lower mass.\nAs a result, the XP-38 was the first 400-mph fighter in the world. The Lightning team was temporarily moved to the 3G Distillery, a former bourbon works where the first YP-38 (constructor's number 2202) was built. Moving from the distillery to a larger building, the stench from a nearby plastic factory was so vile that Irv Culver, one of the engineers, began answering the intra-Lockheed \"house\" phone \"Skonk Works, inside man Culver speaking!\"\nIn Al Capp's comic strip Li'l Abner, Big Barnsmell's Skonk Works\u2014spelled with an \"o\"\u2014was where Kickapoo Joy Juice was brewed from skunks, old shoes, kerosene, anvils, and other strange ingredients. When the name leaked out, Lockheed ordered it changed to \"Skunk Works\" to avoid potential legal trouble over use of a copyrighted term. The term rapidly circulated throughout the aerospace community, and became a common nickname for research and development offices. The once informal nickname is now a registered trademark of Lockheed Martin.\nIn November 1941, Kelsey gave the unofficial nod to Johnson and the P-38 team to engineer a drop tank system to extend range for the fighter, and they completed the initial research and development without a contract. When the Army Air Forces officially asked for a range extension solution it was ready. The range modifications were performed in Lockheed's Building 304, starting with 100 P-38F models on April 15, 1942. Some of the group of independent-minded engineers were later involved with the XP-80 project, the prototype of the P-80 Shooting Star.\nMary G. Ross, the first Native American female engineer, began working at Lockheed in 1942 on the mathematics of compressibility in high-speed flight\u2014a problem first seriously encountered in the P-38. In 1952, she was invited to join the Skunk Works team.\n1950s to 1990s.\nIn 1955, the Skunk Works received a contract from the CIA to build a spyplane known as the U-2 with the intention of flying over the Soviet Union and photographing sites of strategic interest. The U-2 was tested at Groom Lake in the Nevada desert, and the Flight Test Engineer in charge was Joseph F. Ware, Jr. The first overflight took place on July 4 1956. The U-2 ceased overflights when Francis Gary Powers was shot down during a mission on May 1, 1960, while over Russia.\nThe Skunk Works had predicted that the U-2 would have a limited operational life over the Soviet Union. The CIA agreed. In late 1959, Skunk Works received a contract to build five A-12 aircraft at a cost of $96 million. Building a Mach 3.0+ aircraft out of titanium posed enormous difficulties, and the first flight did not occur until 1962. (Titanium supply was largely dominated by the Soviet Union, so the CIA used several shell corporations to acquire source material.) Several years later, the U.S. Air Force became interested in the design, and it ordered the SR-71 Blackbird, a two-seater version of the A-12. This aircraft first flew in 1966 and remained in service until 1998.\nThe D-21 drone, similar in design to the Blackbird, was built to overfly the Lop Nur nuclear test facility in China. This drone was launched from the back of a specially modified A-12, known as M-21, of which there were two built. After a fatal mid-air collision on the fourth launch, the drones were re-built as D-21Bs, and launched with a rocket booster from B-52s. Four operational missions were conducted over China, but the camera packages were never successfully recovered. Kelly Johnson headed the Skunk Works until 1975. He was succeeded by Ben Rich.\nIn 1976, the Skunk Works began production on a pair of stealth technology demonstrators for the U.S. Air Force named \"Have Blue\" in Building 82 at Burbank. These scaled-down demonstrators, built in only 18 months, were a revolutionary step forward in aviation technology because of their extremely small radar cross-section. After a series of successful test flights beginning in 1977, the Air force awarded Skunk Works the contract to build the F-117 stealth fighter on November 1, 1978.\nDuring the entirety of the Cold War, the Skunk Works was located in Burbank, California, on the eastern side of Burbank-Glendale-Pasadena Airport (). After 1989, Lockheed reorganized its operations and relocated the Skunk Works to Site 10 at U.S. Air Force Plant 42 in Palmdale, California, where it remains in operation today. Most of the old Skunk Works buildings in Burbank were demolished in the late 1990s to make room for parking lots. One main building still remains at 2777 Ontario Street in Burbank (near San Fernando Road), now used as an office building for digital film post-production and sound mixing. During the late 1990s when designing Pixar's building, Edwin Catmull and Steve Jobs visited a Skunk Works Building which influenced Jobs' design. In 2009, the Skunk Works was inducted into the International Air &amp; Space Hall of Fame at the San Diego Air &amp; Space Museum.\nProjects.\n2015 projects.\nNext generation optionally-crewed U-2 aircraft. During September 2015 the proposed aircraft was deemed to have developed into more of a tactical reconnaissance aircraft, instead of strategic reconnaissance.\nAircraft.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTerm origin.\nThe term \"Skunk Works\" came from Al Capp's satirical, hillbilly comic strip \"Li\u2019l Abner\", which was immensely popular from 1935 through the 1950s. In the comic, the \"Skonk Works\" was a dilapidated factory located on the remote outskirts of Dogpatch, in the backwoods of Kentucky. According to the strip, scores of locals were done in yearly by the toxic fumes of the concentrated \"skonk oil\", which was brewed and barreled daily by \"Big Barnsmell\" (known as the lonely \"inside man\" at the Skonk Works), by grinding dead skunks and worn shoes into a smoldering still, for some mysterious, unspecified purpose.\nIn mid-1939 when Lockheed was expanding rapidly, the YP-38 project was moved a few blocks away to the newly purchased 3G Distillery, also known as Three G or GGG Distillery. Lockheed took over the building but the sour smell of bourbon mash lingered, partly because the group of buildings continued to store barrels of aging whiskey. The first YP-38 was built there before the team moved back to Lockheed's main factory a year later. In 1964, Johnson told \"Look\" magazine that the bourbon distillery was the first of five Lockheed skunk works locations.\nDuring the development of the P-80 Shooting Star, Johnson's engineering team was located adjacent to a malodorous plastics factory. According to Ben Rich\u2019s memoir, an engineer jokingly showed up to work one day wearing a Civil Defense gas mask. To comment on the smell and the secrecy the project entailed, another engineer, Irv Culver, referred to the facility as \"Skonk Works\". As the development was very secret, the employees were told to be careful even with how they answered phone calls. One day, when the Department of the Navy was trying to reach the Lockheed management for the P-80 project, the call was accidentally transferred to Culver\u2019s desk. Culver answered the phone in his trademark fashion of the time, by picking up the phone and stating \"Skonk Works, inside man Culver\". \"What?\" replied the voice at the other end. \"Skonk Works\", Culver repeated. The name stuck. Culver later said at an interview conducted in 1993 that \"when Kelly Johnson heard about the incident, he promptly fired me. It didn\u2019t really matter, since he was firing me about twice a day anyways.\"\nAt the request of the comic strip copyright holders, Lockheed changed the name of the advanced development company to \"Skunk Works\" in the 1960s. The name \"Skunk Works\" and the skunk design are now registered trademarks of the Lockheed Martin Corporation. The company also holds several registrations of it with the United States Patent and Trademark Office. They have filed several challenges against registrants of domain names containing variations on the term under anti-cybersquatting policies, and have lost a case under the .uk domain name dispute resolution service against a company selling cannabis seeds and paraphernalia, which used the word \"skunkworks\" in its domain name (referring to \"Skunk\", the pungent smell of the cannabis flower). Lockheed Martin claimed the company registered the domain in order to disrupt its business and that consumer confusion might result. The respondent company argued that Lockheed \"used its size, resources and financial position to employ 'bullyboy' tactics against [...] a very small company.\"\nIn Australia, the trademark for use of the name \"Skunkworks\" is held by Perth-based television accessory manufacturer The Novita Group Pty Ltd. Lockheed Martin formally registered opposition to the application in 2006, however the Australian government's intellectual property authority, IP Australia, rejected the opposition, awarding Novita the trademark in 2008.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55250", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55250", "title": "Cloudina", "text": ""}
{"id": "55251", "revid": "51029584", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55251", "title": "Titus", "text": "Roman emperor from AD 79 to 81\nTitus Caesar Vespasianus ( ; 30 December 39 \u2013 13 September 81 AD) was Roman emperor from 79 to 81 AD. A member of the Flavian dynasty, Titus succeeded his father Vespasian upon his death, becoming the first Roman emperor ever to succeed his biological father.\nBefore becoming emperor, Titus gained renown as a military commander, serving under his father in Judea during the First Jewish\u2013Roman War. The campaign came to a brief halt with the death of emperor Nero in 68 AD, launching Vespasian's bid for the imperial power during the Year of the Four Emperors. When Vespasian was declared Emperor on 1 July 69 AD, Titus was left in charge of ending the Jewish rebellion. In 70 AD, he besieged and captured Jerusalem, and destroyed the city and the Second Temple. For this achievement Titus was awarded a triumph; the Arch of Titus commemorates his victory and still stands today.\nDuring his father's rule, Titus gained notoriety in Rome serving as prefect of the Praetorian Guard, and for carrying on a controversial relationship with the Jewish queen Berenice. Despite concerns over his character, Titus ruled to great acclaim following the death of Vespasian on 23 June 79 AD, and was considered a good emperor by Suetonius and other contemporary historians.\nAs emperor, Titus is best known for completing the Colosseum and for his generosity in relieving the suffering caused by two disasters, the eruption of Mount Vesuvius in AD 79 and a fire in Rome in 80 AD. After barely two years in office, Titus died of a fever on 13 September 81 AD. He was deified by the Roman Senate and succeeded by his younger brother Domitian.\nEarly life.\nTitus was born in Rome, probably on 30 December 39 AD, as the eldest son of Titus Flavius Vespasianus, commonly known as Vespasian, and Domitilla the Elder. He had one younger sister, Domitilla the Younger (born 45), and one younger brother, Titus Flavius Domitianus (born 51), commonly referred to as Domitian.\nFamily background.\nDecades of civil war during the 1st century BC had contributed greatly to the demise of the old aristocracy of Rome, which was gradually replaced in prominence by a new Italian nobility during the early 1st century. One such family was the \"gens Flavia\", which rose from relative obscurity to prominence in only four generations, acquiring wealth and status under the Emperors of the Julio-Claudian dynasty. Titus's great-grandfather, Titus Flavius Petro, had served as a centurion under Pompey during Caesar's Civil War. His military career ended in disgrace when he fled the battlefield at the Battle of Pharsalus in 48 BC.\nNevertheless, Petro managed to improve his status by marrying the extremely-wealthy Tertulla, whose fortune guaranteed the upwards mobility of Petro's son Titus Flavius Sabinus I, Titus's grandfather. Sabinus himself amassed further wealth and possible equestrian status through his services as tax collector in Asia and banker in Helvetia. By marrying Vespasia Polla, he allied himself to the more prestigious patrician \"gens Vespasia\", ensuring the elevation of his sons Titus Flavius Sabinus II and Vespasian to the senatorial rank.\nThe political career of Vespasian included the offices of quaestor, aedile and praetor and culminated with a consulship in 51, the year Domitian was born. As a military commander, he gained early renown by participating in the Roman invasion of Britain in 43. What little is known of Titus's early life has been handed down by Suetonius, who recorded that he was brought up at the imperial court in the company of Britannicus, the son of Emperor Claudius, who would be murdered by Nero in 55.\nThe story was even told that Titus was reclining next to Britannicus on the night he was murdered and sipped of the poison that was handed to him. Further details on his education are scarce, but it seems he showed early promise in the military arts and was a skilled poet and orator both in Greek and Latin.\nAdult life.\nFrom around 57 to 59 he was a military tribune in Germania. He also served in Britannia and perhaps arrived about 60 with reinforcements needed after the revolt of Boudica. About 63, he returned to Rome and married Arrecina Tertulla, daughter of Marcus Arrecinus Clemens, a former Prefect of the Praetorian Guard. She died about 65.\nTitus then took a new wife of a much more distinguished family, Marcia Furnilla. However, Marcia's family was closely linked to the opposition to Nero. Her uncle Barea Soranus and his daughter Servilia were among those who perished after the failed Pisonian conspiracy of 65. Some modern historians think that Titus divorced his wife because of her family's connection to the conspiracy.\nTitus never remarried and appears to have had daughters, at least one of them by Marcia Furnilla. The only one known to have survived to adulthood was Julia Flavia, perhaps Titus's child by Arrecina, whose mother was also named Julia. During this period Titus also practiced law and attained the rank of quaestor.\nJudaean campaigns.\nIn 66, the Jews of the Judaea Province revolted against the Roman Empire. Cestius Gallus, the legate of Syria, was defeated at the battle of Beth-Horon and forced to retreat from Jerusalem. The pro-Roman King Agrippa II and his sister Berenice fled the city to Galilee, where they later gave themselves up to the Romans.\nNero appointed Vespasian to put down the rebellion, who was dispatched to the region at once with the Fifth Legion and Tenth Legion. He was later joined at Ptolemais by Titus with the Fifteenth Legion. With a strength of 60,000 professional soldiers, the Romans prepared to sweep across Galilee and march on Jerusalem.\nThe history of the war was covered in detail by the Roman-Jewish historian Josephus in his work \"The War of the Jews\". Josephus served as a commander in the city of Yodfat when the Roman army invaded Galilee in 67. After an exhausting siege which lasted 47 days, the city fell, with an estimated 40,000 killed. Titus, however, was not simply set on ending the war.\nSurviving one of several group suicides, Josephus surrendered to Vespasian and became a prisoner. He later wrote that he had provided the Romans with intelligence on the ongoing revolt. By 68, the entire coast and the north of Judaea were subjugated by the Roman Army, with decisive victories won at Taricheae and Gamala, where Titus distinguished himself as a skilled general.\nYear of the Four Emperors.\nThe last and most significant fortified city held by the Jewish resistance was Jerusalem. The campaign came to a sudden halt when news arrived of Nero's death. Almost simultaneously, the Roman Senate had declared Galba, the governor of Hispania, as emperor. Vespasian decided to await further orders and sent Titus to greet the new \"princeps\".\nBefore reaching Italy, Titus learnt that Galba had been murdered and replaced by Otho, the governor of Lusitania, and that Vitellius and his armies in Germania were preparing to march on the capital, intent on overthrowing Otho. Not wanting to risk being taken hostage by one side or the other, he abandoned the journey to Rome and rejoined his father in Judaea. Meanwhile, Otho was defeated in the First Battle of Bedriacum and committed suicide.\nWhen the news reached the armies in Judaea and \u00c6gyptus, they took matters into their own hands and declared Vespasian emperor on 1 July 69. Vespasian accepted and, after negotiations by Titus, joined forces with Gaius Licinius Mucianus, governor of Syria. A strong force drawn from the Judaean and Syrian legions marched on Rome under the command of Mucianus, and Vespasian travelled to Alexandria, leaving Titus in charge to end the Jewish rebellion. By the end of 69, the forces of Vitellius had been beaten, and Vespasian was officially declared emperor by the Senate on 21 December, thus ending the Year of the Four Emperors.\nSiege of Jerusalem.\nMeanwhile, the Jews had become embroiled in a civil war of their own by splitting the resistance in Jerusalem among several factions. The Sicarii, led by Menahem ben Judah, could hold on for long; the Zealots, led by Eleazar ben Simon, eventually fell under the command of the Galilean leader John of Gush Halav; and the other northern rebel commander, Simon Bar Giora, managed to gain leadership over the Idumeans. Titus besieged Jerusalem. The Roman Army was joined by the Twelfth Legion, which had been previously defeated under Cestius Gallus, and from Alexandria, Vespasian sent Tiberius Julius Alexander, governor of Egypt, to act as Titus' second in command.\nTitus surrounded the city with three legions (Vth, XIIth and XVth) on the western side and one (Xth) on the Mount of Olives to the east. He put pressure on the food and water supplies of the inhabitants by allowing pilgrims to enter the city to celebrate Passover and then refusing them egress. Jewish raids continuously harassed the Roman Army, one of which nearly resulted in Titus being captured.\nAfter attempts by Josephus to negotiate a surrender had failed, the Romans resumed hostilities and quickly breached the first and second walls of the city. To intimidate the resistance, Titus ordered deserters from the Jewish side to be crucified around the city wall. By that time the Jews had been exhausted by famine, and when the weak third wall was breached, bitter street fighting ensued.\nThe Romans finally captured the Antonia Fortress and began a frontal assault on the gates of the Second Temple. As they breached the gate, the Romans set the upper and lower city aflame, culminating with the destruction of the Temple. When the fires subsided, Titus gave the order to destroy the remainder of the city, allegedly intending that no one would remember the name Jerusalem. The Temple was demolished, Titus's soldiers proclaimed him \"imperator\" in honour of the victory.\nJerusalem was sacked and much of the population killed or dispersed. Josephus claims that 1,100,000 people were killed during the siege, most of whom were Jewish. Josephus's death toll assumptions are rejected as impossible by modern scholarship since about a million people then lived in the Land of Israel, half of them Jewish, and sizable Jewish populations remained in the area after the war was over, even in the hard-hit region of Judea. However, 97,000 were captured and enslaved, including Simon Bar-Giora and John of Gischala. Many fled to areas around the Mediterranean Sea. Titus reportedly refused to accept a wreath of victory, as he claimed that he had not won the victory on his own but had been the vehicle through which their God had manifested His wrath against His people.\nThe Jewish diaspora during the Temple's destruction, according to Josephus, was in Parthia (Persia), Babylonia (Iraq), and Arabia, and some were beyond the Euphrates and in Adiabene (Kurdistan).\nHeir to Vespasian.\nUnable to sail to Italy during the winter, Titus celebrated elaborate games at Caesarea Maritima and Berytus and then travelled to Zeugma on the Euphrates, where he was presented with a crown by Vologases I of Parthia. While he was visiting Antioch, he confirmed the traditional rights of the Jews in that city.\nOn his way to Alexandria, he stopped in Memphis to consecrate the sacred bull Apis. According to Suetonius, that caused consternation since the ceremony required Titus to wear a diadem, which the Romans associated with monarchy, and the partisanship of Titus's legions had already led to fears that he might rebel against his father. Titus returned quickly to Rome in the hope, according to Suetonius, of allaying any suspicions about his conduct.\nUpon his arrival in Rome in 71, Titus was awarded a triumph. Accompanied by Vespasian and Domitian, Titus rode into the city, enthusiastically saluted by the Roman populace and preceded by a lavish parade containing treasures and captives from the war. Josephus describes a procession with large amounts of gold and silver carried along the route, followed by elaborate re-enactments of the war, Jewish prisoners and finally the treasures taken from the Temple of Jerusalem, including the Menorah and the Pentateuch. Simon Bar Giora was executed in the Forum, and the procession closed with religious sacrifices at the Temple of Jupiter.\nThe triumphal Arch of Titus, which stands at one entrance to the Forum, memorialises the victory of Titus.\nWith Vespasian declared emperor, Titus and his brother Domitian received the title of \"Caesar\" from the Senate. In addition to sharing tribunician power with his father, Titus held seven consulships during Vespasian's reign and acted as his secretary, appearing in the Senate on his behalf. More crucially, he was appointed Praetorian prefect (commander of the Praetorian Guard), ensuring its loyalty to the emperor and further solidifying Vespasian's position as a legitimate ruler.\nIn that capacity, Titus achieved considerable notoriety in Rome for his violent actions, frequently ordering the execution of suspected traitors on the spot. When in 79, a plot by Aulus Caecina Alienus and Eprius Marcellus to overthrow Vespasian was uncovered, Titus invited Alienus to dinner and ordered him to be stabbed before he had even left the room.\nDuring the Jewish Wars, Titus had begun a love affair with Berenice, the sister of Agrippa II. The Herodians had collaborated with the Romans during the rebellion, and Berenice herself had supported Vespasian in his campaign to become emperor. In 75, she returned to Titus and openly lived with him in the palace as his promised wife. The Romans were wary of the eastern queen and disapproved of their relationship. When the pair was publicly denounced by Cynics in the theatre, Titus acceded to the pressure and sent her away, but his reputation suffered further regardless.\nEmperor.\nSuccession.\nVespasian died of an infection on 23 or 24 June 79 AD, and was immediately succeeded by his son Titus. He was the first Roman emperor to come to the throne after his own biological father. As Pharaoh of Egypt, Titus adopted the titulary \"Autokrator Titos Kaisaros Hununefer Benermerut\" (\"Emperor Titus Caesar, the perfect and popular youth\"). Because of his many (alleged) vices, many Romans feared that he would be another Nero. Against those expectations, however, Titus proved to be an effective emperor and was well loved by the population, who praised him highly when they found that he possessed the greatest virtues, instead of vices.\nOne of his first acts as emperor was to order a halt to trials based on treason charges, which had long plagued the principate. The law of treason, or law of majestas, was originally intended to prosecute those who had corruptly \"impaired the people and majesty of Rome\" by any revolutionary action. Under Augustus, however, that custom had been revived and applied to cover slander and libel as well. This led to numerous trials and executions under Tiberius, Caligula, and Nero, and the formation of networks of informers (\"delators\"), which terrorised Rome's political system for decades.\nTitus put an end to that practice against himself or anyone else and declared:\nIt is impossible for me to be insulted or abused in any way. For I do naught that deserves censure, and I care not for what is reported falsely. As for the emperors who are dead and gone, they will avenge themselves in case anyone does them a wrong, if in very truth they are demigods and possess any power.\nConsequently, no senators were put to death during his reign; he thus kept to his promise that he would assume the office of Pontifex Maximus \"for the purpose of keeping his hands unstained\". Informants were publicly punished and banished from the city. Titus further prevented abuses by making it unlawful for a person to be tried under different laws for the same offense. Finally, when Berenice returned to Rome, he sent her away.\nAs emperor, he became known for his generosity, and Suetonius states that upon realising he had brought no benefit to anyone during a whole day he remarked, \"Friends, I have lost a day\".\nChallenges.\nAlthough Titus's brief reign was marked by a relative absence of major military or political conflicts, he faced a number of major disasters. A few months after his accession, Mount Vesuvius erupted. The eruption almost completely destroyed the cities and resort communities around the Bay of Naples. The cities of Pompeii and Herculaneum were buried under metres of stone and ash, killing thousands. Titus appointed two ex-consuls to organise and coordinate the relief effort and personally donated large amounts of money from the imperial treasury to aid the victims of the volcano. Additionally, he visited Pompeii once after the eruption and again the following year.\nMeanwhile, war had resumed in Britannia, where Gnaeus Julius Agricola pushed further into Caledonia and managed to establish several forts there. As a result of his actions, Titus received the title of imperator for the fifteenth time, between 9 September and 31 December 79 AD.\nDuring the second visit to Pompeii, in spring of 80, a fire broke out in Rome and burned large parts of the city for three days and three nights. Although the extent of the damage was not as disastrous as during the Great Fire of 64 and crucially spared the many districts of insulae, Cassius Dio records a long list of important public buildings that were destroyed, including Agrippa's Pantheon, the Temple of Jupiter, the Diribitorium, parts of the Theatre of Pompey, and the Saepta Julia among others. Once again, Titus personally compensated for the damaged regions. According to Suetonius, a plague also broke out during the fire. The nature of the disease, however, and the death toll are unknown.\nHis reign also saw the rebellion led by Terentius Maximus, one of several false Neros who appeared throughout the 70s. Although Nero was primarily known as a universally-hated tyrant, there is evidence that for much of his reign, he remained highly popular in the eastern provinces. Reports that Nero had survived his overthrow were fuelled by the confusing circumstances of his death and several prophecies foretelling his return.\nAccording to Cassius Dio, Terentius Maximus resembled Nero in voice and appearance and, like him, sang to the lyre. Terentius established a following in Asia Minor but was soon forced to flee beyond the Euphrates and took refuge with the Parthians. In addition, sources state that Titus discovered that his brother Domitian was plotting against him but refused to have him killed or banished.\nPublic works.\nConstruction of the Flavian Amphitheatre, now better known as the Colosseum, was begun in 70 under Vespasian and was finally completed in 80 under Titus. In addition to providing spectacular entertainments to the Roman populace, the building was also conceived as a gigantic triumphal monument to commemorate the military achievements of the Flavians during the Jewish Wars.\nThe inaugural games lasted for a hundred days and were said to be extremely elaborate, including gladiatorial combat, fights between wild animals (elephants and cranes), mock naval battles for which the theatre was flooded, horse races and chariot races. During the games, wooden balls were dropped into the audience, inscribed with various prizes (clothing, gold, or even slaves), which could then be traded for the designated item.\nAdjacent to the amphitheatre, within the precinct of Nero's Golden House, Titus had also ordered the construction of a new public bath house, the Baths of Titus. Construction of the building was hastily finished to coincide with the completion of the Flavian Amphitheatre.\nPractice of the imperial cult was revived by Titus, but apparently, it met with some difficulty since Vespasian was not deified until six months after his death. To honour and glorify the Flavian dynasty further, foundations were laid for what would later become the Temple of Vespasian and Titus, which was finished by Domitian.\nDeath.\nAt the closing of the games, Titus officially dedicated the amphitheatre and the baths in what was his final recorded act as Emperor. He set out for the Sabine territories but fell ill at the first posting station where he died of a fever, reportedly in the same farmhouse as his father. Allegedly, the last words he uttered before dying were \"I have made but one mistake\".\nTitus had ruled the Roman Empire for just over two years: from the death of his father in 79 to his own on 13 September 81. He was succeeded by Domitian, whose first act as emperor was to deify his brother.\nHistorians have speculated on the exact nature of his death and to which mistake Titus alluded in his final words. Philostratus wrote that he was poisoned by Domitian with a sea hare (\"Aplysia depilans\") and that his death had been foretold to him by Apollonius of Tyana. Suetonius and Cassius Dio maintain that he died of natural causes, but both accuse Domitian of having left the ailing Titus for dead. Consequently, Dio believed the mistake to refer to not having Titus's brother executed when he was found to be openly plotting against him.\nIn the Talmud.\nThe Babylonian Talmud (Gittin 56b) attributes Titus's death to an insect that flew into his nose and picked at his brain for seven years in a repetition of another legend referring to the biblical King Nimrod. According to Rabbinic literature, Titus was a descendant of Esau and dared to challenge the Lord. Jewish tradition says that Titus was plagued by God for destroying the second Temple and died as a result of a gnat going up his nose, which slowly ate his brain and killed him. According to the Talmud, an autopsy discovered his brain mass had been reduced to the \"size of a small bird\". \nRabbinic scholars like Azariah de Rossi reject the literal historicity of the story, viewing it as an allegory about divine retribution. Maharal and others, such as Yosef Chaim of Baghdad, interpret the narrative allegorically, emphasizing its spiritual and moral lessons rather than its historical accuracy. Reuven Margolios suggests the Talmud might refer to another figure, Titus Frigius, rather than the emperor. \nAnother story is recorded in which Onkelos, a nephew of the Roman emperor Titus who destroyed the Second Temple, intent on converting to Judaism, summons up spirits to help make up his mind. Each describes his punishment in the afterlife.\"Onkelos son of Kolonikos ... went and raised Titus from the dead by magical arts, and asked him; 'Who is most in repute in the [other] world? He replied: Israel. What then, he said, about joining them? He said: Their observances are burdensome and you will not be able to carry them out. Go and attack them in that world and you will be at the top as it is written, Her adversaries are become the head etc.; whoever harasses Israel becomes head. He asked him: What is your punishment [in the other world]? He replied: What I decreed for myself. Every day my ashes are collected and sentence is passed on me and I am burnt and my ashes are scattered over the seven seas...\"\nLegacy.\nHistoriography.\nTitus's record among ancient historians stands as one of the most exemplary of any emperor. The extant accounts from the period, many of them written by his contemporaries, present a highly favourable view toward Titus. His character has especially prospered in comparison with that of his brother Domitian. \"The Wars of the Jews\" offers a witness account of the Jewish rebellion and the character of Titus. The neutrality of Josephus's writings has been questioned as he was indebted to the Flavians. In 71, he arrived in Rome in the entourage of Titus, became a Roman citizen and took on the Roman nomen Flavius and praenomen Titus from his patrons. He received an annual pension and lived in the palace.\nIt was in Rome and under Flavian patronage that Josephus wrote all of his known works. \"The War of the Jews\" is biased against the leaders of the revolt by portraying the rebellion as weak and unorganised and even blaming the Jews for causing the war. His credibility as a historian was later questioned.\nAnother contemporary of Titus was Publius Cornelius Tacitus, who started his public career in 80 or 81 and credits the Flavian dynasty with his elevation. \"The Histories\", his account of the period, was published during the reign of Trajan. Unfortunately only the first five books from this work have survived, with the text on Titus's and Domitian's reigns lost.\nSuetonius Tranquilius gives a short but highly favourable account on Titus's reign in \"The Lives of Twelve Caesars\", emphasising his military achievements and his generosity as emperor.\nTitus, of the same surname as his father, was the delight and darling of the human race; such surpassing ability had he, by nature, art, or good fortune, to win the affections of all men, and that, too, which is no easy task, while he was emperor.\nCassius Dio wrote his \"Roman History\" over 100 years after the death of Titus. He shares a similar outlook as Suetonius, possibly even using the latter as a source but is more reserved by noting that\nHis satisfactory record may also have been due to the fact that he survived his accession but a very short time, for he was thus given no opportunity for wrongdoing. For he lived after this only two years, two months and twenty days\u2014in addition to the thirty-nine years, five months and twenty-five days he had already lived at that time. In this respect, indeed, he is regarded as having equalled the long reign of Augustus, since it is maintained that Augustus would never have been loved had he lived a shorter time, nor Titus had he lived longer. For Augustus, though at the outset he showed himself rather harsh because of the wars and the factional strife, was later able, in the course of time, to achieve a brilliant reputation for his kindly deeds; Titus, on the other hand, ruled with mildness and died at the height of his glory, whereas, if he had lived a long time, it might have been shown that he owes his present fame more to good fortune than to merit.\nPliny the Elder, who died during the eruption of Mount Vesuvius, dedicated his \"Naturalis Historia\" to Titus.\nIn contrast to the ideal portrayal of Titus in Roman histories, Jewish memory has \"Titus the Wicked\" remembered as an evil oppressor and destroyer of the Temple. A legend in the Babylonian Talmud described Titus as having had sex with a prostitute on a Torah scroll inside the Temple during its destruction.\nIn later arts.\nThe war in Judaea and the life of Titus, particularly his relationship with Berenice, have inspired writers and artists through the centuries. The bas-relief in the Arch of Titus has been influential in the depiction of the destruction of Jerusalem, with the Menorah frequently being used to symbolise the looting of the Second Temple.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55252", "revid": "1241103", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55252", "title": "Apostle Paul", "text": ""}
{"id": "55254", "revid": "3188090", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55254", "title": "Simon Peter", "text": ""}
{"id": "55255", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55255", "title": "Andrew Brother of Simon Peter", "text": ""}
{"id": "55256", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55256", "title": "Standard model", "text": ""}
{"id": "55257", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55257", "title": "Lee Teng-Hui", "text": ""}
{"id": "55263", "revid": "46220142", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55263", "title": "Superhighway", "text": "Superhighway can refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "55264", "revid": "50609445", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55264", "title": "North Brabant", "text": "Province of the Netherlands\nNorth Brabant ( ; ), also unofficially called Brabant or Dutch Brabant, is a province in the south of the Netherlands. It borders the provinces of South Holland and Gelderland to the north, Limburg to the east, Zeeland to the west, and Belgium's provinces of Antwerp and Limburg to the south. The northern border follows the Meuse westward to its mouth in the Hollands Diep strait, part of the Rhine\u2013Meuse\u2013Scheldt delta. \nNorth Brabant had a population of about 2,626,000 as of January 2023. Major cities in North Brabant are Eindhoven (pop. 231,642), Tilburg (pop. 217,259), Breda (pop. 183,873), its provincial capital 's-Hertogenbosch (pop. 154,205), and Helmond (pop. 94,967). The province has the third-largest economy of all Dutch provinces, after North Holland and South Holland. The agricultural and horticultural sectors are traditionally strong, as is forestry.\nRooted in the Duchy of Brabant, the province still possesses a recognizable character today. This is evident in the Brabant dialects and traditions such as Carnival. Catholicism, which was a dominant social force for centuries, has had a significant influence on the development of North Brabant's distinct identity. Both the province and Limburg remained in the Netherlands following the Belgian Revolution when it was decided to adopt the old pre-1790s borders of the Dutch Republic.\nHistory.\nThe Duchy of Brabant was a state of the Holy Roman Empire established in 1183 or 1190. It developed from the Landgraviate of Brabant and formed the heart of the historic Low Countries, part of the Burgundian Netherlands from 1430 and of the Habsburg Netherlands from 1482, until it was split up after the Dutch revolt. After the War of Independence, Catholics in the Southern Netherlands were systematically and officially discriminated against by the Northern Protestant government until the second half of the 19th century, which had a major influence on the economic and cultural development of the southern part of the Netherlands.\nPresent-day North Brabant (\"Staats-Brabant\") was adjudicated to the Generality Lands of the Dutch Republic according to the 1648 Peace of Westphalia, while the reduced duchy remained in existence with the Southern Netherlands until it was conquered by French Revolutionary forces in 1794.\nUntil the 17th century, the area that now makes up the province of North Brabant was mostly part of the Duchy of Brabant, of which the southern part is now in Belgium. During the 14th and 15th centuries, the area experienced a golden age\u2014especially the now-Belgian cities of Brussels, Mechelen, Leuven and Antwerp, and the Dutch cities of Breda, Bergen op Zoom and 's-Hertogenbosch.\nAfter the Union of Utrecht was signed in 1579, Brabant became a battlefield between the Protestant Dutch Republic and Catholic Spain, which occupied the southern Netherlands. As a result of the Peace of Westphalia, the northern part of Brabant became part of the Netherlands as the territory of Staats-Brabant (Statal Brabant) under federal rule, in contrast to the founding provinces of the Dutch Republic, which were self-governing.\nAttempts to introduce Protestantism into the region were largely unsuccessful; North Brabant remained strongly Catholic. For over a century, North Brabant served mainly as a military buffer zone. In 1796, when the confederate Dutch Republic became the unitary Batavian Republic, Staats-Brabant became a province as \"Bataafs Brabant\". This status ended with the reorganisation by the invading French, and the area was united into the \"d\u00e9partement\" of Deux-N\u00e8thes (present province of Antwerp).\nIn 1815, Belgium and the Netherlands were united in the United Kingdom of the Netherlands, and the province of North Brabant was established and so named to distinguish it from Central Brabant and South Brabant in present-day Belgium, which seceded from the Kingdom in 1830. This boundary between the Netherlands and Belgium is special in that it does not form a contiguous line, but leaves a handful of tiny enclaves (and enclaves inside enclaves) on both sides of the border. In fact, the Dutch government generally used the pre-Napoleonic borders in 1815 to divide its provinces, in hommage to the principle of Restoration. A few of these irregularities were corrected (Luyksgestel was exchanged for Lommel, Huijbergen became totally Dutch), but some remain, notably Baarle-Hertog (Belgian) and Baarle-Nassau (Dutch).\nWhen the present province was instituted, its territory was expanded with a part of the province of Holland and the former territory of Ravenstein, which had previously belonged to the Duchy of Cleves, as well as several small, formerly autonomous entities.\nIn World War II the area was liberated by the allies during Operation Pheasant between October 20 to November 4, 1944.\nThe period from 1900 until the late 1960s is called \"Het Rijke Roomse Leven\" (translated as 'the rich Roman life', with 'Roman' meaning 'Roman Catholic'), an era of strong religious belief. \"Het Rijke Roomse Leven\" came about as result of the emancipatory drive of the province's disadvantaged Catholic population and was supported by a Roman Catholic pillar, which was directed by the clergy, and not only encompassed churches, but also Roman Catholic schools and hospitals, which were run by nuns and friars. In those days every village in North Brabant had a convent from which the nuns operated. Politically, the province was dominated by Catholic parties: the Roman Catholic State Party and its post-war successor, the Catholic People's Party, which often held around 75% of the vote.\nIn the 1960s secularisation and the actual emancipation of the Catholic population brought about the gradual dissolution of the Catholic pillar, as church attendance decreased in North Brabant as elsewhere in Western Europe. The influence of \"Het Rijke Roomse Leven\" (The Rich Roman [Catholic] Life) remains in the form of education where some schools are still Roman Catholic (today run by professional teachers and not by nuns) and in North Brabant's culture, politics, mentality and customs, such as carnival.\nThe interpretation of the Roman Catholic identity in North Brabant has shifted during the last 65 years from religious to cultural, but the province still has a distinct Catholic atmosphere when compared to the provinces north of the major rivers. A cultural divide is still found between the \"Catholic\" south and the \"Protestant\" north, but with a total of 1.5 million people and 20% of the industrial production in the Netherlands the southern \"Catholic\" area BrabantStad has become one of the major economically important, metropolitan regions of the Netherlands. As of 2010, Catholics were no longer a majority of the population in the province of North Brabant. Only 1\u20132% of the total population of the Catholic area attend mass, and these churchgoers consist mostly of people over 65 years old.\nGeography.\nWith a population density of 501/km2, North Brabant is above average urbanized. The urbanization is at the center of the province at largest, where the 'kite' (the Brabantse Stedenrij Breda, Tilburg, Eindhoven and 's-Hertogenbosch) is located, the rest of the province has a more rural character. The province has preserved some of its scenic nature well. National parks are found at the Loonse and Drunen Dunes, De Biesbosch and De De Groote Peel, on the marshes of the Meierij at Oisterwijk and Boxtel (within an area called Het Groene Woud), the border park Zoom-Kalmthoutse Heide, and in the forested area around Breda. Also, south of Eindhoven named De Kempen is an area with farmlands and forests. In Heeze, also south of Eindhoven, are the heath areas the \"Groote Heide\" (333 ha) and Strabrechtse Heath (1500 ha) located. The \"Strabrechtse Heide\" holds also the largest fen of the Netherlands. The \"Beuven\" (Beu fen) measures 85 hectares.\nLike most of the Netherlands, North Brabant is mostly flat but nearly every part of North Brabant is above sea level; therefore, there are not as many canals as in the lower parts of The Netherlands. Although most of the population lives in urban areas, the province is scattered with villages around which most of the land is cultivated.\nNational Parks in North Brabant are:\nDe Biesbosch.\nThe Biesbosch (from \"bies\", \"rushes\", and \"bosch\", \"woodland\") is an area southeast of Dordrecht formed when the dike on the Meuse burst and the St. Elizabeth's floods on 19 November 1421 engulfed great tracts of land in the southwestern Netherlands and altered the geography of the whole area, inundating over 40,000 hectares (100,000 acres) of land. More than four-fifths of the flooded land has been reclaimed since the 18th century. An area of 6,000 hectares (15,000 acres) was left as it was, and now forms the Biesbosch nature reserve and bird sanctuary.\nUntil the end of the 1960s the Biesbosch was directly connected with the sea and subject to changing tide levels. As a result, it developed a flora which tolerated brackish water and was the home of numerous waterfowl. Since the damming of the Haringvliet there is no variation in water level, and both flora and fauna have adapted to the new environment.\nThe Biesbosch is crisscrossed by a network of footpaths and bike paths and by rivers and streams which offer facilities for water sports (sailing, surfing). In spite of the large numbers of visitors the natural environment has remained largely unspoiled.\nThe Biesbosch nature reserve can be reached by car only from the east (preferably via Werkendam). The southwest part of the area, with its three large reservoirs of drinking water, is closed to road traffic. The Biesbosch can also be reached by boat from Drimmelen, Geertruidenberg or Lage Zwaluwe.\nDe Kempen.\nThe historical region of Kempen occupies the southern part of the province of Noord-Brabant and extends south of Eindhoven far into northern Belgium. To the east it reaches as far as the Meuse valley. The surface topography of De Kempen is very uniform. Most of it lies between 5\u00a0m (15\u00a0ft) and 35\u00a0m (115\u00a0ft) above sea level. The basement rocks are Cretaceous and Tertiary sediments, which are overlaid by Ice Age gravels and sands carried here by rivers of melt-water from the retreating glaciers. It is a typical area of sandy heathland.\nThe infertile soil is suitable only for undemanding crops such as rye, oats, potatoes and fodder plants; this limits the profitability of agriculture. Until a few decades ago Kempen was a region of heathland and sand drifts with a sparse growth of pines, a few scattered villages subsisting on the poor soil and some small towns; and this is still the pattern in much of the region.\nIn recent years, however, the rapid advance of industry has brought about profound changes in this agricultural region. The origins of this industrial development go back 70\u2013100 years. The main concentrations of industry are along the southern frontier of the Netherlands, e.g., at Eindhoven, Helmond, Tilburg, Breda, 's-Hertogenbosch.\nDe Peel.\nIn the east of Noord-Brabant, near the Limburgish border, is the Peel area, an expanse of moorland extending from Eindhoven to Venlo, on the border with Limburg. Southeast of Asten is a nature reserve (1,300 hectares (3,250 acres); visitor center at Ospeldijk) which has escaped destruction by peat cutting. Mostly boggy, it will appeal to nature lovers with its interesting flora and fauna. Apart from this small area almost the whole of the Peel has been brought into cultivation.\nRivers and deltas.\nThe province is bordered by the river Meuse in the north. Its delta flows through De Biesbosch area, a national park.\nMunicipalities.\nNorth Brabant has been divided into 56 municipalities since 2022. Traditionally, almost every town was a separate municipality, but their number was reduced greatly in the 1990s by incorporating smaller towns into neighbouring cities or by other mergers. The municipalities in North Brabant are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMunicipal reclassifications.\nThe following municipal reclassifications took place in the 21st century:\nOn 1 January 2003 the municipality of Ravenstein merged into the existing municipality of Oss.\nOn 1 January 2004 the municipalities of Geldrop and Mierlo merged into a new municipality called Geldrop-Mierlo.\nOn 1 January 2011 the municipality of Lith merged into the existing municipality of Oss.\nOn 1 January 2015 the municipality of Maasdonk merged into the existing municipalities of 's-Hertogenbosch and Oss.\nOn 1 January 2017 the municipalities of Veghel, Schijndel, and Sint-Oedenrode merged into a new municipality called Meierijstad, creating the largest municipality of the province of North Brabant in terms of land area.\nOn 1 January 2019 the municipalities of Aalburg, Werkendam, and Woudrichem merged into a new municipality called Altena, an even larger municipality in terms of land area. \nOn 1 January 2021 the municipality of Haaren merged into the existing municipalities of Boxtel, Oisterwijk, Tilburg, and Vught.\nOn 1 January 2022 the municipalities of Landerd and Uden merged into the new municipality of Maashorst, and the municipalities of Boxmeer, Cuijk, Grave, Mill en Sint Hubert, and Sint Anthonis merged into the new municipality of Land van Cuijk.\nEconomy.\nThe Gross domestic product (GDP) of the province was 116.1 billion \u20ac in 2018, accounting for 15.0% of the Netherlands economic output. GDP per capita adjusted for purchasing power was \u20ac39,900 or 132% of the EU27 average in the same year.\nEmployment is found in the agricultural, industrial and service sectors, with agricultural and food processing companies such as Agrifirm, Bavaria, FrieslandCampina, Mars Incorporated, Nutreco, Royal Canin all having large production sites or their headquarters located in the province. The main agricultural products are sweetcorn, wheat and sugar beet, while cows and pigs are held as livestock.\nAn important economical activity is electronics industry, which developed as a spin-off from Philips. Several companies originated from Philips, such as Signify (formerly Philips Lighting), NXP (producer of semiconductors), and the world's largest supplier of photolithography systems, ASML.\nThere are eight 'innovation campusses' in North Brabant, including the High Tech Campus Eindhoven and BrainPort, which comprises more than 5000 tech and IT companies. In 2017, Brabantian companies applied for 3655 patents, earning a spot in the regional top five in Europe. The chip company Axelera AI is also headquartered in Eindhoven.\nOther important industries are automobile production (e.g. General Motors in Breda, Tesla in Tilburg) and DAF in Eindhoven, textile and shoes.\nIn the 20th century, tourism has become an important sector for North Brabant. A tourist attraction is theme park Efteling in Kaatsheuvel, the largest of the Benelux.\nSafaripark Beekse Bergen is an Safaripark located between Tilburg and Hilvarenbeek. In terms of area, it is the largest Safaripark in the Benelux. More than 150 animal species are kept, ranging from small mammals to large birds. It is best known for its diversity. You can explore the park on foot, by boat, bus or with your own car.\nBrabantStad is a partnership between the municipalities of Breda, Eindhoven, Helmond, 's-Hertogenbosch and Tilburg and the province of North Brabant. According to national rules, BrabantStad is defined as the area of Eindhoven, 's-Hertogenbosch and Tilburg.\nLanguage.\nBrabantian is not a minority language in the Netherlands. It can be divided in two main dialects: East Brabantian and West Brabantian. Along with the Hollandic dialects it is one of the two most spoken versions of Dutch. Brabantian has, as compared to the other main Dutch dialects, had a big influence on the development of Standard Dutch. This is because Brabant was the dominant region in the Netherlands when the standardization of Dutch started in the 16th century. The first major formation of standard Dutch also took place in Antwerp, where a Brabantian dialect is spoken. The default language having been developed around this time, it therefore had mainly Brabantian influences. The early modern Dutch written language was initially influenced primarily by Brabantian, with strong influence from Hollandic emerging after the 16th century. Since the Brabantian dialect has developed faster than 16th- and 17th-century Dutch, it has become more diverse than modern Standard Dutch but is still quite similar and very understandable.\nAbout one third of the Dutch-speaking population lives in the Brabantian dialect zone. Both in Brabantian cities such as Breda and Eindhoven and in rural areas many people still speak the original dialect or colloquial Dutch with a typical \"southern\" tongue. Tilburg and 's-Hertogenbosch have a large number of people speaking the Brabantian dialect.\nCulture.\nThere are many museums, especially in the larger cities which include the North Brabant Museum in 's-Hertogenbosch, the Van Abbemuseum in Eindhoven, the Museum of the Image in Breda, Noordbrabants Natuurmuseum in Tilburg. Also a few towns have a large theater like the Chass\u00e9 Theater in Breda and the Eindhoven Park Theatre. Large, reputable music venues like the 013 in Tilburg, which boasts the largest space of music venues in the Netherlands, and the Effenaar in Eindhoven offer concerts by major artists. Smaller venues like Mezz Breda, W2 Concert in 's-Hertogenbosch and the smaller halls of the 013 and the Effenaar offer concerts by emerging artists and bigger names in an intimate setting.\nEvents.\nSome yearly cultural events in North Brabant are:\nMuseums.\nList of museums in North Brabant\nMuseums of the main cities:\nCuisine.\nThe Southern Dutch cuisine constitutes the cuisine of the Dutch provinces of North Brabant and Limburg and the Flemish Region in Belgium. It is renowned for its many rich pastries, soups, stews, and vegetable dishes and is often called \"Burgundian\", which is a Dutch idiom invoking the rich Burgundian court which ruled the Low Countries in the Middle Ages and was renowned for its splendor and great feasts.\nIt is the only Dutch culinary region which developed an \"haute cuisine\", as it is influenced by both German cuisine and French cuisine, and it forms the base of most traditional Dutch restaurants including typical main courses such as \"Biefstuk\", \"Varkenshaas\", or \"Ossenhaas\", which are premium cuts of meat, generally pork or beef, accompanied by various sauces and potatoes which have been double fried in the traditional Dutch (or Belgian) manner.\nStews, such as \"hachee\", a stew of onions, beef and a thick gravy, contain a lot of flavour and require hours to prepare. Vegetable soups are made from richly flavored stock or bouillon and typically contain small meatballs alongside a variety of different vegetables. Asparagus and \"witlo(o)f\" are highly prized and traditionally eaten with cheese and/or ham.\nPastries are abundant, often with rich fillings of cream, custard or fruits. Cakes, such as the \"Moorkop\" and \"Bossche Bol\" from Brabant, are typical pastries. There are also savory pastries, especially the popular \"worstenbroodje\" (a roll with a sausage of ground beef).\nThe traditional alcoholic beverage of the region is beer. There are many local brands, ranging from \"Trappist\" to \"Kriek\". Beer, like wine in French cuisine, is also used in cooking, often in stews.\nSports.\nAssociation football.\nNorth Brabant is home to 8 professional football clubs, more than any other province in the Netherlands. Four clubs (PSV, NAC, Willem II and RKC Waalwijk) play in the Eredivisie, the highest professional football league in the Netherlands. Four clubs (Helmond Sport, FC Den Bosch, FC Eindhoven and TOP Oss) play in the Eerste Divisie, the second-highest division of professional football in the Netherlands. PSV Eindhoven is the biggest club of North Brabant, and most successful with 25 Eredivisie titles, 1 European Cup and 1 UEFA Cup, among many other domestic cups, and is one of the traditional \"big three\" clubs in the Netherlands.\nHockey.\nNorth Brabant is home to 3 hockey clubs that play in the Hoofdklasse. HC Den Bosch ('s-Hertogenbosch), Oranje Zwart (Eindhoven) and MOP (Vught). Oranje Zwart is the most successful of these clubs with many prizes, in the regular competition as well as in Europe. The most recent prizes are National Champions in 2014\u20132015, 2015\u20132016 and European Champions in 2014\u20132015. In 2016, Oranje Zwart merged with the smaller EMHC into . Since then, mens team has always played in the highest league.\nPolitics.\nThe States of North Brabant (\"Staten van Noord-Brabant\") have 55 seats and are headed by the King's Commissioner (\"Commissaris van de Koning\"), currently Ina Adema. Whereas the provincial council (the States-Provincial - \"Provinciale Staten\") is elected by the inhabitants, the Commissioner is appointed by the King and the cabinet of the Netherlands. With 10 seats, People's Party for Freedom and Democracy is the largest party in the council, closely followed by Christian Democratic Appeal and Socialist Party, both with 9 seats.\nThe daily affairs of the province are taken care of by the Provincial-Executive (\"Gedeputeerde Staten\"), which are also headed by the Commissioner; its members (commissioners - \"gedeputeerden\") can be compared with ministers.\nStates-Provincial.\nResults in North Brabant in the elections for the States-Provincial:\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTraditionally the province of North Brabant has been strongly Roman Catholic, in contrast to most of the rest of the Netherlands. Following the country's independence, Catholics faced discrimination by the Protestant government until the mid-19th century. During the 1960s the relatively strong demarcation between the Catholic south on one side and the Calvinist west and north on the other side of the Netherlands started to diminish. In the second half of the 20th century a rapid secularization took place in North Brabant.\nIn 2015 slightly fewer than half (48%) of the Brabantian people reported adhering to Catholicism, while 5.6% adhered to the Protestant Church in the Netherlands, 4.4% to Islam, 3.3% to other churches or faiths. More than a third (38.8%) of the population identified as non-religious.\nAlthough much of the population identifies as Catholic, regular attendance at Mass is low. For example, in the Diocese of 's-Hertogenbosch, the eastern part of North Brabant and part of the province of Gelderland, 1,167,000 people reported in 2006 an association with Roman Catholicism (56.8 percent of the population). However, only 45,645 residents of this area attended the mass on average, which was only 2 percent of the total population of the area. In western North Brabant (Diocese of Breda) the number of people associating themselves with Catholicism also strongly decreased; only 52 percent of the West Brabantians identify as Roman Catholic. Church attendance was even lower in the west, with only 1 percent of the West Brabantian population attending Mass. North Brabant is mostly Catholic by tradition. Residents may adhere to certain traditions as a base for their cultural identity, but the vast majority of the Catholic population is now largely irreligious in practice. Research among Catholics in the Netherlands in 2007 showed that only 27% of the Dutch Catholics could be regarded as theist, while 55% were ietsist or nontheist and 17% were agnostic.\nFamous Brabantians.\nPolitics, science, religion\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEntertainment, arts\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSports\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55265", "revid": "50984755", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55265", "title": "Road train", "text": "Type of trucking vehicle\nA road train, also known as a land train or long combination vehicle (LCV), is a semi-trailer truck used to move road freight more efficiently than single-trailer semi-trailers. It consists of one semi-trailer or more connected together with or without a prime mover. It typically has to be at least three trailers and one prime mover. Road trains are often used in areas where other forms of heavy transport (freight train, cargo aircraft, container ship) are not feasible or practical.\nHistory.\nEarly road trains consisted of traction engines pulling multiple wagons. The first identified road trains operated into South Australia's Flinders Ranges from the Port Augusta area in the mid-19th century. They displaced bullock teams for the carriage of minerals to port and were, in turn, superseded by railways.\nDuring the Crimean War, a traction engine was used to pull multiple open trucks. By 1898 steam traction engine trains with up to four wagons were employed in military manoeuvres in England.\nIn 1900, John Fowler &amp; Co. provided armoured road trains for use by the British Armed Forces in the Second Boer War. Lord Kitchener stated that he had around 45 steam road trains at his disposal.\nA road train devised by Captain Charles Renard of the French Engineering Corps was displayed at the 1903 Paris Salon. After his death, Daimler, which had acquired the rights, attempted to market it in the United Kingdom. Four of these vehicles were successfully delivered to Queensland, Australia, before the company ceased production upon the start of World War I.\nIn the 1930s/40s, the government of Australia operated an AEC Roadtrain to transport freight and supplies into the Northern Territory, replacing the Afghan camel trains that had been trekking through the deserts since the late 19th century. This truck pulled two or three Dyson four-axle self-tracking trailers. At , the AEC was grossly underpowered by today's standards, and drivers and offsiders (a partner or assistant) routinely froze in winter and sweltered in summer due to the truck's open cab design and the position of the engine radiator, with its cooling fan, behind the seats.\nAustralian Kurt Johannsen, a bush mechanic, is recognised as the inventor of the modern road train. After transporting stud bulls to an outback property, Johannsen was challenged to build a truck to carry 100 head of cattle instead of the original load of 20. Provided with financing of about 2000 pounds and inspired by the tracking abilities of the Government roadtrain, Johannsen began construction. Two years later his first road train was running.\nJohannsen's first road train consisted of a United States Army World War II surplus Diamond-T tank carrier, nicknamed \"Bertha\", and two home-built self-tracking trailers. Both wheel sets on each trailer could steer, and therefore could negotiate the tight and narrow tracks and creek crossings that existed throughout Central Australia in the earlier part of the 20th century. Freighter Trailers in Australia viewed this improved invention and went on to build self-tracking trailers for Kurt and other customers, and went on to become innovators in transport machinery for Australia.\nThis first example of the modern road train, along with the AEC Government Roadtrain, forms part of the huge collection at the National Road Transport Hall of Fame in Alice Springs, Northern Territory.\nIn 2023, Janus launched the first battery electric (BEV) triple road train with 620 kWh battery, also the world's heaviest street-legal BEV truck at 170 tonnes (gross weight).\nUsage.\nAustralia.\nThe term \"road train\" is used in Australia and typically means a prime mover hauling two or more trailers, other than a B-double. In contrast with a more common semi-trailer towing one trailer or semi-trailer, the diesel prime mover of a road train hauls two or more trailers or semi-trailers. Australia has the longest and heaviest road-legal road trains in the world, weighing up to .\nDouble (two-trailer) road train combinations are allowed on some roads in most states of Australia, including specified approaches to the ports and industrial areas of Adelaide, South Australia and Perth, Western Australia. An A-double road train should not be confused with a B-double, which is allowed access to most of the country and in all major cities.\nIn South Australia, B-triples up to and two-trailer road trains to are permitted on only a small number of approved routes in the north and west of the state, including access to Adelaide's north-western suburban industrial and export areas such as Port Adelaide, Gillman and Outer Harbour via Salisbury Highway, Port Wakefield Road and Augusta Highway before 2017. A project named \"Improving Road Transport for the Agriculture Industry\" added of key routes on which it is permitted to operate vehicles over in 2015\u20132018.\nTriple (three-trailer) road trains operate in western New South Wales, western Queensland, South Australia, Western Australia, and the Northern Territory, with the last three states also allowing AB-quads (a B double with two additional trailers coupled behind). Darwin is the only capital city in the world where triples and quads are allowed to within of the central business district (CBD).\nStrict regulations regarding licensing, registration, weights, and experience apply to all operators of road trains throughout Australia.\nRoad trains are used for transporting all manner of materials; common examples are livestock, fuel, mineral ores, and general freight. Their cost-effective transport has played a significant part in the economic development of remote areas; some communities are totally reliant on regular service.\nWhen road trains get close to populated areas, the multiple dog-trailers are unhooked, the dollies removed and then connected individually to multiple trucks at \"assembly\" yards.\nWhen the flat-top trailers of a road train need to be transported empty, it is common practice to stack them. This is commonly referred to as \"doubled-up\" or \"doubling-up\". If many trailers must be moved at one time, they are sometimes triple-stacked, or \"tripled-up\".\nHigher Mass Limits (HML) Schemes are now extant in all jurisdictions in Australia, allowing trucks to carry additional weight beyond general mass limits. Some roads in some states regularly allowing up to 4 trailers at long and . On private property such as mines, highway restrictions on trailer length, weight, and count may not apply. Some of the heaviest road trains carrying ore are multiple unit with a diesel engine in each trailer, controlled by the tractor.\nDiesel sales in Australia (per year) are around 32 billion litres, of which some is used by road trains. In order to reduce emissions and running cost, trials are made with road trains powered by batteries.\nUnited States.\nIn most of the United States, trucks on public roads are limited to two trailers (two and a dolly to connect; the limit is end to end). Some states allow three trailers, although triples are usually restricted to less populous states such as Idaho, Oregon, and Montana, plus the Ohio Turnpike and the Indiana East\u2013West Toll Road. Triples are used for long-distance less-than-truckload freight hauling (in which case the trailers are shorter than a typical single-unit trailer) or resource hauling in the interior west (such as ore or aggregate). Triples are sometimes marked with \"LONG LOAD\" banners both front and rear. \"Turnpike doubles\"\u2014tractors towing two full-length trailers\u2014are allowed on the New York Thruway and Massachusetts Turnpike (Interstate 90), Florida's Turnpike, Kansas Turnpike (Kansas City \u2013 Wichita route) as well as the Ohio and Indiana toll roads. Colorado allows what are known as \"Rocky Mountain Doubles\" which is one full length trailer and an additional trailer. The term \"road train\" is not commonly used in the United States; \"turnpike train\" has been used, generally in a pejorative sense.\nIn the western United States LCVs are allowed on many Interstate highways. The only LCVs allowed nationwide are STAA doubles.\nOn private property such as farms, highway restrictions on trailer length and count do not apply. Bales of straw, for example, are sometimes moved using wagon trains of up to 20 trailers extending an eighth of a mile and carrying a total of 3,600 bales.\nEurope.\nIn Finland, Sweden, Germany, the Netherlands, Denmark, Belgium, and some roads in Norway, trucks with trailers are allowed to be long. In Finland, a length of has been allowed since January 2019. In Sweden, this length has been allowed on several major roads, including all of E4, since August 2023. 34.5 meters allows two 40 foot containers.\nElsewhere in the European Union, the limit is (Norway allows ). The trucks are of a cab-over-engine design, with a flat front and a high floor about above ground. Scandinavia countries is less densely populated than most of the rest of the EU, and travel distances there, especially in Finland and Sweden, are long. Until the late 1960s, vehicle length was unlimited, giving rise to long vehicles to cost effectively handle goods. As traffic increased, truck lengths became more of a concern and they were limited, albeit at a more generous level than in the rest of Europe.\nIn the United Kingdom in 2009, a two-year desk study of Longer Heavier Vehicles (LHVs), including up to 11-axle, long, combinations, ruled out all road-train-type vehicles for the foreseeable future.\nIn 2010, Sweden performed tests on log-hauling trucks, weighing up to and measuring and haulers for two 40\u00a0ft containers, measuring in total. In 2015, a pilot began in Finland to test a 104-tonne timber lorry which was and had 13 axles. Testing of the special lorry was limited to a predefined route in northern Finland\nSince 2015, Spain has permitted B-doubles with a length of up to and weighing up to 60 tonnes to travel on certain routes. In July 2024, after 5 years of testing, HCTs have been permitted on Spanish territory, with lengths of up to 32 meters (105\u00a0ft) and 70 gross tonnes.\nSince 2016, Eoin Gavin Transport, Shannon and Dennison Trailers, Kildare have been trialling B-doubles on the Irish motorways. In Feb 2024, The Pallet Network announced four B-doubles to operate between Dublin, Cork and Galway.\nIn 2020, a small number of road trains were operating between Belgium and the Netherlands.\nMexico.\nIn Mexico road trains exist in a limited capacity due to the sizes of roads in its larger cities, and they are only allowed to pull 2 trailers joined with a pup or dolly created for this purpose. Recently the regulations tend to be more severe and strict to avoid overloading and accidents, to adhere to the federal rules of transportation. Truck drivers must obtain a certificate to certify that the driver is capable to manipulate and drive that type of vehicle.\nAll the tractor vehicles that make road train type transport in the country (along with the normal security requirements) need to have visual warnings like;\nSome major cargo enterprises in the country use this form to cut costs of carrying all type of goods in some regions where other forms of transportation are too expensive compared to it due to the difficult geography of the country.\nThe Mexican road train equivalent form in Australian Standard is the A-Double form, the difference is that the Mexican road trains can be hauled with a long distance tractor truck.\nZimbabwe.\nIn Zimbabwe, they are used on only one highway, Ngezi\u2013Makwiro road. They make use of 42\u00a0m long road trains pulling three trailers.\nIndia.\nIn India beacon lights and road-train signs are mandatory, one on the windshield of the tractor and another on the rear of the trailer. These signals should also identicate what type of combination is being used. The configuration should be equipped with CAN network system, Electronic Braking System (EBS) to increase safety. Following this, companies are also using 360\u00b0 camera systems and steerable axles for ease of driving.\n4x2, 6x2 and 6x4 tractors can be used for the combination driven by a heavy vehicle drivers licence personal. With a speed limit of 50kmph at selected routes and corridors the combination has to have a Turning Clearance Circle Diameter (TCCD) of 28m using fifth wheel, drawbar and converter dolly couplings.\nOn 15 February 2025 Volvo Trucks India and Delhivery a Gurgaon based logistics company unveiled India's first road train consisting of a Volvo FM 420 4x2 tractor and a B-Double combination of 24\u00a0ft lead trailer and 44\u00a0ft semi-trailer coupled via fifth wheel making total length of vehicle close to 80\u00a0ft. With approvals from Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MORTH) and Automotive Research Association of India (ARAI). Currently, road trains are only permitted to operate on Mumbai-Nagpur Expressway.\nTrailer arrangements.\nA-double.\nAn A-double consists of a prime mover towing a normal lead trailer with a towing hitch such as a Ringfeder coupling affixed to it at the rear. A fifth wheel dolly is then affixed to the hitch allowing another standard trailer to be attached. Eleven-axle coal tipping sets carrying to Port Kembla, Australia are described as A-doubles. The set depicted has a tare weight of and is capable of carrying of coal. Note the shield at the front of the second trailer to direct tipped coal from the first trailer downwards.\nPros include the ability to use standard semi-trailers and the potential for very large loads. Cons mainly include very tricky reversing due to the multiple articulation points across two different types of coupling.\nB-double.\nA B-double consists of a prime mover towing a specialised lead trailer that has a fifth-wheel mounted on the rear towing an ordinary semi-trailer, resulting in two articulation points. It may also be known as a B-train, interlink in South Africa, B-double in Australia, tandem tractor-trailer, tandem rig, or double in North America. They may typically be up to long. The fifth wheel coupling is located at the rear of the lead (first) trailer and is mounted on a \"tail\" section commonly located immediately above the lead trailer axles. In North America this area of the lead trailer is often referred to as the \"bridge\". The twin-trailer assembly is hooked up to a tractor unit via the tractor unit's fifth wheel in the customary manner.\nAn advantage of the B-train configuration is its inherent stability when compared to most other twin trailer combinations, as the turntable mounted on the forward trailer results in the B-train not requiring a converter dolly as with all other road train configurations. Also, reversing is simpler because all articulation points are on fifth wheel couplings. These properties have ensured its continued development and global acceptance.\nB-train trailers are used to transport many types of load and examples include tanks for liquid and dry-bulk, flat-beds and curtain-siders for deck-loads, bulkers for aggregates and wood residuals, refrigerated trailers for chilled and frozen goods, vans for dry goods, logging trailers for forestry work and cattle liners for livestock.\nIn Australia, standard semi-trailers are permitted on almost every road. B-doubles are more heavily regulated, but routes are made available by state governments for almost anywhere that significant road freight movement is required.\nAround container ports in Australia exists what is known as a super B-double; a B-double with an extra axle (total of 4) on the lead trailer and either three or four axle set on the rear trailer. This allows the super B-Double to carry combinations of two 40 foot containers, four 20 foot containers, or a combination of one 40 foot container and two twenty foot containers. However, because of their length and low accessibility into narrow streets, these vehicles are restricted in where they can go and are generally used for terminal-to-terminal work, i.e. wharf to container holding park or wharf-to-wharf. The rear axle on each trailer can also pivot slightly while turning to prevent scrubbing out the edges of the tyres due to the heavy loads placed on them.\nB-triple.\nEssentially a B-double arrangement with a second lead trailer attached to the first, and an ordinary trailer attached to the second bridge trailer. The B-train principle has been exploited in Australia, where configurations such as B triples, double-B doubles and 2AB quads are permitted on some routes. These are run in most states of Australia where double road trains are allowed. Australia's National Transport Commission proposed a national framework for B-triple operations that includes basic vehicle specifications and operating conditions that the commission anticipates will replace the current state-by-state approach, which largely discourages the use of B-triples for interstate operation. In South Australia, B-triples up to and two-trailer road trains to are generally permitted only on specified routes, including access to industrial and export areas near Port Adelaide from the north.\nIn New South Wales, B-Triples are classified between modular B Triples and non-modular B Triples. Modular B Triples are limited to a maximum length of 35.0 metres (114 ft 10 in) but more importantly, the combination must be able to form a compliant B-Double with a maximum length of 26.0 metres by removing any one of its three semitrailers. On the other hand, non-modular B Triples can be up to 36.5 metres (119 ft 9 in) in length and have no restrictions on the relative size of each of its three trailers. \nB quad.\nBeginning in 2018, the B quad has been allowed in Victoria, New South Wales, and Queensland.\nAB triple.\nAn AB triple consists of a standard trailer with a B-Double behind it using a converter dolly, with a trailer order of Standard, Dolly, B-Train, Standard. The final trailer may be either a B-Train with no trailer attached to it or a standard trailer. Alternatively, a BA triple sees this configuration reversed, consisting of a B-double with a converter dolly and standard trailer behind it.\nA-triple.\nIn South Australia, larger road trains up to (three full trailers) are permitted only on certain routes in the Far North.\nBAB quad.\nA BAB quad consists of two B-double units linked with a converter dolly, with trailer order of Prime Mover, B-Train, Dolly, B-Train.\nABB quad.\nABB quad consists of one standard trailer and B-triple units linked with a converter dolly.\nAAB quad.\nAAB quad consists of A-double and B-double units linked with a converter dolly. Alternatively, a BAA quad sees this configuration reversed, first the B-double, then the A-double.\nA quad.\nIn some parts of Australia, 'super quad' road trains up to are permitted, consisting of four standard trailers connected via three converter dollies, with a 196 tonne gross mass and 140 tonne payload.\nC-train.\nA C-train is a semi-trailer attached to a turn table on a C-dolly. Unlike in an A-Train, the C-dolly is connected to the tractor or another trailer in front of it with two drawbars, thus eliminating the drawbar connection as an articulation point. One of the axles on a C-dolly is self-steerable to prevent tire scrubbing. C-dollies are not permitted in Australia, due to the lack of articulation.\nDog-trailer (dog trailer).\nA dog-trailer (also called a pup) is a short trailer with a permanent dolly, with a single A-frame drawbar that fits into the Ringfeder or pintle hook on the rear of the truck or trailer in front, giving the whole unit two or more articulation points and very little roll stiffness. These are commonly used in Australia, particularly for end tipper applications like shown above. They are normally limited to a single dog trailer behind a short bodied (independently load carrying) truck with a standard length limit of 19 metres (20 under design permits). A quad dog trailer in combination with a bodied truck is able to carry more weight than a truck and single semi-trailer of the same length limit and access restrictions, as well as carrying two different materials as separate loads, such as with tipper bodies and fluid tankers.\nIn certain states in Australia, a road train configuration consisting of a rigid truck towing two dog trailers is recognized and permitted on certain roads. This combination is commonly known as a Rigid Combination. Its length can be up to 36.5 metres long (119 ft 9 in). \nInterstate road transport registration in Australia.\nIn 1991, at a special Premiers' Conference, Australian heads of government signed an inter-governmental agreement to establish a national heavy vehicle registration, regulation and charging scheme: the Federal Interstate Registration Scheme (FIRS). Its requirements are as follows:\nDue to the \"eastern\" and \"western\" mass limits in Australia, two different categories of registration were enacted. The second digit of the registration plate showed what mass limit was allowed for that vehicle. If a vehicle had a 'V' as the second letter, its mass limits were in line with the eastern states mass limits, which were:\nIf a vehicle had an \"X\" as the second letter, its mass limits were in line with the western states mass limits, which were:\nThe second digit of the registration being a \"T\" designates a trailer.\nOne of the main criteria of the registration is that intrastate operation is not permitted. The load has to come from one state or territory and be delivered to another. Many grain carriers were reported and prosecuted for cartage from the paddock to the silos. However, if the load went to a port silo, they were given the benefit of the doubt, as that grain was more than likely to be going overseas.\nSignage.\nAustralian road trains have horizontal signs front and back with high black uppercase letters on a reflective yellow background reading \"ROAD TRAIN\". The sign(s) must have a black border and be at least long and high and be placed between and above the ground on the fore or rearmost surface of the unit.\nIn the case of B-triples in Western Australia, they are signed front and rear with \"ROAD TRAIN\" until they cross the WA/SA border where they are then signed with \"LONG VEHICLE\" in the front and rear.\nConverter dollies must have a sign affixed horizontally to the rearmost point, complying to the same conditions, reading \"LONG VEHICLE\". This is required for when a dolly is towed behind a trailer.\nOperating weights.\nOperational weights are based on axle group masses, as follows:\nTherefore, \nSpeed limits.\nThe Australian national heavy vehicle speed limit is , except in New South Wales and Queensland where the speed limit for any road train is . B triple road trains have a speed limit of 100\u00a0km/h (62\u00a0mph) in Queensland.\nIn Canada, there is no difference between the cars' and road trains' speed limits, which range from on two-lane roads and on three-lane roads.\nIn Europe, the speed limit for heavy goods trucks is usually . Heavy trucks are required to have speed limiters, making it impossible to drive them faster than . These limits are normally the same for road trains. Trucks are discouraged from overtaking slightly slower vehicles on motorways because doing so obstructs the left lane, although such overtaking is still common, e.g. when heavy road trains lose speed uphill.\nWorld's longest road trains.\nBelow is a list of the longest road trains in the world. Most of these had no practical use, as they were driven across relatively short distances for the express purpose of record-breaking.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55266", "revid": "1318355225", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55266", "title": "Asia (band)", "text": "English rock band\nAsia are an English rock supergroup formed in London in 1981. The most commercially successful lineup was its original, which consisted of four members of different progressive rock bands who had enjoyed great success in the 1970s: lead vocalist and bassist John Wetton (King Crimson, Uriah Heep and U.K.), guitarist Steve Howe (Yes), keyboardist Geoff Downes (Yes and the Buggles) and drummer Carl Palmer (Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer, itself a supergroup). Their self-titled debut album released in 1982, remains their best-selling album and went to number one in several countries. \"Billboard\" listed it as the top album in the U.S. in 1982. The lead single from the album, \"Heat of the Moment\", remains their top charting and best-known song, reaching the top 40 in over a dozen markets. It peaked at No. 4 in the U.S. on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 and hit No. 1 on the \"Billboard\" Mainstream Rock chart.\nThe band underwent multiple lineup changes before the original four members reunited in 2006. As a result, a band called Asia featuring John Payne exists as a continuation of John Payne's career as Asia's frontman from 1991 until Wetton's return in 2006. In 2013, the original lineup was broken once again when Howe retired from the band and was replaced by guitarist Sam Coulson. After a few years of inactivity, Billy Sherwood (of Yes, World Trade and ) replaced an ailing Wetton (who died shortly thereafter) in Asia for a summer 2017 tour with Journey. Following the end of the tour, the band went on hiatus again, re-emerging in 2019 with Ron \"Bumblefoot\" Thal replacing both Sherwood on vocals and Coulson on guitar. In 2022, Marc Bonilla joined the group as guitarist and vocalist in place of Thal, but this brief lineup of the band never performed or recorded together. In 2024, Downes announced a new touring line-up of himself, Virgil Donati, John Mitchell and Harry Whitley.\nHistory.\nFormation.\nAsia began in early 1981 after the apparent ending of Yes and Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer, two of the founding bands of British progressive rock. After the breakup of King Crimson in 1974, various plans for a supergroup involving bassist John Wetton had not been successful, including the abortive British Bulldog project with Bill Bruford and Rick Wakeman in 1976. In 1977 Bruford and Wetton were reunited in U.K., augmented by guitarist Allan Holdsworth and keyboardist/violinist Eddie Jobson. Their self-titled debut was released in 1978. But by January 1980, U.K. had folded after one lineup change and three recordings. A new project was then suggested involving Wetton, Wakeman, drummer Carl Palmer and (then little known) guitarist/singer Trevor Rabin, but Wakeman left this project shortly before they were due to sign to Geffen and before they had played together.\nIn early January 1981, Wetton and former Yes guitarist Steve Howe were brought together by A&amp;R man John Kalodner and Geffen Records to start writing material for a new album. They were eventually joined by Palmer and finally by Howe's fellow member of Yes, keyboardist Geoff Downes. Two other players auditioned and considered during the band's formation were former The Move and ELO founder Roy Wood and the aforementioned guitarist/singer Trevor Rabin, who would end up replacing Steve Howe in a reformed Yes in 1983. Rabin, in a filmed 1984 interview included in the DVD \"9012Live\", said that his involvement with Asia never went anywhere because \"there was no chemistry\" among the participants.\nThe band's first recordings, under the auspices of Geffen record label head David Geffen and Kalodner, were extremely popular with record buyers, while considered disappointing by music critics and fans of progressive rock, who found the music closer to radio-friendly album-oriented rock (AOR). However, Asia clicked with fans of popular arena acts such as Journey and Styx; Kalodner had once introduced Wetton to Journey's short-lived frontman Robert Fleischman, with a view to Fleischman becoming Asia's lead singer. As they worked on material together, Fleischman was impressed by Wetton's singing and felt the voice best suited to the new material was Wetton's own. He left Asia amicably.\n\"Rolling Stone\" gave \"Asia\" an indifferent review, while acknowledging the band's musicianship was a cut above the usual AOR expectations.\n1981\u20131985: \"Heat of the Moment\" and early success.\nAsia's debut album \"Asia\", released in March 1982, gained considerable commercial success, spending nine weeks at number one on the United States album chart and selling over four million copies in the States alone. The album sold over 10 million worldwide and has never been out of print. The singles \"Heat of the Moment\" and \"Only Time Will Tell\" became Top 40 hits, both boosted by popular MTV music videos. Both tracks went on to become stadium favourites at United States sporting events. \"Sole Survivor\" also received heavy air play on rock stations across the United States, as did \"Wildest Dreams\" (another MTV video) and \"Here Comes The Feeling\". The band's best performing single, and perhaps their most recognised and popular hit song, \"Heat of the Moment\", spent six weeks at No. 1 on \"Billboard\"'s Album Rock Tracks chart and climbed to No. 4 on the Hot 100.\nIn the United States the band sold out every date on their debut tour, which began at Clarkson University in Potsdam, New York on 22 April 1982 and continued in theatres but quickly expanded into massive arenas because of high ticket demand. Asia would go on to receive a Grammy Award nomination as Best New Artist of 1982. MTV also played Asia videos on heavy rotation\u2014as many as five times a day. Both \"Billboard\" and \"Cash Box\" named Asia's debut the No. 1 album of the year. Asia's logo and cover art were created by illustrator Roger Dean.\nAsia's second album \"Alpha\" (released in August 1983) and future Asia albums did not achieve the chart success of their debut release; however, \"Alpha\"'s \"Don't Cry\" was a No. 1 Album Rock Track and Top 10 Pop hit in the summer of 1983, and the video received considerable attention on MTV, while \"The Smile Has Left Your Eyes\" was another Top 40 hit for the band. The video for \"Smile\" also scored heavy MTV play. However, \"Rolling Stone\" criticized \"Alpha\" as an \"over-produced commercial album\", while others stated that Howe and Palmer were effectively reduced to session musicians. \"Alpha\" received indifferent reviews from various critics, while attaining platinum status and reaching No. 6 on the Billboard album chart.\nIn October 1983 Wetton left the group after the comparatively disappointing sales of \"Alpha\". The band says that Wetton quit; Wetton stated that he was fired by phone. There is no universally agreed version of what happened. Wetton later said that his alcohol dependency may have been a factor. Howe, in his 2021 autobiography \"All My Yesterdays\", says that tensions had been building gradually, as songs began to work out differently on stage than they had while recording the album, which had itself not gone smoothly. After a show in New York where some members of the band had, after giving an interview, taken the stage and given a subpar performance, Howe recalls that he, Downes and Palmer confronted Wetton about his increasing mistakes on stage.\nThe next leg of their 1983 United States tour (which had begun in the summer but shut down suddenly on 10 September following a performance at Pine Knob outside Detroit, Michigan), scheduled for the autumn, was abruptly cancelled, reportedly because of low ticket sales. Howe says this was because Wetton's issues had worsened; the ensuing two-month break in the tour marked Wetton's departure from the band as a practical matter regardless of who had initiated it.\nIn December 1983 ex-King Crimson and ELP lead singer and bassist Greg Lake replaced Wetton for a few concerts in Japan, including the highly publicised \"Asia in Asia\" concert at the Nippon Budokan Hall in Tokyo, Japan, on 6 December 1983, which was the first concert broadcast over satellite to MTV in the United States and was later made into a home video. Some songs were played in a lower key to suit Lake's voice. He sang some lyrics assisted with a teleprompter, as he had been asked to cover Wetton's parts on short notice as a favour to Carl Palmer; although he initially declined due to the short preparation time, eventually he accepted because Geffen Records \"offered me so much money there was no way I could refuse it.\" In a 2011 interview, asked why he had not stayed a member of Asia, he stated, \"I did a brief stint with them and didn't want to go in that corporate rock direction. I didn't believe in that sort of music, so I didn't continue.\" Howe says Lake 'was' interested in remaining a member and recording with the band but Palmer was opposed.\nFollowing Lake's departure in early 1984, Wetton was asked to return (in Howe's account, Wetton approached the band via management) after a three-month absence; he returned on the condition that Howe be ousted from the band. For a while, the group considered continuing as a three-piece without a permanent guitarist, inviting guest guitarists such as Jeff Beck and David Gilmour into the studio. Geffen Records suggested recruiting Krokus guitarist Mandy Meyer, who got on well with the band and was offered a permanent position: his playing style was more inclined to straightforward hard rock, thus changing the sound of the band. Meanwhile, Howe went on to brief success with GTR (another supergroup, this one formed with former Genesis guitarist Steve Hackett and produced by Geoff Downes).\n1985\u20131991: \"Astra\", breakup and new lineups.\nThe third Asia album was tentatively titled \"Arcadia\", but during production it was discovered that that name was being used by a forthcoming spin-off project from Duran Duran. The retitled \"Astra\", released in November 1985, was not as commercially successful as the first two albums. The record label cancelled the planned tour because of lack of interest. The band charted another single with \"Go\" (No. 46), featuring Meyer's guitar work as a primary element. The music video was another hit with MTV but in 1986 this Asia lineup folded, bringing the group to an end for the time being. Wetton is quoted as saying \"[\"Astra\"] did really well in Sweden\u00a0... but Swedish sales aren't that large.\"\nWetton resurfaced in January 1987 with an album recorded with guitarist Phil Manzanera, \"Wetton-Manzanera\", based on material that had been originally intended for Asia. Also in 1987, Wetton played with Phenomena on their \"Dream Runner\" album and landed a number one hit in South America with the Phenomena single \"Did It All for Love\", also appearing in the related music video. \nAsia were also credited with contributing the Giorgio Moroder produced track \"Gypsy Soul\" to the Sylvester Stallone film soundtrack to \"Over the Top\" (1987), although Wetton was the only band member involved.\nWetton and Downes' attempt to restart the group in 1987 with guitarist Scott Gorham (formerly of Thin Lizzy) and drummer Michael Sturgis (ex-A-ha) failed when they were unable to land a worldwide recording deal.\nWetton and Palmer reunited the band for tours of Europe in the summer and autumn of 1989. Downes (working on a project with Greg Lake) was not available, so keyboards were played by John Young. Guitars on the tour were handled by Alan Darby (replaced by German guitarist Holger Larisch); and Zoe Nicholas and Susie Webb were brought aboard to provide back-up vocals. Unlike Wetton's later anger at Asia continuing without him in the 1990s, this lineup was viewed favourably by other Asia band members.\nAsia returned to the studio in 1990 with Downes, Toto guitarist Steve Lukather and other studio musicians and released \"Then &amp; Now\" (August 1990), a best-of with four new tracks. \"Days Like These\" from the disc received substantial airplay during the summer of 1990 on AOR radio stations and re-sparked some interest in the band. Lukather later revealed that Wetton had asked him to join the band, but he had obligations with Toto who at that time had recently come off of a short hiatus. Lukather later contributed to Wetton's solo album \"Battle Lines\" in 1994. Instead, Pat Thrall joined Downes, Palmer and Wetton on tour and they performed classic material, including King Crimson and U.K. songs.\nThe band toured the former Soviet Union in November 1990 to play in front of 20,000 fans on two sold-out nights. \"Days Like These\" charted in the United States at No. 64 in 1990 and No. 2 on the United States Album Rock Tracks chart. But a U.S. tour was scrapped when various problems hampered the single's chance at the Top 40. Asia received the RIAA Gold album award for \"Then and Now\" years later, but initially the album did not reach the Top 100. A DVD and CD are available of the Asia concerts in the USSR (featuring a bonus studio track, \"Kari-Anne\" recorded by the 1987 Wetton-Downes-Gorham-Sturgis lineup and with Francis Dunnery contributing a guitar solo). Wetton left the group in April 1991 after a South American tour, discouraged by Asia's lack of success in the United States.\n1991\u20132006: Downes/Payne era.\nAfter Wetton's departure, vocalist/bassist John Payne joined the band and, together with Downes, enlisted new musicians and led Asia through to 2006. The first album with this lineup was \"Aqua\", released in June 1992. In addition to Downes and Payne, the album featured Howe, Palmer, and guitarist Al Pitrelli (of Danger Danger, Megadeth and Alice Cooper). Howe returned during the sessions having just left Yes again, but Palmer would leave soon, committing to an ELP reunion, and was able to play on just three songs. Drummers Simon Phillips and Nigel Glockler then completed the sessions. Downes' environmentalist single \"Who Will Stop the Rain?\" (originally written for Max Bacon and the aborted \"Rain\" project, later appearing on Bacon's album \"From the Banks of the River Irwell\") attracted some radio attention. The \"Aqua\" club tour featured Howe (whose presence was heavily promoted), who took the stage after the fifth song. The tour was successful enough to warrant the band's continuation. The 1992\u201393 tour featured Downes, Howe, Payne, guitarist Vinny Burns and drummer Trevor Thornton. Before a European festival tour in late 1993, Howe and Burns left and were replaced by guitarist Keith More.\nThe group released \"Aria\" in May 1994, which featured lead guitarist Al Pitrelli once again, who would leave Asia during the short \"Aria\" tour. The \"Aria\" album did not fare well commercially and the ensuing tour was limited to four concerts. Ex-Simply Red guitarist Aziz Ibrahim took over during the tour. \"Aria\" also introduced new drummer Michael Sturgis, who had been involved during the band's aborted 1987 reunion and had appeared on some of the sessions for \"Aqua\". \"Aria\" was not released in the United States until May 1995.\nOver New Year's Eve 1995/1996, a broken pipe inundated the control room in Downes' and Payne's recording studio, Electric Palace, in London. Amid the lost equipment, a vault containing unreleased material was found intact. The band decided to release the material on two discs, \"Archiva 1\" and \"Archiva 2\". The \"Archiva\" sets were collections of unreleased tracks recorded during the first three Downes/Payne albums.\nNext, \"Arena\", released in February 1996, featured Downes, Payne, Sturgis, Ibrahim and guest guitarist Elliott Randall (ex-Steely Dan, and Randy Crawford). The album was released on Resurgence Records but there was no tour because of lack of interest. The group's lone promotional performance in conjunction with the album occurred on 19 April 1996, when Downes and Payne appeared with guitarist Elliott Randall on the Virgin FM radio programme \"Alive in London\" to play the song \"Never\".\nAn all-acoustic album, \"Live Acoustic\", was recorded by the group at Stadthalle, Bruchsal, Germany on 21 September 1997 (and released in December 1999) that featured a lineup of Downes, Payne, Ibrahim, and drummer Bob Richards. Also in 1997, a best of album \"Anthology\", featuring songs from the past six albums was released. However, a lawsuit from Wetton meant that songs from the first three albums needed to be re-recorded.\nIn 1999, there was talk of a reunion of the original lineup minus Howe. The original proposition included Dave Kilminster on guitar, who had previously toured and recorded with Wetton. While Howe was interested in participating, he was unable to because of his busy schedule with Yes. This reunion did not take place and John Payne continued to carry on Asia with Downes uninterrupted. Wetton and Palmer did, however, get together to form Qango, which included Kilminster and John Young, although the band was short-lived. Kilminster went on to work with Keith Emerson, The Nice and Roger Waters.\nAlso in 1999, \"Rare\", Asia's seventh studio album, was released on Resurgence. It was made up of instrumental music which Downes and Payne had composed for the soundtrack for David Attenborough's documentary nature film \"Salmon: Against the Tides\" (tracks 1\u201316) and for an unreleased CD-ROM video game (tracks 17\u201322).\nIn 2000 Geffen/Universal released a best-of entitled \"The Very Best of Asia: Heat of the Moment (1982\u20131990)\", which also included three rare B-sides from the early days.\n2001's \"Aura\" featured three different session guitarists, including Ian Crichton (of Canadian progressive rock band Saga) who had briefly joined Asia in 1998\u20131999. \"Aura\" took a more progressive rock form, but still did not recapture the commercial success of the first album. Former members Howe, Thrall, Sturgis and Elliott Randall also made guest appearances. The single \"Ready to Go Home\" was barely distributed. Asia then signed with Recognition Records. 2001 did see the band with a stable lineup, achieved during the \"Aura\" sessions featuring Downes, Payne, guitarist Guthrie Govan and ex-Manfred Mann's Earth Band/The Firm/Uriah Heep/Gary Numan/AC/DC drummer Chris Slade (who had first joined Asia in 1999, briefly).\nIn 2001 and 2002, Asia toured for the first time since 1994, including their first United States dates since 1993. A live album and DVD, both titled \"America: Live in the USA\", were released in 2003, recorded at the Classic Rock Productions Classic Rock Festival at The Patriots Theater at the Trenton War Memorial in Trenton, New Jersey on 5 October 2002, which they co-headlined with Uriah Heep.\nIn the summer of 2003, Downes and Payne undertook the \"Asia Across America Tour\", which received some media attention. Performing \"unplugged\", the duo would reportedly play anywhere in the United States that fans requested, provided there was a venue and the fans put up $3,000 to cover costs.\nMarking a departure from convention, for the first time a studio release was not titled as a single word starting and ending with the letter A (excepting the partial compilation / partial new album \"Then &amp; Now\"). Released on Asia's newly signed label SPV/Inside Out Records, 2004's \"Silent Nation\" (the name being influenced by the Howard Stern vs. FCC incident) picked up some unexpected exposure on the Internet.\nIn 2004 an acoustic Asia toured once again featuring only Downes and Payne. In 2005 the full band toured in Europe and the Americas playing settings ranging from small clubs to medium-sized theatres. In the United States attendance was poor at best.\nIn August 2005 Slade left Asia to be replaced by drummer Jay Schellen. The new band started work on an album, tentatively entitled \"Architect of Time\", which was originally planned for release early in 2006, though subsequent developments would cause this project to be shelved. Half of this material ended up being released on the album \"Window to the Soul\" in August 2006 under the new band name of GPS, which was an acronym for the three players involved: Govan, Payne and Schellen. After this, the three continued on as Asia Featuring John Payne in 2007.\nMeanwhile, Wetton and Downes had released some archival Asia material under the name \"Wetton/Downes\" in September 2002 and they then reunited to record a full-length album (\"Icon\", released in August 2005) and an accompanying EP and DVD. Two additional Icon projects have since followed: \"Icon II: Rubicon\" (November 2006) and \"Icon 3\" (March 2009).\n2006\u20132013: \"Original Asia\" reunion.\nIn early 2006, Downes left for a reunion of the original band lineup under the Asia name, a breakup that Payne described as \"painful\". The existing lineup (minus Downes) continued for a short while before morphing into the aforementioned GPS.\nFollowing Downes' departure, on 9 May 2006, John Payne, Geoff Downes, John Wetton, Carl Palmer and Steve Howe contractually agreed that Payne could continue his 15-year period with Asia as Asia Featuring John Payne. Asia featuring John Payne debuted in 2007 with Payne on vocals/bass, Guthrie Govan on guitar, Erik Norlander on keyboards and Jay Schellen on drums. Downes, Wetton, Palmer and Howe continued to perform and record as Asia thereafter.\nThe official websites of each band reflect a split between the shared history of Payne's tenure with the band, as the reunited Asia acknowledge only pre- and post-Payne albums, whereas Asia Featuring John Payne claim Payne-era (1991\u20132006) albums \"Aqua\" (1992) through \"Silent Nation\" (2004) as part of their own discography. Asia Featuring John Payne perform songs from before and during Payne's time in Asia.\nDownes and the other three original members (Wetton, Palmer and Howe) convened a group meeting in England in early 2006 in anticipation of formally reforming for work that year. And after a slew of rumours, they announced that this original lineup of Asia were planning a CD, DVD and world tour to celebrate the band's 25th anniversary. The band appeared in October 2006 on US cable channel VH-1 Classic and began a world tour largely focused on the United States. The band secured ownership of the Asia name and toured under the description of \"The Four Original Members of Asia\". The set list featured most of the first album as well as a couple of songs from the second, along with one selection each from Yes, ELP, King Crimson and the Buggles to acknowledge the history of each member of the band. In a 2006 interview, guitarist Steve Howe stated, \"This is the real Asia. There have been other incarnations of the band, but this is the one that the public truly embraced\".\nThe tour began on 29 August 2006 in Rochester, New York. \"The Definitive Collection\" was released by Geffen/Universal to tie into the tour in September and peaked at No. 183 on the United States album charts, the first time Asia had made the charts since 1990. A limited edition release available only at Best Buy stores also included a DVD of all the band's music videos.\nThe reunion tour continued into 2007 with venue size based on the success of the 2006 shows, where the band was mainly playing in clubs and theatres. Many of these sold out, including all seven dates in Japan. Also in 2007, the band released \"Fantasia: Live In Tokyo\" on CD and DVD through Eagle Records, commemorating the 25th anniversary and documenting the success of the 2006\u20132007 tour.\nIn mid-2007, all four original members (Wetton, Downes, Howe and Palmer) went into the studio to record a new album, marking the first recorded material from all four original members since 1983's \"Alpha\". The band continued to tour until major heart surgery for Wetton in the second half of the year saw remaining tour dates rescheduled for 2008.\nThe new studio album, entitled \"Phoenix\", was released on Frontiers Records on 14 April 2008 (via EMI/Capitol on 15 April in North America), along with a world tour to promote. The 12-track album includes \"An Extraordinary Life\", based on Wetton's experience of ill health; rockers such as \"Never Again\" and \"Alibis\"; and power ballads such as \"Heroine\" and \"I Will Remember You\". The world tour also featured a couple of the new songs. The album cover featured Roger Dean's illustration and design. The \"Phoenix\" album did well in both the American and European/Japanese markets. It debuted at No. 73 on the American Billboard 200; the band had not charted with a studio album since 1985.\nAs a special finale to the US \"Phoenix\" tour, the band performed, for the first time ever, the entire first Asia album from beginning to end at their San Francisco concert at The Regency Center on 5 May. The album comprised the entire second set of the evening's concert.\nIn summer 2009, Asia toured the United States with Yes. Asia opened with a 55-minute show, while Yes closed with a 1-hour and 50-minute set. Asia's set included only \"An Extraordinary Life\" from \"Phoenix\", the rest of the songs coming from the first two albums plus one cover each from The Buggles (\"Video Killed the Radio Star\" with Wetton on lead vocals and Downes on vocoder), King Crimson (\"The Court of the Crimson King\", which was recorded by the original incarnation of that band with Greg Lake on lead vocals) and Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer (\"Fanfare for the Common Man\"). Yes songs were omitted from this tour's setlist, though Asia also covered \"Roundabout\" on earlier legs of the \"Four Original Members\" tour. Contrary to some early expectations, Downes did not perform with Yes, although their set list included two songs from the 1980 album \"Drama\", which featured Downes on keys. A series of shows late in the tour featured a special appearance by Ian McDonald (flute and vocals on \"The Court Of The Crimson King\", which he co-wrote, and backing vocals on \"Heat Of The Moment\").\nIn late 2009, the band began working on their follow-up CD to \"Phoenix\". According to Wetton's website in late November 2009: \"Good news is that the new album is starting to leap, rather than creep (or sleep) in terms of progress. This week I have two completed lead vocals, with complete harmony/chorus voxes on three. It's just me, Geoff [Downes], Steve R[ispin], and Mike Paxman in the studio--- Carl [Palmer] is pretty much all done, Steve H[owe] is half done, and returns to the fold after Yes tour. It sounds absolutely wonderful\". The follow-up, titled \"Omega\", was released in the UK on 26 April 2010.\nThe band finished a new studio album timed to coincide with the band's thirtieth anniversary, titled \"XXX\", and released in the UK on 2 July 2012 and worldwide around the same time. In September 2012 they played four shows in Japan and a North American tour started on 11 October 2012. The UK tour, however, had to be cancelled after a number of shows due to Palmer contracting a serious case of E. coli.\n2013\u20132017: Howe's retirement, \"Gravitas\" and hiatus.\nOn 10 January 2013, Steve Howe announced his retirement from the band to focus on other projects, including Yes, bringing an end to the reunion of the original lineup. Asia in turn announced they would be continuing with new guitarist Sam Coulson, with a new album in the works entitled \"Gravitas\". The new lineup performed live in 2013.\nOn the website ultimateclassicrock.com, Howe explained his decision to leave Asia:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Something had to give. Because I'd just done five years with both bands and then Geoff had joined [Yes] when we did \"Fly From Here\", which is maybe a lot shorter, only a quarter of that time for him. He only experienced the tip of the iceberg of being on call for two bands. But there were times in the first three years \u2014 it actually got easier when Geoff joined. It was easier because we were both in the band and we could both wrestle with the schedules \u2014 but before that, at times, Yes or Asia would extend a tour by a day and then Yes or Asia would then expand the start of the tour, so the gap would start to close.\nAnd I would start freaking out saying \"yeah, but hang on\u00a0... if you add that date here and they've just added this date here, I'm now squeezed like a concertina.\" So there was going to be a time at some point when this was unworkable and unfortunately it was the end of last year that made me realize that this being on call was really too much. I couldn't keep either really happy. I was either making Yes miserable or Asia miserable, because of the other one being in existence.\nSo I think that Asia had a terrific run and we made three great albums. In fact, \"XXX\", I think, is a fantastic record.\u2014\u200a\nThe band finished the recording sessions for \"Gravitas\" in December 2013 and in January 2014 they started shooting the music video for \"Valkyrie\", which was released as a single. The album's cover artwork was designed by Asia longtime collaborator Roger Dean. On 30 January 2014, Wetton revealed the album's track listing through Asia's official website and talked about each song from the album. The album was released on 24 March 2014 and reached Number 1 in the Progressive Rock Chart for emusic on 27 March.\nFollowing \"Gravitas\" and the subsequent tour, the band went on an almost three-year hiatus due to Wetton having cancer and undergoing chemotherapy. On 5 December 2016, Asia announced a US tour opening for American rock band Journey, beginning with twelve dates from 15 March 2017 at the Yakima Valley Sundome in Yakima, Washington, and four days later, announced their live album \"Symfonia: Live in Bulgaria 2013\", which they performed with the Plovdiv Philharmonic Orchestra.\n2017\u20132018: Wetton's death and tour with Journey.\nOn 11 January 2017, Wetton released a statement that, due to receiving another round of chemotherapy, he would be unable to perform on the dates announced for the Journey tour, and that he would be substituted by Billy Sherwood, one of Downes' Yes bandmates, and Wetton's own co-writer and producer of the album \"Raised in Captivity\". The band originally wanted to cancel the tour altogether, but Journey's management and agents refused, forcing them to pick Sherwood as a last-minute replacement.\nWetton died on 31 January 2017 at the age of 67; Palmer later stated \"So, we used Billy and we had a phenomenal time. It was a great experience all 'round, and I'm pleased we did it. John would have loved to be on that tour, so I'm pleased we did it for him, anyway.\" On 17 June 2017 Asia performed a show in homage to Wetton, titled \"An Extraordinary Life\". The show was an interactive celebration of Wetton's music and life. Fan dedications were sent into management and shown on a large projection screen above the stage.\nAfter Wetton's death, Downes stated that the duo had been working on another Asia album and stated that he hopes to eventually finish and release it as a final testament to Wetton. It is unclear whether Wetton had recorded any parts, or if the album had only been in the songwriting process. In August 2017, Palmer stated that there were no immediate plans for Asia to continue, as it was too soon to make any decisions and the band members would be busy on other projects in the meantime.\n2019\u20132023: Lineup changes, tour with Yes, and 40th Anniversary Tour.\nOn 2 April 2019, the band announced it would join Yes, John Lodge, and Carl Palmer's ELP Legacy as part of The Royal Affair Tour, a 26-date Summer 2019 North American joint tour, with Steve Howe joining the band for a portion of the set. The band also confirmed that Sam Coulson had amicably left Asia to focus on solo projects and that he would be replaced as guitarist on the tour by Ron \"Bumblefoot\" Thal, who also took over lead vocals, with Sherwood remaining on bass but moving to backing vocals. Coulson confirmed his departure on Twitter the same day.\nIn 2019, a \"New York Times\" investigation revealed that Asia was among hundreds of artists whose material was destroyed in the 2008 Universal fire. While Universal Music has generally disputed the severity of the fire's damage, they have yet to publicly confirm or deny the status of Asia's masters, while Downes has stated that he has it \"on good authority\" that the masters survived.\nIn 2022, Asia announced a 40th Anniversary Tour, with Marc Bonilla on guitar and vocals. However, the tour was later cancelled due to Alan Parsons, the band's opening act, backing out in order to undergo surgery. Following the cancellation, Palmer said in February 2023 that there were no plans for any activity for the rest of the year.\n2024\u2013present: Lineup overhaul and upcoming new music.\nThe band toured the US in summer 2024. Carl Palmer announced that he would not be on the tour, although he said \"I plan to eventually embrace the music of ASIA again at some point in the future.\" The tour saw a new line-up of Downes (keys), along with Virgil Donati (drums), John Mitchell (guitar) and Harry Whitley (bass, vocals).\nIn June 2025, the band announced that they had been signed on by Frontiers Music to release several albums, including a new studio album set to be released in 2026.\nPersonnel.\nThroughout the years, Geoff Downes has been the longest serving member of the band and is the only one to appear on every studio album. However, he was out of the band from its 1989 reunion to 1990 due to prior commitments at the time.\nThe original lineup initially lasted from 1981 until 1983 when John Wetton left. It was reunited on two occasions: first, one year later when Wetton rejoined, but Steve Howe left before the band could work together again, and a second time in 2006, when Downes, the last original member in the band at the time, replaced his then-current lineup with his original bandmates. This last original reunion lasted until 2013, when Howe left once again. Wetton died from cancer in 2017.\nSeveral musicians have joined and left after a short time without recording any studio material with the group. The most notable collaboration of this kind was the participation of Greg Lake in the \"Asia in Asia\" concert on bass guitar and lead vocals. Yet more musicians have played as session musicians or have guested with the band without formally joining. Some of these artists include: Robert Fleischman, Vinnie Colaiuta, Francis Dunnery, Ant Glynne, Scott Gorham, Tomoyasu Hotei, Lu\u00eds Jardim, Ron Komie, Tony Levin, Steve Lukather, Thomas Lang, Kim Nielsen-Parsons, Nigel Glockler, Simon Phillips, and Alex Thomas.\nLineup.\nCurrent members\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55267", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55267", "title": "Platos Republic", "text": ""}
{"id": "55268", "revid": "23228310", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55268", "title": "\u00d8resund", "text": "Strait between Denmark and Sweden\n\u00d8resund or \u00d6resund (, ; ; ), commonly known in English as the Sound, is a strait which forms the Danish\u2013Swedish border, separating Zealand (Denmark) from Scania (Sweden). The strait has a length of ; its width varies from to . The narrowest point is between Helsing\u00f8r in Denmark and Helsingborg in Sweden.\n\u00d8resund, along with the Great Belt, the Little Belt and the Kiel Canal, is one of four waterways that connect the Baltic Sea to the Atlantic Ocean via Kattegat, Skagerrak, and the North Sea; this makes it one of the busiest waterways in the world.\nThe \u00d8resund Bridge, between the Danish capital Copenhagen and the Swedish city of Malm\u00f6, inaugurated on 1 July 2000, connects a bi-national metropolitan area with close to 4 million inhabitants. The HH Ferry route, between Helsing\u00f8r, Denmark and Helsingborg, Sweden, in the northern part of \u00d8resund, is one of the world's busiest international ferry routes, with more than 70 departures from each harbour per day.\n\u00d8resund is a geologically young strait that formed 8,500\u20138,000 years ago as a result of rising sea levels. Previously, the Ancylus Lake, a fresh-water body occupying the Baltic basin, had been connected to the sea solely via the Great Belt. The incursion of salt water via \u00d8resund marked the beginning of the modern Baltic Sea as a salt-water body.\nName.\nThe strait is called \"\u00d8resund\" in Danish (and Norwegian), and \"\u00d6resund\" in Swedish, informally \"Sundet\" (lit.\u2009'the Strait') in all three languages.\nThe first part of the name is \"\u00f8re\" \"gravel/sand beach\", and the second part is \"sund\", i.e. \"sound, strait\".\nThe name is first attested on a runestone dated to ca. AD 1000, where it is written as \"ura suti\", read as Old East Norse (the dative case). \nThe Old West Norse (and modern Icelandic) form of the name is \"Eyrarsund\". \n\"\u00d8r\" is the modern form of the old Norse word (aur) meaning a gravel beach or shoal (see also ayre), often forming a spit. Such landforms are common in the area and \"\u00f6r\" is found in the names of many places along the strait, e.g. Helsing\u00f8r, Skan\u00f6r, Drag\u00f8r and Hal\u00f6r, an important center of trade during the Viking Age.\nBoundaries.\nThe northern boundary between \u00d8resund and Kattegat is a line which goes from Gilleleje at Zealand's northern peak to the westernmost point of Kullaberg (Kullen's Lighthouse) at the smaller peninsula north of Helsingborg, known as Kullahalv\u00f6n. In the south, the boundary towards the Baltic Sea starts at Stevns Klint, at the westernmost peak of the peninsula just south of K\u00f8ge Bay, Stevns Peninsula to Falsterbo at the Falsterbo peninsula. \nIts eastern boundary is the Swedish coastline; to the west Amager may be considered part of \u00d8resund (in which case it is the largest island) or a part of Zealand. Amager has eight connections with Zealand (two street bridges, a road bridge, a motorway bridge, a dual-track railway tunnel, an underground metro and a bicycle bridge) as well as a combined motorway and dual track railway to Scania and Sweden.\nStreams, animals and salinity.\n\u00d8resund, like other Danish and Danish-German straits, is at the border between oceanic salt water (which has a salinity of more than 30 PSU or per mille by weight) and the far less salty Baltic Sea.\nAs the Kattegat in the north has almost oceanic conditions and the Baltic Sea (around 7 PSU, in its main basin) has brackish water, \u00d8resund's water conditions are rather unusual and shifting. The streams are very complex, but the surface stream is often northbound (from the Baltic Sea) which gives a lower surface salinity, though streams can change from one day to another. The average surface salinity is about 10\u201312 PSU in the southern part, but above 20 PSU north of Helsing\u00f8r.\nNear the seafloor (where the sea is deep enough), conditions are more stable and salinity is always oceanic (above 30 PSU) below a certain depth that varies between 10 and 15 metres. In the southern part, however, the depth is 5\u20136 metres (outside the rather narrow waterways Drogden and Flintr\u00e4nnan), and this is the definite border of oceanic salt water, therefore also a border for many maritime species of animals. Only 52 known salt-water species reside in the central Baltic Sea, compared to around 1500 in the North Sea. Close to 600 species are known to exist in at least some part of \u00d8resund. Well-known examples, for which the bottom salinity makes a distinct breeding border, include lobster, small crabs (\"Carcinus maenas\"), several species of flatfish and the lion's mane jellyfish; the latter can sometimes drift into the southwest Baltic Sea, but it cannot reproduce there.\nThere are daily tides, but the lunar attraction cannot force much water to move from west to east, or vice versa, in narrow waters where the current is either northbound or southbound. So, not much of the difference in water levels in \u00d8resund is due to daily tides, and other circumstances \"hide\" the little tide that still remains. The current has a much stronger effect than the tide on the water level, but strong winds may also affect the water level. During exceptional conditions, such as storms and hurricanes, oceanic water may suddenly flow into the Baltic Sea at all depths. Such events give deep waters in the southern Baltic Sea higher salinity, which makes it possible for cod to breed there. If no such inflow of oceanic water to the Baltic Sea occurs for around a decade, the breeding of cod becomes endangered.\nHistory.\nPolitical control of \u00d8resund has been an important issue in Danish and Swedish history. Denmark maintained military control with the coastal fortress of Kronborg at Elsinore on the west side and K\u00e4rnan at Helsingborg on the east, until the eastern shore was ceded to Sweden in 1658, based on the Treaty of Roskilde. Both fortresses are located where the strait is 4 kilometres wide.\nIn 1429, King Eric of Pomerania introduced the Sound Dues which remained in effect for more than four centuries, until 1857. Transitory dues on the use of waterways, roads, bridges and crossings were then an accepted way of taxing which could constitute a great part of a state's income. \nThe Strait Dues remained the most important source of income for the Danish Crown for several centuries, thus making Danish kings relatively independent of Denmark's privy council and aristocracy.\nTo be independent of the \u00d8resund, Sweden carried out two great projects: the foundation of Gothenburg in 1621 and the construction of the G\u00f6ta Canal from 1810 to 1832.\nThe Copenhagen Convention of 1857 abolished the Dues and made the Danish straits an international waterway.\nA fixed connection was opened across the strait in 2000, the \u00d8resund Bridge.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55271", "revid": "48523215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55271", "title": "Francisco Pizarro", "text": "Spanish conquistador (1478\u20131541)\nFrancisco Pizarro (; ; c.\u200916 March 1478\u2013 26 June 1541) was a Spanish \"conquistador\", best known for his expeditions that led to the Spanish conquest of the Inca Empire.\nBorn in Trujillo, Spain, to a poor family, Pizarro chose to pursue fortune and adventure in the New World. He went to the Gulf of Urab\u00e1 and accompanied Vasco N\u00fa\u00f1ez de Balboa in his crossing of the Isthmus of Panama, where they became the first Europeans to see the Pacific Ocean from the Americas. He served as mayor of the newly founded Panama City for a few years and undertook two failed expeditions to Peru. In 1529, Pizarro obtained permission from the Spanish crown to lead a campaign to conquer Peru and went on his third, and successful, expedition.\nWhen local people who lived along the coast resisted this invasion, Pizarro moved inland and founded the first Spanish settlement in Peru, San Miguel de Piura. After a series of manoeuvres, Pizarro captured the Inca emperor Atahualpa at the Battle of Cajamarca in November 1532. A ransom for the emperor's release was demanded and Atahualpa filled a room with gold, but Pizarro charged him with various crimes and executed him in July 1533. The same year, Pizarro entered the Inca capital of Cuzco and completed his conquest of Peru. In January 1535, he founded the city of Lima. Pizarro eventually fell victim to political power struggles and was assassinated in 1541.\nEarly life.\nFrancisco Pizarro was born in Trujillo, C\u00e1ceres, Spain (then in the Crown of Castile) in modern-day Extremadura, Spain. He was the illegitimate son of infantry colonel Gonzalo Pizarro (1446\u20131522) and Francisca Gonz\u00e1lez, a woman of poor means. His date of birth is uncertain, but it is believed to be sometime in the 1470s, probably 1475. Little attention was paid to his education and he grew up illiterate.\nHis father served in Navarre and in the Italian campaigns under C\u00f3rdoba. His mother married late in life and had a son, Francisco Mart\u00edn de Alc\u00e1ntara, who was at the conquest of Peru with his half-brother from its inception. Through his father, Francisco was a second cousin, once removed, of Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s.\nEarly career as \"Conquistador\".\nOn 10 November 1509, Pizarro sailed from Spain to the New World with Alonso de Ojeda on an expedition to Urab\u00e1. Pizarro became a participant in Ojeda's failed colony, commanding the remnants until he abandoned it with the survivors. He sailed to Cartagena and joined the fleet of Mart\u00edn Fern\u00e1ndez de Enciso and, in 1513, accompanied Balboa in his crossing of the Isthmus of Panama to the Pacific. The following year, Pedro Arias D\u00e1vila became the newly appointed governor of Castilla de Oro and succeeded Balboa. During the next five years, Pizarro became a close associate of D\u00e1vila and the governor assigned him a \"repartimiento\" of natives and cattle. When D\u00e1vila decided to get rid of Balboa out of distrust, he instructed Pizarro to personally arrest him and bring him to stand trial. Balboa was beheaded in January 1519. For his loyalty to D\u00e1vila, Pizarro was rewarded with the positions of mayor (Alcalde) and magistrate of the then recently founded Panama City from 1519 to 1523.\nExpeditions to South America.\nThe first attempt to explore western South America was undertaken in 1522 by Pascual de Andagoya. The native South Americans he encountered told him about a gold-rich territory called Vir\u00fa, which was on a river called Pir\u00fa (from which we get the pronunciation Per\u00fa). These reports were relayed by the Spanish-Inca \"mestizo\" writer Garcilaso de la Vega in \"Comentarios Reales de los Incas\" (1608).\nAndagoya eventually established contact with several Native American \"curacas\" (chiefs), some of whom he later claimed were sorcerers and witches. Having reached as far as the San Juan River (part of the present boundary between Ecuador and Colombia) Andagoya fell ill and returned to Panama. He spread the news and stories about \"Pir\u00fa\" \u2013 a great land to the south rich with gold (the legendary El Dorado). These revelations, along with the accounts for Cort\u00e9s' success in Mexico, caught the attention of Pizarro, prompting a series of expeditions to the south.\nIn 1524, while he was still in Panama, Pizarro formed a partnership with a priest, Hernando de Luque and a soldier, Diego de Almagro, to explore and conquer the South. Pizarro, Almagro and Luque later explicitly renewed their compact, agreeing to conquer and divide equally among themselves the empire they hoped to vanquish. While their accord was strictly oral, they dubbed their enterprise the \"Empresa del Levante\" and determined that Pizarro would command the expedition, Almagro would provide military and food supplies and Luque would be in charge of finances and additional provisions.\nFirst expedition (1524).\nIn November 1524, the first of three expeditions left Panama for the conquest of Peru with about 80 men and four horses. Juan de Salcedo was the standard bearer, Nicol\u00e1s de Ribera was the treasurer and Juan Carvallo was the inspector.\nDiego de Almagro was left behind because he was to recruit men, gather additional supplies and join Pizarro later. The Governor of Panama, Pedro Arias D\u00e1vila, at first approved in principle the exploration of South America. Pizarro's first expedition, however, turned out to be a failure as his conquistadors, sailing down the Pacific coast, reached no further than Colombia before succumbing to bad weather, lack of food and skirmishes with hostile natives, one of which caused Almagro to lose an eye by arrow-shot. The place names the Spanish bestowed along their route, including \"Puerto Deseado\" (desired port), \"Puerto del Hambre\" (port of hunger) and \"Punta Quemado\" or \"Puebla Quemado\" (burned port), confirmed their difficulties. Fearing subsequent hostile encounters like the one the expedition endured at the Battle of Punta Quemada, Pizarro ended his first expedition and returned to Panama.\nSecond expedition (1526).\nTwo years later Pizarro, Almagro and Luque started the arrangements for a second expedition with permission from Pedro Arias D\u00e1vila, Panama's governor. D\u00e1vila, who himself was preparing an expedition north to Nicaragua, was reluctant to permit another expedition, having lost confidence in Pizarro. The three associates eventually won his trust and he acquiesced. By this time, a new governor was to arrive and succeed D\u00e1vila. Pedro de los R\u00edos took charge as the new colonial administrator in July 1526 and initially approved Pizarro's expeditions (he would join him several years later in Peru).\nOn 10 March 1526, Pizarro left Panama with two ships with 160 men and several horses, reaching as far as the Colombian San Juan River. Soon after arriving the party separated, with Pizarro staying to explore the new and often perilous territory off the swampy Colombian coasts, while the expedition's co-commander, Almagro, returned to Panama for reinforcements. Pizarro's \"Piloto Mayor\" (main pilot), Bartolom\u00e9 Ruiz, continued sailing south and, after crossing the equator, found and captured a \"balsa\" (raft) under sail, with natives from Tumbes. To everyone's surprise, these carried textiles, ceramic objects and some pieces of gold, silver and emeralds, making Ruiz's findings the central focus of this second expedition. Some natives were taken aboard Ruiz's ship to serve as interpreters.\nHe then set sail north for the San Juan River, arriving to find Pizarro and his men exhausted from the difficulties they had faced exploring the new territory. Soon Almagro sailed into the port laden with supplies and a reinforcement of at least eighty recruits who had arrived at Panama from Spain with an expeditionary spirit. The findings and excellent news from Ruiz along with Almagro's new reinforcements cheered Pizarro and his tired followers. They decided to sail back to the territory already explored by Ruiz and, after a difficult voyage due to strong winds and currents, reached Atacames on the Ecuadorian coast. Here, they found a large native population recently brought under Inca rule. Unfortunately for the \"conquistadores\", the people they encountered seemed so defiant and numerous that the Spanish decided not to enter the land.\nThe Famous Thirteen.\nAfter much wrangling between Pizarro and Almagro, it was decided that Pizarro would stay at a safer place, the Isla de Gallo, near the coast, while Almagro would return to Panama with Luque for more reinforcements \u2013 this time with proof of the gold they had found and the news of the discovery of the obviously wealthy land they had explored. The new governor of Panama, Pedro de los R\u00edos, had learned of the mishaps of Pizarro's expeditions and the deaths of various settlers who had gone with him. Fearing an unsuccessful outcome, he rejected Almagro's application for continued resources. In addition, he ordered two ships commanded by Juan Tafur to be sent immediately with the intention of bringing Pizarro and his crew back to Panama.\nPizarro had no intention of returning and when Tafur arrived at Isla de Gallo, Pizarro drew a line in the sand, saying: \"There lies Peru with its riches; Here, Panama and its poverty. Choose, each man, what best becomes a brave Castilian. For my part, I go to the south.\"\nOnly 13 men stayed with Pizarro. They later became known as \"The Famous Thirteen\" (\"Los trece de la fama\"), while the rest of the expeditioners stayed with Tafur. Ruiz left in one of the ships with the intention of joining Almagro and Luque in their efforts to gather reinforcements. Soon after the ships left, Pizarro and his men constructed a crude boat and journeyed 25 leagues north to La Isla Gorgona, where they would remain for seven months before the arrival of new provisions.\nBack in Panama, Pedro de los R\u00edos (after much convincing by Luque) had finally acquiesced to the requests for another ship, but only to bring Pizarro back within six months and completely abandon the expedition. Almagro and Luque grasped the opportunity and left Panama (this time without new recruits) for La Isla Gorgona to join Pizarro once again. On meeting Pizarro, the associates decided to continue sailing south on the recommendations of Ruiz's Indian interpreters.\nBy April 1528, they finally reached the northwestern Peruvian Tumbes Region. Tumbes became the first success that the Spanish had so long desired. They were received with a warm welcome of hospitality and provisions from the Tumpis, the local inhabitants. On subsequent days two of Pizarro's men, Alonso de Molina and Pedro de Candia, reconnoitred the territory and both, on separate accounts, reported back the riches of the land, including the decorations of silver and gold around the chief's residence and the hospitable attentions with which they were received by everyone. The Spanish also saw for the first time the Peruvian llama, which Pizarro called \"little camels\". Pizarro continued receiving the same accounts of a powerful monarch who ruled over the land they were exploring. These events served as evidence to convince the expedition that the wealth and power displayed at Tumbes were an example of the riches of the Peruvian territory. The conquistadors decided to return to Panama to prepare the final expedition of conquest with more recruits and provisions. Before leaving, however, Pizarro and his followers sailed south along the coast to see if anything of interest could be found. Historian William H. Prescott recounts that after passing through territories they named such as Cabo Blanco, port of Payta, Sechura, Punta de Aguja, Santa Cruz and Trujillo (founded by Almagro years later), they finally reached for the first time the ninth degree of the southern latitude in South America.\nOn their return towards Panama, Pizarro briefly stopped at Tumbes, where two of his men had decided to stay to learn the customs and language of the natives. Pizarro was also given two Peruvian boys to learn Spanish, one of whom was later baptised as Felipillo and served as an important interpreter, the equivalent of Cort\u00e9s' La Malinche of Mexico, and another called Martinillo. Their final stop was at La Isla Gorgona, where two of his invalid men (one had died) had been left behind. After at least 18 months away, Pizarro and his followers anchored off the coasts of Panama to prepare for the final expedition.\nCapitulation of Toledo.\nWhen the new governor of Panama, Pedro de los R\u00edos, refused permission for a third expedition to the south, the associates resolved that Pizarro should leave for Spain and appeal to the sovereign in person. Pizarro sailed from Panama for Spain in the spring of 1528, accompanied by Pedro de Candia, some natives and llamas, plus samples of fabric, gold and silver.\nPizarro reached Seville in early summer. King Charles I, who was at Toledo, had an interview with Pizarro and heard of his expeditions in South America. The conquistador described the territory as rich in gold and silver that he and his followers had bravely explored \"to extend the empire of Castile\". The king, who was soon to leave for Italy, was impressed at his accounts and promised his support for the conquest of Peru. Queen Isabel, though, in the absence of the king, signed the \"Capitulaci\u00f3n de Toledo\" on 6 July 1529, a licence document that authorised Pizarro to proceed with the conquest of Peru. Pizarro was officially named the Governor, Captain general, \"Adelantado\" and \"Alguacil Mayor\", of New Castile for the distance of 200 leagues along the newly discovered coast and invested with all authority and prerogatives, leaving his associates in secondary positions (a fact that later incensed Almagro and would lead to eventual discord). One of the grant conditions was that within six months, Pizarro should raise a sufficiently equipped force of 250 men, of whom 100 might be drawn from the colonies.\nThis gave Pizarro time to leave for his native Trujillo and convince his brother Hernando Pizarro and other close friends to join him on his third expedition. Francisco de Orellana joined the group and would later discover and explore the length of the Amazon River. Two half-brothers on his father's side, Juan Pizarro and Gonzalo Pizarro, and a half-brother from his mother, Francisco Mart\u00edn de Alc\u00e1ntara, later also decided to join him, as well as his cousin Pedro Pizarro, who served as his page. When the expedition left the following year, it numbered three ships, 180 men and 27 horses.\nPizarro could not raise the number of men the Capitulaci\u00f3n required and sailed clandestinely from the port of Sanl\u00facar de Barrameda for the Canary Island of La Gomera in January 1530. He was joined there by his brother Hernando and the remaining men in two vessels that would sail back to Panama. Pizarro's third and final expedition left Panama for Peru on 27 December 1530.\nConquest of Peru (1532).\nIn 1531, Pizarro once again landed on the coasts near Ecuador, the province of Coaque and the region of \"esmeraldas\", where some gold, silver and emeralds were procured and then dispatched to Almagro. The latter had stayed in Panama to gather more recruits. Sebasti\u00e1n de Belalc\u00e1zar soon arrived with 30 men. Though Pizarro's main objective was then to set sail and dock at Tumbes as during his previous expedition, he was forced to confront the Punian natives in the Battle of Pun\u00e1, leaving three or four Spaniards dead and many wounded. Soon after, Hernando de Soto, another conquistador who had joined the expedition, arrived with 100 volunteers and horses to aid Pizarro and with him sailed towards Tumbes, only to find the place deserted and destroyed. The two conquistadors suspected that the settlers had disappeared or died under murky circumstances. The chiefs explained that the fierce tribes of Punians had attacked them and ransacked the place.\nAs Tumbes no longer afforded safe accommodations, Pizarro led an excursion into the hinterland in May 1532 and established the first Spanish settlement in Peru, San Miguel de Piura, and a \"repartimiento\".\nLeaving 50 men back at the settlement under the command of Antonio Navarro, Pizarro proceeded with his conquest accompanied by 200 men on 24 September 1532. After arriving at Zaran, de Soto was dispatched to a Peruvian garrison at Caxas. After a week, he returned with an envoy from the Inca himself, with presents and an invitation to visit the Inca ruler's camp.\nFollowing the defeat of his brother, Hu\u00e1scar, in the Inca Civil War, Atahualpa had been resting in the Sierra of northern Peru, near Cajamarca, in the nearby thermal baths known today as the Inca Baths. Arriving at Cajamarca on 15 November 1532, Pizarro had a force of just 110-foot soldiers, 67 cavalry, three arquebuses and two falconets. He sent Hernando Pizarro and de Soto to an audience with Atahualpa in his camp. Atahualpa agreed to meet Pizarro in his Cajamarca plaza fortress the next day. Fray Vincente de Valverde and native interpreter Felipillo approached Atahualpa in Cajamarca's central plaza. After the Dominican friar expounded the \"true faith\" and the need to pay tribute to the Emperor Charles V, Atahualpa replied, \"I shall be no man's tributary.\" His complacency, because fewer than 200 Spanish remained, as opposed to his 50,000-man army, of which 6,000 accompanied him to Cajamarca, sealed his fate and that of the Inca empire.\nAtahualpa's refusal led Pizarro and his force to attack the Inca army in what became the Battle of Cajamarca on 16 November 1532. The Spanish were successful. Pizarro executed Atahualpa's 12-man honour guard and took the Inca captive at the so-called Ransom Room. By February 1533, Almagro had joined Pizarro in Cajamarca with an additional 150 men and 50 horses.\nDespite fulfilling his promise of filling one room () with gold and two with silver, Atahualpa was convicted of 12 charges, including killing his brother and plotting against Pizarro and his forces. He was executed by garrote on 29 August 1533. Francisco Pizarro and de Soto were opposed to Atahualpa's execution, but Francisco consented to the trial due to the \"great agitation among the soldiers\", particularly by Almagro. De Soto was on a reconnaissance mission the day of the trial and execution and upon his return expressed his dismay, stating, \"he should have been taken to Castile and judged by the emperor.\" King Charles later wrote to Pizarro: \"We have been displeased by the death of Atahualpa, since he was a monarch and particularly as it was done in the name of justice.\"\nPizarro advanced with his army of 500 Spaniards toward Cuzco, accompanied by Chalcuchimac, one of the leading Inca generals of the north and a supporter of Atahualpa, who was subsequently burned at the stake. Manco Inca Yupanqui joined Pizarro after the death of T\u00fapac Huallpa. During the exploration of Cuzco, Pizarro was impressed and through his officers wrote back to Spain to King Charles, saying: \"This city is the greatest and the finest ever seen in this country or anywhere in the Indies... We can assure your Majesty that it is so beautiful and has such fine buildings that it would be remarkable even in Spain.\"\nThe Spanish sealed the conquest of Peru by entering Cuzco on 15 November 1533. Jauja, in the fertile Mantaro Valley, was established as Peru's provisional capital in April 1534, but it was high up in the mountains and too distant from the sea to serve as the capital. Pizarro founded the city of Lima on Peru's central coast on 6 January 1535, which he considered to be one of the most important things he had created in life.\nBy early 1536, Manco Inka, supported by an army of perhaps 100,000 people, initiated a siege of Cuzco. At the same time, smaller Inca expeditionary forces moved to destroy other European strongholds. In the three years of continuous warfare since the arrival of Pizarro, Inca military leaders had become familiar with Spanish military tactics and developed effective counters. Perhaps the most effective of these military innovations was the one that dealt with the Europeans' greatest advantage on the battlefield: horses. Inca soldiers would offer battle but hold their position until the Spaniards had concentrated their cavalry in order to break the indigenous line. They would then fall back before the cavalry charge and draw the Europeans into a canyon where previously positioned forces could crush them under avalanches of rocks and missile weapons. Instead of charging the numerically inferior Europeans as they had done early on, Inca soldiers used their discipline and knowledge of the terrain in order to draw the armoured cavalry charge into a death trap. Well documented battlefield deaths show that many more Spaniards died in these battles than in the early days of the war when theoretically the Inca had a much greater advantage. Despite winning the majority of the battles, the inability of the Inca forces to overwhelm Cuzco's fortifications, manned as they were by only 200 fighting men armed with gunpowder weapons, signalled the definitive victory of Spanish forces.\nAfter the final effort of the Inca to recover Cuzco had been defeated by Almagro, a dispute occurred between Pizarro and Almagro regarding the limits of their jurisdiction, as both claimed the city of Cuzco. The king of Spain had awarded the Governorate of New Toledo to Almagro and the Governorate of New Castile to Pizarro. The dispute had originated from a disagreement on how to interpret the limit between the governorates. This led to confrontations between the Pizarro brothers and Almagro, who was eventually defeated during the Battle of Las Salinas in 1538 and executed. Almagro's son, also named Diego and known as \"El Mozo\", was later stripped of his lands and left bankrupt by Pizarro.\nAtahualpa's wife, 10-year-old Cuxirimay Ocllo Yupanqui, was with Atahualpa's army in Cajamarca and had stayed with him while he was imprisoned. Following his execution, she was taken to Cuzco, given the name Do\u00f1a Angelina and made the concubine of Francisco Pizarro. By 1538, it was known she had borne Pizarro two sons, Juan and Francisco.\nDeath.\nIn Lima, on 26 June 1541 \"a group of 20 heavily armed supporters of Diego de Almagro II \"el mozo\" stormed Pizarro's palace, assassinating him and then forcing the terrified city council to appoint young Almagro as the new governor of Peru\". \"Most of Pizarro's guests fled, but a few fought the intruders, numbered variously between seven and 25. While Pizarro struggled to buckle on his breastplate, his defenders, including his half-brother Mart\u00edn de Alc\u00e1ntara, were killed\". For his part, Pizarro killed two attackers and ran through a third. A contemporary chronicler, Agust\u00edn de Z\u00e1rate, wrote that Pizarro fought until \"he was too exhausted to brandish his sword\" and then was struck fatally in the throat. When he fell to the ground he reportedly drew a cross on the floor with his blood and kissed it before dying. A modern forensic examination of his remains indicated that Pizarro had been savagely attacked with multiple stab wounds to his head and neck as well as defensive wounds to his hands and arms.\nPizarro's remains were briefly interred in the cathedral courtyard; at some later time, his head and body were separated and buried in separate boxes underneath the floor of the cathedral. In 1892, in preparation for the anniversary of Christopher Columbus' discovery of the Americas, a body believed to be that of Pizarro was exhumed and put on display in a glass coffin. However, in 1977, men working on the cathedral's foundation discovered a lead box in a sealed niche, which bore the inscription: \"Here is the head of Marquess Don Francisco Pizarro who discovered and conquered the kingdoms of Peru and presented them to the crown of Castile.\" A team of forensic scientists from the United States, led by William R. Maples, was invited to examine the two bodies and they soon determined that the body which had been honoured in the glass case for nearly a century had been incorrectly identified. The skull within the lead box not only bore the marks of multiple sword blows, but the features bore a remarkable resemblance to portraits made of the man in life.\nLegacy.\nBy his marriage to Quispe Sisa, Pizarro had a son also named Francisco, who married his relative In\u00e9s Pizarro, without issue. After Pizarro's death, In\u00e9s Yupanqui, whom he took as a mistress, Inca princess and favourite sister of Atahualpa, who had been given to Francisco in marriage by her brother, married a Spanish cavalier named Ampuero and left for Spain, taking her daughter who would later be legitimized by imperial decree. Francisca Pizarro Yupanqui eventually married her uncle Hernando Pizarro in Spain on 10 October 1537; the third son of Pizarro who was never legitimized, Francisco, by Dona Angelina, a wife of Atahualpa that he had taken as a mistress, died shortly after reaching Spain.\nAfter his invasion, Pizarro destroyed the Inca state and whilst ruling the area for almost a decade, initiated the decline of local cultures. The Incas' polytheistic religion was replaced by Christianity and much of the local population was reduced to serfdom under the Spanish elite. The cities of the Inca Empire were transformed into Spanish Catholic cities. Pizarro has been reviled for ordering Atahualpa's death despite the ransom payment (which Pizarro kept, after paying the Spanish king his due). Some Peruvians, particularly those of indigenous descent, may regard him negatively, although until relatively recently Pizarro had been portrayed positively, for instance in textbooks, for introducing Catholicism and creating a privileged class of mainly Spanish descent.\nSculptures.\nIn the early 1930s, sculptor Ramsay MacDonald created three copies of an anonymous European foot soldier resembling a conquistador with a helmet, wielding a sword and riding a horse. The first copy was offered to Mexico to represent Cort\u00e9s, though it was rejected. The statue was taken to Lima in 1934 and re-purposed to represent Pizarro. One other copy of the statue was unveiled in Wisconsin. The mounted statue of Pizarro in the Plaza Mayor in Trujillo, Spain, was created by American sculptor Charles Cary Rumsey. It was presented to the city by his widow in 1926.\nIn Peru, the statue's original location was the atrium of the Metropolitan Cathedral of Lima.\nIn 1952 it was moved to the Plaza Pizarro, and in 2003 it was relocated to \"Parque de La Muralla\" after 17 months in a warehouse, without the pedestal with which it was inaugurated and that it had throughout its history, being placed on a concrete base. On January 15, 2025, it was again moved to a pedestrian street next to the Plaza Mayor to be inaugurated, with the pedestal, as part of the city's 490th anniversary on the 18th.\nPalace of the Conquest.\nAfter returning from Peru extremely wealthy, the Pizarro family erected a plateresque-style palace on the corner of the Plaza Mayor in Trujillo. Francisca Pizarro Yupanqui and her uncle/husband Hernando Pizarro ordered the construction of the palace; it features busts of them and others. It instantly became a recognizable symbol of the plaza.\nThe opulent palace is structured in four stands, giving it the significance of the coat of arms of the Pizarro family, which is situated at one of its corner balconies displaying its iconographic content. The building's decor includes plateresque ornaments and balustrades.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55272", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55272", "title": "Helsingor", "text": ""}
{"id": "55273", "revid": "51018481", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55273", "title": "Manchukuo", "text": "1932\u20131945 Japanese puppet state in China\nManchukuo, officially known as the State of Manchuria prior to 1934 and the Empire of Great Manchuria thereafter, was a puppet state of the Empire of Japan in Northeast China that existed from 1932 until its dissolution in 1945. It was ostensibly founded as a republic, its territory consisting of the lands seized in the Japanese invasion of Manchuria; it was later declared to be a constitutional monarchy in 1934, though very little changed in the actual functioning of government. Manchukuo received limited diplomatic recognition, primarily from states aligned with the Axis powers, with its existence widely regarded as illegitimate.\nThe region now known as Manchuria had historically been the homeland of the Manchu people, though by the 20th century they had long since become a minority in the region, with Han Chinese constituting by far the largest ethnic group. The Manchu-led Qing dynasty, which had governed China since 17th century, was overthrown with the permanent abolition of the dynastic system in the 1911 Xinhai Revolution, with Puyi, the final emperor of China, forced to abdicate at the age of six. In 1931, Manchuria was invaded and occupied by the Empire of Japan following the Mukden incident. A puppet government was set up the following year, with Puyi brought in by the Japanese to serve as its nominal regent, though he himself had no actual political power. Japanese officials ultimately made all pertinent decisions, and exercised total control over Puyi's court and personal safety. Upon the nominal transition from republic to empire, Puyi was proclaimed as the emperor of Manchukuo.\nThe Japanese population of Manchuria increased dramatically during this period, largely due to Japan's efforts to resettle young, land-poor farmers from the inner islands. By 1945, more than a million Japanese people had settled within Manchukuo. The region's Korean population also increased during this period. Under vice-minister Nobusuke Kishi and the Manchurian Industrial Development Company, heavy industry was dramatically expanded using slave labor of the local populations. Manchukuo was the primary launching ground for further invasion of China in the Second Sino-Japanese War, beginning with the 1937 Marco Polo Bridge incident.\nRegions in the western part of the country with large Mongolian populations were ruled under a slightly different system, reflecting the distinct traditions extant there. The southern tip of the Liaodong Peninsula, now the city of Dalian, continued to be ruled directly by Japan as the Kwantung Leased Territory until the end of the war.\nThe state was ultimately toppled at the end of World War II with the Soviet invasion of Manchuria in August 1945; its government was formally dissolved following the surrender of Japan in September. The territory was transferred to Chinese administration the following year.\nNames.\nThe name of the state is written with the same Han characters sharing the same meaning in both Japanese and Chinese, allowing for the use of the simplified and variant characters that exist in both languages. In Chinese, the name of Manchukuo has often been prefixed with to stress its perceived illegitimacy.\nIn English, 'Manchukuo' derives from the Wade\u2013Giles romanization , incorporating the anglicized demonym 'Manchu'. Other European languages used equivalent terms: Manchukuo was known to its Axis allies as in Italian and or in German.\nManchukuo was often referred to in English simply as 'Manchuria', itself an unfamiliar term within China; its use had previously been widely encouraged by the Japanese in order to connote a level of separation from the rest of China. This was in stark contrast to the position held by the Qing, that Manchus were one of several integral Chinese peoples, with their homeland being an integral part of China. The historian Norman Smith wrote that \"the term 'Manchuria' is controversial\". Professor Mariko Asano Tamanoi remarked that she would \"use the term in quotation marks\". Herbert Giles wrote that the name was unknown to the Manchu people themselves as a geographical designation. In 2012, Professor Chad D. Garcia noted that usage of the term was out of favor in \"current scholarly practice\", instead preferring \"the northeast [of China]\".\nThe name of the country was changed to the 'Empire of Manchuria' in 1934 upon the coronation of Puyi as the Kangde Emperor. The name in Chinese and Japanese literally translates to 'Empire of Great Manchuria', with the prefixed suggestive of official names for previous Chinese dynasties, such as 'Great Ming' and 'Great Qing', though this went largely unreflected in English translations.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nThe Qing dynasty was founded in the 17th century by Manchus hailing from northeastern China, conquering the ethnically Han Shun and Ming dynasties. Upon establishing themselves, the Qing referred to their state as in Chinese and equivalently as ; in Manchu. The name was used in official documents and treaties, and while conducting foreign affairs. The Qing equated the territory of their state, which among other regions included present-day Manchuria, Xinjiang, Mongolia, and Tibet, with the idea of 'China' itself, rejecting notions that only Han areas were core parts of China. The Qing thought of China as fundamentally multi-ethnic: the term 'Chinese people' referred to all the Han, Manchu and Mongol subjects within the empire; likewise, the term 'Chinese language' was used to refer to the Manchu and Mongolian languages in addition to those language varieties that descended from Old Chinese. Moreover, the Qing stated explicitly in various edicts, as well as within the Treaty of Nerchinsk, that the Manchu home provinces belonged to China.\nThe Manchu homeland was referred to as the during the Qing, those provinces being Jilin, Heilongjiang, and Liaoning. These regions were first delineated in 1683, but would not become actual provinces until 1907. Jilin and Heilongjiang, considered primarily Manchu, were separated from Han Liaoning along the Willow Palisade, with internal movement and migration regulated by ethnicity. These policies continued until after the end of the Second Opium War in the late 19th century, when the government started to encourage massive waves of Han migration to the northeast, collectively known as the Chuang Guandong, in order to prevent the Russian Empire from seizing more of the area. In 1907, the three provinces constituting Manchuria were officially constituted, and the Viceroy of the Three Northeast Provinces position was established to govern them.\nQing decline and rising nationalism.\nAs the power of the court in Beijing weakened, many of the empire's outlying areas either broke free (such as Kashgar) or fell under the control of the Western imperialist powers. The Russian Empire had set its sights on Qing's northern territories, and through unequal treaties signed in 1858 and 1860 ultimately annexed huge tracts of territory adjoining the Amur River outright, now known collectively as Outer Manchuria. As the Qing continued to weaken, Russia made further efforts to take control of the rest of Manchuria. By the 1890s, the region was under strong Russian influence, symbolized by the Russian-built Chinese Eastern Railway that ran from Harbin to Vladivostok.\nThe Japanese ultra-nationalist Black Dragon Society initially supported Sun Yat-sen's activities against the Qing state, hoping that an overthrow of the Qing would enable a Japanese takeover of the Manchu homeland, with the belief that Han Chinese would not oppose it. T\u014dyama Mitsuru, who was the Society's leader as well as a member of the pan-Asian secret society Gen'y\u014dsha, additionally believed that the anti-Qing revolutionaries would even aid the Japanese in taking over, as well as helping them to enlarge the opium trade that the Qing were currently trying to destroy. The Society would support Sun and other anti-Manchu revolutionaries until the Qing ultimately collapsed. In Japan, many anti-Qing revolutionaries gathered in exile, where they founded and operated the Tongmenghui resistance movement, whose first meeting was hosted by the Black Dragon Society. The Black Dragon Society had a large impact on Sun specifically, cultivating an intimate relationship with him. Sun often promoted pan-Asianism, and sometimes even passed himself off as Japanese. In the wake of the Xinhai Revolution, the Black Dragons began infiltrating China, making inroads selling opium and spreading anti-Communist sentiment. Eventually, they also began directly agitating for a Japanese takeover of Manchuria.\nWith the Russo-Japanese War, Japanese influence largely replaced that of Russia in Manchuria. Japan had mobilized one million soldiers to fight the Russians in Manchuria, one for every eight Japanese families. Despite shocking success, the Japanese military underwent heavy losses, ultimately incurring about 500,000 casualties. The war caused many Japanese people to develop a more possessive attitude towards Manchuria, with Japan having sacrificed so much while fighting in Manchurian territory. From 1905 on, Japanese publications often described Manchuria as a \"sacred\" and \"holy\" land where many Japanese had died as martyrs. The war had almost bankrupted Japan, forcing the Japanese to accept the compromise Treaty of Portsmouth mediated by President Theodore Roosevelt of the United States, under which Japan made gains, but nowhere to the extent that the Japanese public had been expecting. The Treaty of Portsmouth set off an anti-American riot in Tokyo between 5\u20137 September 1905 as the general viewpoint in Japan was that the Japanese had won the war but lost the peace. The perception in Japan was the Treaty of Portsmouth was a humiliating diplomatic disaster that did not place all of Manchuria into the Japanese sphere of influence as widely expected, and the question of Manchuria was still \"unfinished business\" that would one day be resolved by the Imperial Army. In 1906, Japan established the South Manchurian Railway on the southern half of the former Chinese Eastern Railway built by Russia from Manzhouli to Vladivostok via Harbin with a branch line from Harbin to Port Arthur, now known as Dalian.\nUnder the terms of the Treaty of Portsmouth, the Kwantung Army had the right to occupy southern Manchuria while the region fell into the Japanese economic sphere of influence. The Japanese-owned South Manchurian Railroad company had a market capitalization of 200 million yen, making it Asia's largest corporation, which went beyond just running the former Russian railroad network in southern Manchuria to owning the ports, mines, hotels, telephone lines, and sundry other businesses, dominating the economy of Manchuria. With the growth of the South Manchuria Railroad company (\"Mantetsu\") came a growth in number of Japanese people living in Manchuria, from a Japanese population of 16,612 in 1906 to one of 233,749 in 1930. The majority of blue-collar employees for \"Mantetsu\" were Chinese, and the Japanese employees were mostly white-collar, meaning most of the Japanese living in Manchuria were middle-class people who saw themselves as an elite. In Japan, Manchuria was widely seen as analogous to the Wild West: a dangerous frontier region full of bandits, revolutionaries, and warlords, but also a land of boundless wealth and promise, where it was possible for ordinary people to become very well-off. During the interwar period, Manchuria once again became a political and military battleground between Russia, Japan, and China. Imperial Japan moved into Russia's far eastern territories, taking advantage of internal chaos following the Russian Revolution. However, in the years following the establishment of the Soviet Union, a combination of Soviet military successes and American economic pressure forced the Japanese to withdraw from the area, and Outer Manchuria would be under Soviet control by 1925.\nJapanese invasion and establishment of Manchukuo.\nDuring the Warlord Era, Marshal Zhang Zuolin established himself in Manchuria with Japanese backing. Later, the Japanese Kwantung Army found him too independent, so he was assassinated in 1928. In assassinating Marshal Zhang, the 'Old Marshal', the Kwantung Army generals expected Manchuria to descend into anarchy, providing the pretext for seizing the region. Marshal Zhang was killed when the bridge his train was riding across was blown up while three Chinese men were murdered and explosive equipment was placed on their corpses to make it appear that they were the killers, but the plot was foiled when Zhang's son Zhang Xueliang, the 'Young Marshal', succeeded him without incident while Tokyo refused to send additional troops to Manchuria. Given that the Kwantung Army had assassinated his father, the \"Young Marshal\"\u2014who unlike his father was a Chinese nationalist\u2014had strong reasons to dislike Japan's privileged position in Manchuria. Marshal Zhang knew his forces were too weak to expel the Kwantung Army, but his relations with the Japanese were unfriendly right from the start.\nAfter the Japanese invasion of Manchuria in 1931, Japanese militarists moved forward to separate the region from Chinese control and to create a Japanese-aligned puppet state. To create an air of legitimacy, the last Emperor of China, Puyi, was invited to come with his followers and act as the head of state for Manchuria. One of his faithful companions was Zheng Xiaoxu, a Qing reformist and loyalist.\nThe \"Northeast Supreme Administrative Council\" was established as a Japanese puppet organization in Manchuria following the Mukden Incident. On 16 February 1932, the Imperial Army hosted the \"Founding Conference\" or \"Big Four Conference\" with Liaoning governor Zang Shiyi, Heilongjiang governor Zhang Jinghui, commander of the Kirin Provincial Army Xi Qia, and general Ma Zhanshan, in order to establish the Northeast Administrative Committee. On the committee's second meeting, the aforementioned four plus Tang Yulin, Ling Sheng, and Qimote Semupilei were appointed as chairmen. On 18 February, the Council issued a statement announcing that \"the Northeast provinces are completely independent\".\nOn 18 February 1932 Manchukuo was proclaimed by the Northeast Supreme Administrative Council nominally in control of the region. On 25 February, the Council decided that the name of the new country name (Manchukuo), the national flag, era name, and more. Manchukuo was formally established on 1 March in Xinjing, and the council was abolished. It received formal recognition from Japan on 15 September 1932 through the Japan\u2013Manchukuo Protocol, after the assassination of Japanese Prime Minister Inukai Tsuyoshi. The city of Changchun\u2014renamed \u2014became the capital of Manchukuo. The local Chinese organized volunteer armies to oppose the Japanese and the new state required a war lasting several years to pacify the country.\nNominal transition to monarchy.\nManchukuo was proclaimed a monarchy on 1 March 1934, with Puyi assuming the throne with the era name of Kangde. He was nominally assisted in his executive duties by a Privy Council and a General Affairs State Council. This State Council was the center of political power, and consisted of several cabinet ministers, each assisted by a Japanese vice-minister. The commander-in-chief of the Kwantung Army also served as the official Japanese ambassador to the state. He functioned in a manner similar to resident officers in European colonial empires, with the added ability to veto decisions by the emperor. The Kwantung Army leadership placed Japanese vice ministers in his cabinet, while all Chinese advisors gradually resigned or were dismissed.\nZheng Xiaoxu served as Manchukuo's first prime minister until 1935, when Zhang Jinghui succeeded him. Puyi was nothing more than a figurehead and real authority rested in the hands of the Japanese military officials. An imperial palace was specially built for the emperor. The Manchu ministers all served as frontmen for their Japanese vice-ministers, who made all decisions.\nIn this manner, Japan formally detached Manchukuo from China over the course of the 1930s. With Japanese investment and rich natural resources, the area became an industrial powerhouse. Manchukuo had its own issued banknotes and postage stamps. Several independent banks were founded as well.\nThe conquest of Manchuria proved to be extremely popular with the Japanese people who saw the conquest as providing a much-needed economic \"lifeline\" to their economy which had been badly hurt by the Great Depression. The very image of a \"lifeline\" suggested that Manchuria\u2014which was rich in natural resources\u2014was essential for Japan to recover from the Great Depression, which explains why the conquest was so popular at the time and later why the Japanese people were so completely hostile towards any suggestion of letting Manchuria go. At the time, censorship in Japan was nowhere near as stringent as it would later become, and the American historian Louise Young noted: \"Had they wished, it would have been possible in 1931 and 1932 for journalists and editors to express anti-war sentiments\". The popularity of the conquest meant that newspapers such as the \"Asahi Shimbun\" that had initially opposed the war swiftly pivoted to support the war as the best way of improving sales. The conquest of Manchuria was also presented as resolving the \"unfinished business\" left over the Russo-Japanese war that finally undid one of the key terms of the Treaty of Portsmouth. The most popular song in Japan in 1932 was the \"Manchuria March\" whose verses proclaimed that the seizing of Manchuria in 1931\u201332 was a continuation of what Japan had fought for against Russia in 1904\u201305, and the ghosts of the Japanese soldiers killed in the Russo-Japanese war could now rest at ease as their sacrifices had not been in vain.\nIn 1935, Manchukuo purchased the Chinese Eastern Railway from the Soviet Union.\nSecond Sino-Japanese War.\nDuring the Second Sino-Japanese War, the Japanese used Manchukuo as a base to conduct their invasion of the rest of China. The Manchu general Tong Linge was killed in action by the Japanese in the Battle of Beiping\u2013Tianjin, which marked the beginning of the Second Sino-Japanese War. In the summer of 1939, a border dispute between Manchukuo and the Mongolian People's Republic resulted in the Battle of Khalkhin Gol. During this battle, a combined Soviet\u2013Mongolian force defeated a Kwantung Army with limited Manchukuoan support.\nSoviet invasion, dissolution, and aftermath.\nOn 8 August 1945, the Soviet Union declared war on Japan, in accordance with the agreement at the Yalta Conference, and invaded Manchukuo from Outer Manchuria and Outer Mongolia. During the Soviet offensive, the Manchukuo Imperial Army, on paper a 200,000-man force, performed poorly and whole units surrendered to the Soviets without firing a single shot; there were even cases of armed riots and mutinies against the Japanese forces. Puyi abdicated on 17 August and had hoped to escape to Japan to surrender to the Americans, but the Soviets captured him and eventually extradited him to the government of China, when the Chinese Communist Party came to power in 1949, where the authorities had him imprisoned on charges of war crimes, along with all other captured Manchukuo officials.\nFrom 1945 to 1948, Manchuria served as a base of operations for the People's Liberation Army against the National Revolutionary Army in the Chinese Civil War. The Chinese Communists used Manchuria as a staging ground until the final Nationalist retreat to Taiwan in 1949. Many Manchukuo army and Japanese Kant\u014dgun personnel served with the communist troops during the Chinese Civil War against the Nationalist forces. Most of the 1.5\u00a0million Japanese who had been left in Manchukuo at the end of World War II were sent back to their homeland in 1946\u20131948 by U.S. Navy ships in the operation now known as the Japanese repatriation from Huludao.\nPolitics.\nHistorians generally consider Manchukuo a puppet state of the Empire of Japan due to the Japanese military's continued occupation of the country and its direct control over the government.\nThe Legislative Council was largely a ceremonial body, existing to rubber-stamp decisions issued by the State Council. The only authorized political party was the government-sponsored Concordia Association, although various \u00e9migr\u00e9 groups were permitted their own political associations such as the White Russian Russian Fascist Party.\nThe American historian Louise Young noted that one of the most striking aspects of Manchukuo was that many of the young Japanese civil servants who went to work in Manchukuo were on the left, or at least had once been. In the 1920s, much of the younger \"intelligentsia\" in Japan had rejected their parents' values and had become active in various left-wing movements. Starting with the Peace Preservation Law of 1925, which made the very act of thinking about 'altering the ' a crime, the government had embarked on a sustained campaign to stomp out all left-wing thought in Japan. However, many of the bright young university graduates active in left-wing movements in Japan were needed to serve as civil servants in Manchukuo, which Young noted led the Japanese state to embark upon a contradictory policy of recruiting the same people active in the movements that it was seeking to crush.\" To rule Manchukuo, which right from the start had a very statist economy, the Japanese state needed university graduates who were fluent in Mandarin Chinese, and the 1920s\u201330s, many of the university graduates in Japan who knew Mandarin were \"progressives\" involved in left-wing causes. The fact that young Japanese civil servants in Manchukuo with their degrees in economics, sociology, etc., who had once been active in left-wing movements helps explain the decidedly leftist thrust of social and economic policies in Manchukuo with the state playing an increasingly large role in society. Likewise, much of the debate between Japanese civil servants about the sort of social-economic policies Japan should follow in Manchukuo in the 1930s was framed in Marxist terms, with the civil servants arguing over whether Manchuria prior to September 1931 had a \"feudal\" or a \"capitalist\" economy. The American historian Joshua Fogel wrote about the young servants of Manchukuo: \"Tremendous debates transpired on such things as the nature of the Chinese economy, and the lingua franca of these debates was always Marxism\". To resolve this debate, various research teams of five or six young civil servants, guarded by detachments from the Kwantung Army of about 20 or 30 men, went out to do field research in Manchukuo, gathering material about the life of ordinary people, to determine Manchukuo was in the \"feudal\" or \"capitalist\" stage of development. Starting in 1936, the Manchukuo state launched Five Year Plans for economic development, which were closely modeled after the Five Year Plans in the Soviet Union.\nIn theory, the Japanese were creating an entirely new, independent state, and this allowed for a considerable level of experimentation regarding the policies that the new state would be carrying out. Many university graduates in Japan who were ostensibly opposed to the social system within Japan itself, instead went to Manchukuo with the belief that they could implement reforms that might later inspire policy within Japan itself. This was especially the case since it was impossible to effect any reforms in Japan itself as the very act of thinking about \"altering the \"kokutai\"\" was a crime, which led many leftist Japanese university graduates to go work in Manchukuo, where they believed they could achieve the sort of social revolution that was impossible in Japan. By 1933, the Japanese state had essentially destroyed both the Japanese Socialist Party and the Japanese Communist Party via mass arrests and \"Tenk\u014d\" with both parties reduced down to mere rumps, which caused many Japanese student leftists to draw the conclusion that change was impossible in Japan, but still possible in Manchukuo, where paradoxically the Kwantung Army was sponsoring the sort of policies that were unacceptable in Japan. Moreover, the Great Depression had made it very difficult for university graduates in Japan to find work, which made the prospect of a well-paying job in Manchukuo very attractive to otherwise underemployed Japanese university graduates. In Manchukuo, the Japanese state was creating an entire state anew, which meant that Manchukuo had a desperate need for university graduates to work in its newly founded civil service. In addition, the Pan-Asian rhetoric of Manchukuo and the prospect of Japan helping ordinary people in Manchuria greatly appealed to the idealistic youth of Japan. Young wrote about the young Japanese people who went to work in Manchukuo: \"The men, and in some cases, the women, who answered the call of this land of opportunity, brought with them tremendous drive and ambition. In their efforts to remake their own lives, they remade an empire. They invested it with their preoccupations of modernity and their dreams of a Utopian future. They pushed it to embrace idealist rhetoric of social reform and justified itself in terms of Chinese nationalist aspiration. They turned it to architectural ostentation and the heady luxury of colonial consumption. They made it into a project of radical change, experimentation and possibility\".\nThe Kwantung Army for its part tolerated the talk of social revolution in Manchukuo as the best way of gaining support from the Han majority of Manchukuo, who did not want Manchuria to be severed from China. Even more active in going to Manchukuo were the products of \"Tenk\u014d\" ('changing directions'), a process of brainwashing by the police of left-wing activists to make them accept that the Emperor was a god after all, whom they were best to serve. \"Tenko\" was a very successful process that turned young Japanese who once had been ardent liberals or leftists who rejected the idea that the Emperor was a god into fanatical rightists, who made up for their previous doubts about the divinity of the Emperor with militant enthusiasm. One \"tenkosha\" was Tachibana Shiraki, who had once been a Marxist Sinologist until after he was arrested and undergoing \"tenko\" became a fanatical right-winger. Tachibana went to Manchukuo in 1932, proclaiming that the theory of the \"five races\" working together was the best solution to Asia's problems and argued in his writings that only Japan could save China from itself, which was a complete change from his previous policies, where he criticized Japan for exploiting China. Other left-wing activists like Ohgami Suehiro did not undergo \"tenko\", but still went to work in Manchukuo, believing it was possible to effect social reforms that would end the \"semi-feudal\" condition of the Chinese peasants of Manchukuo, and that he could use the Kwantung Army to effect left-wing reforms in Manchukuo. Ohgami went to work in the \"agricultural economy\" desk of the Social Research Unit of the South Manchurian Railroad company, writing up reports about the rural economy of Manchukuo that were used by the Kwantung Army and the Manchukuo state. Ohgami believed that his studies helped ordinary people, citing one study he did about water use in rural Manchukuo, where he noted a correlation between villages that were deprived of water and \"banditry\" (the codeword for anti-Japanese guerrillas), believing that the policy of improving water supply in villages was due to his study. The outbreak of the war with China in 1937 caused the state in Manchukuo to grow even bigger as a policy of \"total war\" came in, which meant there was a pressing demand for people with university degrees trained to think \"scientifically\". Fogel wrote that almost all of the university graduates from Japan who arrived in Manchukuo in the late 1930s were \"largely left-wing Socialists and Communists. This was precisely at the time when Marxism had been all but banned in Japan, when (as Yamada G\u014dichi put) \"if the expression \"shakai\" [social] appeared in the title of a book, it was usually confiscated\".\nYoung also noted\u2014with reference to Lord Acton's dictum that \"Absolute power corrupts absolutely\"\u2014that for many of the idealistic young Japanese civil servants, who believed that they could affect a \"revolution from above\" that would make the lives of ordinary people better, that the absolute power that they enjoyed over millions of people \"went to their heads\", causing them to behave with abusive arrogance towards the very people that they had gone to Manchukuo to help. Young wrote that it was a \"monumental conceit\" of the part of the young idealists to believe that they could use the Kwantung Army to achieve a \"revolution from above\" when it was the Kwantung Army that was using them. The ambitious plans for land reform in Manchukuo were vetoed by the Kwantung Army for precisely the reason that it might inspire similar reforms in Japan. The landlords in Japan tended to come from families who once belonged to the samurai caste, and almost all of the officers in the Imperial Japanese Army came from samurai families, which made the Kwantung Army very hostile towards any sort of land reform which might serve as an example for Japanese peasants. In October 1941, the Soviet spy ring headed by Richard Sorge was uncovered in Tokyo, which caused the authorities to become paranoid about Soviet espionage, and led to a new crackdown on the left. In November 1941, the Social Research Unit of the South Manchurian Railroad Company, which was well known as a hotbed of Marxism since the early 1930s, was raided by the \"Kenpeitai\", who arrested 50 of those working in the Social Research Unit. At least 44 of those working in the Social Research Unit were convicted of violating the Peace Preservation Law, which made thinking about \"altering the \"kokutai\"\" a crime in 1942\u201343 and were given long prison sentences, of whom four died due to the harsh conditions of prisons in Manchukuo. As the men working in the Social Research Unit had played important roles in Manchukuo's economic policy and were university graduates from good families, the Japanese historian Hotta Eri wrote that the \"Kenpeitai\" was ordered to \"handle them with care\", meaning no torture of the sort that the \"Kenpeitai\" normally employed in its investigations.\nWhen the Japanese surrender was announced on 15 August 1945, Puyi agreed to abdicate.\nAdministrative divisions.\nManchukuo was initially divided into three provinces. This number increased to five in 1934 when Sanjiang and Heihe were split off from Longjiang Province. A special ward of Beiman () existed between 1 July 1933 and 1 January 1936. In 1941, Manchukuo was reorganized into 19 provinces, with the two special cities of Xinjing and Harbin. Each province was in turn divided in four (Xing'an dong) and 24 (Fengtian) prefectures. Harbin was later incorporated into Binjiang province. Andong and Jinzhou provinces separated themselves from Fengtian while Binjiang and Jiandao separated themselves from Jilin in the same year.\nEconomy.\nManchukuo experienced rapid economic growth. During the 1920s, the Japanese Army under the influence of the \"Wehrstaat\" (Defense State) theories popular with the \"Reichswehr\" had started to advocate their own version of the \"Wehrstaat\", the totalitarian \"national defense state\" which would mobilize an entire society for war in peacetime. At least part of the reason why the Kwantung Army seized Manchuria in 1931 was to use it as a laboratory for creating an economic system geared towards the \"national defense state\"; colonial Manchuria offered up possibilities for the army carrying out drastic economic changes that were not possible in Japan.\nIndustrial development in Manchukuo was accomplished with state planning and Japanese investment, prioritizing military build-up and heavy industry without an emphasis on profitability.29\nFrom the beginning, the Army intended to turn Manchukuo into the industrial heartland of the empire. Economic planning in Manchukuo was influenced by Japanese observations of the Soviet approach to catch-up industrialization and reflected in Manchukuo's Five Year Plan for Heavy Industry.9 The development of industry in Manchukuo further influenced Japanese economic mobilization following the start of the Second Sino-Japanese War.9\nThe \"Zaibatsu\" were excluded from Manchukuo and all of the heavy industrial factories were built and owned by Army-owned corporations. In 1935, there was a change when the \"reform bureaucrat\" Nobusuke Kishi was appointed Deputy Minister of Industrial Development. Kishi persuaded the Army to allow the \"zaibatsu\" to invest in Manchukuo, arguing that having the state carry out the entire industrialization of Manchukuo was costing too much money. Kishi pioneered an elitist system where bureaucrats such as himself developed economic plans, which the \"zaibatsu\" had to then carry out. Kishi succeeded in marshaling private capital in a very strongly state-directed economy to achieve his goal of vastly increased industrial production while at the same time displaying utter indifference to the exploited Chinese workers toiling in Manchukuo's factories; the American historian Mark Driscoll described Kishi's system as a \"necropolitical\" system where the Chinese workers were literally treated as dehumanized cogs within a vast industrial machine. The system that Kishi pioneered in Manchuria of a state-guided economy where corporations made their investments on government orders later served as the model for Japan's post-1945 development, albeit not with same level of brutal exploitation as in Manchukuo. By the 1930s, Manchukuo's industrial system was among the most advanced making it one of the industrial powerhouses in the region. Manchukuo's steel production exceeded Japan's in the late 1930s. Many Manchurian cities were modernized during the Manchukuo era.\nMuch of the country's economy was often subordinated to Japanese interests and, during the war, raw material flowed into Japan to support the war effort. Traditional lands were taken and redistributed to Japanese farmers with local farmers relocated and forced into collective farming units over smaller areas of land. Chinese workers were the target of pervasive discrimination.30 Japanese and Manchukuo authorities used Chinese prisoners of war for forced labor.30\nTransportation.\nWhen Manchukuo was founded as a Japanese puppet state, it inherited the railroad network of Manchuria that was built originally during an economic and military struggle between Russia and Japan over Chinese territory and became a focal point before and after the Russo-Japanese War. Chinese warlords had also aimed to build local lines when possible. Manchukuo's railroad system would consist mainly of the South Manchuria Railway, a Japanese concession in the Republic of China, and the Chinese Eastern Railway, a Russian concession which was still owned by the Soviet Union inside Manchukuo. The Soviet Union sold the Chinese Eastern Railway to Japanese Manchukuo in 1935, giving Japan and Manchukuo full control over the railroads of Manchuria.\nThe Japanese built an efficient railway system that still functions well today. Known as the South Manchuria Railway or \"Mantetsu\", this large corporation came to own large stakes in many industrial projects throughout the region. Mantetsu personnel were involved in the economic exploitation of occupied China during World War II, and colonial planning at the behest of the Imperial Japanese Army. Many railway lines in Manchukuo were owned by the Manchukuo National Railway. After 1933, the Manchukuo National Railway was fully owned by the South Manchuria Railway/Mantetsu. Mantetsu had close to monopoly status and its properties were guarded by the Kwantung Army.\nBy the end of World War II, the South Manchuria Railway owned 70 companies and employed about 340,000 people in Manchukuo and occupied China.\nDemographics.\nIn 1908, the number of residents was 15,834,000, which rose to 30,000,000 in 1931 and 43,000,000 for the Manchukuo state. The population balance remained 123 men to 100 women and the total number in 1941 was 50,000,000.\nIn early 1934, the total population of Manchukuo was estimated as 30,880,000, with 6.1 persons the average family, and 122 men for each 100 women. These numbers included 29,510,000 Chinese (96%, which should have included the Manchu people), 590,760 Japanese (2%), 680,000 Koreans (2%), and 98,431 (&lt;1%) of other nationality: White Russians, Mongols, etc. Around 80% of the population was rural. During the existence of Manchukuo, the ethnic balance did not change significantly, except that Japan increased the Korean population in China. From Japanese sources come these numbers: in 1940 the total population in Manchukuo of Longjiang, Rehe, Jilin, Fengtian, and Xing'an provinces at 43,233,954; or an Interior Ministry figure of 31,008,600. Another figure of the period estimated the total population as 36,933,000 residents. The majority of Han Chinese in Manchukuo believed that Manchuria was rightfully part of China, and they both passively and violently resisted Japan's propaganda that Manchukuo was a \"multinational state\".\nAfter the Russian Civil War (1917\u20131922), thousands of Russians fled to Manchuria to join the Russian community already there. The Russians living in Manchuria were stateless and as whites had an ambiguous status in Manchukuo, which was meant to be a Pan-Asian state, whose official \"five races\" were the Chinese, Mongols, Manchus, Koreans, and Japanese. At various times, the Japanese suggested that the Russians might be a \"sixth race\" of Manchukuo, but this was never officially declared. In 1936, the \"Manchukuo Almanac\" reported that were 33,592 Russians living in the city of Harbin\u2014the \"Moscow of the Orient\"\u2014and of whom only 5,580 had been granted Manchukuo citizenship. Japanese imperialism was to a certain extent based on racism with the Japanese as the \"great Yamato race\", but there was always a certain dichotomy in Japanese thinking between an ideology based on racial differences based on bloodlines versus the idea of Pan-Asianism with Japan as the natural leader of all the Asian peoples. In 1940, ethnic Russians were included among the other nationalities of Manchukuo as candidates for conscription into the Manchukuo military.\nUntil World War II, the Japanese tended to leave alone those travelling to Manchukuo with a passport as they did not like to deal with protests from embassies in Tokyo about the mistreatment of their citizens. The Kwantung Army operated a secret biological-chemical warfare unit based in Pinfang, Unit 731, that performed gruesome experiments on people involving much evisceration of the subjects to see the effects of chemicals and germs on the human body. In the late 1930s, the doctors of Unit 731 demanded more European subjects to experiment upon in order to test the efficiency the strains of anthrax and plague that they were developing, leading to a great many of the Russians living in Manchukuo becoming the unwilling human guinea pigs of Unit 731. The Russian Fascist Party, which worked with the Japanese, was used to kidnap various \"unreliable\" Russians living in Manchukuo for Unit 731 to experiment upon.\nThe children of the Russian exiles often married Han Chinese, and the resulting children were always known in Manchukuo as \"mixed water\" people, and were shunned by both the Russian and Chinese communities. Chinese accounts, both at the time and later, tended to portray the Russians living in Manchuria as all prostitutes and thieves, and almost always ignored the contributions made by middle-class Russians to community life. Mindful of the way that Americans and most Europeans enjoyed extraterritorial rights in China at the time, accounts in Chinese literature about the Russians living in Manchukuo and their \"mixed water\" children often display a certain \"schadenfreude\" recounting how the Russians in Manchukuo usually lived in poverty on the margins of Manchukuo society with the local Chinese more economically successful. The South Korean historian Bong Inyoung noted when it came to writing about the \"mixed water\" people, Chinese writers tended to treat them as not entirely Chinese, but on the other hand were willing to accept these people as Chinese provided that would totally embrace Chinese culture by renouncing their Russian heritage, thus making Chineseness as much a matter of culture as of race.\nAround the same time the Soviet Union was advocating the Siberian Jewish Autonomous Oblast across the Manchukuo-Soviet border, some Japanese officials investigated a plan (known as the Fugu Plan) to attract Jewish refugees to Manchukuo as part of their colonisation effort, which was never adopted as official policy. The Jewish community in Manchukuo was not subjected to the official persecution that Jews experienced under Japan's ally Nazi Germany, and Japanese authorities were involved in closing down local anti-Semitic publications such as the Russian Fascist Party's newspaper \"Nash Put\". However, Jews in Manchukuo were victims of harassment by antisemitic elements among the White Russian population, one notable incident being the murder of Simon Kasp\u00e9. In 1937 the Far Eastern Jewish Council was created, chaired by the Harbin Jewish community leader Dr. Abraham Kaufman. Between 1937 and 1939 the city of Harbin in Manchukuo was the location of the Conference of Jewish Communities in the Far East. Following the Russian Red Army's invasion of Manchuria in 1945, Dr. Kaufman and several other Jewish community leaders were arrested by the Soviets and charged with anti-Soviet activities, resulting in Kaufman's imprisonment for ten years in a Soviet labor camp.\nThe Japanese Ueda Ky\u014dsuke labeled all 30 million people in Manchuria as \"Manchus\", including Han Chinese, despite the fact that most of them were not ethnic Manchu, and the Japanese written, \"Great Manchukuo\" built upon Ueda's argument to claim that all 30 million \"Manchus\" in Manchukuo had the right to independence to justify splitting Manchukuo from China. In 1942 the Japanese wrote \"Ten Year History of the Construction of Manchukuo\" which attempted to emphasize the right of ethnic Japanese to the land of Manchukuo while attempting to delegitimize the Manchu's claim to Manchukuo as their native land, noting that most Manchus moved out during the Qing period and only returned later.\nJapanese population.\nIn 1931\u20131932, there were 100,000 Japanese farmers; other sources mention 590,760 Japanese inhabitants. Other figures for Manchukuo speak of a Japanese population 240,000 strong, later growing to 837,000. In Xinjing, they made up 25% of the population. Accordingly, to the census of 1936, of the Japanese population of Manchukuo, 22% were civil servants and their families; 18% were working for the South Manchurian Railroad company; 25% had come to Manchukuo to establish a business, and 21% had come to work in industry. The Japanese working in the fields of transportation, the government, and in business tended to be middle class, white-collar people such as executives, engineers, and managers, and those Japanese who working in Manchukuo as blue-collar employees tended to be skilled workers. In 1934, it was reported that a Japanese carpenter working in Manchukuo with its growing economy could earn twice as much as he could in Japan. With its gleaming modernist office buildings, state of the art transport networks like the famous Asia Express railroad line, and modern infrastructure that was going up all over Manchukuo, Japan's newest colony became a popular tourist destination for middle-class Japanese, who wanted to see the \"Brave New Empire\" that was going up in the mainland of Asia. The Japanese government had official plans projecting the emigration of 5\u00a0million Japanese to Manchukuo between 1936 and 1956. Between 1938 and 1942 a batch of young farmers of 200,000 arrived in Manchukuo; joining this group after 1936 were 20,000 complete families. Of the Japanese settlers in Manchukuo, almost half came from the rural areas of Kyushu. When Japan lost sea and air control of the Yellow Sea in 1943\u201344, this migration stopped.\nAbout 2% of the Japanese population worked in agriculture. Many had been young, land-poor farmers in Japan that were recruited by the Patriotic Youth Brigade to colonize new settlements in Manchukuo. The Manchukuo Government had seized great portions of these land through \"price manipulation, coerced sales and forced evictions\". Some Japanese settlers gained so much land that they could not farm it themselves and had to hire Chinese or Korean laborers for help, or even lease some of it back to its former Chinese owners, leading to uneasy, sometimes hostile relations between the groups.\nWhen the Red Army invaded Manchukuo, they captured 850,000 Japanese settlers. With the exception of some civil servants and soldiers, these were repatriated to Japan in 1946\u20137. Many Japanese orphans in China were left behind in the confusion by the Japanese government and were adopted by Chinese families. Many, however, integrated well into Chinese society. In the 1980s Japan began to organize a repatriation program for them but not all chose to go back to Japan.\nThe majority of Japanese left behind in China were women, and these Japanese women mostly married Chinese men and became known as \"stranded war wives\" (zanryu fujin). Because they had children fathered by Chinese men, the Japanese women were not allowed to bring their Chinese families back with them to Japan, so most of them stayed. Japanese law allowed children fathered only by Japanese to become Japanese citizens.\nLegal system.\nAlthough the League of Nations ruled that Japan had broken international law by seizing Manchuria, the Japanese invested much effort into giving Manchukuo a legal system, believing that this was the fastest way for international recognition of Manchukuo. A particular problem for the Japanese was that Manchukuo was always presented as a new type of state: a multi-ethnic Pan-Asian state comprising Japanese, Koreans, Manchus, Mongols and Chinese to mark the birth of the \"New Order in Asia\". Typical of the rhetoric surrounding Manchukuo was always portrayed as the birth of a glorious new civilization was the press release issued by the Japanese Information Service on 1 March 1932 announcing the \"glorious advent\" of Manchukuo with the \"eyes of the world turned on it\" proclaimed that the birth of Manchukuo was an \"epochal event of far-reaching consequences in world history, marking the birth of a new era in government, racial relations, and other affairs of general interest. Never in the chronicles of the human species was any State born with such high ideals, and never has any State accomplished so much in such a brief space of its existence as Manchukuo\".\nThe Japanese went out of their way to try to ensure that Manchukuo was the embodiment of modernity in all of its aspects, as it was intended to prove to the world what the Asian peoples could accomplish if they worked together. Manchukuo's legal system was based upon the Organic Law of 1932, which featured a 12 article Human Rights Protection Law and a supposedly independent judiciary to enforce the law. The official ideology of Manchukuo was the \"wangdao\" (\"Kingly Way\") devised by a former mandarin under the Qing turned Prime Minister of Manchukuo Zheng Xiaoxu calling for an ordered Confucian society that would promote justice and harmony that was billed at the time as the beginning of a new era in world history. The purpose of the law in Manchukuo was not the protection of the rights of the individual, as the \"wangdao\" ideology was expressly hostile towards individualism, which was seen as a decadent European concept inimical to Asia, but rather the interests of the state by ensuring that subjects fulfilled their duties to the emperor. The \"wangdao\" favored the collective over the individual, as the \"wangdao\" called for all people to put the needs of society ahead of their own needs. Zheng together with the Japanese legal scholar Ishiwara Kanji in a joint statement attacked the European legal tradition for promoting individualism, which they claimed led to selfishness, greed and materialism, and argued that the \"wangdao\" with its disregard for the individual was a morally superior system. The seemingly idealistic Human Rights Protection Law counterbalanced the \"rights\" of the subjects with their \"responsibilities\" to the state with a greater emphasis on the latter, just as was the case in Japan. The \"wangdao\" promoted Confucian morality and spirituality, which was seen as coming down from Emperor Puyi, and as such, the legal system existed to serve the needs of the state headed by Emperor Puyi, who could change the laws as he saw fit. In this regard it is noteworthy that Legislative Yuan had only the power of \"assisting\" the Emperor with making laws, being endowed with far fewer powers than even the Imperial Diet in Japan had, which had the power to reject or approve laws. It was often suggested at the time that the Legislative Yuan of Manchukuo was a model for the Imperial Diet in Japan, an idea Hirohito, the Japanese emperor, was sympathetic to, but never took up. Hirohito in the end preferred the Meiji constitution passed by his grandfather in 1889 as it gave the Emperor of Japan ultimate power, while at the same time the fictitious nature of the Imperial Diet together with a prime minister and his cabinet governing Japan gave the Emperor a scapegoat when things went wrong.\nInitially, the judges who had served the Zhangs were retained, but in 1934, the Judicial Law College headed by the Japanese judge Furuta Masatake was opened in Changchun, to be replaced by a larger Law University in 1937. Right from the start, the new applicants vastly exceeded the number of openings as the first class of the Law College numbered only 100, but 1,210 students had applied. The legal system that the students were trained was closely modeled after the Japanese legal system, which in its turn was modeled after the French legal system, but there were a number of particularities unique to Manchukuo. Law students were trained to write essays on such topics as the \"theory of the harmony of the five races [of Manchukuo]\", the \"political theory of the Kingly Way\", \"practical differences between consular jurisdiction and extraterritoriality\", and how best to \"realize the governance of the Kingly Way\". The Japanese professors were \"astonished\" by the \"enthusiasm\" which the students wrote their essays on these subjects as the students expressed the hope that the \"wangdao\" was a uniquely Asian solution to the problems of the modern world, and that Manchukuo represented nothing less than the beginning of a new civilization that would lead to a utopian society in the near future. The Japanese professors were greatly impressed with the Confucian idealism of their students, but noted that their students all used stock phrases to the extent it was hard to tell their essays apart, cited examples of wise judges from ancient China while ignoring more recent legal developments, and were long on expressing idealistic statements about how the \"wangdao\" would lead to a perfect society, but were short on how explaining just how this was to be done in practice.\nAn example of the extent of Japanese influence on the legal system of Manchukuo was that every issue of the \"Manchukuo Legal Advisory Journal\" always contained a summary of the most recent rulings by the Supreme Court of Japan, and the reasons why the Japanese Supreme Court had ruled in these cases. However, there were some differences between the Manchukuo and Japanese legal systems. In Japan itself, corporal punishment had been abolished as part of the successful effort to end the extraterritorial rights enjoyed by citizens of the European powers but retained for the Japanese colonies of Korea and Taiwan. However, corporal punishment, especially flogging, was a major part of the Manchukuo legal system with judges being very much inclined to impose floggings on low-income Chinese men convicted of minor offenses that would normally merit only a fine or a short prison sentence in Japan. Writing in a legal journal in 1936, Ono Jitsuo, a Japanese judge serving in Manchukuo, regretted having to impose floggings as a punishment for relatively minor crimes but argued that it was necessary of Manchukuo's 30 million people \"more than half are ignorant and completely illiterate barbarians\" who were too poor to pay fines and too numerous to imprison. In Taiwan and Korea, Japanese law was supreme, but judges in both colonies had to respect \"local customs\" in regard to family law. In the case of Manchukuo, a place with a Han majority, but that ideology proclaimed the \"five races\" of Japanese, Chinese, Koreans, Manchus, and Mongols as all equal, this led in effect to several family laws for each of the \"five races\" respecting their \"local customs\" plus the Russian and Hui Muslim minorities.\nPolicing.\nThe Manchukuo police had the power to arrest without charge anyone who was engaged in the vaguely defined crime of \"undermining the state\". Manchukuo had an extensive system of courts at four levels staffed by a mixture of Chinese and Japanese judges. All of the courts had both two Japanese and two Chinese judges with the Chinese serving as the nominal superior judges and the Japanese the junior judges, but in practice the Japanese judges were the masters and the Chinese judges puppets. Despite the claims that the legal system of Manchukuo was a great improvement over the legal system presided over by Marshal Zhang Xueliang the \"Young Marshal\", the courts in Manchukuo were inefficient and slow, and ignored by the authorities whenever it suited them. In Asia, the rule of law and an advanced legal system are commonly seen as one of the marks of \"civilization\", which is why the chaotic and corrupt legal system run by Marshal Zhang was denigrated so much by the Japanese and Manchukuo media. In the early 1930s, Manchukuo attracted much legal talent from Japan as Japanese Pan-Asian idealists went to Manchuria with the goal of establishing a world-class legal system. As the Kwantung Army had the ultimate power in Manchukuo, the best Japanese judges by the late 1930s preferred not to go to Manchukuo where their decisions could be constantly second-guessed, and instead only the second-rate judges went to Manchukuo. By 1937 the Japanese judges and lawyers in Manchukuo were either disillusioned Pan-Asian idealists or more commonly cynical opportunists and mediocre hacks who lacked the talent to get ahead in Japan. By contrast, the best of the ethnic Chinese law schools' graduates in Manchukuo chose to work as part of Manchukuo's judicial system, suggesting many middle-class Chinese families were prepared to accept Manchukuo. White Russian emigres were recruited into the mountain forest police and the border police forces in the early 1930s.\nStarting with the Religions Law of May 1938, a cult of Emperor-worship closely modeled after the Imperial cult in Japan where Hirohito was worshiped as a living god, began in Manchukuo. Just as in Japan, schoolchildren began their classes by praying to a portrait of the emperor while imperial rescripts, and the imperial regalia become sacred relics imbued with magical powers by being associated with the god-emperor. As the Emperor Puyi was considered to be a living god, his will could not be limited by any law, and the purpose of the law was starkly reduced down to serving the will of the emperor rather than upholding values and rules. As in Japan, the idea governing the legal philosophy in Manchukuo was the Emperor was a living god who was responsible to no-one and who delegated some of his powers down to mere human beings who had the duty of obeying the will of the god-emperors. In Japan and Manchukuo, the actions of the god-emperors were always just and moral because gods could never do wrong, rather than because the god-emperors were acting to uphold moral values that existed \"a priori\".\nAgain following the Japanese system, in 1937 a new category of \"thought crime\" was introduced declaring that certain thoughts were now illegal and those thinking these forbidden thoughts were \"thought criminals\". People were thus convicted not for their actions, but merely for their thoughts. After the war with China began in July 1937, an \"emergency law\" was declared in Manchukuo, placing it under a type of martial law that suspended the theoretical civil liberties that existed up to that point, ordered the mobilization of society for total war, and increased the tempo of repression with the law on \"thought crimes\" being merely the most dramatic example. In April 1938, a new type of Special Security Court was created for those charged with the five types of \"thought crime\". On 26 August 1941, a new security law ruled that those tried before the Special Security Courts had no right of appeal or to a defense lawyer. One Special Security Court in Jinzhou between 1942 and 1945 sentenced about 1,700 people to death and another 2,600 for life imprisonment for \"thought crimes\", a figure that appears to be typical of the special courts. The police frequently used torture to obtain confessions and those tried in the Special Security Courts had no right to examine the evidence against them. Starting in 1943 the number of those tried and convicted by the courts rose drastically, though the number of death sentences remained stable. The rise in the number of convictions was due to the need for slave labor for the factories and mines of Manchukuo as the traditional supplies of slave labor from northern China were disturbed by World War II as most of those convicted were sentenced to work in the factories and mines. The American historian Thomas David Dubois wrote the legal system of Manchukuo went through two phases: the first lasting from 1931 to 1937, when the Japanese wanted to show the world a state with an ultra-modern legal system that was meant to be a shining tribute to Asians working together in brotherhood; and the second from 1937 to 1945 when the legal system becomes more of a tool for the totalitarian mobilization of society for total war.\nMilitary.\nThe Manchukuo Imperial Army was the ground component of Manchukuo's armed forces and consisted of as many as 170,000 to 220,000 troops at its peak in 1945 by some estimates, having formally been established by the Army and Navy Act of 15 April 1932. The majority of the soldiers were Manchurian-born Han Chinese, with smaller groups of Koreans, Mongols, and White Russian emigres, who were all trained and led by Japanese instructors and advisors. Despite the numerous attempts by the Japanese to improve the combat capability of the Imperial Army and instill a Manchukuoan patriotic spirit among its troops, most of its units were regarded as unreliable by Japanese officers. Their main role was to fight Nationalist and Communist insurgents who continued to resist the Japanese occupation of northeastern China, and occasionally the Manchukuo Imperial Army took part in operations against the Chinese National Revolutionary Army and the Soviet Red Army (in support of the Imperial Japanese Army). Initially its members were former soldiers of Marshal Zhang Xueliang's warlord army who had surrendered to Japan during the Japanese invasion of Manchuria. But since the Young Marshal's former troops were not sufficiently loyal to the new regime and performed poorly against partisans, the new government of Manchukuo took efforts to recruit\u2014and later draft\u2014new soldiers. In 1934 a law was passed stating that only those that had been trained by the government of Manchukuo could serve as officers. The Military Supplies Requisition Law of 13 May 1937 allowed Japanese and Manchukuo authorities to draft forced laborers. The actual calling up of conscripts for the army did not begin until 1940, at which point all youths received a physical and 10% were to be selected for service. Between 1938 and 1940, several military academies were established to provide a new officer corps for the Imperial Army, including a specific school for ethnic Mongols and one for White Russians.\nAfter fighting against insurgents during the early to mid-1930s, the Manchukuo Imperial Army played mainly a supporting role during the actions in Inner Mongolia against Chinese forces, with news reports stating that some Manchukuoan units performed fairly well. Later it fought against the Soviet Red Army during the Soviet\u2013Japanese border conflicts. A skirmish between Manchukuoan and Mongolian cavalry in May 1939 escalated as both sides brought in reinforcements and began the Battle of Khalkhin Gol. Although they did not perform well in the battle overall, the Japanese considered their actions useful enough to warrant expansion of the Manchukuo Army. Throughout the 1940s the only action it saw was against Communist guerrilla fighters and other insurgents, although the Japanese chose to rely only on the more elite units while the majority were used for garrison and security duty. Although Japan took the effort of equipping the Manchukuoan forces with some artillery (in addition to the wide variety it had inherited from Zhang Xueliang's army) along with some elderly tankettes and armored cars, the cavalry was the Imperial Army's most effective and developed branch. This was the force that confronted the 76 battle-hardened Red Army divisions transferred from the European front in August 1945 for the Soviet invasion of Manchuria. The cavalry branch saw the most combat against the Red Army, but they and their depleted Japanese Kwantung Army allies were quickly swept aside by the Soviet offensive. While some units remained loyal to their Japanese allies and put up a resistance, many mutinied against their Japanese advisors while others simply melted away into the countryside. Many of these Manchukuo Army troops would later join the Communists since the Chinese Nationalists executed former collaborators with Japan, becoming an important source of manpower and equipment for the Communists in the region.\nThe other two branches, the Manchukuo Imperial Air Force and the Manchukuo Imperial Navy, were small and underdeveloped, largely existing as token forces to give legitimacy to the Manchukuo regime. An Air Force was established in February 1937 with 30 men selected from the Manchukuo Imperial Army who were trained at the Japanese Kwantung Army aircraft arsenal in Harbin (initially the Kwantung Army did not trust the Manchukuoans enough to train a native air force for them). The Imperial Air Force's predecessor was the Manchukuo Air Transport Company, a paramilitary airline formed in 1931, which undertook transport and reconnaissance missions for the Japanese military. The first air unit was based in Xinjing and equipped with just one Nieuport-Delage NiD 29 and was later expanded with Nakajima Army Type 91 fighters and Kawasaki Type 88 light bombers. Two more air units were established, but they suffered a setback when one hundred pilots took their aircraft and defected to insurgents after murdering their Japanese instructors. Nonetheless, three fighter squadrons were formed in 1942 from the first batch of cadets, being equipped with Nakajima Ki-27 fighters in addition to Tachikawa Ki-9s and Tachikawa Ki-55 trainers, along with some Mitsubishi Ki-57 transports. In 1945, because of American bombing raids, they were issued with Nakajima Ki-43 fighters to have a better chance of intercepting B-29 Superfortresses. Some pilots saw action against the American bombers and at least one Ki-27 pilot downed a B-29 by ramming it with his plane in a kamikaze attack. The air force practically ceased to exist by the Soviet invasion but there were isolated instances of Manchukuoan planes attacking Soviet forces.\nThe Imperial Navy of Manchukuo existed mainly as a small river flotilla and consisted mainly of small gunboats and patrol boats, both captured Chinese ships and some Japanese additions. The elderly Japanese destroyer \"Kashi\" was lent to the Manchukuoan fleet from 1937 to 1942 as the \"Hai Wei\" before returning to the Imperial Japanese Navy. These ships were mostly crewed by Japanese sailors.\nSeveral specialized units which functioned outside of the main command structure of the military also existed. The Manchukuo Imperial Guard was formed out of soldiers of ethnic Manchu descent, charged with the protection of the Kangde Emperor and senior officials, as well as to function as an honor guard. Despite this it took part in combat and was considered to be an effective unit. Throughout the 1930s a \"Mongolian Independence Army\" was established out of about 6,000 ethnic Mongolian recruits and fought its own war against bandits with some success. It was expanded in 1938 but merged with the regular Imperial Army in 1940, although Mongol units continued to perform well. A special Korean detachment was founded in 1937 on the personal initiative of Lee Beom-ik, a collaborationist Korean governor of Gando Province. The unit was small but distinguished itself in combat against Communist guerrillas and was noted by the Japanese for its martial spirit, becoming one of the few puppet units to earn the respect of its Japanese superiors.\nHuman rights abuses.\nWar crimes.\nAccording to a joint study by historians Zhifen Ju, Mitsuyochi Himeta, Toru Kubo, and Mark Peattie, more than ten million Chinese civilians were used by the Kwantung Army for slave labor in Manchukuo under the supervision of the K\u014da-in.\nThe Chinese slave laborers often suffered illness due to high-intensity manual labor. Some badly ill workers were directly pushed into mass graves in order to avoid the medical expenditure and the world's most serious mine disaster, at Benxihu Colliery, happened in Manchukuo.\nBacteriological weapons were experimented on humans by the infamous Unit 731 located near Harbin in Beiyinhe from 1932 to 1936 and to Pingfan until 1945. Victims, mostly Chinese, Russians and Koreans, were subjected to vivisection, sometimes without anesthesia.\nAbuse of ethnic minorities.\nThe Oroqen suffered a significant population decline under Japanese rule. The Japanese distributed opium among them and subjected some members of the community to human experiments, and combined with incidents of epidemic diseases this caused their population to decline until only 1,000 remained.The Japanese banned Oroqen from communicating with other ethnicities, and forced them to hunt animals for them in exchange for rations and clothing which were sometimes insufficient for survival, which led to deaths from starvation and exposure. Opium was distributed to Oroqen adults older than 18 as a means of control. After 2 Japanese troops were killed in Alihe by an Oroqen hunter, the Japanese poisoned 40 Oroqen to death. The Japanese forced Oroqen to fight for them in the war which led to a population decrease of Oroqen people. Even those Oroqen who avoided direct control by the Japanese found themselves facing conflict from anti-Japanese forces of the Chinese Communists, which contributed to their population decline during this period.\nBetween 1931 and 1945, the Hezhen population declined by 80% or 90%, due to heavy opium use and deaths from Japanese cruelty, such as slave labor and relocation by the Japanese.\nDrug trafficking.\nIn 2007, an article by Reiji Yoshida in \"The Japan Times\" argued that Japanese investments in Manchukuo were partly financed by selling drugs. According to the article, a document found by Yoshida shows that the K\u014da-in was directly implicated in providing funds to drug dealers in China for the benefit of the puppet governments of Manchukuo, Nanjing and Mongolia. This document corroborates evidence analyzed earlier by the Tokyo tribunal which stated that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Japan's real purpose in engaging in drug traffic was far more sinister than even the debauchery of Chinese people. Japan, having signed and ratified the opium conventions, was bound not to engage in drug traffic, but she found in the alleged but false independence of Manchukuo a convenient opportunity to carry on a worldwide drug traffic and cast the guilt upon that puppet state\u00a0... In 1937, it was pointed out in the League of Nations that 90% of all illicit white drugs in the world were of Japanese origin\u00a0...\nInternational relations and recognition.\nFollowing the seizure of Manchuria by Japanese troops in September 1931, the League of Nations dispatched the Lytton Commission to investigate the situation in December of that year. The pretext for the Japanese invasion was an alleged bombing by Chinese soldiers of a railway controlled by Japan at Liutiaogou in Manchuria, despite widespread knowledge that the Japanese army had orchestrated it. This event, referred to as the 'Manchurian Incident,' resulted in the establishment of the state of Manchukuo under Japanese control. While there was much doubt over the truth of the Incident, including from the members of the Lytton Commission, it was not until after the Tokyo War Crimes Trials that documents revealed that the Manchurian Incident was fabricated by Japanese military officers. Manchukuo was merely a puppet state of Japan; and Japan's actions constituted unjustified aggression. When the League of Nations officially endorsed the Lytton Report in February 1933, Japan responded by withdrawing from the international organization. The Manchukuo case persuaded the United States to articulate the Stimson Doctrine, under which international recognition was withheld from changes in the international system created by the force of arms.\nIn spite of the League's approach, the new state was diplomatically recognized by El Salvador (3 March 1934) and the Dominican Republic (1934), Costa Rica (23 September 1934), Italy (29 November 1937), Spain (2 December 1937), Germany (12 May 1938) and Hungary (9 January 1939). The Soviet Union extended de facto recognition on 23 March 1935, but explicitly noted that this did not mean de jure recognition. However, upon signing the Soviet\u2013Japanese Neutrality Pact on 13 April 1941, the Soviet Union recognized Manchukuo de jure in exchange for Japan recognizing the integrity of neighboring Mongolia. The USSR did maintain five consulates-general in Manchukuo initially, although in 1936\u201337 these were reduced to just two: one in Harbin and another in Manzhouli. Manchukuo opened consulates in Blagoveshchensk (September 1932) and in Chita (February 1933).\nIt is commonly believed that the Holy See established diplomatic relations with Manchukuo in 1934, but the Holy See never did so. This belief is partly due to the erroneous reference in Bernardo Bertolucci's 1987 film \"The Last Emperor\" that the Holy See diplomatically recognized Manchukuo. Bishop Auguste Ernest Pierre Gaspais was appointed as \"representative \"ad tempus\" of the Holy See and of the Catholic missions of Manchukuo to the government of Manchukuo\" by the Congregation De Propaganda Fide (a purely religious body responsible for missions) and not by the Secretariat of State responsible for diplomatic relations with states. In the 1940s the Vatican established full diplomatic relations with Japan, but it resisted Japanese and Italian pressure to recognize Manchukuo and the Nanking regime.\nAfter the outbreak of World War II, the state was recognized by Slovakia (1 June 1940), Vichy France (12 July 1940), Romania (1 December 1940), Bulgaria (10 May 1941), Finland (17 July 1941), Denmark (August 1941), Croatia (2 August 1941)\u2014all controlled or influenced by Japan's ally Germany\u2014as well as by Wang Jingwei's Reorganized National Government of the Republic of China (30 November 1940), Thailand (5 August 1941) and the Philippines (1943)\u2014all under the control or influence of Japan.\nSociety and culture.\nNational symbols.\nAside from the national flag, the orchid, reportedly Puyi's favorite flower, became the royal flower of the country, similar to the chrysanthemum in Japan. The sorghum flower also became a national flower by decree in April 1933. \"Five Races Under One Union\" was used as a national motto.\nEducation.\nManchukuo developed an efficient public education system. The government established many schools and technical colleges, 12,000 primary schools in Manchukuo, 200 middle schools, 140 normal schools (for preparing teachers), and 50 technical and professional schools. In total the system had 600,000 children and young pupils and 25,000 teachers. Local Chinese children and Japanese children usually attended different schools, and the ones who did attend the same school were segregated by ethnicity, with the Japanese students assigned to better-equipped classes.\nConfucius's teachings also played an important role in Manchukuo's public school education. In rural areas, students were trained to practice modern agricultural techniques to improve production. Education focused on practical work training for boys and domestic work for girls, all based on obedience to the \"Kingly Way\" and stressing loyalty to the Emperor. The regime used numerous festivals, sports events, and ceremonies to foster loyalty of citizens. Eventually, Japanese became the official language in addition to the Chinese taught in Manchukuo schools.\nFilm.\nThe Photographic Division, part of the public relations section of the South Manchurian Railway was created in 1928 to produce short documentary films about Manchuria to Japanese audiences. In 1937, the Manchukuo Film Association was established by the government and the South Manchurian Railway in a studio in Jilin province. It was founded by Masahiko Amakasu, who also helped the career of Yoshiko \u014ctaka, also known as Ri Koran. He also tried to ensure that Manchukuo would have its own industry and would be catering mainly to Manchurian audiences. The films for the most part usually promote pro-Manchukuo and pro-Japanese views. General Amakasu shot various \"documentaries\" showing carefully choreographed scenes worthy of Hollywood of Emperor Puyi in his capital of Xinjing (modern Changchun) being cheered by thousands of subjects and reviewing his troops marching in parades that were intended to help legitimize Manchukuo's independence. After World War II, the archives and the equipment of the association were used by the Changchun Film Studio of the People's Republic of China.\nDress.\nThe Changshan and the Qipao, both derived from traditional Manchu dress, were considered national dresses in Manchukuo.\nIn a meeting with the Concordia Association, the organizers devised what was termed Concordia Costume, or the \"ky\u014dwafuku\", in 1936. Even Japanese such as Masahiko Amakasu and Kanji Ishiwara adopted it. It was gray and a civilianized version of the Imperial Japanese Army uniform. It was similar to the National Clothes (\"kokumin-fuku\") worn by Japanese civilians in World War II as well as the Zhongshan suit. A pin of either a Manchukuo flag or a five-pointed, five-colored star with the Manchukuo national colors were worn on the collars.\nSport.\nManchukuo had a national football team, and football was considered the country's de facto national sport; the Football Association of Manchukuo was formed around it.\nManchukuo hosted and participated in baseball matches with Japanese teams. Some of the games of the Intercity baseball tournament were held in the country, and played with local teams.\nManchukuo was to compete in the 1932 Summer Olympics, but one of the athletes who intended to represent Manchukuo, Liu Changchun, refused to join the team and instead joined as the first Chinese representative in the Olympics. There were attempts by Japanese authorities to let Manchukuo join the 1936 games, but the Olympic Committee persisted in the policy of not allowing an unrecognized state to join the Olympics. Manchukuo had a chance to participate in the planned 1940 Helsinki Olympics, but the onset of World War II prevented the games from taking place. Manchukuo instead sent athletes to compete at the 1940 East Asian Games in Tokyo organised by the Japanese Empire, as a replacement for the cancelled 1940 Summer Olympics.\nStamps and postal history.\nManchukuo issued postage stamps from 28 July 1932 until its dissolution following the surrender of the Empire of Japan in August 1945. The last issue of Manchukuo was on 2 May 1945.\nIn popular culture.\nin Herg\u00e9's 1934 \"Tintin: The Blue Lotus\", Tintin and Snowy are invited to China in the midst of the 1931 Japanese invasion of Manchuria, where he reveals the machinations of Japanese spies and uncovers a drug-smuggling ring.\nThe 1944 Australia radio serial \"Forgotten Men\" was set in the country.\nIn Masaki Kobayashi's \"The Human Condition\" (1959), Kaji, the main protagonist, is a labor supervisor assigned to a workforce consisting of Chinese prisoners in a large mining operation in Japanese-colonized Manchuria.\nBernardo Bertolucci's 1987 film \"The Last Emperor\" presented a portrait of Manchukuo through the memories of Emperor Puyi, during his days as a political prisoner in the People's Republic of China.\nHaruki Murakami's 1995 novel \"The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle\" deals greatly with Manchukuo through the character of Lieutenant Mamiya. Mamiya recalls, in person and in correspondence, his time as an officer in the Kwantung Army in Manchukuo. While the period covered in these recollections extends over many years, the focus is on the final year of the war and the Soviet invasion of Manchuria.\nThe 2008 South Korean western \"The Good, the Bad, the Weird\" is set in the desert wilderness of 1930s Manchuria.\nMichael Chabon's 2007 novel \"The Yiddish Policemen's Union\"; in this alternative 2007 Manchukuo has broken off from the rest of China and is an independent nation in its own right, and has its own Space Programme.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55275", "revid": "612852", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55275", "title": "Denotational semantics", "text": "Study of programming languages via mathematical objects\nIn computer science, denotational semantics (initially known as mathematical semantics or Scott\u2013Strachey semantics) is an approach of formalizing the meanings of programming languages by constructing mathematical objects (called \"denotations\") that describe the meanings of expressions from the languages. Other approaches providing formal semantics of programming languages include axiomatic semantics and operational semantics.\nBroadly speaking, denotational semantics is concerned with finding mathematical objects called domains that represent what programs do. For example, programs (or program phrases) might be represented by partial functions or by games between the environment and the system.\nAn important tenet of denotational semantics is that \"semantics should be compositional\": the denotation of a program phrase should be built out of the denotations of its subphrases.\nHistorical development.\nDenotational semantics originated in the work of Christopher Strachey and Dana Scott published in the early 1970s. As originally developed by Strachey and Scott, denotational semantics provided the meaning of a computer program as a function that mapped input into output. To give meanings to recursively defined programs, Scott proposed working with continuous functions between domains, specifically complete partial orders. As described below, work has continued in investigating appropriate denotational semantics for aspects of programming languages such as sequentiality, concurrency, non-determinism and local state.\nDenotational semantics has been developed for modern programming languages that use capabilities like concurrency and exceptions, e.g., Concurrent ML, CSP, and Haskell. The semantics of these languages is compositional in that the meaning of a phrase depends on the meanings of its subphrases. For example, the meaning of the applicative expression codice_1 is defined in terms of semantics of its subphrases f, E1 and E2. In a modern programming language, E1 and E2 can be evaluated concurrently and the execution of one of them might affect the other by interacting through shared objects causing their meanings to be defined in terms of each other. Also, E1 or E2 might throw an exception which could terminate the execution of the other one. The sections below describe special cases of the semantics of these modern programming languages.\nMeanings of recursive programs.\nDenotational semantics is ascribed to a program phrase as a function from an environment (holding current values of its free variables) to its denotation. For example, the phrase produces a denotation when provided with an environment that has binding for its two free variables: and . If in the environment has the value 3 and has the value 5, then the denotation is 15.\nA function can be represented as a set of ordered pairs of argument and corresponding result values. For example, the set {(0,1), (4,3)} denotes a function with result 1 for argument 0, result 3 for the argument 4, and undefined otherwise.\nConsider for example the factorial function, which might be defined recursively as:\nint factorial(int n)\n if (n == 0)\n return 1;\n else\n return n * factorial(n - 1);\nTo provide a meaning for this recursive definition, the denotation is built up as the limit of approximations, where each approximation limits the number of calls to factorial. At the beginning, we start with no calls - hence nothing is defined. In the next approximation, we can add the ordered pair (0,1), because this doesn't require calling factorial again. Similarly we can add (1,1), (2,2), etc., adding one pair each successive approximation because computing \"factorial(n)\" requires \"n+1\" calls. In the limit we get a total function from formula_1 to formula_1 defined everywhere in its domain.\nFormally we model each approximation as a partial function formula_3. Our approximation is then repeatedly applying a function implementing \"make a more defined partial factorial function\", i.e. formula_4, starting with the empty function (empty set). \"F\" could be defined in code as follows (using codice_2 for formula_3):\nint factorial_nonrecursive(Map&lt;int,int&gt; factorial_less_defined, int n)\n if (n == 0) then return 1;\n else if (fprev = lookup(factorial_less_defined, n-1)) then\n return n * fprev;\n else\n return NOT_DEFINED;\nMap&lt;int,int&gt; F(Map&lt;int,int&gt; factorial_less_defined)\n Map&lt;int,int&gt; new_factorial = Map.empty();\n for (int n in all&lt;int&gt;()) {\n if (f = factorial_nonrecursive(factorial_less_defined, n) != NOT_DEFINED)\n new_factorial.put(n, f);\n return new_factorial;\nThen we can introduce the notation \"Fn\" to indicate \"F\" applied \"n\" times.\nThis iterative process builds a sequence of partial functions from formula_1 to formula_1. Partial functions form a chain-complete partial order using \u2286 as the ordering. Furthermore, this iterative process of better approximations of the factorial function forms an expansive (also called progressive) mapping because each formula_8 using \u2286 as the ordering. So by a fixed-point theorem (specifically Bourbaki\u2013Witt theorem), there exists a fixed point for this iterative process.\nIn this case, the fixed point is the least upper bound of this chain, which is the full function, which can be expressed as the union\nformula_9\nThe fixed point we found is the least fixed point of \"F\", because our iteration started with the smallest element in the domain (the empty set). To prove this we need a more complex fixed point theorem such as the Knaster\u2013Tarski theorem.\nDenotational semantics of non-deterministic programs.\nThe concept of power domains has been developed to give a denotational semantics to non-deterministic sequential programs. Writing \"P\" for a power-domain constructor, the domain \"P\"(\"D\") is the domain of non-deterministic computations of type denoted by \"D\".\nThere are difficulties with fairness and unboundedness in domain-theoretic models of non-determinism.\nDenotational semantics of concurrency.\nMany researchers have argued that the domain-theoretic models given above do not suffice for the more general case of concurrent computation. For this reason various new models have been introduced. In the early 1980s, people began using the style of denotational semantics to give semantics for concurrent languages. Examples include Will Clinger's work with the actor model; Glynn Winskel's work with event structures and Petri nets; and the work by Francez, Hoare, Lehmann, and de Roever (1979) on trace semantics for CSP. All these lines of inquiry remain under investigation (see e.g. the various denotational models for CSP).\nRecently, Winskel and others have proposed the category of profunctors as a domain theory for concurrency.\nDenotational semantics of state.\nState (such as a heap) and simple imperative features can be straightforwardly modeled in the denotational semantics described above. The key idea is to consider a command as a partial function on some domain of states. The meaning of \" is then the function that takes a state to the state with assigned to . The sequencing operator \" is denoted by composition of functions. Fixed-point constructions are then used to give a semantics to looping constructs, such as \"\".\nThings become more difficult in modelling programs with local variables. One approach is to no longer work with domains, but instead to interpret types as functors from some category of worlds to a category of domains. Programs are then denoted by natural continuous functions between these functors.\nDenotations of data types.\nMany programming languages allow users to define recursive data types. For example, the type of lists of numbers can be specified by\ndatatype list = Cons of nat * list | Empty\nThis section deals only with functional data structures that cannot change. Conventional imperative programming languages would typically allow the elements of such a recursive list to be changed.\nFor another example: the type of denotations of the untyped lambda calculus is\ndatatype D = D of (D \u2192 D)\nThe problem of \"solving domain equations\" is concerned with finding domains that model these kinds of datatypes. One approach, roughly speaking, is to consider the collection of all domains as a domain itself, and then solve the recursive definition there.\nPolymorphic data types are data types that are defined with a parameter. For example, the type of \u03b1 s is defined by\ndatatype \u03b1 list = Cons of \u03b1 * \u03b1 list | Empty\nLists of natural numbers, then, are of type , while lists of strings are of .\nSome researchers have developed domain theoretic models of polymorphism. Other researchers have also modeled parametric polymorphism within constructive set theories.\nA recent research area has involved denotational semantics for object and class based programming languages.\nDenotational semantics for programs of restricted complexity.\nFollowing the development of programming languages based on linear logic, denotational semantics have been given to languages for linear usage (see e.g. proof nets, coherence spaces) and also polynomial time complexity.\nDenotational semantics of sequentiality.\nThe problem of full abstraction for the sequential programming language PCF was, for a long time, a big open question in denotational semantics. The difficulty with PCF is that it is a very sequential language. For example, there is no way to define the parallel-or function in PCF. It is for this reason that the approach using domains, as introduced above, yields a denotational semantics that is not fully abstract.\nThis open question was mostly resolved in the 1990s with the development of game semantics and also with techniques involving logical relations. For more details, see the page on PCF.\nDenotational semantics as source-to-source translation.\nIt is often useful to translate one programming language into another. For example, a concurrent programming language might be translated into a process calculus; a high-level programming language might be translated into byte-code. (Indeed, conventional denotational semantics can be seen as the interpretation of programming languages into the internal language of the category of domains.)\nIn this context, notions from denotational semantics, such as full abstraction, help to satisfy security concerns.\nAbstraction.\nIt is often considered important to connect denotational semantics with operational semantics. This is especially important when the denotational semantics is rather mathematical and abstract, and the operational semantics is more concrete or closer to the computational intuitions. The following properties of a denotational semantics are often of interest.\nFor semantics in the traditional style, adequacy and full abstraction may be understood roughly as the requirement that \"operational equivalence coincides with denotational equality\". For denotational semantics in more intensional models, such as the actor model and process calculi, there are different notions of equivalence within each model, and so the concepts of adequacy and of full abstraction are a matter of debate, and harder to pin down. Also the mathematical structure of operational semantics and denotational semantics can become very close.\nAdditional desirable properties we may wish to hold between operational and denotational semantics are:\nCompositionality.\nAn important aspect of denotational semantics of programming languages is compositionality, by which the denotation of a program is constructed from denotations of its parts. For example, consider the expression \"7 + 4\". Compositionality in this case is to provide a meaning for \"7 + 4\" in terms of the meanings of \"7\", \"4\" and \"+\".\nA basic denotational semantics in domain theory is compositional because it is given as follows. We start by considering program fragments, i.e. programs with free variables. A \"typing context\" assigns a type to each free variable. For instance, in the expression (\"x\" + \"y\") might be considered in a typing context (\"x\":,\"y\":). We now give a denotational semantics to program fragments, using the following scheme.\nNow, the meaning of the compound expression (7+4) is determined by composing the three functions \u301a\u22a27:\u301b:1\u2192formula_1\u22a5, \u301a\u22a24:\u301b:1\u2192formula_1\u22a5, and \u301a\"x\":,\"y\":\u22a2\"x\"+\"y\":\u301b:formula_1\u22a5\u00d7formula_1\u22a5\u2192formula_1\u22a5.\nIn fact, this is a general scheme for compositional denotational semantics. There is nothing specific about domains and continuous functions here. One can work with a different category instead. For example, in game semantics, the category of games has games as objects and strategies as morphisms: we can interpret types as games, and programs as strategies. For a simple language without general recursion, we can make do with the category of sets and functions. For a language with side-effects, we can work in the Kleisli category for a monad. For a language with state, we can work in a functor category. Milner has advocated modelling location and interaction by working in a category with interfaces as objects and \"bigraphs\" as morphisms.\nSemantics versus implementation.\nAccording to Dana Scott (1980):\n\"It is not necessary for the semantics to determine an implementation, but it should provide criteria for showing that an implementation is correct.\"\nAccording to Clinger (1981):\n\"Usually, however, the formal semantics of a conventional sequential programming language may itself be interpreted to provide an (inefficient) implementation of the language. A formal semantics need not always provide such an implementation, though, and to believe that semantics must provide an implementation leads to confusion about the formal semantics of concurrent languages. Such confusion is painfully evident when the presence of unbounded nondeterminism in a programming language's semantics is said to imply that the programming language cannot be implemented.\"\nConnections to other areas of computer science.\nSome work in denotational semantics has interpreted types as domains in the sense of domain theory, which can be seen as a branch of model theory, leading to connections with type theory and category theory. Within computer science, there are connections with abstract interpretation, program verification, and model checking.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55278", "revid": "13220696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55278", "title": "Warp drive", "text": "Fictional superluminal spacecraft propulsion system\nA warp drive or a drive enabling space warp is a fictional superluminal (faster than the speed of light) spacecraft propulsion system in many science fiction works, most notably \"Star Trek\", and a subject of ongoing real-life physics research. The general concept of \"warp drive\" was introduced by John W. Campbell in his 1957 novel \"Islands of Space\" and was popularized by the \"Star Trek\" series. Its closest real-life equivalent is the Alcubierre drive, a theoretical solution of the field equations of general relativity.\nHistory and characteristics.\nWarp drive, or a drive enabling space warp, is one of several ways of travelling through space found in science fiction. It has been often discussed as being conceptually similar to hyperspace. A warp drive is a device that distorts the shape of the space-time continuum. A spacecraft equipped with a warp drive may travel at speeds greater than that of light by many orders of magnitude. In contrast to some other fictitious faster-than-light technologies such as a jump drive, the warp drive does not permit instantaneous travel and transfers between two points, but rather involves a measurable passage of time which is pertinent to the concept. In contrast to hyperspace, spacecraft at warp velocity would continue to interact with objects in \"normal space\".\nThe general concept of warp drive was introduced by John W. Campbell in his 1957 novel \"Islands of Space.\" \"Brave New Words\" gave the earliest example of the term \"space-warp drive\" as Fredric Brown's \"Gateway to Darkness\" (1949), and also cited an unnamed story from \"Cosmic Stories\" (May 1941) as using the word \"warp\" in the context of space travel, although the usage of this term as a \"bend or curvature\" in space which facilitates travel can be traced to several works as far back as the mid-1930s, for example Jack Williamson's \"The Cometeers\" (1936).\nEinstein's space warp and real-world physics.\nEinstein's theory of special relativity states that speed of light travel is impossible for material objects that, unlike photons, have a non-zero rest mass. The problem of a material object exceeding light speed is that an infinite amount of kinetic energy would be required to travel at exactly the speed of light. Warp drives are one of the science-fiction tropes that serve to circumvent this limitation in fiction to facilitate stories set at galactic scales. However, the concept of space warp has been criticized as \"illogical\", and has been connected to several other rubber science ideas that do not fit into our current understanding of physics, such as the transporters and replicators in Star Trek, antigravity or negative mass.\nSome argue that these effects mean that although it's not possible to travel faster than the speed of light, both space and time \"warp\" to allow travelling the distance of one light year, in less than a year. Although it is not possible to travel faster than the speed of light, the effective speed is faster than light. This warping of space and time is precisely mathematically specified by the Lorentz factor, which depends on velocity. Although only theoretical when published over 100 years ago, the effect has since been measured and confirmed many times. In the limit, at light speed time stops completely (relative to a certain reference frame) and it is possible to travel infinite distances across space with no passage of time. \nThe solution to Einstein\u2019s field equations proposed by Alcubierre defines a spacetime metric\u2014known as the Alcubierre metric\u2014where spacetime itself is distorted in a controlled manner. The metric creates a region of compressed spacetime in front of the spacecraft and expanded spacetime behind it, forming a \"warp bubble.\" The spacecraft resides within this bubble, moving with the local spacetime without experiencing relativistic time dilation or violating causality.\nMathematically, the Alcubierre metric is expressed as:\nformula_1\nwhere:\nThe creation of such a bubble requires exotic matter\u2014substances with negative energy density (a violation of the Weak Energy Condition). Casimir effect experiments have hinted at the existence of negative energy in quantum fields, but practical production at the required scale remains speculative.\nSimilarly, a quantum drive might utilize quantum field theory to exploit vacuum energy, leveraging phenomena such as the zero-point energy of the quantum vacuum. The drive could theoretically manipulate virtual particle pairs or create localized energy gradients via quantum entanglement. The energy density of the quantum vacuum, often estimated as 10113J/m3 in the context of quantum field fluctuations, could provide immense power if harnessed effectively.\nAlthough the concept of warp drive has originated in fiction, it has received some scientific consideration, most notably related to the 1990s concept of the Alcubierre drive. Alcubierre stated in an email to William Shatner that his theory was directly inspired by the term used in the TV series \"Star Trek\" and cites the \"'warp drive' of science fiction\" in his 1994 article.\nIn 2021, DARPA-funded researcher Harold White, of the Limitless Space Institute, claimed that he had succeeded in creating a real warp bubble, saying \"our detailed numerical analysis of our custom Casimir cavities helped us identify a real and manufacturable nano/microstructure that is predicted to generate a negative vacuum energy density such that it would manifest a real nanoscale warp bubble, not an analog, but the real thing.\"\n\"Star Trek\".\nWarp drive is one of the fundamental features of the \"Star Trek\" franchise and one of the best-known examples of space warp (warp drive) in fiction. In the first pilot episode of \"\", \"The Cage\", it is referred to as a \"hyperdrive\", with Captain Pike stating the speed to reach planet TalosIV as \"time warp, factor 7\". The warp drive in Star Trek is one of the most detailed fictional technologies. Compared to the hyperspace drives of other fictional universes, it differs in that a spaceship does not leave the normal space-time continuum and instead the space-time itself is distorted, as is made possible in the general theory of relativity.\nThe basic functional principle of the warp drive in \"Star Trek\" is the same for all spaceships. A strong energy source, usually a so-called\" warp core\" or sometimes called \"intermix chamber\", generates a high-energy plasma. This plasma is transported to the so-called \"warp field generators\" via lines that are reminiscent of pipes. These generators are basically coils in \"warp nacelles\" protruding from the spaceship. These generate a subspace field, the so-called \"warp field\" or a \"warp bubble\", which distort space-time and propels the bubble and spaceship in the bubble forward.\nThe warp core can be designed in various forms. Humans and most of the other fictional races use a moderated reaction of antimatter and matter. The energy produced passes through a matrix, which is made of a fictional chemical element, called dilithium. Other species are shown to use different methods for faster-than-light propulsion. The Romulans, for example, use artificial micro-black holes called \"quantum singularities\".\nThe speeds are given in warp factors and follow a geometric progression. The first scale developed by Franz Joseph was simply a cubic progression with no limit. This leads to the use of ever growing warp factors in and the \"\". For example, warp 14.1 in the TOS-episode \"That Which Survives\" or warp 36 in the TAS-episode \"The Counter-Clock Incident\". In order to focus more on the story and away from the technobabble, Gene Roddenberry commissioned Michael Okuda to invent a revised warp scale. Warp 10 should be the absolute limit and stand for infinite speed. In homage to Gene Roddenberry, this limit was also called \"Eugene's Limit\". Okuda explains this in an author's comment in his technical manual for the USS \"Enterprise\"-D. Between Warp 1 (the speed of light) and Warp 9, the increase was still roughly geometric, but the exponent was adjusted so that the speeds were higher compared to the old scale. For instance, Warp 9 is more than 1500 times faster than Warp 1 in comparison to the 729 times (nine to the power of 3) calculated using the original cubic formula. In the same author's comment, Okuda explains that the motivation was to fulfill fan expectations that the new Enterprise is much faster than the original, but without changing the warp factor numbers. Between Warp 9 and Warp 10, the new scale grows exponentially. Only in a single episode of \"Star Trek Voyager\" there was a specific numerical speed value given for a warp factor. In the episode \"The 37's\", Tom Paris tells Amelia Earhart that Warp 9.9 is about 4 billion miles per second (using customary units for the character's benefit). That is more than 14 times the value of Warp 9 and equal to around 21,400 times speed of light. However, this statement contradicts the technical manuals and encyclopedias written by Rick Sternbach and Michael Okuda, where a speed of 3053 times the speed of light was established for a warp factor of 9.9 and a speed of 7912 times the speed of light for a warp factor of 9.99. Both numerical values are well below the value given by Tom Paris.\nIn the episode \"\", a \"coaxial warp drive\" is mentioned. The working principle is explained in more detail in the \"Star Trek Encyclopedia\". This variant of a warp drive uses spatial folding instead of a warp field and allows an instant movement with nearly infinite velocity.\n\"Star Trek\" has also introduced a so-called \"Transwarp\" concept, but without a fixed definition. It is effectively a catch-all phrase for any and all technologies and natural phenomena that enable speeds above Warp 9.99.\nRick Sternbach described the basic idea in the Technical Manual: \"Finally, we had to provide some loophole for various powerful aliens like Q, who have a knack for tossing the ship million of light years in the time of a commercial break. [...] This lets Q and his friends have fun in the 9.9999+ range, but also lets our ship travel slowly enough to keep the galaxy a big place, and meets the other criteria.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55279", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55279", "title": "James Dewar", "text": "British chemist and physicist (1842\u20131923)\nSir James Dewar ( ; 20 September 1842 \u2013 27 March 1923) was a Scottish chemist and physicist. He is best known for his invention of the vacuum flask, which he used in conjunction for his research into the liquefaction of gases. He also studied atomic and molecular spectroscopy, working in these fields for more than 25 years. Dewar was nominated for the Nobel Prize 8 times \u2014 5 times in Physics and 3 times in Chemistry \u2014 but he was never so honoured.\nEarly life.\nJames Dewar was born in Kincardine, Perthshire (now in Fife) in 1842, the youngest of six boys of Ann Dewar and Thomas Dewar, a vintner. He was educated at Kincardine Parish School and then Dollar Academy, and his parents died when he was 15. He attended the University of Edinburgh where he studied chemistry under Lyon Playfair (later Baron Playfair), becoming Playfair's personal assistant. Later, Dewar also studied under August Kekul\u00e9 at Ghent University.\nCareer.\nIn 1875, Dewar was elected Jacksonian professor of natural experimental philosophy at the University of Cambridge, becoming a member of Peterhouse. He became a member of the Royal Institution and later, in 1877, replaced Dr. John Hall Gladstone as Fullerian Professor of Chemistry. Dewar was also the President of the Society of Chemical Industry from 1887-88, President of the Chemical Society in 1897 and the British Association for the Advancement of Science in 1902, as well as serving on the Royal Commission established to examine London's water supply from 1893 to 1894 and the Committee on Explosives. While serving on the Committee on Explosives, he and Frederick Augustus Abel developed cordite, a smokeless gunpowder alternative.\nIn 1867, Dewar described several chemical formulas for benzene, which were published in 1869. One of the formulae, which does not represent benzene correctly and was not advocated by Dewar, is sometimes still referred to as Dewar benzene. In 1869, he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, after being nominated by his former mentor, Lyon Playfair.\nHis scientific work covers a wide field \u2013 his earlier papers cover topics including organic chemistry, hydrogen and its physical constants, high-temperature research, the temperature of the Sun and the electric spark, spectrophotometry, and the chemistry of the electric arc.\nWith Professor J. G. McKendrick, of the University of Glasgow, he investigated the physiological action of light and examined the changes that take place in the electrical condition of the retina under its influence. With Professor G. D. Liveing, one of his colleagues at the University of Cambridge, he began in 1878 a long series of spectroscopic observations, the latter of which were devoted to the spectroscopic examination of various gaseous elements separated from atmospheric air under extremely cold conditions. He also joined Professor J. A. Fleming, of University College London, in the investigation of the electrical behaviour of substances cooled to very low temperatures.\nHis name is most widely known in connection with his work on the liquefaction of the so-called permanent gases and his research at temperatures approaching absolute zero. His interest in this branch of physics and chemistry dates back at least as far as 1874, when he discussed the \"Latent Heat of Liquid Gases\" before the British Association. In 1878, he devoted a Friday evening lecture at the Royal Institution to the then-recent work of Louis Paul Cailletet and Raoul Pictet, and exhibited for the first time in Great Britain the working of the Cailletet apparatus. Six years later, again at the Royal Institution, he described the research of Zygmunt Florenty Wr\u00f3blewski and Karol Olszewski, and illustrated for the first time in public the liquefaction of oxygen and air. Soon afterward, he built a machine from which the liquefied gas could be drawn off through a valve for use as a cooling agent, before using the liquid oxygen in research work related to meteorites; about the same time, he also obtained oxygen in the solid state.\nBy 1891, he had designed and built, at the Royal Institution, machinery which yielded liquid oxygen in industrial quantities, and towards the end of that year, he showed that magnets strongly attract both liquid oxygen and liquid ozone. Around 1892, the idea occurred to him of using vacuum-jacketed vessels for the storage of liquid gases \u2013 the Dewar flask (otherwise known as a Thermos or vacuum flask) \u2013 the invention for which he became most famous. The vacuum flask was so efficient at keeping heat out, it was found possible to preserve liquids for comparatively long periods without the need for refrigeration, making examination of their optical properties possible. Dewar did not profit from the widespread adoption of his vacuum flask \u2013 he lost a court case against Thermos concerning the patent for his invention. Although he was recognised as its inventor, there was no way for him to prevent Thermos from using his design since he did not patent his invention.\nHis next project was to experiment with a high-pressure hydrogen jet by which low temperatures were realised through the Joule\u2013Thomson effect, and the successful results he obtained led him to build a large regenerative cooling refrigerating machine at the Royal Institution. Using this machine in 1898, liquid hydrogen was collected for the first time, solid hydrogen following in 1899. He tried to liquefy the last remaining gas, helium, which condenses into a liquid at \u2212268.9\u00a0\u00b0C, but owing to a number of factors, including a short supply of helium, Dewar was preceded by Heike Kamerlingh Onnes as the first person to produce liquid helium, in 1908. Onnes would later be awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics for his research into the properties of matter at low temperatures \u2013 Dewar was nominated several times, but never succeeded in winning the Nobel Prize.\nIn 1905, he and J. A. Fleming began to investigate the gas-absorbing powers of charcoal when cooled to low temperatures and applied his research into the creation of a high vacuum, which was used for further experiments in atomic physics. Dewar continued his research work into the properties of elements at low temperatures, specifically low-temperature calorimetry, until the outbreak of World War I. The Royal Institution laboratories lost a number of staff to the war effort, both in fighting and scientific roles, and after the war, Dewar had little interest in restarting the serious research work that had gone on before the war. Shortages of scholars necessarily compounded the problems. His research during and after the war mainly involved investigating surface tension in soap bubbles and the detection of infrared radiation in the atmosphere, rather than further work into the properties of matter at low temperatures.\nLater life.\nDewar died on 27 March 1923, aged 80, and was cremated at Golders Green Crematorium in London. An urn with his ashes still resides there.\nFamily.\nHe married Helen Rose Banks in 1871. They had no children. Helen was a sister-in-law to both Charles Dickson, Lord Dickson and James Douglas Hamilton Dickson.\nDewar's nephew, Dr. Thomas William Dewar FRSE, was an amateur artist who painted a portrait of Sir James Dewar. He is presumably also the same Thomas William Dewar who was mentioned as the executor in James Dewar's will, ultimately replaced \"unopposed\" by Dewar's wife.\nRoyal Institution Christmas Lectures.\nDewar was invited to deliver several Royal Institution Christmas Lectures:\n\"A Soap Bubble\" (1878)\n\"Atoms\" (1880)\n\"Alchemy in Relation to Modern Science\" (1883)\n\"The Story of a Meteorite\" (1885)\n\"The Chemistry of Light and Photography\" (1886)\n\"Clouds and Cloudland\" (1888)\n\"Frost and Fire\" (1890)\n\"Air: Gaseous and Liquid\" (1893)\n\"Christmas Lecture Epilogues\" (1912)\nHonours and awards.\nAlthough Dewar was never recognised by the Swedish Academy, he was recognised by many other institutions both before and after his death, in Britain and overseas. The Royal Society elected him a Fellow of the Royal Society in June 1877 and bestowed their Rumford (1894), Davy (1909), and Copley Medal (1916) medals upon him for his work, as well as inviting him to deliver their Bakerian Lecture in 1901. In 1899, he became the first recipient of the Hodgkins gold medal of the Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC, for his contributions to knowledge of the nature and properties of atmospheric air. That same year, he was elected to the American Philosophical Society, and was elected to the United States National Academy of Sciences in 1907.\nHe was President of the Society of Chemical Industry from 1887-88.\nIn 1904, he became the first British subject to receive the Lavoisier Medal of the French Academy of Sciences, and in 1906, he was the first to be awarded the Matteucci Medal of the Italian Society of Sciences. He was knighted in 1904 and awarded the Gunning Victoria Jubilee Prize for 1900\u20131904 by the Royal Society of Edinburgh, and in 1908, he was awarded the Albert Medal of The Society of Arts. A lunar crater was named in his honour.\nA street within the Kings Buildings complex of the University of Edinburgh was named in memory of Dewar in the early 21st century.\nCharacter.\nDewar's bad temper was legendary. Rowlinson (2012) called him \"ruthless\", particularly with his colleague Siegfried Ruhemann.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55280", "revid": "48938876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55280", "title": "Grand Prix", "text": "Grand Prix (plural Grands Prix) most commonly refers to:\nGrand Prix may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "55281", "revid": "6604420", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55281", "title": "Superbug", "text": ""}
{"id": "55283", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55283", "title": "Canning Stock Route", "text": "Track in Western Australia\nThe Canning Stock Route is a track that runs from Halls Creek in the Kimberley region of Western Australia to Wiluna in the mid-west region. With a total distance of around 1,850\u00a0km (1,150\u00a0mi) it is claimed to be the longest historic stock route in the world.\nA 1928 Royal Commission into the price of beef in Western Australia led to the repair of the wells and the re-opening of the stock route. Around 20 droves took place between 1931 and 1959 when the final droving run was completed.\nThe Canning Stock Route is now a popular but challenging four-wheel drive trek typically taking 10 to 20 days to complete. A few adventurers have traversed the track on foot, by bicycle, motorcycle and in two-wheel drive vehicles.\nThere are two small settlements on the track where fuel and other supplies may be obtained; Kunawarritji, approximately north of Wiluna, and Billiluna, south of Halls Creek.\nIn March 2020, the route was closed to tourists due to the COVID-19 pandemic. It was reopened on 14 June 2022.\nHistory.\nIn Western Australia at the beginning of the 20th century, east Kimberley cattlemen were looking for a way to traverse the western deserts of Australia with their cattle as a way to break a west Kimberley monopoly that controlled the supply of beef to Perth and the goldfields in the south of the state. East Kimberley cattle were infested with Boophilus ticks infected with a malaria-like parasitic disease called Babesiosis and were prohibited from being transported to southern markets by sea due to a fear that the ticks would survive the journey and spread. This gave west Kimberley cattlemen a monopoly on the beef trade and resulted in high prices.\nWith east Kimberley cattlemen keen to find a way to get their cattle to market, and the Government of Western Australia keen for competition to bring prices down, a 1905 proposal of a stock route through the desert was taken seriously. James Isdell, an east Kimberley pastoralist and member of the Western Australian Legislative Assembly, proposed the stock route arguing that ticks would not survive in the dry desert climate on the trip south.\nSurveying the route.\nCalvert and Carnegie expeditions.\nThe route, which crossed the territories of nine different Aboriginal language groups, had been explored previously in 1896 by the Calvert Expedition led by Lawrence Wells and again later that year by the Carnegie Expedition led by David Carnegie. Two members of the Calvert Expedition perished of thirst and the Carnegie Expedition suffered considerable hardships with camels dying after eating poisonous grass and a member of the party accidentally shooting himself dead. Carnegie investigated the possibility of a stock route and concluded that the route was \"too barren and destitute of vegetation\" and was impractical.\nWells and Carnegie both mistreated Aboriginals they encountered on their expeditions, including by tying them up and forcing them to find water. Carnegie is also believed to have fed them salt, and he was later publicly criticised for this. Evidence supports that Alfred Canning had read both the Calvert and Carnegie expedition accounts to find out about the country (both described the terrain as \"extremely difficult\") and the use of Aboriginal people to find water, an example Canning followed during his own expedition.\nCanning survey.\nAfter it was determined that ticks could not survive a desert crossing, the government endorsed James Isdell's scheme and funded a survey to find a stock route that would cross the Great Sandy Desert, the Little Sandy Desert and the Gibson Desert. Alfred Canning, a surveyor with the Western Australian Department of Lands and Surveys, was appointed to survey the stock route.\nCanning's task was to find a route through 1850 kilometres of desert, from Wiluna in the mid west to the Kimberley in the north. He needed to find significant water sources \u2013 enough for up to 800 head of cattle, a day's walk apart \u2013 where wells could be dug, and enough good grazing land to sustain this number of cattle during the journey south.\nIn 1906, with a team of 23 camels, two horses, and eight men, Canning surveyed the route completing the difficult journey from Wiluna to Halls Creek in less than six months. On 1 November 1906, shortly after arriving in Halls Creek, Canning sent a telegram to Perth stating that the finished route would \"be about the best watered stock route in [the] Colony\". Canning was forced to delay his return journey because of an early wet season in the Kimberley that year. The survey party left Halls Creek in late January 1907 and arrived back in Wiluna in early July 1907. During the 14-month expedition, they had trekked about , relying on Aboriginal guides to help them find water.\nCanning had always planned to rely on Aboriginal guides to help him find water and had taken neck chains and handcuffs supplied to him by the Wiluna police to make sure local \"guides\" stayed as long as he needed them. In order to gain assistance in locating water along the route, Canning captured several Martu men, chained them by the neck and forced them to lead his party to native water sources (soaks). As many soaks were sacred, the Martu may have misdirected the explorers away from these, resulting in the eventual stock route winding more than would otherwise have been necessary.\nRoyal Commission into treatment of Aboriginal people.\nAfter the Canning survey party returned to Perth, Canning's use of Aboriginal guides came under scrutiny. The expedition's cook, Edward Blake, accused Canning of mistreating many of the Aboriginal people they met during the survey expedition. Blake objected to the use of chains and criticised the \"party's 'immoral' pursuit of Aboriginal women, the theft and 'unfair' trade of Aboriginal property and the destruction of native waters\". Blake was concerned that the planned wells would prevent Aboriginal people accessing water.\nBlake's complaints led to a Royal Commission into the treatment of natives by the Canning exploration party.\nBlake was unable to prove many of his claims, but Canning did admit to the use of chains. Kimberley explorer and the first Premier of Western Australia, John Forrest, dismissed Canning's actions by claiming that all explorers behaved in this manner. Despite condemning the use of chains, the Royal Commission accepted the survey party's actions as \"reasonable\" and Canning and his men were exonerated of all charges, including \"immorality with native women\" and stealing property. The Royal Commission approved the immediate commencement of the stock route's construction. Canning was appointed to lead the construction party.\nConstruction.\nCanning left Perth in March 1908, along with 30 men, 70 camels, four wagons, 100 tonnes of food and equipment and 267 goats (for milk and meat), and travelled the route again to commence the construction of well heads and water troughs at the 54 water sources identified by his earlier expedition. He arrived back in Wiluna in April 1910 having completed the last of 48 wells and bringing the total cost of the route to \u00a322000 (2010: A$2.6 million).\nThirty-seven of the wells were built on or near existing Aboriginal waters and were constructed in the European tradition, which made many of them inaccessible to Aboriginal people. Pulling the heavy buckets up from the bottom of the wells required the strength of three men or use of a camel. Consequently, many Aboriginal people were injured or died while trying to access the water, either falling in and drowning or breaking bones on the windlass handle. In reprisal, buckets were cut off or timber set on fire, and by 1917 Aboriginal people had vandalised or dismantled approximately half of the wells in a bid to reclaim access to the water or to prevent drovers from using the wells. Canning's party had constructed the wells with the forced help of one of the Aboriginal peoples whose land the route traversed, the Martu.\nCanning produced a detailed map of the stock route, Plan of Wiluna\u2013Kimberley stock route exploration (showing positions of wells constructed 1908\u20139 and 10) on which he also recorded his observations of the land and water sources along the route. The map has become a symbol of Australia's pioneering history.\nUsing the stock route.\nFirst droving runs.\nCommercial droving along the stock route began in 1910. The first few droves were of small groups of horses \u2013 the first started out with 42 horses of which only nine survived the journey.\nThe first mob of bullocks to attempt to use the stock route set out in January 1911; however, the party of three drovers, George Shoesmith, James Thompson and an Aboriginal stockman who was known as \"Chinaman\", were killed by Aboriginals at Well 37. Thomas Cole discovered their bodies later in 1911 during his successful drove along the stock route. In September 1911, Sergeant R.H. Pilmer led a police \"punitive expedition\" to find the culprits and ensure the stock route remained open. The police made no arrests, but the expedition was considered a success after Pilmer acknowledged killing at least 10 Aboriginals.\nOn 7 September 1911 it was reported that the first mob of cattle to traverse the entire length of the stock route had successfully arrived in Wiluna. The cattle had apparently gained condition on the long drove.\nThe stock route was closed at some time prior to 1925. In 1925 the Billiluna Pastoral Company requested that it be reopened. The state government refused saying that it had fallen into disrepair from disuse as a result of stockmen being attacked by Aboriginals. The government claimed it would cost \u00a35,625 and take six months to repair and refused to consider the expenditure at that time.\nDespite police protection, drovers were afraid to use the track and it was rarely used for almost 20 years. Between 1911 and 1931, only eight mobs of cattle were driven along the Canning Stock Route.\nReopening of the stock route.\nA 1928 Royal Commission into the price of beef in Western Australia led to the re-opening of the stock route. In 1929, William Snell was commissioned to repair the wells and found that the only wells undamaged were the ones that Aboriginal people could use. Snell criticised the construction of Canning's wells because they were difficult for Aboriginal people to use safely, and he put the destruction of the wells down to the anger and frustration people felt at being unable to access traditional water sources. Snell personally committed to making the wells more accessible to Aboriginal people:Natives cannot draw water from the Canning Stock Route wells. It takes three strong white men to land a bucket of water. It is beyond the natives power to land a bucket. They let go the handle [and] some times escape with their life but get an arm and head broken in the attempt to get away. To heal the wounds so severely inflicted and [as] a safeguard against the natives destroying the wells again I equipped the wells ... so that the native can draw water from the wells without destroying them.\u2014William Snell\nSnell started work on the refurbishment of the wells, fitting some with ladders for easier access, but he abandoned the work after well 35. Reports vary that he either ran out of materials or the desert became too much for him.\nIn 1930, Alfred Canning (then aged 70) was commissioned to complete the work. While Snell had encountered no hostility, Canning had trouble with the Aboriginals from the start but successfully completed the commission in 1931.\nWith these improvements, the route was used on a more regular basis although in total, it would only be used around 20 times between 1931 and 1959 when the last droving run was completed. None of the larger station owners used the track as it was found that only 600 head of cattle could be supported at a time, which was 200 less than was estimated when first completed. As Carnegie had accurately reported in 1896, the track was impractical for cattle drives.\nDuring the Second World War the track was upgraded at considerable expense in case it was needed for an evacuation of the north if Australia was invaded. Including horse drives there were only 37 recorded drives between 1910 and the last run in 1959.\nTraverses.\nIn the 1950s horses became scarce in the Kimberley as widespread losses were caused by \"walkabout poison\". This led to the stock route being used to drove horses north from around the Norseman area where they were sold to the stations. Wally Dowling, a drover who had made nine droves along the stock route took what was probably the last group of horses northwards along the route in September 1951.\nIn 1968 the entire length of the track was driven for the first time by surveyors Russell Wenholz and David Chudleigh, and Noel Kealley.\nIn 1972, before the route was regularly negotiated in four-wheel drives, ambitious attempts to complete it on foot took place. A New Zealander, Murray Rankin, and two English brothers, John and Peter Waterfall, fashioned homemade trolleys from bicycle wheels and metal tubing, and began their attempt starting from Wiluna in early June 1972. First John and then Peter turned back, but Rankin continued to Kumpupintil Lake, then called Lake Disappointment, before being forced to abandon the attempt. The remains of one of their trolleys lie north of well 15.\nIn 1973 Rankin tried again, this time starting from Old Halls Creek with Englishman John Foulsham. This time they had professionally built trolleys with motor-cycle wheels. The walk began on 1 June. Soon after reaching Godfrey's Tank they were unable to pull the trolleys over the high sand hills. They left them and walked on to Lake Tobin and there abandoned the attempt and returned to Halls Creek.\nThree years later, in 1976, Rankin achieved his ambition to walk the stock route. After driving the route in a Land Rover and establishing food depots along the way, he set out from Halls Creek on 12 July 1976 with three other bushwalkers, Ralph Barraclough, Kathy Burman and Rex Shaw. Barraclough turned back after becoming ill, but the others completed the journey in just under three months. \nIn 1974, the first motorcycle crossing from Wiluna to Billiluna was achieved by Paul Allardyce, Colin Fitzgerald and Andy Bowman. They had air support flown by John Fitzgerald and Phil Schubert.\nIn 1977, the first commercial tour completed the drive.\nDuring the 1980s fuel dumps were created and adventurous travellers became interested in the history of the track and the challenge to drive it.\nIn 1985, a Beach Buggy driven by Gordon Hayes, became the first two-wheel drive vehicle to complete the CSR under its own power. A support crew carried the fuel.\nIn 1991, a Citro\u00ebn 2CV, driven by Rupert Backford and Mathew Rawlings, completed the CSR with a support crew towing the car over many of the dunes.\nIn 1993 long-distance walker Drew Kettle walked the route.\nIn 1997 Robin Rishworth cycled, with the aid of food drops, in just less than 27 days, and is considered to be the first modern day solo cyclist.\nIn 2004 Kate Leeming, as part of a longer trek, completed the route with the aid of a support vehicle.\nIn 2005 Jakub Postrzygacz became the first person to traverse the entire track without either support or the use of food drops, travelling alone by fatbike for 33 days. With large tyres and a single-wheel trailer, he carried all his food with him and replenished his water at wells.\nIn 2016 Sam Mitchell towed an array of solar panels behind his fatbike. This was the first time a solar powered vehicle traversed the complete length of the route.\nPresent.\nTourism.\nThe Canning Stock route is considered one of the world's great four-wheel drive adventures. Apart from keeping the track open, the route is not maintained. Some wells have been restored but others are in ruins and unusable. While quite a few travellers successfully make the trip, it still requires substantial planning and a convoy of well-equipped four-wheel drives or equivalent vehicles, and is only practical during the cooler months. Fuel drops typically need to be organised in advance and the trip will take two to three weeks. Fuel is now available at Kunawarritji Community near well 33 and Parnngurr Community near well 22.\nThe Kuju Wangka committee of the Yanunijarra Aboriginal Corporation closed the Canning Stock Route to tourists in March 2020 because of the COVID-19 pandemic. They reopened it on 14 June 2022.\nAboriginal perspective.\nThe history of the Canning Stock Route has been well documented from the colonial perspective \u2013 accounts of European explorers, drovers, prospectors and law enforcers \u2013 but increasingly the Aboriginal history of the track is also being recognised, and Aboriginal people are keen to have their story told.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We wanna tell you fellas 'bout things been happening in the past that hasn't been recorded, what old people had in their head. No pencil and paper. The white man history has been told and it's today in the book. But our history is not there properly. We've got to tell 'em through our paintings.\u2014\u200a\nArchaeologists now believe that the Western Desert has been occupied for around 30,000 years. For Aboriginal people, the history of the stock route is therefore part of a much older story. They have recorded this story, including the changes brought about by the construction of the stock route, through oral and artistic traditions.\nThe building of the stock route impacted on the cultural and social life of the more than 15 Aboriginal language groups that have a \"cultural, familial or historical connection to the route and its custodians, or to sites along the major Dreaming tracks or songlines\". Some Dreaming tracks exist within the Country of a single language group, but others cross the territory of many groups and the major Dreaming tracks often mark the territorial boundaries of the Countries they cross. The stock route, and the people and stock it brought with it, inevitably interrupted traditional patterns of movement and connection to Country.\nWhile many Aboriginal people made a determined effort to avoid contact with the people the stock route brought into their Country, the route became a path out of the desert for others. At different times, and for different reasons, people moved away to the outskirts of towns, to pastoral stations and church missions. Many found work with the drovers using the stock route and successful droves relied on the skill of these Aboriginal stockmen and women. Others left looking for more reliable sources of food and water, especially in times of drought, while some were drawn to the changes taking place around the edges of the desert or motivated by a desire to join family already living elsewhere.\nRock art project.\nThere are a large number of Aboriginal rock paintings and carvings along the stock route. As more and more people visit the area each year, custodians of the Western Desert have become concerned about the protection and management of Aboriginal sites along the route. In 2007, researchers from the Australian National University began a project to draw up the first comprehensive plan of management for the entire Canning Stock Route. The project aimed to develop a series of modules to inform detailed guides and signs for visitors, while also protecting sites that have special significance for Indigenous peoples.\nThe Canning Stock Route Project.\nThe Canning Stock Route has a strong connection to the story of Aboriginal art in the Western Desert. When droving along the stock route led to many family groups dispersing to the edges of the desert, communities were established in missions, towns, stations and settlements, and it was here that contemporary painting movements flourished.\nIn 2006, Western Australian independent cultural organisation Form instigated a contemporary arts and cultural initiative to \"explore the complex history of the Canning Stock Route through the prism of contemporary Aboriginal art\". Partnerships among nine art centres and communities with direct connections to the stock route region were set up. The project involved several years of research by Form in collaboration with Aboriginal artists and their art centres and organisations.\nA major part of the project's program of bush work was a six-week, desert journey from Wiluna to Billiluna. During this trip, and in follow-up workshops and other trips, 80 artists created a collection of paintings, contemporary cultural objects and documentary material.\nThe historical and artistic value of the project was recognised in 2008 when the National Museum of Australia decided to acquire the entire Canning Stock Route Project collection.\nThe language groups identified during the project, as being crossed by the stock route, or adjacent to it are identified as:\nKiyajarra\nPutijarra\nKartujarra\nManyjilyjarra\nWarnman\nWangkajunga\nNyangajarra\nJuwaliny\nWalmajarri\nKukatja\nDjaru\nThe Canning Stock Route Collection.\nThe National Museum of Australia acquired a significant collection of artworks and other material collected by the 60 artists who travelled along the Canning Stock Route on a six-week return to country trip in 2007 as part of the Canning Stock Route Project. The Canning Stock Route collection includes over 100 works of art, 120 oral histories, historical research, social and cultural data, artists' biographies, 20,000 photographs and over 200 hours of film footage.\nOne of the key aims of the Canning Stock Route Project was the development of a travelling exhibition. The National Museum of Australia committed to assisting Form to develop an exhibition. \"Yiwarra Kuju (One Road) \u2013 The Canning Stock Route\", a joint initiative between the National Museum of Australia and Form, was held at the museum from July 2010 to January 2011. The exhibition used works of art and stories to tell the story of the stock route's impact on Aboriginal people from an Aboriginal perspective. When it closed in January 2011, \"Yiwarra Kuju \u2013 The Canning Stock Route\" had been the most successful exhibition in the history of the Museum, with over 120,000 visitors.\nJourney distances.\nThe nearest capital city to the Wiluna starting point of the route is Perth, south west of Wiluna by road. Then to return to Perth via sealed roads from Halls Creek it is ; including the Canning route this gives a total driving distance of .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55284", "revid": "47074852", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55284", "title": "Coat of arms", "text": "Heraldic design on a shield, surcoat or tabard\nA coat of arms is a heraldic visual design on an escutcheon (i.e., shield), surcoat, or tabard (the last two being outer garments), originating in Europe. The coat of arms on an escutcheon forms the central element of the full heraldic achievement, which in its whole consists of a shield, supporters, a crest, and a motto. A coat of arms is traditionally unique to the armiger (e.g. an individual person, family, state, organization, school or corporation). The term \"coat of arms\" itself, describing in modern times just the heraldic design, originates from the description of the entire medieval chainmail \"surcoat\" garment used in combat or preparation for the latter.\nRolls of arms are collections of many coats of arms, and since the early Modern Age centuries, they have been a source of information for public showing and tracing the membership of a noble family, and therefore its genealogy across time.\nHistory.\nHeraldic designs came into general use among European nobility in the 12th century. \nSystematic, heritable heraldry had developed by the beginning of the 13th century.\nExactly who had a right to use arms, by law or social convention, varied to some degree between countries. \nEarly heraldic designs were personal, used by individual noblemen (who might also alter their chosen design over time).\nArms became hereditary by the end of the 12th century, in England by the time of King Richard I during the Third Crusade (1189\u20131192).\nBurgher arms were used in Northern Italy in the second half of the 14th century, and in the Holy Roman Empire\nby the mid 14th century.\nIn the late medieval period, use of arms spread to the clergy, to towns as civic identifiers, and to royally chartered organizations such as universities and trading companies. \nThe arts of vexillology and heraldry are closely related.\nThe term \"coat of arms\" itself in origin refers to the surcoat with heraldic designs worn by combatants, especially in the knightly tournament, in Old French \"\". The sense is transferred to the heraldic design itself in Middle English, in the mid-14th century.\nDespite no common, enforceable widespread regulation, heraldry has remained consistent across Europe, where tradition alone has governed the design and use of arms. Some nations, such as England and Scotland, still maintain the same heraldic authorities which have traditionally granted and regulated arms for centuries and continue to do so in the present day. In England, for example, the granting of arms is and has been controlled by the College of Arms. Unlike seals and other general emblems, heraldic \"achievements\" have a formal description called a blazon, which uses vocabulary that allows for consistency in heraldic depictions. In the present day, coats of arms are still in use by a variety of institutions and individuals: for example, many European cities and universities have guidelines on how their coats of arms may be used, and protect their use as trademarks as any other unique identifier might be. Many societies exist that also aid in the design and registration of personal arms.\nHeraldry has been compared to modern corporate logos.\nRegional traditions.\nFrench heraldry.\nThe French system of heraldry greatly influenced the British and Western European systems. Much of the terminology and classifications are taken from it. However, with the fall of the French monarchy (and later Empire) there is not currently a \"Fons Honorum\" (power to dispense and control honors) to strictly enforce heraldic law. The French Republics that followed have either merely affirmed pre-existing titles and honors or vigorously opposed noble privilege. Coats of arms are considered an intellectual property of a family or municipal body. Assumed arms (arms invented and used by the holder rather than granted by an authority) are considered valid unless they can be proved in court to copy that of an earlier holder.\nBritish heraldry.\nIn the heraldic traditions of England and Scotland, an individual, rather than a family, had a coat of arms. In those traditions coats of arms are legal property transmitted from father to son; wives and daughters could also bear arms modified to indicate their relation to the current holder of the arms. Undifferenced arms are used only by one person at any given time. Other descendants of the original bearer could bear the ancestral arms only with some difference: usually a colour change or the addition of a distinguishing charge. One such charge is the label, which in British usage (outside the Royal Family) is now always the mark of an heir apparent or (in Scotland) an heir presumptive. Because of their importance in identification, particularly in seals on legal documents, the use of arms was strictly regulated; few countries continue in this today. This has been carried out by heralds and the study of coats of arms is therefore called \"heraldry\". In time, the use of arms spread from military entities to educational institutes, and other establishments.\nIn Scotland, the Lord Lyon King of Arms has criminal jurisdiction to control the use of arms. In England, Northern Ireland and Wales the use of arms is a matter of civil law and regulated by the College of Arms and the High Court of Chivalry.\nIn reference to a dispute over the exercise of authority over the Officers of Arms in England, Arthur Annesley, 1st Earl of Anglesey, Lord Privy Seal, declared on 16 June 1673 that the powers of the Earl Marshal were \"to order, judge, and determine all matters touching arms, ensigns of nobility, honour, and chivalry; to make laws, ordinances, and statutes for the good government of the Officers of Arms; to nominate Officers to fill vacancies in the College of Arms; to punish and correct Officers of Arms for misbehaviour in the execution of their places\". It was further declared that no patents of arms or any ensigns of nobility should be granted and no augmentation, alteration, or addition should be made to arms without the consent of the Earl Marshal.\nIrish heraldry.\nIn Ireland the usage and granting of coats of arms was strictly regulated by the Ulster King of Arms from the office's creation in 1552. After Irish independence in 1922 the office was still functioning and working out of Dublin Castle. The last Ulster King of Arms was Sir Nevile Rodwell Wilkinson [Ulster King of Arms 1908\u20131940], who held it until his death in 1940. At the Irish government's request, no new King of Arms was appointed. Thomas Ulick Sadleir, the Deputy Ulster King of Arms, then became the Acting Ulster King of Arms. He served until the office was merged with that of Norroy King of Arms in 1943 and stayed on until 1944 to clear up the backlog.An earlier Ireland King of Arms was created by King Richard II in 1392 and discontinued by King Henry VII in 1487. It did not grant many coats of arms \u2013 the few it did grant were annulled by the other Kings of Arms because they encroached upon their jurisdictions. Its purpose was supposedly to marshal an expedition to fully conquer Ireland that never materialized. Since 1 April 1943 the authority has been split between the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland. Heraldry in the Republic of Ireland is regulated by the Government of Ireland, by the Genealogical Office through the Office of the Chief Herald of Ireland. Heraldry in Northern Ireland is regulated by the British Government by the College of Arms through the Norroy and Ulster King of Arms.\nGerman heraldry.\nThe heraldic tradition and style of modern and historic Germany and the Holy Roman Empire \u2013 including national and civic arms, noble and burgher arms, ecclesiastical heraldry, heraldic displays, and heraldic descriptions \u2013 stand in contrast to Gallo-British, Latin and Eastern heraldry, and strongly influenced the styles and customs of heraldry in the Nordic countries, which developed comparatively late.\nNordic heraldry.\nIn the Nordic countries, provinces, regions, cities, and municipalities have coats of arms. These are posted at the borders and on buildings containing official offices, as well as used in official documents and on the uniforms of municipal officers. Arms may also be used on souvenirs or other effects, given that an application has been granted by the municipal council.\nOther national traditions.\nAt a national level, \"coats of arms\" were generally retained by European states with constitutional continuity of more than a few centuries, including constitutional monarchies like Denmark as well as old republics like San Marino and Switzerland.\nIn Italy the use of coats of arms was only loosely regulated by the states existing before the unification of 1861. Since the Consulta Araldica, the college of arms of the Kingdom of Italy, was abolished in 1948, personal coats of arms and titles of nobility, though not outlawed, are not recognised.\nCoats of arms in Spain were generally left up to the owner themselves, but the design was based on military service and the heritage of their grandparents. In France, the coat of arms is based on the Fleur-de-lys and the \"Rule of Tinctures\" used in English heraldry as well.\nNorth American.\nCanada.\nThe monarch of Canada's prerogative to grant armorial bearings has been delegated to the Governor General of Canada. Canada has its own Chief Herald and Herald Chancellor. The Canadian Heraldic Authority, the governmental agency which is responsible for creating arms and promoting Canadian heraldry, is situated at Rideau Hall.\nUnited States.\nThe Great Seal of the United States uses on the obverse as its central motif a heraldic achievement described as being the arms of the nation. The seal, and the armorial bearings, were adopted by the Continental Congress on 20 June 1782, and is a shield divided palewise into thirteen pieces, with a blue chief, which is displayed upon the breast of an American bald eagle. The crest is thirteen stars breaking through a glory and clouds, displayed with no helm, torse, or mantling (unlike most European precedents at the time). Many of the American states have adopted their own coats of arms, which usually designed as part of the respective state's seal. Vermont has both a state seal and a state coat of arms that are independent of one another (though both contain a pine tree, a cow and sheaves of grain); the seal is used to authenticate documents, whilst the heraldic device represents the state itself.\nEcclesiastic heraldry.\nThe Vatican City State and the Holy See each have their own coat of arms. As the papacy is not hereditary, its occupants display their personal arms combined with those of their office. Some popes came from armigerous (noble) families; others adopted coats of arms during their career in the Church. The latter typically allude to their ideal of life, or to specific pontifical programmes. A well-known and widely displayed example in recent times was Pope John Paul II's arms. His selection of a large letter M (for the Virgin Mary) was intended to express the message of his strong Marian devotion. Roman Catholic dioceses are also each assigned a coat of arms, as are basilicas or papal churches, the latter usually displaying these on the building. These may be used in countries which otherwise do not use heraldic devices. In countries like Scotland with a strong statutory heraldic authority, arms will need to be officially granted and recorded.\nFlags and banners.\nFlags are used to identify ships (where they are called ensigns), embassies and such, and they use the same colors and designs found in heraldry, but they are not usually considered to be heraldic. A country may have both a national flag and a national coat of arms, and the two may not look alike at all. For example, the flag of Scotland (St Andrew's Cross) has a white saltire on a blue field, but the royal arms of Scotland has a red lion within a double tressure on a gold (or) field.\nModern national emblems.\nAmong the states ruled by communist regimes, emblems resembling those of the Soviet states were adopted in all the Warsaw Pact states except Czechoslovakia and Poland. Since 1986\u20131989, some of the ex-Communist states, such as Russia, have reused their original pre-communist heraldry, often with only the symbols of monarchy removed. Other countries such as Belarus have retained their communist coats of arms or at least kept some of the old heraldry.\nWith the independence of the modern nation states of the Arab World from the First World War onwards, European traditions of heraldry were partially adopted for state emblems. These emblems often involve the star and crescent symbol taken from the Ottoman flag.\nOther commonly seen symbols are birds, chiefly the Eagle of Saladin, and the Hawk of Quraish. These symbols can be found on the coat of arms of Egypt, and Syria, amongst others.\nSub-Saharan African flags and emblems after decolonisation often chose emblems based on regional traditions or wildlife. Symbols of a ritual significance according to local custom were generally favoured, such as the leopard in the arms of Benin, Malawi, Somalia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and, in the form of the black panther, of Gabon.\nIn Kenya, the Swahili word Harambee (lit.\u2009'Let us come together') is used as a motto in the country's coat of arms. In Botswana and Lesotho, meanwhile, the word Pula (lit.\u2009'Rain') is used in like fashion.\nIn the coat of arms of Eswatini, a lion and an elephant serve as supporters. They are each intended to represent the king and the queen mother respectively, the nation's joint heads of state.\nComparable traditions outside of Europe.\nJapanese emblems, called \"kamon\" (often abbreviated \"mon\"), are family badges which often date back to the 7th century, and are used in Japan today. The Japanese tradition is independent of the European, but many abstract and floral elements are used.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55285", "revid": "34434225", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55285", "title": "Ernst Mach", "text": "Austrian physicist, philosopher and university educator (1838\u20131916)\nErnst Waldfried Josef Wenzel Mach ( ; ; 18 February 1838 \u2013 19 February 1916) was an Austrian physicist and philosopher, who contributed to the understanding of the physics of shock waves. The ratio of the speed of a flow or object to that of sound is named the Mach number in his honor. As a philosopher of science, he was a major influence on logical positivism and American pragmatism. Through his criticism of Isaac Newton's theories of space and time, he foreshadowed Albert Einstein's theory of relativity.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nMach was born in Chrlice (), Moravia, Austrian Empire (now part of Brno in the Czech Republic). His father Jan Nepomuk Mach, who had graduated from Charles-Ferdinand University in Prague, acted as tutor to the noble Brethon family in Zl\u00edn in eastern Moravia. His grandfather Wenzl Lanhaus, an administrator of the Chirlitz estate, was also master builder of the streets there. His activities in that field later influenced Ernst Mach's theoretical work. Some sources give Mach's birthplace as Tu\u0159any (, also part of Brno), the site of the Chirlitz registry office. It was there that Mach was baptized by Peregrin Weiss. Mach later became a socialist and an atheist, but his theory and life were sometimes compared to Buddhism. Heinrich Gomperz called Mach the \"Buddha of Science\" because of his phenomenalist approach to the \"Ego\" in his \"Analysis of Sensations\".\nUp to the age of 14, Mach was educated at home by his parents. He then entered a gymnasium in Krom\u011b\u0159\u00ed\u017e (), where he studied for three years. In 1855, he became a student at the University of Vienna, where he studied physics and for one semester medical physiology, receiving a doctorate in physics in 1860 under Andreas von Ettingshausen, with his thesis \"\u00dcber elektrische Ladungen und Induktion\" and his habilitation the following year. His early work focused on the Doppler effect in optics and acoustics. \nProfessional research.\nIn 1864, Mach became professor of mathematics at the University of Graz after having declined a chair in surgery at the University of Salzburg. In 1866, he was appointed professor of physics. During this period, Mach continued his work in psycho-physics and in sensory perception. In 1867, he took the chair of experimental physics at Charles-Ferdinand University, where he stayed for 28 years before returning to Vienna. In 1871, he was elected a member of the Royal Bohemian Society of Sciences.\nMach's main contribution to physics involved his description and photographs of spark shock-waves and then ballistic shock-waves. He described how when a bullet or shell moved faster than the speed of sound, it created a compression of air in front of it. Using schlieren photography, he and his son Ludwig photographed the shadows of the invisible shock waves. During the early 1890s, Ludwig invented a modification of the Jamin interferometer that allowed for much clearer photographs. But Mach also made many contributions to psychology and physiology, including his anticipation of gestalt phenomena, his discovery of the oblique effect and of Mach bands, an inhibition-influenced type of visual illusion, and especially his discovery of a non-acoustic function of the inner ear that helps control human balance.\nOne of the best-known of Mach's ideas is the so-called Mach principle, the physical origin of inertia. This was never written down by Mach but was given a graphic verbal form, attributed by Philipp Frank to Mach: \"When the subway jerks, it's the fixed stars that throw you down.\"\nIn 1900, Mach became godfather of physicist Wolfgang Ernst Pauli, who was also named after him.\nMach was also well-known for his philosophy, developed in close interplay with his science. He defended a type of phenomenalism, recognizing only sensations as real. That position seemed incompatible with the view of atoms and molecules as external, mind-independent things. After an 1897 lecture by Ludwig Boltzmann at the Imperial Academy of Science in Vienna, Mach said, \"I don't believe that atoms exist!\"\nIn 1898, Mach survived a paralytic stroke, and in 1901, he retired from the University of Vienna and was appointed to the upper chamber of the Austrian Parliament. On leaving Vienna in 1913, he moved to his son's home in Vaterstetten, near Munich, where he continued writing and corresponding until his death in 1916, one day after his 78th birthday.\nPolitics.\nBorn to a liberal family, Mach lamented that a \"very reactionary-clerical\" period followed the 1848 revolutions, prompting him to plan to emigrate to America, although he never did.\nIn 1901, Mach accepted an appointment to the Austrian House of Lords but declined a nobility because he thought it inappropriate for a scientist to accept such a thing. He was on good personal terms with the Social Democrat politician Viktor Adler and left money in his will to the Social Democrat newspaper Arbeiter-Zeitung.\nMach was critical of the European powers' colonial conquests, saying that they \"will constitute...the most distasteful chapter of history for coming generations\".\nPhysics.\nMost of Mach's initial studies in experimental physics concentrated on the interference, diffraction, polarization and refraction of light in different media under external influences. From there followed explorations in supersonic fluid mechanics. Mach and physicist-photographer Peter Salcher presented their paper on this subject in 1887; it correctly describes the sound effects observed during the supersonic motion of a projectile. They deduced and experimentally confirmed the existence of a shock wave of conical shape, with the projectile at the apex. The ratio of the speed of a fluid to the local speed of sound \"v\"p/\"v\"s is called the Mach number after him. It is a critical parameter in the description of high-speed fluid movement in aerodynamics and hydrodynamics. Mach also contributed to cosmology the hypothesis known as Mach's principle.\nPhilosophy of science.\nEmpirio-criticism.\nFrom 1895 to 1901, Mach held a newly created chair for \"the history and philosophy of the inductive sciences\" at the University of Vienna. In his historico-philosophical studies, Mach developed a phenomenalistic philosophy of science that became influential in the 19th and 20th centuries, empirio-criticism, a rigorously positivist and radically empiricist philosophy established by the German philosopher Richard Avenarius and further developed by Mach, Joseph Petzoldt, and others, according to which all we can know is our sensations.\nMach originally saw scientific laws as summaries of experimental events, constructed for the purpose of making complex data comprehensible, but later emphasized mathematical functions as a more useful way to describe sensory appearances. Thus, scientific laws, while somewhat idealized, have more to do with describing sensations than with reality as it exists beyond sensations:\nMach's positivism influenced many Russian Marxists, such as Alexander Bogdanov. In 1908, Lenin wrote a philosophical work, \"Materialism and Empirio-criticism\", in which he criticized Machism and the views of \"Russian Machists\". His main criticisms were that Mach's philosophy led to solipsism and to the absurd conclusion that nature did not exist before humans:\nLenin also accused Mach of plagiarizing George Berkeley's views on this basis:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is a sheer plagiarism on Berkeley. Not a single idea, not a glimmer of thought, except that \"we sense only our sensations.\" From which there is only one possible inference, namely, that the \"world consists only of my sensations.\" ... For if the \"assumption\" of the existence of the external world is \"idle,\" if the assumption that the needle exists independently of me and that an interaction takes place between my body and the point of the needle is really \"idle and superfluous,\" then primarily the \"assumption\" of the existence of other people is idle and superfluous. Only I exist, and all other people, as well as the external world, come under the category of idle \"nuclei.\" Holding this point of view one cannot speak of \"our\" sensations; and when Mach does speak of them, it is only a betrayal of his own amazing half-heartedness. It only proves that his philosophy is a jumble of idle and empty words in which their author himself does not believe.\u2014\u200a \nIn accordance with empirio-critical philosophy, Mach opposed Ludwig Boltzmann and others who proposed an atomic theory of physics. Since one cannot observe things as small as atoms directly, and since no atomic model at the time was consistent, the atomic hypothesis seemed unwarranted to Mach, and perhaps not sufficiently \"economical\". Mach had a direct influence on the Vienna Circle philosophers and logical positivism in general.\nSeveral principles are attributed to Mach that distill his ideal of physical theorization, called \"Machian physics\":\nThe last is singled out, particularly by Einstein, as \"the\" Mach's principle. Einstein cited it as one of the three principles underlying general relativity. In 1930, he wrote, \"it is justified to consider Mach as the precursor of the general theory of relativity\" and \"the whole direction of thought of this theory conforms with Mach's\". Einstein further reported that he had read David Hume and Mach's work \"with eagerness and admiration shortly before finding relativity theory\" and that \"very possibly, I wouldn't have come to the solution without those philosophical studies\". Before his death, Mach apparently rejected Einstein's theory. Einstein knew his theories did not fulfill all Mach's principles, and no subsequent theory has either.\nPhenomenological constructivism.\nAccording to Alexander Riegler, Mach's work was a precursor to the influential perspective known as constructivism. Constructivism holds that all knowledge is constructed rather than received by the learner. He took an exceptionally non-dualist, phenomenological position. The founder of radical constructivism, Ernst von Glasersfeld, gave a nod to Mach as an ally.\n On the other hand, there is also a reasonable case for viewing Mach simply as an empiricist and a precursor of the logical empiricists and the Vienna Circle. On this view, the purpose of science is to detail functional relationships between observations: \"The goal which it (physical science) has set itself is the simplest and most economical abstract expression of facts.\"\nInfluence.\nFriedrich Hayek wrote that, when he attended the University of Vienna from 1918 to 1921, \"as far as philosophical discussion went it essentially revolved around Mach's ideas\". Mach's work has also been cited as an influence on the Vienna Circle, being described as a \"major precursor of logical positivism\". Members of the Circle organized the \"Ernst Mach Society\" as a vehicle for discussion of their ideas.\nMach's work was a \"forerunner\" of Gestalt psychology.\nPhysiology.\nIn 1873, independently of each other, Mach and the physiologist and physician Josef Breuer discovered how the sense of balance (i.e., the perception of the head's imbalance) functions, tracing its management by information the brain receives from the movement of a fluid in the semicircular canals of the inner ear. That the sense of balance depends on the three semicircular canals was discovered in 1870 by the physiologist Friedrich Goltz, but Goltz did not discover how the balance-sensing apparatus functions. Mach devised a swivel chair to test his theories, and Floyd Ratliff has suggested that this experiment may have paved the way to Mach's critique of a physical conception of absolute space and motion.\nPsychology.\nIn the area of sensory perception, psychologists remember Mach for the optical illusion called Mach bands. The effect exaggerates the contrast between edges of the slightly differing shades of gray as soon as they make contact, by triggering edge-detection in the human visual system.\nMore clearly than anyone before or since, Mach made the distinction between what he called \"physiological\" (specifically visual) and \"geometrical\" spaces.\nMach's views on mediating structures inspired B. F. Skinner's strongly inductive position, which paralleled Mach's in the field of psychology.\nEponyms.\nIn homage his name was given to:\nBibliography.\nMach's principal works in English:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55286", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55286", "title": "Charles University in Prague", "text": ""}
{"id": "55287", "revid": "15949570", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55287", "title": "Iles Kerguelen", "text": ""}
{"id": "55289", "revid": "46052062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55289", "title": "Caracas", "text": "Capital and largest city of Venezuela\nCaracas ( , ), officially Santiago de Le\u00f3n de Caracas (CCS), is the capital and largest city of Venezuela, and the center of the Metropolitan Region of Caracas (or Greater Caracas). Caracas is located along the Guaire River in the northern part of Venezuela, within the Caracas Valley of the Venezuelan coastal mountain range (Cordillera de la Costa). The valley is close to the Caribbean Sea on the north, separated from the coast by a steep mountain range, Cerro El \u00c1vila. To the south there are more hills and mountains. The Metropolitan Region of Caracas has an estimated population of almost 5 million inhabitants.\nThe historic center of the city is the Cathedral, located on Bol\u00edvar Square, though some consider the center to be Plaza Venezuela, located in the Los Caobos area. Businesses in the city include service companies, banks, and malls. Caracas has a largely service-based economy, apart from some industrial activity in its metropolitan area. The Caracas Stock Exchange and Petr\u00f3leos de Venezuela (PDVSA) are headquartered in Caracas. Empresas Polar is the largest private company in Venezuela. Caracas is Venezuela's cultural capital, with many restaurants, theaters, museums, and shopping centers. Caracas has some of the tallest skyscrapers in Latin America, such as the Parque Central Towers. The Museum of Contemporary Art of Caracas is one of the most important in South America.\nHistory.\nBefore the city was founded in 1567, the valley of Caracas was populated by indigenous peoples. Francisco Fajardo, the son of a Spanish captain and a Guaiqueri \"cacica\", who came from Margarita, began establishing settlements in the area of La Guaira and the Caracas valley between 1555 and 1560. Fajardo attempted to establish a plantation in the valley in 1562 after these unsuccessful coastal towns, but it did not last long: it was destroyed by natives of the region led by Terepaima and Guaicaipuro. Fajardo's 1560 settlement was known as Hato de San Francisco, and another attempt in 1561 by Juan Rodr\u00edguez de Su\u00e1rez was called Villa de San Francisco, and was also destroyed by the same native people. The eventual settlers of Caracas came from Coro, the German capital of their Klein-Venedig colony around the present-day coastal Colombia\u2013Venezuela border; from the 1540s, the colony had been \"de facto\" controlled by Spaniards. Moving eastward from Coro, groups of Spanish settlers founded inland towns including Barquisimeto and Valencia before reaching the Caracas valley.\nOn 25 July 1567, Captain Diego de Losada laid the foundations of the city of \"Santiago de Le\u00f3n de Caracas\". De Losada had been commissioned to capture the valley, and was successful by splitting the natives into different groups to work with, then fighting and defeating each of them. The town was the closest to the coast of these new settlements, and the colonists retained a native workforce, which allowed a trade network to develop between Caracas, the interior, and Margarita; the towns further inland produced ample cotton products and beeswax, and Margarita was a rich source of pearls. The Caracas valley had a good environment for both agricultural and arable farming, which contributed to the system of commerce but meant that the town's population was initially sparse, as it was only large enough to support a few farms.\nIn 1577, Caracas became the capital of the Spanish Empire's Venezuela Province under the province's new governor, Juan de Pimentel (1576\u20131583). In the 1580s, Caraque\u00f1os started selling food to the Spanish soldiers in Cartagena, who often docked in the coastal city when collecting products from the empire in South America. Wheat was growing increasingly expensive in the Iberian Peninsula, and the Spanish profited from buying it from Caracas farmers. This cemented the city in the empire's trade circuit.\nDuring the 16th and 17th centuries, the coast of Venezuela was frequently raided by pirates. With the coastal mountains of the Central Range as a barrier, Caracas was relatively immune to such attacks, compared to other Caribbean coastal settlements, but in 1595 the Preston\u2013Somers expedition landed and around 200 English Privateers, including George Somers and Amyas Preston, crossed the mountains through a little-used pass while the town's defenders were guarding the more frequently used one. Encountering little resistance, the invaders sacked and set fire to the town after a failed ransom negotiation. The city managed to rebuild, using wheat profits and \"a lot of sacrifice\". In the 1620s, farmers in Caracas discovered that Cacao beans could be sold, first selling them to native people of Mexico and quickly growing across the Caribbean. The city became important in the Viceroyalty of New Spain, as well as moving from largely native slave labor to African slaves, the first of the Spanish colonies to become part of the slave trade. The city was successful and operated on cacao and slave trade until the 1650s, when an \"alhorra\" blight, the Mexican Inquisition of many of their Portuguese traders, and increased cacao production in Guayaquil greatly affected the market. This and the destructive 1641 earthquake put the city into decline, and they likely began illegally trading with the Dutch Empire, which Caraque\u00f1os later proved sympathetic to; by the 1670s, Caracas had a trading route through Cura\u00e7ao.\nIn 1728, the Guipuzcoan Company of Caracas was founded by the king, and the cacao business grew in importance. Caracas was made one of the three provinces of Nueva Granada, corresponding to Venezuela, in 1739. Over the next three decades the Viceroyalty was variously split, with Caracas province becoming the Venezuela province. Luis de Unzaga created the Captaincy General of Venezuela in the summer of 1777, with Caracas as the capital. Venezuela then attempted to become independent, first with the 1797 Gual and Espa\u00f1a conspiracy, based in Caracas, and then the successful 1811 Venezuelan Declaration of Independence. Caracas then came under worse luck: in 1812, an earthquake destroyed Caracas, a quarter of its population migrated in 1814, and the Venezuelan War of Independence continued until 24 June 1821, when Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar defeated royalists in the Battle of Carabobo. Urban reforms only took place towards the end of the 19th century, under Antonio Guzm\u00e1n Blanco: some landmarks were built, but the city remained distinctly colonial until the 1930s.\nCaracas grew in size, population, and economic importance during Venezuela's oil boom in the early 20th century. In the 1950s, the metropolitan area of Gran Caracas was developed, and the city began an intensive modernization program, funding public buildings, which continued throughout the 1960s and early 1970s. Cultural landmarks, like the University City of Caracas, designed by modernist architect Carlos Ra\u00fal Villanueva and declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 2000; the Caracas Museum of Contemporary Art; and the Teresa Carre\u00f1o Cultural Complex were built, as well as the Caracas Metro and a developed downtown area. Urban development was rapid, leading to the growth of slums on the hillsides surrounding the new city. Much of the city development also fell into disrepair come the end of the 20th century, with the 1980s oil glut and political instability like the Caracazo, meaning maintenance can not be sustained. The economic and social problems persist throughout the capital and country, characterized as the Crisis in Venezuela. By 2017, Caracas was the most violent city in the world.\nCoat of arms.\nThe previous coat of arms was adopted in 1591. Sim\u00f3n de Bol\u00edvar, an ancestor of Venezuelan liberator Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar, had been named the first prosecutor general of the Venezuelan province in 1589. He served as the representative of Venezuela to the Spanish Crown, and vice versa. In 1591, de Bol\u00edvar introduced a petition to King Philip II for a coat of arms, which he granted by Royal Cedula on 4 September that year in San Lorenzo. The coat of arms represents the city's name with the red Santiago (St. James') cross. It originally depicted \"a brown bear rampant on a field of silver, holding between its paws a golden shell with the red cross of Santiago; and its seal is a crown with five golden points\". In the same act, the king declared Caracas as \"The Most Noble and Very Loyal City of Santiago de Le\u00f3n de Caracas\".\nUntil 2022, the anthem of the city was \"Marcha a Caracas\", written by the composer Tiero Pezzuti de Matteis with the lyrics by Jos\u00e9 Enrique Sarabia and approved in 1984.\nGeography.\nCaracas is contained entirely within a valley of the Venezuelan Central Range, and is separated from the Caribbean coast by a roughly expanse of El \u00c1vila National Park. The valley is relatively small and quite irregular. The altitude varies between above sea level; the historic center lies at about above sea level. This, along with the rapid population growth, has profoundly influenced the urban development of the city. The most elevated point of the Capital District, wherein the city is located, is the \"Pico El \u00c1vila\", which rises to .\nThe main body of water in Caracas is the Guaire River, which flows across the city and empties into the Tuy River, which is also fed by the El Valle and San Pedro rivers, in addition to numerous streams which descend from El \u00c1vila. The La Mariposa and Camatagua reservoirs provide water to the city. The city is occasionally subject to earthquakes \u2013 notably in 1641 and 1967.\nGeologically, Caracas was formed in the Late Cretaceous period, with much of the rest of the Caribbean, and sits on what is mostly metamorphic rock. Deformation of the land in this period formed the region.\nClimate.\npx; overflow:hidden; position:relative; background-color:white;\"&gt;\npx; top:-1200 px; width:8000 px; position:absolute;\"&gt; \nA K\u00f6ppen map of Caracas and the surrounding areas:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Image key/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnder the K\u00f6ppen climate classification, Caracas has a tropical savanna climate (\"Aw\"), milder due to the elevation and within the Venezuelan Coastal Range (Maritime Andes). Caracas precipitation varies between (annual), in the city proper to in some parts of the Mountain range. While Caracas is within the tropics, due to its altitude, temperatures are cooler compared to other locations with a typical tropical savanna climate. The annual average temperature is approximately . The average of the coldest month, January, is . The average of the warmest month, May, is , which gives a small annual thermal amplitude of .\nIn December and January abundant fog may appear, in addition to a sudden nightly drop in temperature, until reaching . This peculiar weather is known by the natives of Caracas as the \"Pacheco\". Nightly temperatures year round are much (7 to 11\u00a0\u00b0C) lower than daytime highs and usually do not remain above , resulting in very pleasant evening temperatures. Hailstorms appear in Caracas, although only on rare occasions. Electrical storms are much more frequent, especially between June and October, due to the city being in a closed valley and the orographic action of Cerro El \u00c1vila.\nHydrography.\nThe hydrographic network of the city of Caracas is made up of the Guaire river basin which is a sub-basin of the Tuy river. This basin crosses the valley where the city is located from West to East (Las Adjuntas \u2013 Petare). It covers about 655 square kilometers, about 45\u00a0km. long and about 15\u00a0km. wide, has a rectangular shape. The basin is formed by the Caracas Valley, which is relatively high, narrow and long, surrounded by the high and steep Cordillera de la Costa, which runs parallel to the Litoral.\nAmong the characteristics of the hydrographic network associated with the city of Caracas is the high degree of contamination present in the lower parts of the Guaire River due to its tributaries having been used for sewage collection since 1874, during the government of Antonio Guzm\u00e1n Blanco, until today. The level of contamination is such that it does not allow the maintenance of the life of the species that once populated the basin, and it has become extinct or has been restricted to the highest areas of the basin, mainly within the boundaries of the national park. Avila. Awareness for the recovery of the basin has recently begun, however, much remains to be done before results can be observed.\nAmong the main rivers and streams that make up the basin are in its northern slope: San Pedro River, Macarao River, Quebrada Caroata, Catuche River, Anauco River, Chacaito River, Tocome River, Caurimare River; on its southern slope we find that among the main tributaries are: El Valle river, Quebrada Baruta and Quebrada La Guairita. In the upper part of the basin there are two reservoirs with the purpose of supplying water to the western part of the city; These are the Macarao Dam and the La Mariposa Reservoir.\nUrbanism.\nCaracas shares commonalities with many Latin American cities: densely populated and with limited space because it is surrounded by mountains. Because of this, the city has grown vertically. A very striking aspect is the number of people living in substandard housing built on the mountain slopes surrounding the city. This type of housing is called ranchos, built improvised, without any official planning, with deficiencies and inadequate materials, marking a difference between those who live in the valley proper, 45% of the population in 25% of the urban area lives in these settlements.\nThe city center, developed around a small historic center, represents less than a quarter of the total area of the city, which has spread along the valley and has also been connected in recent years with satellite cities in the states of Miranda and La Guaira, creating a major metropolitan area known as Gran Caracas. The city's rapid population growth has resulted in increasing traffic congestion. To this end, the subway transportation system (Metro de Caracas) has been progressively expanded and is currently linked to the Los Teques Metro and, in the future, to the Guarenas-Guatire Metro system. The \"Ezequiel Zamora\" Central Railway System also links the communities of Charallave and C\u00faa de los Valles del Tuy with the subway transportation of the capital city.\nSome areas of the city have a grid layout, either inherited from the colony or developed during the urban projects of the 20th century. Other areas, built on the mountain slopes, do not follow this pattern, but adapt to the irregularities of the terrain. These elevated areas enjoy a temperate temperature throughout the year.\nDemographics.\nA multiethnic, cultural and racial mix has marked the city throughout history. Its ethnic composition is very diverse.\nIn 2011, the Caracas proper (Distrito Capital) had over 1.9\u00a0million inhabitants. The Metropolitan District of Caracas had an estimated 2.9\u00a0million in 2011. In 2025, the population of Caracas is over 3 million. The majority of the population is mixed-race, typically with varying degrees of European, Indigenous, African and occasionally Asian ancestry. There is a noteworthy Afro-Venezuelan community.\nCaracas has a large number of both European Venezuelans and Asian Venezuelans who descend from the massive influx of immigrants Venezuela received from all across Eurasia during the 20th century. In particular, there are descendants of Spaniards, Portuguese, Italians, Serbs, Chinese, Colombians, Germans, Syrians and Lebanese people. In 2020, the poorest 55% of the Caracas population lived on about a third of its land, in poorly planned slums that are generally dangerous to live in and access.\nCaracas has exceeded the administrative limits of its perimeter due to accelerated population growth, so that its most suitable demographic study territory is the Metropolitan District or AMC. According to 2011 calculations by the National Institute of Statistics, the metropolitan city had a population for the 2011 census of 2,923,959 inhabitants. The Metropolitan District represents less than 1% of the national territory and is home to one-fifteenth of Venezuela's population. In percentage numbers, 9.2% of Venezuela's population lives in the five capital municipalities, out of the 335 municipalities that comprise Venezuela.\nThe region is called Greater Caracas or Metropolitan Region of Caracas (RMC) satellite cities or adjacent bedrooms: the Altos Mirandinos, the Central Coast of La Guaira, Guarenas, Guatire and the Valles del Tuy. This agglomeration had an estimated population of 4.3 million inhabitants in 2011.\nIn the 20th century, an exodus of the peasantry to the capital and other cities intensified, motivated by a search for improvements in their quality of life. This led to depopulation of the rural areas of the country and the demographic saturation of the centers. This saturation caused the expansion of marginal areas on the outskirts of the city; however, the lowest unemployment rates in the entire country correspond precisely to the metropolitan area of Caracas. In 1936, the total population of Venezuela had been equal to the estimated population of Greater Caracas for the year 2000: almost 4 million inhabitants. From 1936 to 1990, Caracas multiplied its population, although far less than any other major city in the country, such as Valencia, which in the same period of time multiplied its population almost 25 times.\nBetween the 1940s and 1950s, after the Second World War, a growing wave of European immigrants began, mostly Spanish, Portuguese and Italians and in other magnitudes, communities of Germans (Colonia Tovar), French, English, Serbs and Jews were established. New developments in Caracas were populated mainly by these European immigrants, such as La Florida and Altamira.\nDuring the 1960s, President R\u00f3mulo Betancourt followed the same policy as the Marcos P\u00e9rez Jim\u00e9nez government: promoting immigration, especially from Latin America and from other parts of the world. These policies were maintained until the late 1980s, with a notable influx of Argentines, Uruguayans, Chileans, Cubans, Peruvians, Ecuadorians, Chinese, and Arabs. Towards the beginning of the 1980s, immigration was marked by a strong exodus of Colombians.\nCrime.\nVenezuela and its capital, Caracas, have been reported to both have among the highest per capita murder rates in the world. In 2010 Caracas had the highest murder rate in the world, having more deaths than Baghdad during the Iraq War, and in 2012 there were 13,080 murders in Venezuela, according to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.\nIn 2019, Caracas was the city with the sixth highest homicide rate in the world outside of a warzone, with a rate of around 76 murders per 100,000 people. In 2023 it was the nineteenth, with a rate of around 52 murders per 100,000 people. Most murders and other violent crimes go unsolved, with estimates of the number of unresolved crimes as high as 98%. The U.S. Department of State and British Foreign and Commonwealth Office have issued travel warnings for Venezuela due to high rates of crime.\nEconomy.\nBusinesses that are located in Caracas include service companies, banks, and malls, among others. It has a largely service-based economy, apart from some industrial activity in its metropolitan area. The Caracas Stock Exchange and Petr\u00f3leos de Venezuela (PDVSA) are headquartered here. PDVSA, a state-run organization, is the largest company in Venezuela, and negotiates all the international agreements for the distribution and export of petroleum. When it existed, the airline Viasa had its headquarters in the Torre Viasa.\nSeveral international companies and embassies are located in El Rosal and Las Mercedes, in the Caracas area. The city also serves as a hub for communication and transportation infrastructure between the metropolitan area and the rest of the country. Important industries in Caracas include chemicals, textiles, leather, food, iron, and wood products. There are also rubber and cement factories. Its nominal GDP is US$70\u00a0billion and the GDP (PPP) per capita is US$24,000.\nA 2009 United Nations survey reported that the cost of living in Caracas was 89% of that of the survey's baseline city, New York. However, this statistic is based upon a fixed currency-exchange-rate of 2003 and might not be completely realistic, due to the elevated inflation rates of the last several years.\nTourism.\nIn 2013, the World Economic Forum evaluated countries in terms of how successful they were in advertising campaigns to attract foreign visitors. Out of the 140 countries evaluated, Venezuela came last. A major factor that has contributed to the lack of foreign visitors has been poor transport for tourists. Venezuela has limited railway systems and airlines. High crime rates and the negative attitude of the Venezuelan population towards tourism also contributed to the poor evaluation.\nIn an attempt to attract more foreign visitors, the Venezuelan Ministry of Tourism invested in multiple hotel infrastructures. The largest hotel investment has been in the Hotel Alba Caracas. The cost for the general maintenance of the north and south towers of the hotel is approximately 231.5\u00a0million Venezuelan bolivars. Although the Venezuelan Ministry of Tourism has taken the initiative to recognize the importance of the tourism industry, the Venezuelan government has not placed the tourism industry as an economic priority. In 2013, the budget for the Ministry of Tourism was only 173.8\u00a0million bolivars, while the Ministry of the Youth received approximately 724.6\u00a0million bolivars. The tourism industry in Venezuela contributes approximately 3.8 percent of the country GDP. The World Economic Forum predicts Venezuela's GDP to rise to 4.2 percent by 2022.\nGovernment.\nOn 8 March 2000, the year after a new constitution was introduced in Venezuela, it was decreed in \"Gaceta Official\" N\u00b0 36,906 that the Metropolitan District of Caracas would be created and that some of the powers of the Libertador, Chacao, Baruta, Sucre, and El Hatillo municipalities would be delegated to the \"Alcald\u00eda Mayor\", physically located in the large Libertador municipality, in the center of the city. The Metropolitan District of Caracas was suppressed on 20 December 2017 by the Constituent National Assembly of Venezuela.\nCapital District.\nIn the case of the Libertador Municipality of Caracas, the only member of the Capital District, the executive authority rests with the head of government of the Capital District, a position designated by the president of the republic.\nAccording to Article 3 of the Capital District Law, the legislative function is exercised directly by the Republic through the National Assembly of Venezuela.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nArticle 3. The special regime of the Capital District is a government system constituted by an executive body exercised by a Head of Government, and the legislative function will be in charge of the National Assembly.\nBefore the creation of the Metropolitan District, the Federal District (current Capital District) had a governor appointed by the president of the republic, while the Caracas municipalities of the State of Miranda governed with their respective mayors in isolation, without any coordinating entity. In April 2009, the National Assembly reformed the Capital District Law, legalizing the constitution of a head of government or governor for the Libertador municipality designated by the National Executive.\nUsing as an argument what is established in article 156 of the constitution:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nArticle 156. It is the competence of the National Public Power: 10. The organization and regime of the Capital District and federal dependencies.\nMetropolitan District.\nThe city of Caracas occupies the entirety of the Libertador municipality of the Capital District and part of the state of Miranda, specifically the municipalities of Baruta, Chacao, El Hatillo and Sucre, which until 2011 formed the Metropolitan District of Caracas, which enjoyed legal personality and autonomy within the limits of the Constitution and the law.\nUntil that year, the Metropolitan Mayor was the first civil, political and administrative authority of the city of Caracas, as well as the municipal mayors in each of the municipalities comprising it. The Metropolitan District of Caracas was organized in a system of municipal government at two levels: the metropolitan or district and the municipalities.\nMedia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt; \nCulture.\nCaracas is Venezuela's cultural capital, with many restaurants, theaters, museums, and shopping centers. The city is home to many immigrants from Spain, Italy, Portugal, the Middle East, Germany, China, and other Latin American countries.\nMusic.\nThe Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar Symphony Orchestra is based in Caracas. Originally a youth orchestra, it is connected with the Fundaci\u00f3n Musical Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar (FMSB), known colloquially as \"El Sistema\", Venezuela's social action music programme. \"The Guardian\" wrote that the orchestra represented \"a message of social inclusion and the manifest power of music to bring communities together\".\nSports.\nProfessional sports teams in the city include the football clubs Caracas F\u00fatbol Club, Deportivo Petare, Atl\u00e9tico Venezuela, SD Centro Italo Venezolano, Estrella Roja FC and Deportivo La Guaira. Deportivo Petare has reached the semi-finals of international tournaments, such as the Copa Libertadores, while the Caracas F\u00fatbol Club has reached the quarterfinals. Baseball team Leones del Caracas plays at the Monumental Stadium with a capacity of 40,000 spectators, while the Tiburones de La Guaira plays at University Stadium, with a capacity of nearly 26,000 spectators.\nThe football stadiums in the city include the Olympic Stadium, home to Caracas F\u00fatbol Club and Deportivo La Guaira, with a capacity of 30,000 spectators, and the Br\u00edgido Iriarte Stadium, home to Atl\u00e9tico Venezuela, with a capacity of 12,000 spectators. In basketball, the Cocodrilos de Caracas play their games in the Gimnasio Jos\u00e9 Beracasa in the El Para\u00edso neighborhood.\nCaracas is the seat of the National Institute of Sports and of the Venezuelan Olympic Committee. The city hosted the 1983 Pan American Games.\nEducation.\nCentral University of Venezuela.\nThe Central University of Venezuela (\"Universidad Central de Venezuela\", UCV) is a public university founded in 1721: it is the oldest university in Venezuela. The university campus was designed by architect Carlos Ra\u00fal Villanueva and declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2000.\nSim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar University.\nThe Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar University (\"Universidad Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar\", USB) is a public institution in Caracas that focuses on science and technology.\nTransport.\nThe Caracas Metro has been in operation since 27 March 1983, with four lines, 47 stations and about 10 more to be constructed. It covers a great part of the city and also has an integrated ticket system that combines the route of the \"Metro\" with those offered by the \"Metrob\u00fas\", a bus service of the Caracas Metro. In 2010, the first segment of a new aerial cable car system opened, Metrocable which feeds into the larger metro system.\nBuses are the main means of mass transportation. There are two bus systems: the traditional system and the \"Metrob\u00fas\". Other transportation services include the IFE train to and from the Tuy Valley cities of Charallave and C\u00faa; the Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar International Airport, the biggest and most important in the country; the metro additional services Caracas Aerial Tramway and Los Teques Metro (connecting Caracas with the suburban city of Los Teques); and the Generalissimo Francisco de Miranda Air Base used by military aviation and government airplanes.\nHighways and main roads.\nThe largest concentration of road networks in the country is in the Caracas region and its surroundings, with a large network of highways and avenues in the Metropolitan District and urban, suburban and interurban roads. The road network has become a great crossroads between the West, the East and the Center of the country. Not very advantageous role for a city saturated with population and vehicles of all kinds, both from the same city and from its immediate area of influence (La Guaira State, Valles del Tuy, Guarenas-Guatire, Altos Mirandinos) and from other areas of the country.\nCurrently, a link is being built that will connect the Central Regional highway (at km 31) with the Gran Mariscal de Ayacucho highway (Kempis sector), in order to serve as a spillway to the city of Caracas and neighboring Guarenas and Guatire, so that vehicles that go from east to west or center, and vice versa, do not have the need to enter Caracas. The route of this highway would be from the vicinity of the Charallave airport, passing through Santa Luc\u00eda and going up to the Kempis area (between Guatire and Caucagua).\nTraffic in the Caracas Region is very congested, since it is the city with the largest number of cars in the country, causing traffic jams at any time in the city and being over-saturated at peak hours, where Caracas residents last up to 3 hours to get out of congestion.\nSince 1986 a mysterious black substance referred to as La Mancha Negra (The Black Stain) has oozed from roads has caused many car accidents killing multiple people.\nCaracas metro.\nIt is one of the most important means of transportation in the city, since its 47 operating stations transport about 2 million people, according to official figures83 The Caracas Metro system covers the central area of the city from east to west, with lines that connect the southwest and with other surface systems of the Metro system (BusCaracas, MetroCable San Agust\u00edn) as well as the southeast (Cabletr\u00e9n de Petare, Metrocable Mariche), Metrob\u00fas feeder routes in most of the stations, in addition to the expansion of lines existing stations (La Rinconada terminal station of line 3 and intermediate stations of the extension; interconnection of the Plaza Venezuela and Capuchinos stations \u2013 extension of line 2, better known as line 4, as well as the future interconnection with the Metro Guarenas Guatire system, which began with the Bello Monte station) and an appendix that extends to the city of Los Teques (capital of the Miranda state). The three stations that comprise this last line make up the Los Teques Metro System86. Both systems are operated by the company C. A. Metro de Caracas (Cametro)\nThe system inaugurated in 1983 has 71\u00a0km and with five lines, being one of the longest in Latin America and expansions of it are being built towards the towns of Guarenas and Guatire. The expansion plans also include the extension to the Baruta and Hatillo municipalities, as well as other metrocable systems in the city center.\nBusCaracas.\nBusCaracas is a mass transit system that connects some areas of the Libertador municipality of Caracas. It began operations in October 201290, taking as a model other means of transportation such as the Trolem\u00e9rida, and Transbarca. The work was undertaken by the Government of Venezuela through the Ministry of Public Works and Housing (MOPVI), the company in charge of the construction was VIALPA, until its contract was cancelled and replaced by PILPERCA in 2010, and inaugurated on 3 October 2012. Also known as Line 7 of the Caracas subway has 11 stations with two connections to the subway system at La Hoyada and La bandera, lines 1 and 3 respectively.\nMetrocable.\nThe Caracas Metrocable is a cable car system integrated into the Caracas Metro, conceived in such a way that residents of Caracas neighborhoods usually located in mountainous areas can travel faster and safer to the city center. It works like a feeder route in the style of the metrobus.\nIn 2011, a new metrocable system was built in the Parroquia de San Agust\u00edn del Sur, where people can freely go and enjoy a view of a large part of Caracas.\nRail system.\nThere is a national railway project, which aims to connect Caracas with the central area of the country. Currently, the Caracas-C\u00faa train service is operating, belonging to the Central Railway System of Venezuela \"Ezequiel Zamora I\". Inaugurated in 2006, it is the only railway section currently operating in Venezuela, according to the Instituto de Ferrocarriles del Estado (IFE). This commuter train line connects the city of Caracas with the towns of the Valles del Tuy (Charallave, Santa Luc\u00eda, Ocumare, Santa Teresa, Yare and C\u00faa) and runs for 41.4 kilometers.\nThe network begins its journey at the Libertador Sim\u00f3n Bolivar station in Caracas, located in La Rinconada and connected to line 3 of the Caracas metro. From the city it communicates with three other stations: Charallave Norte Francisco de Miranda and Charallave Sur Don Sim\u00f3n Rodr\u00edguez; both in the town of Charallave and ends at the C\u00faa General Ezequiel Zamora station (C\u00faa, Miranda).\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nCaracas is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnion of Ibero-American Capital Cities.\nCaracas is part of the Union of Ibero-American Capital Cities from 12 October 1982.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55290", "revid": "1317300409", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55290", "title": "Gedeon Burkhard", "text": "German actor (born 1969)\nDaniel Gedeon Burkhard (born 3 July 1969) is a German film and television actor. Although he has appeared in numerous films and TV series in both Europe and the US, he is probably best recognised for his role as Alexander Brandtner in the Austrian/German television series \"Kommissar Rex\" (1998\u20132001), or as Corporal Wilhelm Wicki in the 2009 film \"Inglourious Basterds\". He is also well recognised for his role as Chris Ritter in the long-running series \"Alarm f\u00fcr Cobra 11\".\nLife and career.\nGedeon Burkhard was born in Munich, West Germany, the son of Wolfgang Burkhard and German actress Elisabeth von Molo (then Burkhard) who is the granddaughter of Alexander Moissi, a famous Albanian-born Austrian actor of the 20th century. Gedeon was educated at a boarding school in England and began his acting career in 1979 in the German TV film \"Tante Maria\".\nDuring the 1990s, he lived in the United States, working in several productions, but without much recognition. Burkhard married Birgit Cunningham, then divorced three months later. After that, he lived in Vienna for \"Kommisar Rex\" for more than five years, then moved to Berlin. Burkhard was working in Cologne on the TV series \"Alarm f\u00fcr Cobra 11\" as the detective Chris Ritter until November 2007. His character Chris Ritter had a heroic death. He then returned to Berlin to be close to his daughter and to work on projects. He said \"For the moment I will dedicate myself again fully to my artistic vagabond life in Berlin\". Burkhard appeared in the Quentin Tarantino movie \"Inglourious Basterds\". In February 2009, he was shooting the film \"Massel\", made for German television. In 2011, he was in Rome, shooting the Italian miniseries \"Caccia al Re \u2013 La narcotici\".\nIn 2011, he competed in \"Ballando con le Stelle\", the Italian version of \"Dancing with the Stars\", accompanied by professional Italian dancer Samanta Togni, in which he danced with his \"daughter\" Laura Glavan.\nIn 2016, Burkhard played Gustav Froehlich, a German actor and UFA star, in the international movie \"The Devil's Mistress\" by Czech director Filip Ren\u010d. The biographical film is about the life of actress L\u00edda Baarov\u00e1 and her relationship with Joseph Goebbels. The film was released in January 2016 in Prague.\nSelected filmography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55292", "revid": "1272735482", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55292", "title": "Nurse", "text": ""}
{"id": "55293", "revid": "30514002", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55293", "title": "Niagara County, New York", "text": "County in New York, United States\nNiagara County is in the U.S. state of New York. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 212,666. The county seat is Lockport. The county name is from the Iroquois word \"Onguiaahra\"; meaning \"the strait\" or \"thunder of waters\". The county is part of the Western New York region of the state.\nNiagara County is part of the Buffalo\u2013Niagara Falls metropolitan area, and across the Canada\u2013US border is the province of Ontario.\nIt is the location of Niagara Falls and Fort Niagara, and has many parks and lake shore recreation communities. In the summer of 2008, Niagara County celebrated its 200th birthday with the first settlement of the county, of Niagara Falls.\nHistory.\nWhen western New York became part of the New York colony in 1763, the present Niagara County was part of Albany County. Prior to the British, the area was part of New France.\nAlbany was an enormous county, including the northern part of New York State as well as all of the present State of Vermont and, in theory, extending westward to the Pacific Ocean. This county was reduced in size on July 3, 1766, by the creation of Cumberland County, and further on March 16, 1770, by the creation of Gloucester County, both containing territory now in Vermont.\nOn March 12, 1772, what was left of Albany County was split into three parts, one remaining under the name Albany County. One of the other pieces, Tryon County, contained the western portion (and thus, since no western boundary was specified, theoretically still extended west to the Pacific). The eastern boundary of Tryon County was approximately five miles west of the present city of Schenectady, and the county included the western part of the Adirondack Mountains and the area west of the West Branch of the Delaware River. The area then designated as Tryon County now includes 37 counties of New York State. The county was named for William Tryon, colonial governor of New York.\nIn the years prior to 1776, most of the Loyalists in Tryon County fled to Canada including the likes of local judge John Butler and militia commander Sir John Johnson. In 1784, following the peace treaty that ended the American Revolutionary War, the name of Tryon County was changed to honor the general, Richard Montgomery, who had captured several places in Canada and died attempting to capture the city of Quebec, replacing the name of the hated British governor.\nIn 1789, Ontario County was split off from Montgomery. In turn, Genesee County was created from Ontario County in 1802.\nNiagara County was created from Genesee County in 1808. It was, however, larger than the present Niagara County even though it consisted of only the Town of Cambria.\nFrom 1814 to 1817, records of Cattaraugus County were divided between Belmont (the seat of Allegany County) and Buffalo (then in Niagara County). Niagara County governed the western portion of Cattaraugus County, then known as the town of Perry.\nIn 1821, Erie County was created from Niagara County.\nThe county has a number of properties on the National Register of Historic Places.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of 1,139 square miles, of which is land and (54%) is water.\nNiagara County is in the most western part of New York State, just north of the city Buffalo and bordering Lake Ontario on its northern border, and the Niagara River Canada on its western border.\nThe county's primary geographic feature is Niagara Falls, the riverbed of which has eroded seven miles south over the past 12,000 years since the last ice age. The Niagara River and Niagara Falls, are in effect, the drainage ditch for four of the Great Lakes which constitute the world's largest supply of fresh water. The water flows north from Lake Erie, then through the Niagara River, goes over Niagara Falls, and then on to Lake Ontario and the St. Lawrence River, eventually emptying into the North Atlantic Ocean. Today, tourists and visitors to the Falls see a diminished flow of water over the Falls, since a portion of the flow has been diverted for hydroelectric power purposes. Both the American and Canadian side of the Niagara River have massive electrical power plants.\nThe Niagara Gorge is the path Niagara Falls has taken over thousands of years as it continues to erode. Niagara Falls started at the Niagara Escarpment which cuts Niagara County in half in an east\u2013west direction. North of the Escarpment lies the Lake Plain, which is a fertile flatland used to grow grapes, apples, peaches and other fruits and vegetables. The grape variety Niagara, source of most American white grape juice but not esteemed for wine, was first grown in the county, in 1868. Viticulture, or wine culture has begun to take place, with several wineries below the escarpment. This has helped to improve the depressed economy of the region.\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGovernment and politics.\nStructure.\nNiagara County is governed by a 15-member Legislature, with the Chairman of the Legislature as the de facto head of county government. The 2024 Legislature, consists of 12 members of the Republican-led Majority Caucus and three members of the Democratic-led Minority Caucus. The Legislature formerly consisted of 19 members, but was downsized to 15 seats effective January 1, 2012, based on the results of a public referendum.\nA subordinate county manager reports to the County Legislature. Governing functions of the Legislature rely on a committee system. There are five standing committees and one long-term ad hoc committee: Administration; Community Services; Community Safety and Security; Economic Development; Public Works; and the \"ad hoc\" Refuse Disposal District Committee.\nThe dominant political party in the Niagara County Legislature is currently the Republican Party, which is ancestrally the dominant party in Niagara County.\n2024 Legislature.\nChairman: Rebecca J. Wydysh\nVice Chairman: Anthony J. Nemi\nMajority Leader: Randy R. Bradt\nMinority Leader: Christopher A. Robins\n1st District: Irene M. Myers\n2nd District: Rebecca J. Wydysh\n3rd District: Christopher J. McKimmie\n4th District: Jeffrey Elder\n5th District: Christopher A. Robins\n6th District: Christopher Voccio\n7th District: Jesse P. Gooch\n8th District: Richard L. Andres\n9th District: Randy R. Bradt\n10th District: David E. Godfrey\n11th District: Anthony J. Nemi\n12th District: Carla L. Speranza\n13th District: Richard E. Abbott\n14th District: Shawn A. Foti\n15th District: Michael A. Hill\nOther entities.\nIn addition to the areas mentioned above, much of Niagara County is serviced by a Water District and a Sewer District. Both bodies are subordinate to the County Legislature; the former has a direct relationship, while the latter is currently under limited oversight of the town supervisors within the district.\nState and federal government.\nNiagara County is part of:\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 216,469 people, 87,846 households, and 58,593 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 95,715 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 90.70% White, 6.15% Black or African American, 0.94% Native American, 0.58% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.40% from other races, and 1.21% from two or more races. 1.33% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 23.6% were of German, 18.1% Italian, 11.3% Irish, 11.2% Polish and 8.3% English ancestry. 94.5% spoke English, 1.6% Spanish and 1.0% Italian as their first language.\nThere were 87,846 households, out of which 30.90% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 50.30% were married couples living together, 12.30% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.30% were non-families. 28.60% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.00% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.45 and the average family size was 3.03.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 24.70% under the age of 18, 8.50% from 18 to 24, 28.40% from 25 to 44, 23.10% from 45 to 64, and 15.40% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females there were 93.30 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 89.50 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $38,136, and the median income for a family was $47,817. Males had a median income of $37,468 versus $24,668 for females. The per capita income for the county was $19,219. About 8.20% of families and 10.60% of the population were below the poverty line, including 15.00% of those under age 18 and 7.30% of those age 65 or over.\nEducation.\nNiagara University is located in Lewiston, New York. SUNY Niagara is located in Sanborn, New York. Many Niagara County residents also attend Erie and other Western New York County Schools.\nIn the Buffalo Metro area there are more than 20 public and private colleges and universities offering programs in technical and vocational training, graduate, and professional studies.\nK-12 school districts.\nSchool districts include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCommunities.\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55294", "revid": "50974564", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55294", "title": "Oneida County, New York", "text": "County in New York, United States\nOneida County ( ) is a county in the state of New York, United States. As of February 26, 2024, the population was 226,654. The county seat is Utica. The name is in honor of the Oneida, one of the Five Nations of the Iroquois League or \"Haudenosaunee\", which had long occupied this territory at the time of European encounter and colonization. The federally recognized Oneida Indian Nation has had a reservation in the region since the late 18th century, after the American Revolutionary War. The county is part of the Mohawk Valley region of the state.\nOneida County is part of the Utica\u2013Rome, NY Metropolitan Statistical Area.\nHistory.\nWhen England established colonial counties in the Province of New York in 1683, the territory of present Oneida County was included in a very large, mostly undeveloped Albany County. This county included the northern part of present-day New York State as well as all of the present state of Vermont and, in theory, extended westward to the Pacific Ocean. This county was reduced in size on July 3, 1766, to create Cumberland County, and further on March 16, 1770, by the creation of Gloucester County, both containing territory now in Vermont.\nOn March 12, 1772, what was left of Albany County was split into three parts, one remaining under the name Albany County. Tryon County contained the western portion (and thus, since no western boundary was specified, theoretically still extended west to the Pacific). The eastern boundary of Tryon County was approximately five miles west of the present city of Schenectady in the Mohawk River Valley, and the county included the western part of the Adirondack Mountains and the area west of the West Branch of the Delaware River. Tryon County was later divided to organize 37 distinct counties of New York State. The county was named for William Tryon, colonial governor of New York.\nDuring and after the Revolution, most of the Loyalists in Tryon County fled to Canada. In 1784, following the peace treaty that ended the American Revolutionary War, Americans changed the name of Tryon County to Montgomery County to honor the general, Richard Montgomery, who had captured several places in Canada and died attempting to capture the city of Quebec. They replaced the name of the British governor.\nIn 1789, Montgomery County was reduced by the splitting off of Ontario County from Montgomery. The area taken from Montgomery County contained all of present-day Allegany, Cattaraugus, Chautauqua, Erie, Genesee, Livingston, Monroe, Niagara, Orleans, Steuben, Wyoming, Yates, and part of Schuyler and Wayne counties, as well as Ontario County.\nAfter continued new settlement, in 1791 Herkimer County was one of three counties taken from Montgomery (the other two being Otsego, and Tioga County). It was much larger than the present Herkimer County, however, and was reduced by a number of subsequent splits.\nIn 1794, Herkimer County was reduced in size by the creation of Onondaga County. This county was larger than the current Onondaga County, including the present Cayuga, Cortland, and part of Oswego counties.\nIn 1798, Oneida County was created from another part of Herkimer County. This county was larger than the current Oneida County, as it included the present-day Jefferson (which extends along Lake Ontario), Lewis, and part of Oswego counties.\nIn 1805, Jefferson and Lewis counties were split off from Oneida. In 1816, parts of Oneida and Onondaga counties were taken to form the new Oswego County.\nTogether with Utica, Oneida county was the cultural centre of Welsh settlement in New York state. By the mid-nineteenth century, the lexicorapher John Russell Bartlett noted that the area had a number of Welsh language newspapers and magazines, as well as Welsh churches. Indeed Bartlett noted in his \"Dictionary of Americanisms\" that \"one may travel for miles and hear nothing but the Welsh language\". By 1855, there were four thousand Welshmen in Oneida.\nIn 1848, John Humphrey Noyes founded a religious and Utopian community, the Oneida Community, near Oneida. Its unconventional views on religion and relations between the sexes generated much controversy. The community lasted until 1881. The Oneida Silver Company was founded here to manufacture sterling silver, silverplate holloware and, later, stainless steel flatware.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (3.6%) is water.\nOneida County is in the central portion of New York State, east of Syracuse, and west of Albany. Oneida Lake is on the northwestern corner of the county, and the Adirondack Park is on the northeast. Part of the Tug Hill Plateau is in the northern part of the county. Oneida County's highest point lies neither on the plateau nor in the Adirondack Park, but in the county's southern extremity. The peak's name is Tassel Hill. It is located slightly southeast of Hardscrabble Road (Tassel Hill Road), between the villages of Waterville and Cassville.\nThe Erie Canal, completed in 1825, runs east\u2013west along the Mohawk River through the county. It stimulated considerable trade and settlement. Oneida Lake and Oneida Creek form part of the western boundary.\nIn the early 21st century, Oneida is the only county in New York state documented as having Chronic wasting disease among its wild White-tailed deer.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 235,469 people, 90,496 households, and 59,184 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 102,803 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 90.21% White, 5.74% African American, 0.23% Native American, 1.16% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 1.11% from other races, and 1.52% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 3.20% of the population.\n21.7% were of Italian, 13.1% Irish, 12.1% German, 9.9% Polish, 8.5% English and 5.6% American ancestry according to self-identification of ethnic background in Census 2000. 90.6% spoke English, 2.7% Spanish, 1.3% Italian, 1.2% Serbo-Croatian and 1.1% Polish as their first language.\nThere were 90,496 households, out of which 30.40% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 49.10% were married couples living together, 12.00% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.60% were non-families. 29.50% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13.10% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.43 and the average family size was 3.02.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 23.90% under the age of 18, 8.60% from 18 to 24, 28.20% from 25 to 44, 22.90% from 45 to 64, and 16.50% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females there were 98.60 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 96.30 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $35,909, and the median income for a family was $45,341. Males had a median income of $32,194 versus $24,295 for females. The per capita income for the county was $18,516. About 9.80% of families and 13.00% of the population were below the poverty line, including 18.90% of those under age 18 and 8.50% of those age 65 or over.\nGovernment and politics.\nA board of supervisors governed Oneida County until 1962, when the county charter was changed to create a county executive and a 29-seat county legislature. The entire county elects the county executive. On January 1, 2014, the Oneida County Legislature was reduced to 23 seats. All 23 members are elected from single-member districts. Currently, there are 17 Republicans and 6 Democrats.\nOneida County also leans Republican in major statewide and national elections. The last Democratic presidential nominee to carry Oneida County was Bill Clinton in 1996, by plurality. The last Democrat to win a majority in the county was Lyndon Johnson in his 1964 landslide. In 2008, Republican John McCain won the county by 6,000 votes out of 90,000 cast. He won all municipalities in the county except the city of Utica and the town of Kirkland. In 2012, Republican Mitt Romney won the county by even fewer votes, by around 4,000 plus votes. Republican Donald Trump returned the county to its reliably red roots, posting strong victories in 2016, 2020, and 2024.\nEconomy.\nThe main product of Oneida County was once silverware, chiefly manufactured at Oneida Ltd.'s headquarters in Sherrill. In January 2005, the company ceased manufacturing their product, closing its main plant and selling its assets. The factory, under new ownership, continues to produce American-made silverware under the Liberty Tabletop brand.\nCurrently the largest non-governmental, non-healthcare product of Oneida County is gambling. Turning Stone Casino Resort is an enterprise of the Oneida Indian Nation of New York, and the largest private employer in Oneida County.\nEducation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCommunities.\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nVillages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCensus-designated places.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHamlets.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55295", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55295", "title": "Onondaga County, New York", "text": "County in New York, United States\nOnondaga County ( ) is a county in the U.S. state of New York. As of the 2020 census, the population was 476,516. The county seat is Syracuse. The county is part of the Central New York region of the state.\nOnondaga County is the core of the Syracuse Metropolitan Statistical Area.\nHistory.\nThe name \"Onondaga\" derives from the name of the Native American tribe indigenous to this area, one of the original Five Nations of the \"Haudenosaunee\". They call themselves (autonym) \"Onoda'gega\", sometimes spelled \"Onontakeka.\" The word means \"People of the Hills\". Sometimes the term is \"Onondagaono\" (\"The People of the Hills\"). The federally recognized Onondaga Nation has a reservation within the county, on which they have self-government.\nWhen counties were established in New York in 1683, the present Onondaga County was part of Albany County. This enormous county included the northern part of New York State as well as all of the present State of Vermont and, in theory, extended westward to the Pacific Ocean. It was reduced in size on July 3, 1766, by the creation of Cumberland County, and further on March 16, 1770, by the creation of Gloucester County, both containing territory now in Vermont.\nOn March 12, 1772, what was left of Albany County was split into three parts, one remaining under the name Albany County. One of the other pieces, Tryon County, contained the western portion (and thus, since no western boundary was specified, theoretically still extended west to the Pacific). The eastern boundary of Tryon County was approximately west of the present city of Schenectady, and the county included the western part of the Adirondack Mountains and the area west of the West Branch of the Delaware River. The area then designated as Tryon County now includes 37 counties of New York State. The county was named for William Tryon, colonial governor of New York.\nIn the years prior to 1776, most of the Loyalists in Tryon County fled to Canada. The Onondaga were among four Iroquois tribes that allied with the British against the American colonists, as they hoped to end their encroachment. Instead, they were forced to cede most of their land in New York to the United States after the war. Many Onondaga went with Joseph Brant and other nations to Canada, where they received land grants in compensation and formed the Six Nations of the Grand River First Nation.\nIn 1784, after a peace treaty ended the American Revolutionary War, the name of Tryon County was changed to Montgomery County. It honored General Richard Montgomery, who had captured several places in Canada and died attempting to capture the city of Quebec, and replaced the name of the hated British governor.\nIn 1789, Montgomery County was reduced by the splitting off of Ontario County from Montgomery. The actual area split off from Montgomery County was much larger than the present county, also including the present Allegany, Cattaraugus, Chautauqua, Erie, Genesee, Livingston, Monroe, Niagara, Orleans, Steuben, Wyoming, Yates, and part of Schuyler and Wayne Counties.\nIn 1791, Herkimer County was one of three counties split off from Montgomery (the other two being Otsego, and Tioga County). This was much larger than the present county, however, and was reduced by a number of subsequent splits.\nIn 1794, Onondaga County was split off from Herkimer County. This county was larger than the current Onondaga County, including the present Cayuga, Cortland, and part of Oswego Counties.\nIn 1799, Cayuga County was split off from Onondaga.\nIn 1808, Cortland County was split off from Onondaga.\nIn 1816, parts of Oneida and Onondaga Counties were taken to form the new Oswego County.\nAt the time Onondaga County was organized, it was divided into eleven towns: Homer, Pompey, Manlius, Lysander, Marcellus, Ulysses, Milton, Scipio, Ovid, Aurelius and Romulus.\nCentral New York developed rapidly after the New Military Tract provided land in lieu of payment to Revolutionary War veterans. Migration was largely from the east, mostly from New England states. The Genesee Road, which became the Seneca Turnpike in 1800, provided access. Generally settlers preferred higher land, since they associated lowlands with disease. Over time, as early clearing and farming eroded hillside soil, valley lands were more fertile and highly prized for agriculture as well as for water power, which was the origin of many communities. An early settler of 1823 was James Hutchinson Woodworth, a native of Washington County, NY. He helped clear land for his family's farm in this region before he moved to Chicago where he became Mayor. The completion of the Erie Canal across New York state in 1825 accelerated trade, development and migration.\nThe city of Syracuse, New York developed relatively late, due to its marshy situation. It was incorporated as a village in 1825 and as a city in 1847; by contrast, the Village of Manlius, along the Cherry Valley and Seneca Turnpikes, was incorporated in 1813. The population of these rural towns was greatest in the late nineteenth century, when more people cultivated land and farms were relatively small, supporting large households.\nSince that time, agriculture has declined in the county. Some Onondaga County towns like Spafford were largely depopulated and many villages became veritable ghost towns. Onondaga County highlands now are more heavily reforested, with public parks and preserves providing recreation. Two Finger Lakes in the county, Skaneateles and Otisco, also attract visitors. The village of Skaneateles on scenic Route 20 has become a major tourist destination.\nAt the turn of the twenty-first century, population declined in the City of Syracuse while suburban communities generally grew, particularly with tract developments north of the city. Elsewhere, scattered commuter houses appeared, generally on fairly large parcels. The rapid development of the village of Skaneateles and shores of Skaneateles Lake led to increased demand for property and property values.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has an area of , of which is land and (3.4%) is water. The geographic dimensions of the county are illustrated as approximately in length and in width, and comprising of the New York State Barge Canal System, in combination with a number of lakes, streams and rivers. Onondaga County is in the central portion of New York State, west of Albany and Utica, east of Rochester and northeast of Ithaca. Onondaga Lake is bordered by many of the larger communities in the county. The highest point in Onondaga County is at 2057 feet, along Morgan Hill located just east of Morgan Hill State Forest on private property. The second highest point in Onondaga County is at 2019 feet elevation and on the summit of Fellows Hill which is located in Morgan Hill State Forest near Fabius and Apulia south of state route 80.\nThe northern part of the county is fairly level lake plain, extending northward to Lake Ontario. Oneida Lake three rivers, as well as the Erie and subsequent Barge Canals are in the lake plain. The main line of the New York Central Railroad and the New York State Thruway extend east and west across the county through the lake plain. The southern part of the county is Appalachian Plateau, with high hills rising at the southern edge of Syracuse. This is the eastern part of the Finger Lakes region. Skaneateles Lake and Otisco Lake are both in Onondaga County. US 20 extends east and west across the county, traversing dramatic hill-and-valley terrain. Between the lake plain and Appalachian highlands is a zone noted for drumlins, smaller, scattered hills formed as mounds of debris left by the last glacier. Tully is geologically noted for the terminal moraine deposited there by the glacier, filling the deep Tully Valley, which might have been another Finger Lake had the moraine been left closer to Syracuse, impounding water. Tully is at the divide between two major watersheds, one flowing northward to the Atlantic Ocean by way of the St. Lawrence River and the other southward to the ocean via the Susquehanna River. Oneida Lake, the Finger Lakes, and smaller bodies of water provide recreation. The Appalachian hills have several ski areas, waterfalls and historic villages as well as large parks and forest preserves.\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2000 census.\nAs of the 2000 census, the county had 458,336 people, 181,153 households, and 115,394 families. The population density was . There were 196,633 housing units at an average density of . The county's racial makeup was 84.78% White, 9.38% African American, 0.86% Native American, 2.09% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 0.89% from other races, and 1.97% from two or more races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race were 2.44% of the population. About 17.5% were of Italian, 16.2% Irish, 12.4% German, 9.4% English, and 6.0% Polish ancestry, and 91.4% spoke English, 2.4% Spanish and 1.1% Italian as their first language.\nOf the 181,153 households, 31.90% had children under age 18 living with them, 46.90% were married couples living together, 12.90% had a female householder with no husband present, and 36.30% were not families. About 29.40% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.80% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.46 and the average family size was 3.07.\n25.80% of the county's population was under age 18, 9.50% was from age 18 to 24, 28.80% was from age 25 to 44, 22.10% was from age 45 to 64, and 13.80% was age 65 or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 91.70 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 87.70 males.\nThe county's median household income was $40,847, and the median family income was $51,876. Males had a median income of $39,048 versus $27,154 for females. The county's per capita income was $21,336. About 8.60% of families and 12.20% of the population were below the poverty line, including 15.50% of those under age 18 and 7.10% of those age 65 or over.\nEducation.\nOnondaga County is home to Syracuse University, a major research university and SUNY Upstate Medical University, a public medical school. Upstate Medical University is the largest producer of jobs in the region with a direct workforce of 10,959 employees.\nOther higher educational institutions include SUNY Oswego's Syracuse Campus,\nLe Moyne College,\nSUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry,\nOnondaga Community College,\nSt. Joseph's College of Nursing, and \nseveral for-profit colleges.\nK-12 school districts which cover parts of the county include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGovernment and politics.\nGovernment.\nOnondaga County was governed exclusively by a board of supervisors until 1961, when voters approved the creation of the county executive. In 1968, the board reorganized into a 24-seat county legislature. In 2001, the legislature was reduced to 19 seats. In 2010, voters approved a measure to reduce the legislature to 17 seats. None of the legislative seats, nor the county executive's seat, are at-large. Currently, there are 12 Republicans and 5 Democrats. J. Ryan McMahon II (R) is the current County Executive.\nSince formation, Republicans have held a majority in the legislature for all but two years (1978\u20131980). In November 2025 elections, Democrats gained control of the legislature, after a 46-year shutout, and will form a 10\u20137 majority from January 2026.\nPolitics.\nHistorically, Onondaga County was a Republican stronghold, like most of Central New York. From 1856 to 1988, the GOP carried the county in all but one presidential election, Lyndon B. Johnson's landslide in 1964. Since 1992, the county has gone Democratic in every presidential election, much like many urban counties around the country. However, it is a swing county in congressional, state and local races. Onondaga is entirely located within New York's 22nd congressional district, represented by Democrat John Mannion. Democratic strength is concentrated in Syracuse itself, while Republicans do well in the suburbs.\nThe sheriff of Onondaga County is Tobias Shelley. Along with Broome County, New York, Onondaga County was sued in 2017 over placing juvenile inmates in solitary confinement.\nCommunities.\nSyracuse, the county seat, is the only city in Onondaga County. The following is a list of official towns, villages, and hamlets.\nPopulation ranking.\n\u2020 - County seat\n\u2021 - Not entirely in Onondaga County\nList of municipalities.\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHamlets.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55296", "revid": "79805", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55296", "title": "Apron styles", "text": ""}
{"id": "55297", "revid": "1229358656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55297", "title": "Bradford (disambiguation)", "text": "Bradford is a city in West Yorkshire, England.\nBradford may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "55298", "revid": "45346956", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55298", "title": "Mountaineering equipment", "text": "Manufactured gear used in mountaineering"}
{"id": "55300", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55300", "title": "Registered nurse", "text": "Nurse who has graduated from a nursing program\nA registered nurse (RN) is a healthcare professional who has graduated or successfully passed a nursing program from a recognized nursing school and met the requirements outlined by a country, state, province or similar government-authorized licensing body to obtain a nursing license or registration An RN's scope of practice is determined by legislation and job role, and is regulated by a professional body or council.\nRegistered nurses are employed in a wide variety of professional settings, and often specialize in a field of practice. Depending on the jurisdiction, they may be responsible for supervising care delivered by other healthcare workers, including student nurses, licensed practical nurses, unlicensed assistive personnel, and less-experienced RNs.\nRegistered nurses must usually meet a minimum practice hours requirement and undertake continuing education to maintain their license. Furthermore, certain jurisdictions require that an RN remain free from serious criminal convictions.\nHistory.\nFlorence Nightingale was a British nurse who provided the foundation of modern nursing. Nightingale obtained her experience during the Crimean War. In 1860, Nightingale established the St. Thomas Hospital and the Nightingale Training School for Nurses.\nThe registration of nurses by nursing councils or boards began in the early twentieth century. New Zealand registered the first nurse in 1901 with the establishment of the Nurses Registration Act. Nurses were required to complete three years of training and pass a state-administered examination. Registration ensured a degree of consistency in the education of new nurses, and the title was usually protected by law. After 1905 in California, for example, it became a misdemeanour to claim to be an RN without a certificate of registration. Today, typical requirements for an RN licence in the United States include earning either an associate degree (community college) or a baccalaureate degree (college or university) in nursing and passing an examination.\nRegistration acts allowed authorities a degree of control over who was admitted to the profession. Requirements varied by location, but often included a stipulation that the applicant must be \"of good moral character\" and must not have mental or physical conditions that rendered them unable to practice.\nBefore the 1870s, most people were cared for at home by family members. The view on nursing began to change as more medical advances were made during the end of the 19th century and leading into the beginning of the 20th century.\nBenefits of nursing.\nWhen obtaining a nursing degree, there are personal benefits that come with it. One personal benefit is that nursing is a highly respected position. Another personal advantage is the availability of jobs; nurses are in high demand. Nursing also provides many different possibilities of employment, because with a nursing degree, there are many positions that fall under this category. Being able to explore multiple options gives someone the chance to find the most suitable job for themselves. Nurses are generally in demand around the world. The World Health Organization estimates that by 2030 there will be a world-wide shortage of 4.5 million nurses.\nPatients benefit from having a sufficient number of nurses to meet the clinic's or hospital's needs. As the number of nurses increases, the quality of life for the patients increases as well.\nIssues within registered nursing.\nNurses are responsible for providing a high quality of care and maintaining the well-being of patients. With that being said, various situations cause nurses to feel overwhelmed. For example when an excessive workload results in missed nursing. An excessive workload can make errors and mishaps more likely. Insufficient time to complete tasks and inadequate staffing also contribute to missed aspects of nursing care. An indicator of an excessive workload correlates with missed nursing care and activities. Missed care and activities may cause nurses to feel stressed and anxious. Nurses often experience sleep disturbance which can result in lost sleep or inability to fall asleep.\nBy nation.\nAustralia.\nNursing registration in Australia has been at a national level since 2010, since the inception of the Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia (NMBA), which forms part of the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (AHPRA). Prior to 2010, Nursing registration in Australia was administered individually by each state and territory.\nThe title 'Registered Nurse' (also known in the state of Victoria as a 'Division 1 Nurse') is granted to a nurse who has successfully completed a board-approved course in the field of nursing, as outlined by education and registration standards defined by the NMBA. Registered Nurses are also required to meet certain other standards to fulfil registration standards as outlined by the NMBA, and these can include continuing professional development, recency of practice, criminal history checks and competency in the English language. A nurse who is registered with the NMBA, and as such AHPRA, is free to practice in any state or territory in Australia, providing they meet the governing boards requirements and the individual state/territory legislative requirements, such as working with children checks and individual police checks for that state or territory.\nEducational requirements for an entry-level Registered Nurse are at the level of bachelor's degree in Australia, and can range in two to four years in length with three years being the national average. Some universities offer a two-year 'fast track' bachelor's degree, whereby a students study three years worth of coursework compressed in a two-year period. This is made possible by reducing summer and winter semester breaks and utilising three semesters per year compared to two. Some universities also offer combined degrees which allow the graduate to exit the program with a Masters in Nursing, e.g.: Bachelor of Science/Master of Nursing, and these are generally offered over a four-year period.\nPostgraduate nursing education is widespread in Australia and is encouraged by employing bodies such as state health services (e.g. New South Wales Health). There are many varying courses and scholarships available which provide a bachelor-level Registered Nurse the opportunity to 'up-skill' and assume an extended scope of practice. Such courses are offered at all levels of the post graduate spectrum and range from graduate certificate to master's degree and provide a theoretical framework for a bachelor level Registered nurse to take up an advanced practice position such as Clinical Nurse Specialist (CNS), Clinical Nurse Consultant (CNC) and Nurse Practitioner (NP).\nRural and Remote nursing is an important sub-speciality within Australia and Registered Nurses with advanced practice skills and of which have undertaken further training, such as Pharmacotherapeutics for Remote Area Nurses (RAN's), Immunisation Certificate, Remote Emergency Care / Remote Pre Hospital Trauma Certification and Midwifery Emergency Care Courses, permit a generalist Registered Nurse to undertake an advanced scope of practice to operate autonomously within certain clinical situations under the guidance of a 'standard treatment manual' such as the Central Australian Remote Practitioners Association (CARPA) manuals as opposed to the direct order of a medical practitioner whilst practising in a remote/isolated setting. A Registered Nurse at this level would be professionally referred to as a 'Remote Area Nurse' or 'Clinical Nurse Specialist - Speciality'.\nCanada.\nIn all Canadian provinces except Quebec, newly registered nurses are required to have a Bachelor of Science in Nursing. This is either achieved through a four-year university (or collaborative) program or through a bridging program for registered practical nurses or licensed practical nurses. Some universities also offer compressed programs for applicants already holding a bachelor's degree in another field.\nPrior to 2015, initial licensure as an RN required passing the Canadian Registered Nurse Examination (CRNE) offered by the Canadian Nurses Association. As of 2015, for initial licensure, Canadian RNs must pass the NCLEX-RN exam offered by the National Council of State Boards of Nursing. In Quebec, the 'Ordre des infirmi\u00e8res et infirmiers du Qu\u00e9bec' (Quebec Order of Nurses) administers their own licensing exam for registration within the province.\nDenmark.\nIn Denmark, nurses are certified by the Danish Ministry of Health. It is also the ministry that keeps track of violations and can retract individual authorization.\nHong Kong.\nApplicants must complete a pre-registration nursing program lasting not less than 3 years to enroll as registered nurses. Applicants trained outside Hong Kong must have a practicing certificate recognized by the Nursing Council of Hong Kong and pass the Licensing Examination for Registration.\nIndia.\nIn the Republic of India nursing is regulated by the Indian Nursing Council.\nMalaysia.\nIn Malaysia, nursing is regulated by the Ministry of Health Malaysia Nursing Division.\nUnited States.\nIn the US, a registered nurse is a professional clinician who has completed at least an associate degree in nursing or a hospital-based diploma program, followed by successfully completing the NCLEX-RN examination for initial licensure. Other requirements vary by state. More information about the NCLEX-RN examination and specific state nursing boards is provided by the National Council of State Boards of Nursing. A BSN degree is preferred by many employers. To obtain state licensure, applicants must also meet clinical nursing requirements and pass the NCLEX-RN. Six weeks prior to graduation, students may submit an application for licensure and then sign up for the NCLEX-RN.\nAlthough associate degree programs are often two years, Associate of Science in Nursing (ASN) degrees frequently take three years to complete because of the increased volume of undergraduate coursework related to the profession of nursing, sometimes as part of the program itself and sometimes as prerequisites for admission. Bachelor of Science in Nursing (BSN) degrees include more thorough coursework in leadership and community health, as well as more clinical hours, and can be completed as an extension of an Associate program or standalone. Accelerated versions of both exist, and are considered particularly challenging due to the increased course-load necessary to complete the program in a short time. Some employers, especially hospitals, may require a bachelor's degree even for entry-level positions; however, it is also increasingly common for hospitals to hire ASN-licensed individuals for limited practice, under the condition that the individual complete a BSN within a designated time-frame, typically 2\u20133 years.\nSpecialty certification is available through organizations such as the American Nurses Credentialing Center, a subsidiary of the American Nurses Association. After meeting the eligibility requirements and passing the appropriate specialty certification exam, the designation of Registered Nurse\u00a0\u2013 Board Certified (RN-BC) credential is granted.\nRegistered Nurses can work in a variety of settings including hospitals, physicians' offices, nursing homes, and home health care services. The median pay for a registered nurse in 2016, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, was $68,450.00 per year with a bachelor's degree. RNs can progress to become clinical nurse specialists, nurse practitioners, certified nurse midwives, or nurse anesthetists after obtaining a graduate nursing degree.\nIn some states, the law allows nurses with higher-level degrees, such as Masters of Science in Nursing (MSN) or Doctor of Nursing Practice (DNP) to work with increased autonomy, permitting them to practice limited medicine including sometimes even the prescription of medication without the official supervision of a licensed physician (MD or DO). However, a number of advanced nursing degree programs are sufficiently specialized for work within a hospital setting (for example, Nurse Anesthetist) that it is uncommon for such nurses to run their own medical practice.\nNurses in the United States follow the Nurse Practice Act (NPA) which are laws that protect the public's health and welfare by outlining the safe practices of nursing. All states and territories in the U.S. have a nurse practice act. The rules and regulations may vary from state to state. It is important to know the current laws governing nursing practices in their state.\nTypical requirements to get into a nursing school: High School diploma, required GPA for school of choice, admissions application, personal essay, personal interview, teacher recommendations, volunteer experience (preferably in healthcare), application fee, test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL) if applicable, minimum SAT scores or TEAS. Students who wish to pursue either an ADN or a BSN in nursing must first fulfill the necessary liberal arts, math, and scientific prerequisites. Basic anatomy, physiology, biology, psychology, and anatomy are frequently required courses for nursing programs. A minimum \"C\" grade in these courses is frequently needed for admission to nursing schools.\nEconomics.\nAs of 2011[ [update]], there are 2.24\u00a0million registered nurses in China. As of 2014[ [update]], the United States had approximately 2.75\u00a0million registered nurses and Canada had just over 250,000. In the US and Canada this works out to approximately eight nurses per 1,000 people. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, registered nursing jobs are projected to grow by 15% between 2016 and 2026, which is much faster than the average overall rate. The growth rate in the United States has a number of reasons, including an increased interest in preventive care, an increase in chronic illnesses, and the demands of services required by the baby boom generation. The highest-paid registered nurses in the United States are in California. California cities often comprise the top five highest-paying metropolitan areas for registered nurses in the country. Most registered nurses start working with competitive salaries. The median annual salary for registered nurses was $80,000 per year as of June 2020, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS.) The lowest 10 percent of RN's earned less than $70,000, and the highest 10 percent earned more than $101,360 for 2015.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55309", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55309", "title": "Blood type", "text": "Classification based on antibodies and antigens on RBC surfaces\nA blood type (also known as a blood group) is a classification of blood based on the presence and absence of antibodies and inherited antigenic substances on the surface of red blood cells (RBCs). These antigens may be proteins, carbohydrates, glycoproteins, or glycolipids, depending on the blood group system. Some of these antigens are also present on the surface of other types of cells of various tissues. Several of these red blood cell surface antigens can stem from one allele (or an alternative version of a gene) and collectively form a blood group system.\nBlood types are inherited and represent contributions from both parents of an individual. As of June 2025, a total of 48 human blood group systems are recognized by the International Society of Blood Transfusion (ISBT). The two most important blood group systems are ABO and Rh; they determine someone's blood type (A, B, AB, and O, with + or \u2212 denoting RhD status) for suitability in blood transfusion.\nBlood type systems.\nA complete blood type would describe each of the 48 blood groups, and an individual's blood type is one of many possible combinations of blood-group antigens. Almost always, an individual has the same blood group for life, but very rarely an individual's blood type changes through addition or suppression of an antigen in infection, malignancy, or autoimmune disease. Another more common cause of blood type change is a bone marrow transplant. Bone-marrow transplants are performed for many leukemias and lymphomas, among other diseases. If a person receives bone marrow from someone of a different ABO type (e.g., a type O patient receives a type A bone marrow), the patient's blood type should eventually become the donor's type, as the patient's hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) are destroyed, either by ablation of the bone marrow or by the donor's T-cells. Once all the patient's original red blood cells have died, they will have been fully replaced by new cells derived from the donor HSCs. Provided the donor had a different ABO type, the new cells' surface antigens will be different from those on the surface of the patient's original red blood cells.\nSome blood types are associated with the inheritance of other diseases; for example, the Kell antigen is sometimes associated with McLeod syndrome. Certain blood types may affect susceptibility to infections, such as the resistance to specific malaria species seen in individuals lacking the Duffy antigen. The Duffy antigen, presumably as a result of natural selection, is less common in population groups from areas having a high incidence of malaria. \nABO blood group system.\nThe ABO blood group system involves two antigens and two antibodies found in human blood. The two antigens are antigen A and antigen B. The two antibodies are A and B. The antigens are present on the red blood cells, and the antibodies in the serum. Regarding the antigen property of the blood, all human beings can be classified into four groups: those with antigen A (group A), those with antigen B (group B), those with both antigen A and B (group AB), and those with neither antigen (group O). The antibodies present together with the antigens are found as follows:\nThere is an agglutination reaction between similar antigen and antibody (for example, antigen A agglutinates the antibody A, and antigen B agglutinates the antibody B). Thus, transfusion can be considered safe as long as the serum of the recipient does not contain antibodies for the blood cell antigens of the donor.\nThe ABO system is the most important blood-group system in human-blood transfusion. The associated anti-A and anti-B antibodies are usually immunoglobulin M, abbreviated IgM, antibodies. It has been hypothesized that ABO IgM antibodies are produced in the first years of life by sensitization to environmental substances such as food, bacteria, and viruses. The original terminology used by Karl Landsteiner in 1901 for the classification was A/B/C; in later publications \"C\" became \"O\". Type O is often called \"0\" (\"zero\", or \"null\") in other languages.\nRh blood group system.\nThe Rh system (Rh meaning \"Rhesus\") is the second most significant blood-group system in human blood transfusion, with currently 50 antigens. The most significant Rh antigen is the D antigen, because it is the most likely to provoke an immune system response of the five main Rh antigens. It is common for D-negative individuals not to have any anti-D IgG or IgM antibodies, because anti-D antibodies are not usually produced by sensitization against environmental substances. However, D-negative individuals can produce IgG anti-D antibodies following a sensitizing event: possibly a fetomaternal transfusion of blood from a fetus in pregnancy or occasionally a blood transfusion with D-positive RBCs. Rh negative blood types are much less common in Asian populations (0.3%) than they are in European populations (15%).\nThe presence or absence of the Rh(D) antigen is signified by the + or \u2212 sign, so that, for example, the A\u2212 group is ABO type A and does not have the Rh (D) antigen.\nABO and Rh distribution by country.\nAs with many other genetic traits, the distribution of ABO and Rh blood groups varies significantly between populations. While theories are still debated in the scientific community as to why blood types vary geographically and why they emerged in the first place, evidence suggests that the evolution of blood types may be driven by genetic selection for those types whose antigens confer resistance to particular diseases in certain regions \u2013 such as the prevalence of blood type O in malaria-endemic countries where individuals of blood type O exhibit the highest rates of survival.\nOther blood group systems.\nAs of June 2025, 48 blood-group systems have been identified and are recognized by the International Society for Blood Transfusion. Thus, in addition to the ABO antigens and Rh antigens, many other antigens are expressed on the RBC surface membrane. For example, an individual can be AB, D positive, and at the same time M and N positive (MNS system), K positive (Kell system), Lea or Leb negative (Lewis system). Many of the blood group systems were named after the patients in whom the corresponding antibodies were initially encountered. Blood group systems other than ABO and Rh pose a potential, yet relatively low, risk of complications upon mixing of blood from different people.\nFollowing is a comparison of clinically relevant characteristics of antibodies against the main human blood group systems:\nClinical significance.\nBlood transfusion.\nTransfusion medicine is a specialized branch of hematology that is concerned with the study of blood groups, along with the work of a blood bank that provides a transfusion service with blood and other blood products. Across the world, blood products must be prescribed by a medical doctor (licensed physician or surgeon) in a similar way as medicines.\nMuch of the routine work of a blood bank involves testing blood from both donors and recipients to ensure that every individual recipient is given blood that is compatible and as safe as possible. If a unit of incompatible blood is transfused between a donor and recipient, a severe acute hemolytic reaction with hemolysis (RBC destruction), kidney failure and shock is likely to occur, and death is a possibility. Antibodies can be highly active and can attack RBCs and bind components of the complement system to cause massive hemolysis of the transfused blood.\nPatients should ideally receive their own blood or type-specific blood products to minimize the chance of a transfusion reaction. It is also possible to use the patient's own blood for transfusion. This is called autologous blood transfusion, which is always compatible with the patient. The procedure of washing a patient's own red blood cells goes as follows: The patient's lost blood is collected and washed with a saline solution. The washing procedure yields concentrated washed red blood cells. The last step is reinfusing the packed red blood cells into the patient. There are multiple ways to wash red blood cells. The two main ways are centrifugation and filtration methods. This procedure can be performed with microfiltration devices. Risks can be further reduced by cross-matching blood, but this may be skipped when blood is required for an emergency. The oldest form of cross-matching involves mixing a sample of the recipient's serum with a sample of the donor's red blood cells and checking if the mixture \"agglutinates\" or forms clumps. If agglutination is not obvious by direct vision, a blood bank technologist may check for agglutination with a microscope. If agglutination occurs, that donor's blood cannot be transfused to that particular recipient. In a bank transfusion service, all blood specimens must be correctly identified, so labelling has been standardized using a barcode system known as ISBT 128.\nThe blood group may be included on identification tags or historically on tattoos worn by military personnel, in case they should need an emergency blood transfusion. Frontline German Waffen-SS had blood group tattoos during World War II.\nRare blood types can cause supply problems for blood banks and hospitals. For example, Duffy-negative blood occurs much more frequently in people of African origin, and the rarity of this blood type in the rest of the population can result in a shortage of Duffy-negative blood for these patients. Similarly, for RhD negative people there is a risk associated with travelling to parts of the world where supplies of RhD-negative blood are rare, particularly East Asia, where blood services may endeavour to encourage Westerners to donate blood.\nHemolytic disease of the newborn (HDN).\nA pregnant woman may carry a fetus with a blood type that is different from her own. Typically, this is an issue if a RhD negative mother has a child with a RhD positive father, and the fetus ends up being Rh positive. In those cases, the mother can make IgG blood group antibodies. This can happen if some of the fetus' blood cells pass into the mother's blood circulation (e.g., a small fetomaternal hemorrhage at the time of childbirth or obstetric intervention), or sometimes after a therapeutic blood transfusion. This can cause hemolytic disease of the newborn (HDN) in the current pregnancy and/or subsequent pregnancies. Sometimes this is lethal for the fetus; in these cases it is called hydrops fetalis. If a pregnant woman is known to have anti-D antibodies, the RhD blood type of a fetus can be tested by analysis of fetal DNA in maternal plasma to assess the risk to the fetus of Rh disease. Cell-free DNA testing can determine the fetal \"RHD\" genotype in a sample of material plasma after 10 weeks of gestation. One of the major advances of twentieth-century medicine was to prevent this disease by stopping the formation of anti-D antibodies by D-negative mothers with an injectable medication called Rho(D) immune globulin. Antibodies associated with some blood groups can cause severe HDN, others can only cause mild HDN and others are not known to cause HDN.\nBlood products.\nTo provide maximum benefit from each blood donation and to extend shelf-life, blood banks fractionate some whole blood into several products. The most common of these products are RBCs, plasma, platelets, cryoprecipitate, and fresh frozen plasma (FFP). FFP is quick-frozen to retain the labile clotting factors V and VIII, which are usually administered to patients who have a potentially fatal clotting problem caused by a condition such as advanced liver disease, overdose of anticoagulant, or disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC).\nUnits of packed red cells are made by removing as much of the plasma as possible from whole blood units.\nClotting factors synthesized by modern recombinant methods are now in routine clinical use for hemophilia, as the risks of infection transmission that occur with pooled blood products are avoided.\nRed blood cell compatibility.\nAn Rh D-negative patient who does not have any anti-D antibodies (never been previously sensitized to D-positive RBCs) can receive a transfusion of D-positive blood, but this may cause sensitization to the D antigen, and a female patient could become at risk for hemolytic disease of the newborn. If a D-negative patient has developed anti-D antibodies, a subsequent exposure to D-positive blood could lead to a potentially dangerous transfusion reaction. Rh D-positive blood should never be given to D-negative women of childbearing age or to patients with D antibodies, so blood banks must conserve Rh-negative blood for these patients. In extreme circumstances, such as for a major bleed when stocks of D-negative blood units are very low at the blood bank, D-positive blood might be given to D-negative females above childbearing age or to Rh-negative males, provided that they did not have anti-D antibodies, to conserve D-negative inventory in the blood bank. The converse is not true; Rh D-positive patients do not react to D-negative blood.\nThis same matching is done for other antigens of the Rh system as C, c, E, and e, and for other blood group systems with a known risk for alloimmunization, such as the Kell system, particularly for chronically transfused patients.\nPlasma compatibility.\nBlood plasma compatibility is the inverse of red blood cell compatibility. Type AB plasma carries neither anti-A nor anti-B antibodies and can be transfused to individuals of any blood group; but type AB patients can only receive type AB plasma. Type O carries both antibodies, so individuals of blood group O can receive plasma from any blood group, but type O plasma can be used only by type O recipients.\nUniversal donors and universal recipients.\nIn transfusions of red blood cells, individuals with type O Rh D-negative blood are often called universal donors. Those with type AB Rh D-positive blood are called universal recipients. However, these terms are only generally true with respect to possible reactions of the recipient's anti-A and anti-B antibodies to transfused red blood cells, and also possible sensitization to Rh D antigens. One exception is individuals with hh antigen system (also known as the Bombay phenotype) who can only receive blood safely from other hh donors, because they form antibodies against the H antigen present on all red blood cells.\nBlood donors with exceptionally strong anti-A, anti-B, or any atypical blood group antibody may be excluded from blood donation of high plasma volume blood products. In general, while the plasma fraction of a blood transfusion may carry donor antibodies not found in the recipient, a significant reaction is unlikely because of dilution.\nAdditionally, red blood cell surface antigens other than A, B and Rh D might cause adverse reactions and sensitization, if they can bind to the corresponding antibodies to generate an immune response. Transfusions are further complicated because platelets and white blood cells (WBCs) have their own systems of surface antigens, and sensitization to platelet or WBC antigens can occur as a result of transfusion.\nFor transfusions of plasma, this situation is reversed. Type O plasma, containing both anti-A and anti-B antibodies, can only be given to O recipients. The antibodies will attack the antigens of any other blood type. Conversely, AB plasma can be given to patients of any ABO blood group, because it does not contain any anti-A or anti-B antibodies.\nBlood typing.\nTypically, blood type tests are performed by adding a blood sample to a solution containing antibodies corresponding to each antigen. The presence of an antigen on the surface of the blood cells is indicated by agglutination.\nBlood group genotyping.\nIn addition to the current practice of serologic testing of blood types, the progress in molecular diagnostics allows the increasing use of blood group genotyping, commonly known as red cell genotyping. In contrast to serologic tests reporting a direct blood type phenotype, genotyping allows the prediction of a phenotype based on the knowledge of the molecular basis of the currently known antigens. This allows a more detailed determination of the blood type and therefore a better match for transfusion, which can be crucial in particular for patients with needs for many transfusions to prevent alloimmunization.\nHistory.\nBlood types were first discovered by an Austrian physician, Karl Landsteiner, working at the Pathological-Anatomical Institute of the University of Vienna (now Medical University of Vienna). In 1900, he found that blood sera from different persons would clump together (agglutinate) when mixed in test tubes, and not only that, some human blood also agglutinated with animal blood. He wrote a two-sentence footnote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis was the first evidence that blood variation exists in humans. The next year, in 1901, he made a definitive observation that the blood serum of an individual would agglutinate with only those of certain individuals. Based on this, he classified human blood into three groups, namely group A, group B, and group C. He defined that group A blood agglutinates with group B, but never with its own type. Similarly, group B blood agglutinates with group A. Group C blood is different in that it agglutinates with both A and B. This was the discovery of blood groups for which Landsteiner was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1930. (C was later renamed to O after the German \"Ohne\", meaning without, or zero, or null.) Another group (later named AB) was discovered a year later by Landsteiner's students Adriano Sturli and Alfred von Decastello without designating the name (simply referring it to as \"no particular type\"). Thus, after Landsteiner, three blood types were initially recognised, namely A, B, and C.\nCzech serologist Jan Jansk\u00fd was the first to recognise and designate four blood types in 1907 that he published in a local journal, using the Roman numerical I, II, III, and IV (corresponding to modern O, A, B, and AB respectively). Unknown to Jansk\u00fd, American physician William L. Moss introduced an almost identical classification in 1910, but with Moss's I and IV corresponding to Jansk\u00fd's IV and I. Thus the existence of two systems immediately created confusion and potential danger in medical practice. Moss's system was adopted in Britain, France, and the US, while Jansk\u00fd's was preferred in most other European countries and some parts of the US. It was reported that \"The practically universal use of the Moss classification at that time was completely and purposely cast aside. Therefore, in place of bringing order out of chaos, chaos was increased in the larger cities.\" To resolve the confusion, the American Association of Immunologists, the Society of American Bacteriologists, and the Association of Pathologists and Bacteriologists made a joint recommendation in 1921 that the Jansky classification be adopted based on priority. But it was not followed particularly where Moss's system had been used.\nIn 1927, Landsteiner, who had moved to the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research in New York, and as a member of a committee of the National Research Council concerned with blood grouping suggested to substitute Jansk\u00fd's and Moss's systems with the letters O, A, B, and AB. There was another confusion on the use of O, which was introduced by Polish physician Ludwik Hirszfeld and German physician Emil von Dungern in 1910. It was never clear whether it was meant for the figure 0, German \"null\" for zero or the upper case letter O for \"ohne\", meaning without; Landsteiner chose the letter.\nIn 1928 the Permanent Commission on Biological Standardization adopted Landsteiner's proposal and stated:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Commission learns with satisfaction that, on the initiative of the Health Organization of the League of Nations, the nomenclature proposed by von Dungern and Hirszfeld for the classification of blood groups has been generally accepted, and recommends that this nomenclature shall be adopted for international use as follows: 0 A B AB. To facilitate the change from the nomenclature hitherto employed, the following is suggested:\nHirszfeld and Dungern discovered the inheritance of blood types as Mendelian genetics in 1910 and the existence of sub-types of A in 1911. In 1927, Landsteiner, with Philip Levine, discovered the MN blood group system, and the P system. Development of the Coombs test in 1945, the advent of transfusion medicine, and the understanding of ABO hemolytic disease of the newborn led to discovery of more blood groups. As of June\u00a02025[ [update]], the International Society of Blood Transfusion (ISBT) recognizes 48 blood groups.\nSociety and culture.\nA popular pseudoscientific belief in Eastern Asian countries (especially in Japan and South Korea) is that a person's ABO blood type is predictive of their personality, character, and compatibility with others. Researchers have established no scientific basis exists for blood type personality categorization, and studies have found no \"significant relationship between personality and blood type, rendering the theory 'obsolete' and concluding that no basis exists to assume that personality is anything more than randomly associated with blood type.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55311", "revid": "34944050", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55311", "title": "Seattle Wireless", "text": "Seattle Wireless was an American non-profit project created by Matt Westervelt and Ken Caruso in June 2000. It sought to develop a free, locally owned wireless community network using widely available, license-free technology wireless broadband Internet access. It is a metropolitan area network. As of 2016, Seattle Wireless is no longer operational.\nSeattle Wireless was one of the first Community Wireless Networks and one of the first project focused wikis. It also had a short lived (7 episode) online television show, called http://. It was created by Peter Yorke and Michael Pierce and ran July 2003 - June 2004. SWTV was an early adopter of Bittorrent to distribute its shows.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55312", "revid": "44555953", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55312", "title": "United Federation of Planets", "text": "Star Trek interplanetary government\nIn the fictional universe of \"Star Trek\", the United Federation of Planets (UFP) is the interstellar government with which, as part of its space force Starfleet, most of the characters and starships of the franchise are affiliated. Commonly referred to as \"the Federation\", it was introduced in the . The survival, success, and growth of the Federation and its principles of freedom have become some of the \"Star Trek\" franchise's central themes.\nThe Federation is an organization of numerous planetary sovereignties, including Earth and Vulcan. The franchise focuses on Starfleet, the exploration and defense arm of the Federation, rather than the Federation's government. Viewers are rarely given details of the internal workings of the government; however, many episodes refer to the rules and laws that the Federation imposes on the characters and their adventures.\nDevelopment.\nEarly in the first season of \"Star Trek\", Captain Kirk had said the \"Enterprise\"'s authority came from the United Earth Space Probe Agency. Bases visited in the series were labeled \"Earth Outposts\". In August 1966, Gene L. Coon was hired by Gene Roddenberry as a writer for \"Star Trek\". Actor William Shatner credits Coon with injecting the concepts of Starfleet, Starfleet Command and the United Federation of Planets into the show. One of the first teleplays Coon was credited with was \"A Taste of Armageddon\", where an ambassador on the \"Enterprise\" is referred to as a Federation official.\nEventually, the series became an allegory for the current events of the 1960s counterculture, placing great emphasis on an anti-war message and depicting the United Federation of Planets, a vast interstellar alliance founded on the enlightened principles of liberty, equality, justice, progress, and peaceful co-existence, as an idealistic version of the United Nations.\nReception.\nThe optimistic view of the future present in the Federation has been highlighted as unique among most science fiction, showing how \"evolved\" and \"civilized\" the future could conceivably be. It has been described, along with the series as a whole, as a vehicle to explore what it means to be human, as well as exploring mankind's efforts to build a better society. Other writers have noted that \"Star Trek\"'s Federation has the same logistical and philosophical difficulties of other utopian economic and political schemes that make it seem unrealistic. However, Star Trek has brought up this idea of coerced service labor being necessary for its utopian society in \"\", where Captain Jean-Luc Picard successfully defends Data's right to resign from Starfleet in a trial of his sentience, which extends the right not to work to robots alongside all other sentient beings following the in-universe year 42523.7 (2365 AD).\nIn 2020, \"Screen Rant\" noted the \"Star Trek: The Next Generation\" episode \"\" for exploring the United Federation of Planets and how it sometimes struggles with contact with aliens.\nIn-universe portrayal.\nLike many things in \"Star Trek\", episodes and films may reference entities or laws within the Federation, but viewers are never given a broad view of its inner workings. Many contemporary terms are assigned to the Federation, but parallels to current government bodies and their roles and responsibilities are pure speculation on the part of fans and critics.\nIn the timeline of \"Star Trek\", the Federation was founded in 2161, after the events of \"\" but before those of the other series in the franchise. Its founding members were Earth, Vulcan, Andoria, and Tellar. Over time it has expanded to include many more worlds through peaceful voluntary association. Some notable ones include Trill, Betazed, and Bolarus IX. References to the size of the Federation vary, with Captain Kirk stating in 2267 that humanity was on \"a thousand planets and spreading out\", while Captain Picard referred to the Federation (in 2373) as being made up of \"over one hundred and fifty\" planets, spread across 8,000 light-years. The Federation is a major galactic power, and at various times has been at war with other powers such as the Klingons, the Romulans and the Dominion. The Federation's space force is called Starfleet, and, although most of \"Star Trek\" depicts peaceful exploration of the galaxy, Starfleet is also capable of considerable military might. Section 31 is a paramilitary espionage agency, described by writer Ira Steven Behr as \"...doing the nasty stuff that no one wants to think about.\".\nThe Federation is depicted as a democratic republic, led by a President based in Paris on Earth. Presidential powers include issuing pardons and declaring states of emergency. This president is supported by a cabinet. The Federation also has a supreme court and a legislature, the Federation Council, with delegates from its various member worlds. A constitution and a charter have both been referred to as founding documents of the Federation.\nSeveral planets are shown to desire Federation membership. Joining the Federation is a complicated process, and requires meeting various criteria. Disqualifying criteria include caste-based discrimination and violations of sentient rights. A single, unified government is not required for admission, but is desirable. Most Starfleet personnel are Federation citizens. Non-citizens can join Starfleet, but the process is more difficult, as with all non-Federation races.\nThe Federation's counterpart in the Mirror Universe is the Terran Empire, a human-dominated authoritarian state which has formed an empire by conquest.\nFuture of the Federation.\nIn the episode \"Calypso\", taking place at an unknown time in the distant future, the character of Craft refers to the \"V'draysh\". Little is said about the V'draysh, except that it is at war with Alcor IV, and that the V'draysh people are searching for artifacts from ancient human history. The writer of this episode, Michael Chabon, stated that the name \"V'draysh\" is intended to be a syncope for the word \"Federation\".\nIn the 32nd century setting of the third season of \"\", the Federation had undergone a near-total collapse precipitated by \"The Burn\", a galaxy-wide disaster. This shrunk the Federation from a peak of 350 worlds to just 38, notably excluding both Earth and Ni'Var (formerly known as Vulcan). During the fourth season, the Federation is in the process of rebuilding itself; Starfleet Academy is reopened, new shipbuilding facilities are commissioned, and many former member worlds such as Trill, Ni'Var and Earth rejoin.\nNon-canon references.\nIn non-canon sources like the original 1975 \"Star Trek Star Fleet Technical Manual\", Johnson's \"Worlds of the Federation\", and roleplaying games, the Federation's five founding members were Earth (or Terra), Vulcan, Tellar, Andor, and Alpha Centauri. Some non-canon works assert that founding member Alpha Centauri is home to a human race (transplanted by the Preservers from classical third-century BC Greece) known as, variously, Centaurans, Centaurians, or Centauri.\nThe 1980-to-2188 historical guide \"Star Trek Spaceflight Chronology\" posits the Federation as being incorporated at 'the first Babel Interplanetary Conference' in 2087.\nIn books such as the \"Star Trek Star Fleet Technical Manual\" and the novel \"Articles of the Federation\", the Federation's founding document is the Articles of the Federation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55313", "revid": "50567391", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55313", "title": "Allergy", "text": "Immune system response to a substance that most people tolerate well\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nAn allergy is an exaggerated immune response where the body mistakenly identifies an ordinarily harmless allergen as a threat. Allergic reactions give rise to allergic diseases such as hay fever, allergic conjunctivitis, allergic asthma, atopic dermatitis, food allergies, and anaphylaxis. Symptoms of allergic diseases may include red eyes, an itchy rash, sneezing, coughing, a runny nose, shortness of breath, or swelling.\nCommon allergens include pollen, certain foods, metals, insect stings, and medications. The development of allergies is due to genetic and environmental factors. The mechanism of allergic reactions involves immunoglobulin E antibodies (IgE) binding to an allergen and then to a receptor on mast cells or basophils, where they trigger the release of inflammatory chemicals such as histamine. Diagnosis is typically based on a person's medical history. Further testing of the skin or blood may be useful in certain cases. Positive tests, however, may not necessarily mean there is a significant allergy to the substance in question.\nEarly exposure of children to potential allergens may be protective. Treatments for allergies include avoidance of known allergens and the use of medications such as steroids and antihistamines. In severe reactions, injectable adrenaline (epinephrine) is recommended. Allergen immunotherapy, which gradually exposes people to larger and larger amounts of allergen, is useful for some types of allergies such as hay fever and reactions to insect bites. Its use in food allergies is unclear.\nAllergies are common. In the developed world, about 20% of people are affected by allergic rhinitis, food allergy affects 10% of adults and 8% of children, and about 20% have or have had atopic dermatitis at some point in time. Depending on the country, about 1\u201318% of people have asthma. Anaphylaxis occurs in between 0.05\u20132% of people. Rates of many allergic diseases appear to be increasing. The word \"allergy\" was first used by Clemens von Pirquet in 1906.\nSigns and symptoms.\nMany allergens such as dust or pollen are airborne particles. In these cases, symptoms arise in areas in contact with air, such as the eyes, nose, and lungs. For instance, allergic rhinitis, also known as hay fever, causes irritation of the nose, sneezing, itching, and redness of the eyes. Inhaled allergens can also lead to increased production of mucus in the lungs, shortness of breath, coughing, and wheezing.\nAside from these ambient allergens, allergic reactions can result from foods, insect stings, and reactions to medications like aspirin and antibiotics such as penicillin. Symptoms of food allergy include abdominal pain, bloating, vomiting, diarrhea, itchy skin, and hives. Food allergies rarely cause respiratory (asthmatic) reactions, or rhinitis. Insect stings, food, antibiotics, and certain medicines may produce a systemic allergic response that is also called anaphylaxis; multiple organ systems can be affected, including the digestive system, the respiratory system, and the circulatory system. Depending on the severity, anaphylaxis can include skin reactions, bronchoconstriction, swelling, low blood pressure, coma, and death. This type of reaction can be triggered suddenly, or the onset can be delayed. The nature of anaphylaxis is such that the reaction can seem to be subsiding but may recur throughout a period of time.\nSkin.\nSubstances that come into contact with the skin, such as latex, are also common causes of allergic reactions, known as contact dermatitis or eczema. Skin allergies frequently cause rashes, or swelling and inflammation within the skin, in what is known as a \"wheal and flare\" reaction characteristic of hives and angioedema.\nWith insect stings, a large local reaction may occur in the form of an area of skin redness greater than 10\u00a0cm in size that can last one to two days. This reaction may also occur after immunotherapy.\nThe way the body responds to foreign invaders on the molecular level is similar to how allergens are treated even on the skin. The skin forms an effective barrier to the entry of most allergens but this barrier cannot withstand everything that comes at it. A situation such as an insect sting can breach the barrier and inject allergen to the affected spot. When an allergen enters the epidermis or dermis, it triggers a localized allergic reaction which activates the mast cells in the skin resulting in an immediate increase in vascular permeability, leading to fluid leakage and swelling in the affected area. Mast-cell activation also stimulates a skin lesion called the wheal-and-flare reaction. This is when the release of chemicals from local nerve endings by a nerve axon reflex, causes the vasodilatations of surrounding cutaneous blood vessels, which causes redness of the surrounding skin.\nAs a part of the allergy response, the body has developed a secondary response which in some individuals causes a more widespread and sustained edematous response. This usually occurs about 8 hours after the allergen originally comes in contact with the skin. When an allergen is ingested, a dispersed form of wheal-and-flare reaction, known as urticaria or hives will appear when the allergen enters the bloodstream and eventually reaches the skin. The way the skin reacts to different allergens gives allergists the upper hand and allows them to test for allergies by injecting a very small amount of an allergen into the skin. Even though these injections are very small and local, they still pose the risk of causing systematic anaphylaxis.\nCause.\nRisk factors for allergies can be placed in two broad categories, namely host and environmental factors. Host factors include heredity, sex, race, and age, with heredity being by far the most significant. However, there has been a recent increase in the incidence of allergic disorders that cannot be explained by genetic factors alone. Four major environmental candidates are alterations in exposure to infectious diseases during early childhood, environmental pollution, allergen levels, and dietary changes.\nDust mites.\nDust mite allergy, also known as house dust allergy, is a sensitization and allergic reaction to the droppings of house dust mites. The allergy is common and can trigger allergic reactions such as asthma, eczema, or itching. The mite's gut contains potent digestive enzymes (notably peptidase 1) that persist in their feces and are major inducers of allergic reactions such as wheezing. The mite's exoskeleton can also contribute to allergic reactions. Unlike scabies mites or skin follicle mites, house dust mites do not burrow under the skin and are not parasitic.\nFoods.\nA wide variety of foods can cause allergic reactions, but 90% of allergic responses to foods are caused by cow's milk, soy, eggs, wheat, peanuts, tree nuts, fish, and shellfish. Other food allergies, affecting less than 1 person per 10,000 population, may be considered \"rare\". The most common food allergy in the US population is a sensitivity to crustacea. Although peanut allergies are notorious for their severity, peanut allergies are not the most common food allergy in adults or children. Severe or life-threatening reactions may be triggered by other allergens and are more common when combined with asthma.\nRates of allergies differ between adults and children. Children can sometimes outgrow peanut allergies. Egg allergies affect one to two percent of children but are outgrown by about two-thirds of children by the age of 5. The sensitivity is usually to proteins in the white, rather than the yolk.\nMilk-protein allergies\u2014distinct from lactose intolerance\u2014are most common in children. Approximately 60% of milk-protein reactions are immunoglobulin E\u2013mediated, with the remaining usually attributable to inflammation of the colon. Some people are unable to tolerate milk from goats or sheep as well as from cows, and many are also unable to tolerate dairy products such as cheese. Roughly 10% of children with a milk allergy will have a reaction to beef. Lactose intolerance, a common reaction to milk, is not a form of allergy at all, but due to the absence of an enzyme in the digestive tract.\nThose with tree nut allergies may be allergic to one or many tree nuts, including pecans, pistachios, and walnuts. In addition, seeds, including sesame seeds and poppy seeds, contain oils in which protein is present, which may elicit an allergic reaction.\nAllergens can be transferred from one food to another through genetic engineering; however, genetic modification can also remove allergens. Little research has been done on the natural variation of allergen concentrations in unmodified crops.\nLatex.\nLatex can trigger an IgE-mediated cutaneous, respiratory, and systemic reaction. The prevalence of latex allergy in the general population is believed to be less than one percent. In a hospital study, 1 in 800 surgical patients (0.125 percent) reported latex sensitivity, although the sensitivity among healthcare workers is higher, between seven and ten percent. Researchers attribute this higher level to the exposure of healthcare workers to areas with significant airborne latex allergens, such as operating rooms, intensive-care units, and dental suites. These latex-rich environments may sensitize healthcare workers who regularly inhale allergenic proteins.\nThe most prevalent response to latex is an allergic contact dermatitis, a delayed hypersensitive reaction appearing as dry, crusted lesions. This reaction usually lasts 48\u201396 hours. Sweating or rubbing the area under the glove aggravates the lesions, possibly leading to ulcerations. Anaphylactic reactions occur most often in sensitive patients who have been exposed to a surgeon's latex gloves during abdominal surgery, but other mucosal exposures, such as dental procedures, can also produce systemic reactions.\nLatex and banana sensitivity may cross-react. Furthermore, those with latex allergy may also have sensitivities to avocado, kiwifruit, and chestnut. These people often have perioral itching and local urticaria. Only occasionally have these food-induced allergies induced systemic responses. Researchers suspect that the cross-reactivity of latex with banana, avocado, kiwifruit, and chestnut occurs because latex proteins are structurally homologous with some other plant proteins.\nMedications.\nAbout 10% of people report that they are allergic to penicillin; however, of that 10%, 90% turn out not to be. Serious allergies only occur in about 0.03%.\nInsect stings.\nOne of the main sources of human allergies is insects. An allergy to insects can be brought on by bites, stings, ingestion, and inhalation.\nToxins interacting with proteins.\nAnother non-food protein reaction, urushiol-induced contact dermatitis, originates after contact with poison ivy, eastern poison oak, western poison oak, or poison sumac. Urushiol, which is not itself a protein, acts as a hapten and chemically reacts with, binds to, and changes the shape of integral membrane proteins on exposed skin cells. The immune system does not recognize the affected cells as normal parts of the body, causing a T-cell-mediated immune response.\nOf these poisonous plants, sumac is the most virulent. The resulting dermatological response to the reaction between urushiol and membrane proteins includes redness, swelling, papules, vesicles, blisters, and streaking.\nEstimates vary on the population fraction that will have an immune system response. Approximately 25% of the population will have a strong allergic response to urushiol. In general, approximately 80\u201390% of adults will develop a rash if they are exposed to of purified urushiol, but some people are so sensitive that it takes only a molecular trace on the skin to initiate an allergic reaction.\nGenetics.\nAllergic diseases are strongly familial; identical twins are likely to have the same allergic diseases about 70% of the time; the same allergy occurs about 40% of the time in non-identical twins. Allergic parents are more likely to have allergic children and those children's allergies are likely to be more severe than those in children of non-allergic parents. Some allergies, however, are not consistent along genealogies; parents who are allergic to peanuts may have children who are allergic to ragweed. The likelihood of developing allergies is inherited and related to an irregularity in the immune system, but the specific allergen is not.\nThe risk of allergic sensitization and the development of allergies varies with age, with young children most at risk. Several studies have shown that IgE levels are highest in childhood and fall rapidly between the ages of 10 and 30 years. The peak prevalence of hay fever is highest in children and young adults and the incidence of asthma is highest in children under 10.\nEthnicity may play a role in some allergies; however, racial factors have been difficult to separate from environmental influences and changes due to migration. It has been suggested that different genetic loci are responsible for asthma, to be specific, in people of European, Hispanic, Asian, and African origins.\nResearchers have worked to characterize genes involved in inflammation and the maintenance of mucosal integrity. The identified genes associated with allergic disease severity, progression, and development primarily function in four areas: regulating inflammatory responses (IFN-\u03b1, TLR-1, IL-13, IL-4, IL-5, HLA-G, iNOS), maintaining vascular endothelium and mucosal lining (FLG, PLAUR, CTNNA3, PDCH1, COL29A1), mediating immune cell function (PHF11, H1R, HDC, TSLP, STAT6, RERE, PPP2R3C), and influencing susceptibility to allergic sensitization (e.g., ORMDL3, CHI3L1).\nMultiple studies have investigated the genetic profiles of individuals with predispositions to and experiences of allergic diseases, revealing a complex polygenic architecture. Specific genetic loci, such as MIIP, CXCR4, SCML4, CYP1B1, ICOS, and LINC00824, have been directly associated with allergic disorders. Additionally, some loci show pleiotropic effects, linking them to both autoimmune and allergic conditions, including PRDM2, G3BP1, HBS1L, and POU2AF1. These genes engage in shared inflammatory pathways across various epithelial tissues\u2014such as the skin, esophagus, vagina, and lung\u2014highlighting common genetic factors that contribute to the pathogenesis of asthma and other allergic diseases.\nIn atopic patients, transcriptome studies have identified IL-13-related pathways as key for eosinophilic airway inflammation and remodeling. That causes the body to experience the type of airflow restriction of allergic asthma. Expression of genes was quite variable: genes associated with inflammation were found almost exclusively in superficial airways, while genes related to airway remodeling were mainly present in endobronchial biopsy specimens. This enhanced gene profile was similar across multiple sample sizes \u2013 nasal brushing, sputum, endobronchial brushing \u2013 demonstrating the importance of eosinophilic inflammation, mast cell degranulation and group 3 innate lymphoid cells in severe adult-onset asthma. IL-13 is an immunoregulatory cytokine that is made mostly by activated T-helper 2 (Th2) cells. It is an important cytokine for many steps in B-cell maturation and differentiation, since it increases CD23 and MHC class II molecules, and aids in B-cell isotype switching to IgE. IL-13 also suppresses macrophage function by reducing the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines. The more striking thing is that IL-13 is the prime mover in allergen-induced asthma via pathways that are independent of IgE and eosinophils.\nHygiene hypothesis.\nAllergic diseases are caused by inappropriate immunological responses to harmless antigens driven by a TH2-mediated immune response. Many bacteria and viruses elicit a TH1-mediated immune response, which down-regulates TH2 responses. The first proposed mechanism of action of the hygiene hypothesis was that insufficient stimulation of the TH1 arm of the immune system leads to an overactive TH2 arm, which in turn leads to allergic disease. In other words, individuals living in too sterile an environment are not exposed to enough pathogens to keep the immune system busy. Since our bodies evolved to deal with a certain level of such pathogens, when they are not exposed to this level, the immune system will attack harmless antigens, and thus normally benign microbial objects\u2014like pollen\u2014will trigger an immune response.\nThe hygiene hypothesis was developed to explain the observation that hay fever and eczema, both allergic diseases, were less common in children from larger families, which were, it is presumed, exposed to more infectious agents through their siblings, than in children from families with only one child. It is used to explain the increase in allergic diseases that have been seen since industrialization, and the higher incidence of allergic diseases in more developed countries. The hygiene hypothesis has now expanded to include exposure to symbiotic bacteria and parasites as important modulators of immune system development, along with infectious agents.\nEpidemiological data support the hygiene hypothesis. Studies have shown that various immunological and autoimmune diseases are much less common in the developing world than the industrialized world, and that immigrants to the industrialized world from the developing world increasingly develop immunological disorders in relation to the length of time since arrival in the industrialized world. Longitudinal studies in the third world demonstrate an increase in immunological disorders as a country grows more affluent and, it is presumed, cleaner. The use of antibiotics in the first year of life has been linked to asthma and other allergic diseases. The use of antibacterial cleaning products has also been associated with higher incidence of asthma, as has birth by caesarean section rather than vaginal birth.\nStress.\nChronic stress can aggravate allergic conditions. This has been attributed to a T helper 2 (TH2)-predominant response driven by suppression of interleukin 12 by both the autonomic nervous system and the hypothalamic\u2013pituitary\u2013adrenal axis. Stress management in highly susceptible individuals may improve symptoms.\nOther environmental factors.\nAllergic diseases are more common in industrialized countries than in countries that are more traditional or agricultural, and there is a higher rate of allergic disease in urban populations versus rural populations, although these differences are becoming less defined. Historically, the trees planted in urban areas were predominantly male to prevent litter from seeds and fruits, but the high ratio of male trees causes high pollen counts, a phenomenon that horticulturist Tom Ogren has called \"botanical sexism\".\nAlterations in exposure to microorganisms is another plausible explanation, at present, for the increase in atopic allergy. Endotoxin exposure reduces release of inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-\u03b1, IFN\u03b3, interleukin-10, and interleukin-12 from white blood cells (leukocytes) that circulate in the blood. Certain microbe-sensing proteins, known as Toll-like receptors, found on the surface of cells in the body are also thought to be involved in these processes.\nParasitic worms and similar parasites are present in untreated drinking water in developing countries, and were present in the water of developed countries until the routine chlorination and purification of drinking water supplies. Recent research has shown that some common parasites, such as intestinal worms (e.g., hookworms), secrete chemicals into the gut wall (and, hence, the bloodstream) that suppress the immune system and prevent the body from attacking the parasite. This gives rise to a new slant on the hygiene hypothesis theory\u2014that co-evolution of humans and parasites has led to an immune system that functions correctly only in the presence of the parasites. Without them, the immune system becomes unbalanced and oversensitive.\nIn particular, research suggests that allergies may coincide with the delayed establishment of gut flora in infants. However, the research to support this theory is conflicting, with some studies performed in China and Ethiopia showing an increase in allergy in people infected with intestinal worms. Clinical trials have been initiated to test the effectiveness of helminthic therapy with certain worms in treating some allergies. It may be that the term 'parasite' could turn out to be inappropriate, and in fact a hitherto unsuspected symbiosis is at work.\nPathophysiology.\nAcute response.\nIn the initial stages of allergy, a type I hypersensitivity reaction against an allergen encountered for the first time and presented by a professional antigen-presenting cell causes a response in a type of immune cell called a TH2 lymphocyte, a subset of T cells that produce a cytokine called interleukin-4 (IL-4). These TH2 cells interact with other lymphocytes called B cells, whose role is production of antibodies. Coupled with signals provided by IL-4, this interaction stimulates the B cell to begin production of a large amount of a particular type of antibody known as IgE. Secreted IgE circulates in the blood and binds to an IgE-specific receptor (a kind of Fc receptor called Fc\u03b5RI) on the surface of other kinds of immune cells called mast cells and basophils, which are both involved in the acute inflammatory response. The IgE-coated cells, at this stage, are sensitized to the allergen.\nIf later exposure to the same allergen occurs, the allergen can bind to the IgE molecules held on the surface of the mast cells or basophils. Cross-linking of the IgE and Fc receptors occurs when more than one IgE-receptor complex interacts with the same allergenic molecule and activates the sensitized cell. Activated mast cells and basophils undergo a process called degranulation, during which they release histamine and other inflammatory chemical mediators (cytokines, interleukins, leukotrienes, and prostaglandins) from their granules into the surrounding tissue causing several systemic effects, such as vasodilation, mucous secretion, nerve stimulation, and smooth muscle contraction.\nThis results in rhinorrhea, itchiness, dyspnea, and anaphylaxis. Depending on the individual, allergen, and mode of introduction, the symptoms can be system-wide (classical anaphylaxis) or localized to specific body systems. Asthma is localized to the respiratory system and eczema is localized to the dermis.\nLate-phase response.\nAfter the chemical mediators of the acute response subside, late-phase responses can often occur. This is due to the migration of other leukocytes such as neutrophils, lymphocytes, eosinophils, and macrophages to the initial site. The reaction is usually seen 2\u201324 hours after the original reaction. Cytokines from mast cells may play a role in the persistence of long-term effects. Late-phase responses seen in asthma are slightly different from those seen in other allergic responses, although they are still caused by release of mediators from eosinophils and are still dependent on activity of TH2 cells.\nAllergic contact dermatitis.\nAlthough allergic contact dermatitis is termed an \"allergic\" reaction (which usually refers to type I hypersensitivity), its pathophysiology involves a reaction that more correctly corresponds to a type IV hypersensitivity reaction. In type IV hypersensitivity, there is activation of certain types of T cells (CD8+) that destroy target cells on contact, as well as activated macrophages that produce hydrolytic enzymes.\nDiagnosis.\nEffective management of allergic diseases relies on the ability to make an accurate diagnosis. Allergy testing can help confirm or rule out allergies. Correct diagnosis, counseling, and avoidance advice based on valid allergy test results reduce the incidence of symptoms and need for medications, and improve quality of life. To assess the presence of allergen-specific IgE antibodies, two different methods can be used: a skin prick test, or an allergy blood test. Both methods are recommended, and they have similar diagnostic value.\nSkin prick tests and blood tests are equally cost-effective, and health economic evidence shows that both tests were cost-effective compared with no test. Early and more accurate diagnoses save cost due to reduced consultations, referrals to secondary care, misdiagnosis, and emergency admissions.\nAllergy undergoes dynamic changes over time. Regular allergy testing of relevant allergens provides information on if and how patient management can be changed to improve health and quality of life. Annual testing is often the practice for determining whether allergy to milk, egg, soy, and wheat have been outgrown, and the testing interval is extended to 2\u20133 years for allergy to peanut, tree nuts, fish, and crustacean shellfish. Results of follow-up testing can guide decision-making regarding whether and when it is safe to introduce or re-introduce allergenic food into the diet.\nSkin prick testing.\nSkin testing is also known as \"puncture testing\" and \"prick testing\" due to the series of tiny punctures or pricks made into the patient's skin. Tiny amounts of suspected allergens and/or their extracts (\"e.g.\", pollen, grass, mite proteins, peanut extract) are introduced to sites on the skin marked with pen or dye (the ink/dye should be carefully selected, lest it cause an allergic response itself). A negative and positive control are also included for comparison (eg, negative is saline or glycerin; positive is histamine). A small plastic or metal device is used to puncture or prick the skin. Sometimes, the allergens are injected \"intradermally\" into the patient's skin, with a needle and syringe. Common areas for testing include the inside forearm and the back.\nIf the patient is allergic to the substance, then a visible inflammatory reaction will usually occur within 30\u00a0minutes. This response will range from slight reddening of the skin to a full-blown hive (called \"wheal and flare\") in more sensitive patients similar to a mosquito bite. Interpretation of the results of the skin prick test is normally done by allergists on a scale of severity, with +/\u2212 meaning borderline reactivity, and 4+ being a large reaction. Increasingly, allergists are measuring and recording the diameter of the wheal and flare reaction. Interpretation by well-trained allergists is often guided by relevant literature.\nIn general, a positive response is interpreted when the wheal of an antigen is \u22653mm larger than the wheal of the negative control (eg, saline or glycerin). Some patients may believe they have determined their own allergic sensitivity from observation, but a skin test has been shown to be much better than patient observation to detect allergy.\nIf a serious life-threatening anaphylactic reaction has brought a patient in for evaluation, some allergists will prefer an initial blood test prior to performing the skin prick test. Skin tests may not be an option if the patient has widespread skin disease or has taken antihistamines in the last several days.\nPatch testing.\nPatch testing is a method used to determine if a specific substance causes allergic inflammation of the skin. It tests for delayed reactions. It is used to help ascertain the cause of skin contact allergy or contact dermatitis. Adhesive patches, usually treated with several common allergic chemicals or skin sensitizers, are applied to the back. The skin is then examined for possible local reactions at least twice, usually at 48 hours after application of the patch, and again two or three days later.\nBlood testing.\nAn allergy blood test is quick and simple and can be ordered by a licensed health care provider (\"e.g.\", an allergy specialist) or general practitioner. Unlike skin-prick testing, a blood test can be performed irrespective of age, skin condition, medication, symptom, disease activity, and pregnancy. Adults and children of any age can get an allergy blood test. For babies and very young children, a single needle stick for allergy blood testing is often gentler than several skin pricks.\nAn allergy blood test is available through most laboratories. A sample of the patient's blood is sent to a laboratory for analysis, and the results are sent back a few days later. Multiple allergens can be detected with a single blood sample. Allergy blood tests are very safe since the person is not exposed to any allergens during the testing procedure. After the onset of anaphylaxis or a severe allergic reaction, guidelines recommend emergency departments obtain a time-sensitive blood test to determine blood tryptase levels and assess for mast cell activation.\nThe test measures the concentration of specific IgE antibodies in the blood. Quantitative IgE test results increase the possibility of ranking how different substances may affect symptoms. A rule of thumb is that the higher the IgE antibody value, the greater the likelihood of symptoms. Allergens found at low levels that today do not result in symptoms cannot help predict future symptom development. The quantitative allergy blood result can help determine what a patient is allergic to, help predict and follow the disease development, estimate the risk of a severe reaction, and explain cross-reactivity.\nA low total IgE level is not adequate to rule out sensitization to commonly inhaled allergens. Statistical methods, such as ROC curves, predictive value calculations, and likelihood ratios have been used to examine the relationship of various testing methods to each other. These methods have shown that patients with a high total IgE have a high probability of allergic sensitization, but further investigation with allergy tests for specific IgE antibodies for a carefully chosen of allergens is often warranted.\nLaboratory methods to measure specific IgE antibodies for allergy testing include enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA, or EIA), radioallergosorbent test (RAST), fluorescent enzyme immunoassay (FEIA), and chemiluminescence immunoassay (CLIA).\nOther testing.\nChallenge testing: Challenge testing is when tiny amounts of a suspected allergen are introduced to the body orally, through inhalation, or via other routes. Except for testing food and medication allergies, challenges are rarely performed. When this type of testing is chosen, it must be closely supervised by an allergist.\nElimination/challenge tests: This testing method is used most often with foods or medicines. A patient with a suspected allergen is instructed to modify his diet to totally avoid that allergen for a set time. If the patient experiences significant improvement, he may then be \"challenged\" by reintroducing the allergen, to see if symptoms are reproduced.\nUnreliable tests: There are other types of allergy testing methods that are unreliable, including applied kinesiology (allergy testing through muscle relaxation), cytotoxicity testing, urine autoinjection, skin titration (Rinkel method), and provocative and neutralization (subcutaneous) testing or sublingual provocation.\nDifferential diagnosis.\nBefore a diagnosis of allergic disease can be confirmed, other plausible causes of the presenting symptoms must be considered. Vasomotor rhinitis, for example, is one of many illnesses that share symptoms with allergic rhinitis, underscoring the need for professional differential diagnosis. Once a diagnosis of asthma, rhinitis, anaphylaxis, or other allergic disease has been made, there are several methods for discovering the causative agent of that allergy.\nPrevention.\nGiving peanut products early in childhood may decrease the risk of allergies, and only breastfeeding during at least the first few months of life may decrease the risk of allergic dermatitis. There is little evidence that a mother's diet during pregnancy or breastfeeding affects the risk of allergies, although there has been some research to show that irregular cow's milk exposure might increase the risk of cow's milk allergy. There is some evidence that delayed introduction of certain foods is useful, and that early exposure to potential allergens may actually be protective.\nAccording to recent studies from pediatric professionals in the U.K. and North Carolina, they suggest that early exposure to peanut products has greatly reduced peanut allergies among young children in the U.S. Following milestone research from a decade ago, the studies found that pediatric guidelines from 2015 and 2017 were revised to encourage introducing peanuts to high risk infants from the early ages of 4 to 6 months. Researchers who looked into the collected data found a 43% drop in the frequent occurrence of peanut allergies. Which prevented an estimated 40,000 cases and resulted in a noticeable decline in overall food allergy cases. While this is notable, some pediatric experts want to ensure that caution is still provided to the public about the real-world implementation of guidelines since there are potential inconsistencies and limitations. These findings focus on the benefits and risks of early allergen introductions to hopefully slow the rise of food allergies.\nFish oil supplementation during pregnancy is associated with a lower risk of food sensitivities. Probiotic supplements during pregnancy or infancy may help to prevent atopic dermatitis.\nManagement.\nManagement of allergies typically involves avoiding the allergy trigger and taking medications to improve the symptoms. Allergen immunotherapy may be useful for some types of allergies.\nMedication.\nSeveral medications may be used to block the action of allergic mediators, or to prevent activation of cells and degranulation processes. These include antihistamines, glucocorticoids, epinephrine (adrenaline), mast cell stabilizers, and antileukotriene agents are common treatments of allergic diseases. Anticholinergics, decongestants, and other compounds thought to impair eosinophil chemotaxis are also commonly used. Although rare, the severity of anaphylaxis often requires epinephrine injection, and where medical care is unavailable, a device known as an epinephrine autoinjector may be used.\nImmunotherapy.\nAllergen immunotherapy is useful for environmental allergies, allergies to insect bites, and asthma. Its benefit for food allergies is unclear and thus not recommended. Immunotherapy involves exposing people to larger and larger amounts of allergen in an effort to change the immune system's response.\nMeta-analyses have found that injections of allergens under the skin is effective in the treatment in allergic rhinitis in children and in asthma. The benefits may last for years after treatment is stopped. It is generally safe and effective for allergic rhinitis and conjunctivitis, allergic forms of asthma, and stinging insects.\nTo a lesser extent, the evidence also supports the use of sublingual immunotherapy for rhinitis and asthma. For seasonal allergies the benefit is small. In this form the allergen is given under the tongue and people often prefer it to injections. Immunotherapy is not recommended as a stand-alone treatment for asthma.\nAlternative medicine.\nAn experimental treatment, enzyme potentiated desensitization (EPD), has been tried for decades but is not generally accepted as effective. EPD uses dilutions of allergen and an enzyme, beta-glucuronidase, to which T-regulatory lymphocytes are supposed to respond by favoring desensitization, or down-regulation, rather than sensitization. EPD has also been tried for the treatment of autoimmune diseases, but evidence does not show effectiveness.\nA review found no effectiveness of homeopathic treatments and no difference compared with placebo. The authors concluded that based on rigorous clinical trials of all types of homeopathy for childhood and adolescence ailments, there is no convincing evidence that supports the use of homeopathic treatments.\nAccording to the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health, U.S., the evidence is relatively strong that saline nasal irrigation and butterbur are effective, when compared to other alternative medicine treatments, for which the scientific evidence is weak, negative, or nonexistent, such as honey, acupuncture, omega 3's, probiotics, astragalus, capsaicin, grape seed extract, Pycnogenol, quercetin, spirulina, stinging nettle, tinospora, or guduchi.\nEpidemiology.\nThe allergic diseases\u2014hay fever and asthma\u2014have increased in the Western world over the past 2\u20133 decades. Increases in allergic asthma and other atopic disorders in industrialized nations, it is estimated, began in the 1960s and 1970s, with further increases occurring during the 1980s and 1990s, although some suggest that a steady rise in sensitization has been occurring since the 1920s. The number of new cases per year of atopy in developing countries has, in general, remained much lower.\nChanging frequency.\nAlthough genetic factors govern susceptibility to atopic disease, increases in atopy have occurred within too short a period to be explained by a genetic change in the population, thus pointing to environmental or lifestyle changes. Several hypotheses have been identified to explain this increased rate. Increased exposure to perennial allergens may be due to housing changes and increased time spent indoors, and a decreased activation of a common immune control mechanism may be caused by changes in cleanliness or hygiene, and exacerbated by dietary changes, obesity, and decline in physical exercise. The hygiene hypothesis maintains that high living standards and hygienic conditions exposes children to fewer infections. It is thought that reduced bacterial and viral infections early in life direct the maturing immune system away from TH1 type responses, leading to unrestrained TH2 responses that allow for an increase in allergy.\nChanges in rates and types of infection alone, however, have been unable to explain the observed increase in allergic disease, and recent evidence has focused attention on the importance of the gastrointestinal microbial environment. Evidence has shown that exposure to food and fecal-oral pathogens, such as hepatitis A, \"Toxoplasma gondii\", and \"Helicobacter pylori\" (which also tend to be more prevalent in developing countries), can reduce the overall risk of atopy by more than 60%, and an increased rate of parasitic infections has been associated with a decreased prevalence of asthma. It is speculated that these infections exert their effect by critically altering TH1/TH2 regulation. Important elements of newer hygiene hypotheses also include exposure to endotoxins, exposure to pets and growing up on a farm.\nHistory.\nSome symptoms attributable to allergic diseases are mentioned in ancient sources. Particularly, three members of the Roman Julio-Claudian dynasty (Augustus, Claudius and Britannicus) are suspected to have a family history of atopy. The concept of \"allergy\" was originally introduced in 1906 by the Viennese pediatrician Clemens von Pirquet, after he noticed that patients who had received injections of horse serum or smallpox vaccine usually had quicker, more severe reactions to second injections. Pirquet called this phenomenon \"allergy\" from the Ancient Greek words \u1f04\u03bb\u03bb\u03bf\u03c2 \"allos\" meaning \"other\" and \u1f14\u03c1\u03b3\u03bf\u03bd \"ergon\" meaning \"work\".\nAll forms of hypersensitivity used to be classified as allergies, and all were thought to be caused by an improper activation of the immune system. Later, it became clear that several different disease mechanisms were implicated, with a common link to a disordered activation of the immune system. In 1963, a new classification scheme was designed by Philip Gell and Robin Coombs that described four types of hypersensitivity reactions, known as Type I to Type IV hypersensitivity.\nWith this new classification, the word \"allergy\", sometimes clarified as a \"true allergy\", was restricted to type I hypersensitivities (also called immediate hypersensitivity), which are characterized as rapidly developing reactions involving IgE antibodies.\nA major breakthrough in understanding the mechanisms of allergy was the discovery of the antibody class labeled immunoglobulin E (IgE). IgE was simultaneously discovered in 1966\u201367 by two independent groups: Ishizaka's team at the Children's Asthma Research Institute and Hospital in Denver, USA, and by Gunnar Johansson and Hans Bennich in Uppsala, Sweden. Their joint paper was published in April 1969.\nDiagnosis.\nRadiometric assays include the radioallergosorbent test (RAST test) method, which uses IgE-binding (anti-IgE) antibodies labeled with radioactive isotopes for quantifying the levels of IgE antibody in the blood.\nThe RAST methodology was invented and marketed in 1974 by Pharmacia Diagnostics AB, Uppsala, Sweden, and the acronym RAST is actually a brand name. In 1989, Pharmacia Diagnostics AB replaced it with a superior test named the ImmunoCAP Specific IgE blood test, which uses the newer fluorescence-labeled technology.\nAmerican College of Allergy Asthma and Immunology (ACAAI) and the American Academy of Allergy Asthma and Immunology (AAAAI) issued the Joint Task Force Report \"Pearls and pitfalls of allergy diagnostic testing\" in 2008, and is firm in its statement that the term RAST is now obsolete:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe updated version, the ImmunoCAP Specific IgE blood test, is the only specific IgE assay to receive Food and Drug Administration approval to quantitatively report to its detection limit of 0.1kU/L.\nMedical specialty.\nThe medical speciality that studies, diagnoses and treats diseases caused by allergies is called allergology.\nAn allergist is a physician specially trained to manage and treat allergies, asthma, and the other allergic diseases. In the United States physicians holding certification by the American Board of Allergy and Immunology (ABAI) have successfully completed an accredited educational program and evaluation process, including a proctored examination to demonstrate knowledge, skills, and experience in patient care in allergy and immunology. Becoming an allergist/immunologist requires completion of at least nine years of training.\nAfter completing medical school and graduating with a medical degree, a physician will undergo three years of training in internal medicine (to become an internist) or pediatrics (to become a pediatrician). Once physicians have finished training in one of these specialties, they must pass the exam of either the American Board of Pediatrics (ABP), the American Osteopathic Board of Pediatrics (AOBP), the American Board of Internal Medicine (ABIM), or the American Osteopathic Board of Internal Medicine (AOBIM). Internists or pediatricians wishing to focus on the sub-specialty of allergy-immunology then complete at least an additional two years of study, called a fellowship, in an allergy/immunology training program. Allergist/immunologists listed as ABAI-certified have successfully passed the certifying examination of the ABAI following their fellowship.\nIn the United Kingdom, allergy is a subspecialty of general medicine or pediatrics. After obtaining postgraduate exams (MRCP or MRCPCH), a doctor works for several years as a specialist registrar before qualifying for the General Medical Council specialist register. Allergy services may also be delivered by immunologists. A 2003 Royal College of Physicians report presented a case for improvement of what were felt to be inadequate allergy services in the UK.\nIn 2006, the House of Lords convened a subcommittee. It concluded likewise in 2007 that allergy services were insufficient to deal with what the Lords referred to as an \"allergy epidemic\" and its social cost; it made several recommendations.\nResearch.\nLow-allergen foods are being developed, as are improvements in skin prick test predictions; evaluation of the atopy patch test, wasp sting outcomes predictions, a rapidly disintegrating epinephrine tablet, and anti-IL-5 for eosinophilic diseases.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55314", "revid": "445772", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55314", "title": "Deacon", "text": "Office in Christian churches\nA deacon is a member of the diaconate, an office in Christian churches that is generally associated with service of some kind, but which varies among theological and denominational traditions.\nMajor Christian denominations, such as the Catholic Church, the Oriental Orthodox Churches, the Eastern Orthodox Church, Lutheranism, Presbyterianism, Methodism, and Anglicanism, view the diaconate as an order of ministry.\nPermanent deacons (or distinctive deacons) are those who do not later transition to another form of ministry, in contrast to those continuing their formation who are then often called transitional deacons.\nOrigin and development.\nThe word \"deacon\" is derived from the Greek word (), which is a standard ancient Greek word meaning \"servant\", \"waiter\", \"minister\", or \"messenger\". Recent research has highlighted the role of the deacon \"as a co-operator\" and \"go-between,\" emphasizing their intermediary position in early Christian communities.\nIt is generally assumed that the office of deacon originated in the selection of seven men by the apostles, among them Stephen, to assist with the charitable work of the early church as recorded in Acts of the Apostles chapter 6. Newer research emphasizes that while the deacons' role was indeed to help, their assistance involved more liturgical, teaching and leadership functions than purely charitable work.\nThe Greek word (), meaning deaconess, is not found in the Bible. However, one woman, Phoebe, is mentioned at Romans 16:1\u20132 as a deacon or deaconess () of the church in Cenchreae. Nothing more specific is said about her duties or authority, although it is assumed she carried Paul's Letter to the Romans.\nFemale deacons are mentioned by the Roman author Pliny the Younger in a letter to the Roman emperor Trajan dated c.\u2009112:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis is the earliest Latin text that appears to refer to female deacons as a distinct category of Christian minister.\nA biblical description of the qualities required of a deacon can be found in 1 Timothy 3:1\u201313.\nThe Synod of Arles in 314 and the First Council of Nicaea denied deacons the possibility of presiding over the Eucharist even in exceptional cases.\nAmong the more prominent deacons in history are:\nProminent historical figures who played major roles as deacons and went on to higher office include Athanasius of Alexandria, Thomas Becket, and Reginald Pole. On June 8, 536, a serving Roman deacon was raised to Pope, Silverius.\nThe diaconate has been retained as a separate vocation in Eastern Christianity, while in Western Christianity it was largely used in cathedrals and as a temporary step along the path toward priestly ordination. In the 20th century, the diaconate was restored as a vocational order in many Western churches, most notably in the Catholic Church, the Anglican Communion, and the United Methodist Church.\nBy Christian denomination.\nIn the Catholic, Lutheran, Anglican, Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, Assyrian Church of the East, and Ancient Church of the East churches, the diaconate is one of the major orders\u2014the others being bishop, presbyter (priest), and, historically, subdeacon. Deacons assist priests in their pastoral and administrative duties, but often report directly to the bishops of their diocese. They have a distinctive role in the liturgy of the Eastern and Western Churches.\nDeacons are also appointed or elected in other denominations, though this is less commonly seen as a step towards the clerical ministry. The role of deacon in these denominations varies greatly from denomination to denomination; often, there will be more emphasis on administrative duties than on pastoral or liturgical duties. In some denominations, deacons' duties are only financial management and practical aid and relief. Elders handle pastoral and other administrative duties.\nCatholicism.\nLatin Catholicism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBeginning around the fifth century, there was a gradual decline in the diaconate as a permanent state of life in the Latin Church. The development of a (sequence of offices) found men entering the clerical state through tonsure, then ordination to the minor orders of lector, porter, exorcist, acolyte before ordination to the major orders of sub-deacon and deacon, all stages on the path to priesthood. Only men destined for priesthood were permitted to be ordained deacons. As seminaries developed, following the Council of Trent, to contemporary times, the only men ordained as deacons were seminarians who were completing the last year or so of graduate theological training, so-called transitional deacons. Permanent deacons became an office following the Second Vatican Council.\nDuring the Mass, the deacon's responsibilities include assisting the priest, proclaiming the Gospel, announcing the General Intercessions, and distributing Communion. They may also preach the homily. As clerics, deacons are required to pray the Liturgy of the Hours. Deacons, like priests and bishops, are ordinary ministers of the sacrament of Baptism and may witness at the sacrament of holy matrimony outside of Mass. Deacons may lead funeral rites outside Mass such as the final commendation at the gravesite or the reception of the body at a service in the funeral home, and may assist the priest at the requiem Mass. They can also preside over various services such as Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament, and they may give certain blessings. While in ancient history their tasks and competencies varied, today deacons cannot hear confession and give absolution, anoint the sick, or celebrate Mass.\nThe vestments most particularly associated with the Latin Catholic deacon are the alb, stole and dalmatic. Deacons, like priests and bishops, must wear their albs and stoles; deacons place the stole over their left shoulder and it hangs across to their right side, while priests and bishops wear it around their necks. The dalmatic, a vestment especially associated with the deacon but originating with the bishop (see below), is worn during the celebration of the Mass and other liturgical functions; its use is more liberally applied than the corresponding vestment of the priest, the chasuble. At certain major celebrations, such as ordinations, the diocesan bishop wears a dalmatic under his chasuble, now taken to signify that he enjoys the fullness of the three degrees of holy orders\u2014deacon, priest, and bishop, but owing its origin, like the sakkos of Byzantine-rite bishops, to the court dress of the eastern Roman Empire.\nThe diaconate is conferred on seminarians continuing to the priesthood no sooner than 23 years of age although there will be higher minimum ages for permanent deacons.\nDeacons, like seminarians, religious, bishops and priests, pray the Liturgy of the Hours; however, deacons are usually only required to pray morning and evening prayer.\nPermanent deacons.\nFollowing the recommendations of the Second Vatican Council and the instigation of the Josephites (whose work with African Americans necessitated increased vocational opportunity for married men), in 1967 Pope Paul VI issued the motu proprio , reviving the practice of ordaining to the diaconate men who were not candidates for priestly ordination. These men are known as permanent deacons, in contrast to transitional deacons who were continuing their priestly formation. There is no sacramental difference between the two, however, as there is only one order of deacons.\nThe permanent diaconate can be conferred on single men 25 or older, and on married men 35 or older, but an older age can be required by the episcopal conference. A married candidate for the permanent diaconate must have the written consent of his wife.\nIf a married deacon is widowed, he must maintain the celibate state. Under some very rare circumstances, however, deacons who have been widowed can receive permission to remarry. This is most commonly done when the deacon is left as a single father. In some cases, a widowed deacon will seek priestly ordination, especially if his children are grown.\nThe period of formation to the permanent diaconate varies from diocese to diocese as determined by the local ordinary, but it usually entails a period of prayerful preparation and several years of study. Diaconal candidates receive instruction in philosophy, theology, study of the Bible, homiletics, sacramental studies, evangelization, ecclesiology, counseling, and pastoral care and ministry before ordination.\nThey may be assigned to work in a parish by the diocesan bishop, where they are under the supervision of the parish priests, or in diocesan ministries. Unlike most clerics, permanent deacons who also have a secular profession have no right to receive a salary for their ministry, but many dioceses opt to remunerate them anyway.\nManner of address.\nA deacon is styled as \"Deacon\", abbreviated variously as \"Dn.\" or \"Dcn.\"\nThe proper address in written correspondence for all deacons of the Latin Church in the United States is \"Deacon \"Name\"\", although it is not uncommon to see \"Rev. Mr.\" sometimes used. \"Rev. Mr.\", however, is more often used to indicate a transitional deacon (i.e., preparing for ordination to the priesthood) or one who belongs to a religious institute, while Rev. Deacon is used as the honorific for permanent deacons in many dioceses (e.g., Rev. Deacon John Smith, or Deacon John Smith). The decision as to whether deacons wear the Roman collar as street attire is left to the discretion of each bishop. Where clerical garb is approved by the bishop, the deacon can choose to wear or not wear the collar.\nEastern Orthodoxy and Eastern Catholicism.\nIn addition to proclaiming the Gospel and assisting in the distribution of holy communion, the deacon censes the icons and people, calls the people to prayer, leads the litanies, and has a role in the dialogue of the anaphora. In keeping with Eastern tradition, the deacon is not permitted to perform any sacred mysteries (sacraments) on their own, except for Baptism \"in extremis\" (in danger of death), conditions under which anyone, including the laity, may baptize. When assisting at a normal baptism, it is often the deacon who goes down into the water with the one being baptized (). In contrast to the Latin Church, deacons in the Eastern Catholic and Eastern Orthodox Churches may not preside at the celebration of marriages, as in Eastern theology the sacrament is conferred by the nuptial blessing of a priest.\nDiaconal vestments are the sticharion (alb, although it has come to resemble the western dalmatic), the orarion (deacon's stole), and the epimanikia (cuffs). The last are worn under the sticharion, not over it as does a priest or bishop. The deacon usually wears a simple orarion which is only draped over the left shoulder but, if elevated to the rank of archdeacon, the deacon wears the doubled-orarion, meaning it is passed over the left shoulder, under the right arm, and then crossed over the left shoulder (see photograph, right). In modern Greek practice, a deacon wears this doubled orarion from the time of their ordination. Also, in the Greek practice, a deacon wears the clerical kamilavka (cylindrical head covering) with a rim at the top. In Slavic practice, a hierodeacon (monastic deacon) wears the simple black kamilavka of a monk (without the rim), but removes the monastic veil (see klobuk) when vested; a married deacon would not wear a kamilavka unless it is given to them by the bishop as an ecclesiastical award; the honorary kamilavka is purple in colour, and may be awarded to either married or monastic clergy.\nAs far as street clothing is concerned, immediately following ordination a deacon receives a blessing to wear the \"exorasson\" (Arabic: \"Jib'be\", Slavonic: r\"iasa\"), an outer cassock with wide sleeves, in addition to the \"anterion\" (Slavonic: podriasnik), the inner cassock worn by all orders of clergy. In the Slavic practice, married clergy may wear any of a number of colours, but most often grey, while monastic clergy always wear black. In certain jurisdictions in North America and Western Europe, a Roman collar is often worn, although this is not a traditional or widespread practice.\nA \"protodeacon\" (Ecclesiastical Greek: , \"first deacon\") is a distinction of honor awarded to senior deacons, usually serving on the staff of the diocesan bishop. An \"archdeacon\" is similar, but is among the monastic clergy. Protodeacons and archdeacons use a double-length orarion even if it is not the local tradition for all deacons to use it. In the Slavic tradition a deacon may be awarded the doubled-orarion even if not a protodeacon or archdeacon.\nAccording to the practice of the Greek Orthodox Church of America, in keeping with the tradition of the Ecumenical Patriarchate, the most common way to address a deacon is \"Father\". \nThe tradition of kissing the hands of ordained clergy extends to the diaconate as well. This practice is rooted in the holy Eucharist and is in acknowledgement and respect of the Eucharistic role members of the clergy play in preparing, handling and disbursing the sacrament during the Divine Liturgy, and in building and serving the church as the Body of Christ.\nLutheranism.\nIn the Lutheran Churches of the Scandinavian tradition, there is a threefold ministry of \"bishops, priests, and deacons\". Until the 1960s, deacons in the Church of Sweden were required to be celibate. For deacons, \"vows made at ordination involve seeking and helping anyone in bodily or spiritual need, defending the rights of all, standing beside the oppressed, and exhorting God's people to all good works so that the love of God is made visible in the world.\" An ordained deacon's charism includes \"visits, helps, and supports those in bodily or spiritual need; gives Christian nurture and teaching in the faith; is a sign of merciful kindness in the parish and society at large, and in all things serves Christ in the neighbour\".\nAnglicanism.\nIn Anglican churches, such as the Church of England and the Free Church of England, deacons are permitted to marry freely before or after ordination, as are Anglican priests. Most deacons are transitional deacons, that is, preparing for the priesthood and they are usually ordained priests about a year after their diaconal ordination. However, there are some deacons who do not go on to receive priestly ordination, recognising a vocation to remain in the diaconate. A permanent deacon is also known as a distinctive deacon, or a vocational deacon. \nMany provinces of the Anglican Communion ordain both women and men as deacons. Many of those provinces that ordain women to the priesthood previously allowed them to be ordained only to the diaconate. The effect of this was the creation of a large and overwhelmingly female diaconate for a time, as most men proceeded to be ordained priests after a short time as a deacon.\nAnglican deacons may baptize and in some dioceses are granted licences to solemnize matrimony, usually under the instruction of their parish priest and bishop. Deacons are not able to preside at the Eucharist (but can lead worship with the distribution of already-consecrated communion elements where this is permitted), nor can they pronounce God's absolution of sin or pronounce the Trinitarian blessing. In most cases, deacons minister alongside other clergy.\nAn Anglican deacon wears an identical choir dress to an Anglican priest: cassock, surplice, tippet and academic hood. However, liturgically, deacons usually wear a stole over their left shoulder and fastened on the right side of their waist. This is worn both over the surplice and the alb. A deacon might also wear a dalmatic. Church of England deacons are supported through the CofE Network of Distinctive Deacons (CENDD). Bishop James Newcome of Carlisle is the Distinctive Deacons\u2019 Champion in the House of Bishops.\nMethodist churches.\nIn Methodism, deacons began as a transitional order before ordination as elders (presbyters). In 1996, the United Methodist Church ended the transitional deacon and established a new Order of Deacons to be equal in status with the Order of Elders. Both men and women may be ordained as deacons. Deacons serve in a variety of specialized ministries including, but not limited to, Christian education, music, communications and ministries of justice and advocacy. Unlike United Methodist elders, deacons must find their own place of service. Nevertheless, the bishop does officially approve and appoint deacons to their selected ministry. Deacons may assist the elder in the administration of Sacraments, but must receive special approval from a bishop before presiding over Baptism and holy communion. United Methodist deacons are present in North America, Europe and Africa.\nThe Methodist Church of Great Britain also has a permanent diaconate\u2014based on an understanding of the New Testament that deacons have an equal, but distinct ministry from presbyters. Deacons are called to a ministry of service and witness, and \"to hold before them the needs and concerns of the world\". The Methodist Diaconal Order is both an order of ministry and a religious order within the Methodist Church in Britain. It was formed in 1989 as a successor to the Wesley Deaconess Order and is open to both women and men. Diaconal ministry is one of two ordained ministries within the Methodist Church. The original Wesleyan Deaconess Order was founded by Thomas Bowman Stephenson in 1890, following observation of new ministries in urban areas in the previous years. The order continued as the Wesley Deaconess Order following Methodist Union in 1932, but, following the admission of women to \"The Ministry\" (as presbyteral ministry is commonly termed in the Methodist Church), a number of deaconesses transferred and recruitment for the WDO ceased from 1978. The 1986 Methodist Conference re-opened the order to both men and women and the first ordinations to the renewed order occurred during the 1990 Conference in Cardiff, which coincided with celebrations of 100 years of diaconal service in British Methodism; deaconesses had previously been ordained at their annual convocation.\nThe Methodist Church of Southern Africa ordains deacons who constitute a diaconal order, similar to that in the British church.\nReformed churches.\nChurch of Scotland.\nThere are two distinct offices of deacon in the Church of Scotland. The best-known form of diaconate are trained and paid pastoral workers. The permanent diaconate was formerly exclusively female, and it was in 1988, the centenary year of the diaconate, that men were admitted to the office of deacon. The offices of deacon and minister are now both open to both women and men; deacons are now ordained (they were previously commissioned).\nThe other office of deacon can be found in congregations formerly belonging to the pre-1900 Free Church of Scotland, with a Deacons' Court having responsibility for financial and administrative oversight of congregations. Only a few congregations still retain this constitutional model, with most having since adopted the Church of Scotland's Model Constitution (with a kirk session and congregational board) or Unitary Congregation (with just a kirk session). Most of the Free Church congregations united with the United Presbyterian Church of Scotland in 1900 creating the United Free Church of Scotland, which itself united with the Church of Scotland in 1929.\nRelated churches.\nThe 100+ congregations of the remnant post-1900 Free Church of Scotland, alongside those of the Free Presbyterian Church, the Associated Presbyterian Churches and Reformed Presbyterian Church, continue to ordain men as both elders and deacons, with deacons (operating through a Deacons' Court) caring for the financial and property requirements of the congregation, and attending to the mercy ministry of the local church. Both elders and deacons have to subscribe to the Westminster Confession of Faith before being ordained to the office.\nOther Presbyterian churches.\nOne of John Calvin's legacies was to restore the diaconate as a servant ministry. Individual congregations of the various Presbyterian denominations, such as the Presbyterian Church (USA), Presbyterian Church in America and Orthodox Presbyterian Church, also elect deacons, along with elders. However, in some churches the property-functions of the diaconate and session of elders is commended to an independent board of trustees.\nDutch Reformed churches.\nIn many Dutch Reformed churches deacons are charged with ministries of mercy. As such, the deacons are also members of the local church council. A special feature of the Dutch Reformed churches is the fact that the diaconate of each local church is its own legal entity with its own financial means, separated from the church itself, and governed by the deacons.\nUniting Church in Australia.\nIn the Uniting Church in Australia, the diaconate is one of two offices of ordained ministry. The other is Minister of the Word.\nDeacons in the Uniting Church are called to minister to those on the fringes of the church and be involved in ministry in the community. Deacons offer leadership in a ministry of service to the world. The primary focus of the ministry of deacons is on care and compassion for the poor and oppressed and in seeking social justice for all people. They take both an active role in leadership in such actions themselves, but are also play a key role in encouraging other Uniting Church members in similar action.\nSome examples of service that deacons may take include: prison chaplaincy, acting as youth or community workers, in community service agencies, in schools and hospitals, or in mission placements in Australia or overseas. Although the primary responsibility for worship in congregations lies with the Ministers of the Word, deacons have a liturgical role appropriate to their distinctive ministry, including ministries where their main leadership is within a congregation.\nIn the Uniting Church both ministers of the word and deacons are styled \"The Reverend\".\nThe Uniting Church has recognised deacons since union, but it was not until the 6th Assembly in 1991 that the Uniting Church began ordaining deacons. This was partly because the historical, theological and sociological roles of deaconesses and deacons was being widely discussed in Churches throughout the world at the time that the Basis of Union was being drafted \nAnabaptist Churches.\nAmish.\nThe Amish have deacons; they are elected by a council and receive no formal training.\nSchwarzenau Brethren.\nChurch of the Brethren.\nThe Church of the Brethren also have deacons, as do other Brethren denominations. They are elected by the congregation to serve in ministries of compassion. They are elected for life in some congregations.\nBaptists.\nBaptists traditionally recognize two ordained positions in the church: elders (pastors) and deacons, as per 1 Timothy 3. Some Baptist churches in the Reformed tradition recognize elder and pastor as separate offices.\nBaptists have traditionally practised congregationalism, giving each church the ability to discern for themselves the interpretation of scripture. Thus, Baptist churches hold a wide variety of views on the qualifications and activities of deacons: some Baptist churches have the deacons decide many of the church affairs, while others have deacons in serving roles only.\nThe predominant view among Baptist churches (especially theologically conservative ones, including the majority of Southern Baptist and Independent Baptist churches) is that a deacon must be a male, and married (or a widower) and not divorced previously. If a deacon subsequently divorces, he must relinquish his office (but if his wife dies he may continue to serve). However, there are Baptist churches where women are allowed to be deacons or deaconesses (primarily in the United Kingdom and in the United States among African-American and theologically moderate churches). In the General Association of Regular Baptist Churches, deacons can be any adult male member of the congregation who is in good standing.\nIn some African American Missionary Baptist churches and in churches affiliated with the National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc. male and female deacons serve as one board. Other churches may have two separate boards of deacons and deaconesses. Most often the deacon or deacon candidate is a long-standing member of the church, being middle aged, but younger deacons may be selected from among members of a family that has had several generations in the same church. They are elected by quorum vote annually. Their roles are semi-pastoral in that they fill in for the pastor on occasion, or support the pastor vocally during his sermon. They may also lead a special prayer service, generally known as \"The deacon's Prayer\". Their other roles are to accompany the pastor during Communion by handing out the remembrances of bread and wine (or grape juice) and to set a good example for others to follow. Their administrative duties sometimes include oversight of the treasury, Sunday school curriculum, transportation, and various outreach ministries.\nSee Baptist Distinctives for a more detailed treatment of deacons in churches in other associations, particularly the UK.\nQuakers.\nDeacons in the structure of most meetings of the Religious Society of Friends (Quakers) are called overseers. This is not an ordained role but rather a temporary ministry that is discerned every three years. They are responsible for coordinating pastoral care within a community while elders (the equivalent of the Biblical presbyterate) take care of the spiritual concerns of the meeting. Other names include \"pastoral care\" or \"care and counsel\".\nChurch of Christ.\nIn accordance with Church of Christ doctrine and practice, only males may serve as deacons (deaconesses are not recognized), and must meet Biblical qualifications (generally 1 Timothy 3:8\u201313 is the Biblical text used to determine if a male is qualified to serve as deacon). A deacon may also be qualified to serve as an elder (and, in fact, may move into that role after a period of time if his service as deacon is considered acceptable).\nThe role of the deacon varies, depending on the local congregation. Generally a deacon will have responsibility for a specific non-spiritual function (e.g. finance, building and grounds, benevolence); however, the deacons (like the rest of the congregation) are under the subjection of the elders, who have spiritual and administrative authority over the deacon's function.\nIn congregations which lack qualified elders (where, in their absence, the men of the congregation handle leadership duties), often there also are no deacons, as they are usually appointed by the elders of the church.\nIrvingian churches.\nNew Apostolic Church.\nIn the New Apostolic Church, the deacon ministry is a local ministry. A deacon mostly works in his home congregation to support the priests. If a priest is unavailable, a deacon will hold a divine service, without the act of communion. (Only priests and up can consecrate holy communion.)\nRestorationist Churches.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.\nThe office of deacon is generally open to all 12- and 13-year-old male members of the LDS church; all are encouraged to become deacons. Duties include:\n's deacons serve as etiquette checkers and offering collectors for males during worship services, with deaconesses as their female counterparts. In the Iglesia ni Cristo, deacons and deaconesses are usually required to be married. There are also head deacons (an exclusively male role with no head deaconess counterpart) who lead the congregation in the prayer before the sermon and the prayer for offerings. They can also be promoted to Bishops if they are faithful to the rules.\nJehovah's Witnesses.\nDeacons among Jehovah's Witnesses are referred to as ministerial servants, claiming it preferable to translate the descriptive Greek term used in the Bible rather than merely transliterate it as though it were a title. Appointed ministerial servants aid elders in congregational duties. Like the elders, they are adult baptized males and serve without a salary.\nDeaconesses.\nThe title \"woman deacon\" or \"deaconess\" appears in many documents from the early church period, particularly in the East. Their duties were often different from that of male deacons; women deacons prepared adult women for baptism and they had a general apostolate to female Christians and catechumens (typically for the sake of modesty). Women appear to have been ordained as deacons to serve the larger community until about the 6th century in the West. Liturgies for the ordination of women deacons had similarities with as well as differences from those for male deacons. Opinions on the sacramental nature of the ordination vary: some scholars argue that the ordination of women deacons would have been equally sacramental to that of male deacons, while others say that women deacons of history were not sacramentally ordained in the full sense, as determined in the Catholic Church by Canons 1008 and 1009 of the Code of Canon Law.\nThe Catholic Church presently does not recognise the validity of female ordinations, be it to the diaconate or any other clerical order. In August 2016, the Catholic Church established a Study Commission on the Women's Diaconate to study the history of female deacons and to study the possibility of ordaining women as deacons. \nThe Russian Orthodox Church had a female subdiaconate into the 20th century. \nThe Armenian Apostolic Church is still ordaining religious sisters as deaconesses; its last monastic deaconess was Sister Hripsime Sasounian (died in 2007) and on 25 September 2017, Ani-Kristi Manvelian, a twenty-four-year-old lay woman, was ordained in Tehran's St. Sarkis Mother Church as the first parish deaconess after many centuries. \nIn 2016, the Holy Synod of the Greek Orthodox Patriarchate of Alexandria and all Africa voted to reinstate the female diaconate; in the following year, it ordained six sub-deaconesses in the Democratic Republic of Congo. In 2024 the Patriarchate ordained its first female deacon, Angelic Molen, in Zimbabwe, making her the first female deacon in the Eastern Orthodox Church.\nCognates.\nThe Greek word \"diakonos\" (\u03b4\u03b9\u03ac\u03ba\u03bf\u03bd\u03bf\u03c2) gave rise to the following terms from the history of Russia, not to be confused with each other: \"dyak\", \"podyachy\", \"dyachok\", in addition to \"deacon\" and \"protodeacon\".\nScots usage.\nIn Scots, the title \"deacon\" is used for a head-workman, a master or chairman of a trade guild, or one who is adept, expert and proficient. The term \"deaconry\" refers to the office of a \"deacon\" or the trade guild under a \"deacon\".\nThe most famous holder of this title was Deacon Brodie, who was a cabinet-maker and president of the Incorporation of Wrights and Masons as well as being a Burgh councillor of Edinburgh but at night led a double life as a burglar. He is thought to have inspired the story of \"The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde\".\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55315", "revid": "1312454441", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55315", "title": "USS Voyager (Star Trek)", "text": "Fictional spacecraft in Star Trek\nUSS \"Voyager\" (NCC-74656) is the fictional \"Intrepid\"-class starship which is the primary setting of the science fiction television series \"\". It is commanded by Captain Kathryn Janeway. \"Voyager\" was designed by \"Star Trek: Voyager\" production designer Richard D. James and illustrator Rick Sternbach. Most of the ship's on-screen appearances are computer-generated imagery (CGI); models were also sometimes used. The ship's motto, as engraved on its dedication plaque, is a quotation from the poem \"Locksley Hall\" by Alfred, Lord Tennyson: \"For I dipt in to the future, far as human eye could see; Saw the vision of the world, and all the wonder that would be.\"\n\"Voyager\" made its television debut in January 1995 in , the most expensive pilot in television history up to that point, reportedly costing $23 million. In addition to its namesake television show, the spacecraft appeared in the computer game \"Star Trek: Voyager Elite Force\" (2000). The spacecraft design was also used for , a theme park in Las Vegas from 1998 to 2008, and as album art.\nConcept and design.\nRick Sternbach, who designed the Borg cube for \"The Next Generation\", and Richard James collaborated over several months to design the USS \"Voyager\". Sternbach started work on the new design in the fall of 1993 when the new series was announced. By the spring of 1994, the design had started to mature, and was smaller than \"The Next Generation\"'s \"Enterprise\"-D with features like the ability to land on a planet's surface. The interior design focused on the bridge, which set the tone for the rest of ship. Throughout the design process, the main goal was to make it new and appealing while still holding in part to the same familiar design.\n\"Voyager\" special effect shots were done with both miniatures and CGI. The miniature shots of the \"Voyager\" model were used as a benchmark to improve the CGI shots. Two different computer models were developed from the physical model by two different companies that scanned it, Amblin Imaging and Foundation Imaging. Amblin won an Emmy for \"Voyager\"'s opening CGI title visuals featuring USS \"Voyager\" passing through space, but the weekly episode exteriors were captured with hand-built miniatures of \"Voyager\". By late 1996 (midway through season three), certain exterior shots were fully CGI. Another challenge of the design was coordinating the interior set design with exterior shots, in particular the location of key rooms and the design of windows. These were important, for example, in shots that crossed over from outside the spacecraft to inside the spacecraft in one filming shot.\nThe principal model of \"Voyager\" used for filming sold at a Christie's auction in 2006 for 132,000 USD.\nMission.\n\"Voyager\" was launched in 2371. The crew's first mission was to track down a Maquis ship in the Badlands. An alien force called the transported both \"Voyager\" and the Maquis vessel across 70,000 light-years to the Delta Quadrant, damaging \"Voyager\" and killing several crewmembers including the medical staff, helm officer, first officer and the chief engineer. \"Voyager\" and the Maquis ship are ultimately stranded in the Delta Quadrant to prevent a genocide of the Ocampans, a species on a nearby planet under the Caretaker's protection from the Kazon, an antagonistic race native to the Delta Quadrant who seek the resources of the Ocampa. Captain Janeway orders the destruction of the device that could transport \"Voyager\" and the Maquis vessel home, thereby protecting the Ocampa. Stranded, and with the Maquis ship also destroyed, both crews integrate and work together for the anticipated 75-year journey home.\nThe intended crew complement was 141 Starfleet personnel, though it held 153 for its inaugural mission. This figure fluctuated during its time in the Delta Quadrant, gaining or losing count due to mishaps, adopted crew, births, and voluntary departures; they start the second year of their journey with 152 people on board, at one point during the fifth year of its journey, there were 150 people on board.\nStarfleet Command eventually becomes aware of the ship's presence in the Delta Quadrant and is later able to establish regular communication. After a seven-year journey, during which the acquisition of new technologies and assistance from various allies had already enabled the ship to travel a distance that otherwise would have taken over thirty years, the ship returned to the Alpha Quadrant via a Borg transwarp conduit.\nIn the \"\" premiere \"Twovix\", \"Voyager\" is being converted into a museum when a dormant macrovirus wreaks havoc on the ship. After the incident is concluded, \"Voyager\" is retired to a museum with the episode's events being added to its exhibits.\nIn \"\" , \"Voyager\" is replaced by the USS \"Voyager\"-A which is described by the Doctor as being a \"Lamarr\"-class science vessel retrofitted with technologies that \"Voyager\" brought back from the Delta Quadrant. The new ship is commanded by now-Vice Admiral Janeway on its maiden voyage. There are several references made to the original \"Voyager\" with Janeway having a model of the ship in her ready room. During this time, Janeway also celebrates the 14th anniversary of her command of \"Voyager\" which was Janeway's first command. \n\"Voyager\" is seen briefly in the \"\" third-season episode \"The Bounty\", now decommissioned and part of Starfleet's Fleet Museum.\nDesign and capabilities.\nThe 15-deck (257 rooms), \"Voyager\" was built at the Utopia Planitia Fleet Yards and launched from Earth Station McKinley.\n\"Voyager\" was equipped with 47 bio-neural gel packs and two holodecks. It was equipped with a class-9 warp drive, allowing for a maximum sustainable speed of Warp 9.975. Variable geometry pylons allowed \"Voyager\" and other \"Intrepid\"-class ships to exceed warp 5 without damaging subspace. Like the \"Galaxy\" class, \"Voyager\"'s warp nacelles were below the primary hull. The ship also was capable of planetary landings.\n\"Voyager\" also had an Emergency Medical Hologram (EMH) programmed with a library of more than five million different medical treatments from 2,000 medical references and 47 physicians.\nThe ship was initially equipped with 40 photon torpedoes with type VI warheads, two of which were equipped with tricobalt devices. Both tricobalt devices were used to destroy the Caretaker's array. Quantum torpedoes were also compatible with \"Voyager\"'s launchers, with some modifications. \"Voyager\" housed five standard torpedo launchers (two fore, two aft, one ventral) and was able to fire up to four torpedoes per launcher at once. In the final episode, an alternate future Kathryn Janeway equipped the ship with transphasic torpedoes and ablative hull armor.\nDuring the years in the Delta Quadrant, the ship is augmented with custom, non-spec upgrades and modifications, some of which are modified from technology of other cultures, an example being Seven of Nine's alcoves and the Delta Flyer which both utilize modified Borg technology. Several pieces of technology from the future were also installed in the final episode, courtesy of Admiral Janeway who went back in time to bring \"Voyager\" home. Some of the adaptive solutions are to compensate for the disadvantages of being from port, such as the airponics bay and the transformation of the Captain's dining room to a galley, and the acquisition of enhancements from aliens in the Void that massively increases replicator efficiency.\nCargo bay 2 is equipped with several Borg alcoves when Captain Janeway forms an alliance with the Borg and several Borg are forced to work aboard \"Voyager\" during the alliance. Seven of Nine and Harry Kim construct an astrometrics lab from scratch with Borg-enhanced sensors, knowledge of which Seven of Nine retained from the Borg.\nShuttlecraft.\nAn important shuttlecraft in many episodes, and operated from the USS \"Voyager\", was a spacecraft called the \"Delta Flyer\". The \"Delta Flyer\" was introduced in the Season 5 episode \"\", and was designed and constructed by the crew in the context of the show. The design of the fictional spacecraft by the production staff and how it was presented in special effects has been written about in books about the franchise. The Delta Flyer was designed by illustrator Rich Sternbach, and exterior views were rendered by computer graphics by Foundation Imaging.\nOne of \"Voyager\"'s shuttles, the \"Aeroshuttle\", was integrated with the hull in the saucer section and although it was never used in an episode, the production team did develop special effects test footage of it disembarking. \"Voyager\"'s \"Aeroshuttle\" was intended as a warp-capable vessel that could also fly in atmospheres; the footage was made by CGI team leaders Rob Bonchune and Adam Lebowitz, along with the VFX producer Dan Curry. Two other craft, the \"Manta\" and \"Cochrane\" were also developed but the Manta was not used. \"Cochrane\" was used in \"\" for the purpose of reaching warp 10.\nPresentations.\nIn addition to its namesake television show, the spacecraft appeared in the computer game \"Star Trek: Voyager Elite Force\" (2000). The spacecraft design was also used for , a theme park in Las Vegas from 1998 to 2008, and as album art. The designs was shown on cover art for LaserDisc releases also.\nIn computer gaming.\nThe \"Voyager\" design appeared in \"Star Trek: Voyager\" which originally aired on UPN network from 1995 to 2001, but was also used in a number of computer and video games in that period in various capacities. One was \"\" which came out in 2000. This was a computer game style known as a first-person shooter and received a positive reception by the gaming community at that time. \"Voyager Elite Force\" was ranked second out of ten of the best \"Star Trek\" games up to 2015. was published in 2003. One game based on the show, \"Voyager\" (circa 1995), was cancelled but has been an influence on other games since.\nMerchandise.\nThe model-making company Revell released a plastic model of USS \"Voyager\". Another pre-built offering was made of metal, and a reviewer praised the \"swooshy\" 'arrowhead' style of the design. The form of the design commonly appears in relation to \"Voyager\" merchandise, or elsewhere in places that make use of \"Star Trek\" franchise content; for example, a view of USS \"Voyager\" was shown as album art for a 4-CD music collection from the show released in 2017.\nProduction.\nIn late October 1994, the USS Voyager model was delivered to Image G, who did the motion control photography video work with the model for the special effects shots for the upcoming launch of the \"Star Trek: Voyager\" television show. Image G also did the motion control photography for the Caretaker Array, as well as for the Maquis and Kazon vessels.\nThe main sets for the interior of the spacecraft were located at Stage 8 and Stage 9 at Paramount Studios.\nOne of the more complex sets for the spacecraft was the bridge of \"Voyager\". The bridge of \"Voyager\" had 11 different monitors of three different sizes, that had custom graphics displayed depending on what was being shot for each scene. For a scene with the \"red alert\" setting, the appropriate video graphics would have to be displayed on cue. These graphics were created a by a team of people, with a need for both static and video graphics. Depending on the episode, custom graphics or video sequences would have to be made by a creative team. The videos were recorded to videocassette to be played at the right time, such as when an actor (e.g. \"Voyager\" crew) was looking at a monitor.\nThe ship's design and sets were also used in the \"Star Trek: Deep Space Nine\" episode \"\", this time as the Intrepid Class USS \"Bellerophon\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55316", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55316", "title": "Atlantic Provinces", "text": ""}
{"id": "55317", "revid": "50724405", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55317", "title": "First day of issue", "text": "Postage stamp franked on earliest date\nA first day of issue cover or first day cover (FDC) is a postage stamp on a cover, postal card or stamped envelope franked on the first day the issue is authorized for use within the country or territory of the stamp-issuing authority. Sometimes the issue is made from a temporary or permanent foreign or overseas office. Covers that are postmarked at sea or their next port of call will carry a Paquebot postmark. There will usually be a first day of issue postmark, frequently a pictorial cancellation, indicating the city and date where the item was first issued, and \"first day of issue\" is often used to refer to this postmark. Depending on the policy of the nation issuing the stamp, official first day postmarks may sometimes be applied to covers weeks or months after the date indicated.\nPostal authorities may hold a first day ceremony to generate publicity for the new issue, with postal officials revealing the stamp, and with connected persons in attendance, such as descendants of the person being honored by the stamp. The ceremony may also be held in a location that has a special connection with the stamp's subject, such as the birthplace of a social movement, or at a stamp show.\nHistory.\nIn England, prior to 1840, postage costs were very high and they were usually paid by the person who received the mail. The cost was measured by how many sheets were in the letter and how far the letter had to go. Sometimes this amounted to a very considerable sum. Sir Rowland Hill calculated that the cost to the Post Office was far less than what some people were paying to send/receive their mail; this figure was just a fraction of 1d. Hill believed that sending mail should be affordable to all so proposed that postage should be pre-paid, based on the weight rather than the number of sheets and the cost should be drastically reduced. On 10 January 1840 a Uniform 1d postmark was released which allowed a universal penny postage rate, this was a postmark that was paid and was applied when the letter was sent. It was later decided that an adhesive label should be used to prevent forgeries and mis-use of the postal service and the Penny Black stamp was born. It was officially released for sale on 6 May 1840; however, several post offices that received the stamps prior to that date released the stamps early. The City of Bath is known for releasing the stamps on 2 May 1840. Here began the very first First Day Covers.\nTypes.\nEvent covers.\nEvent covers, also known as commemorative covers, instead of marking the issuance of a stamp, commemorate events. A design on the left side of the envelope (a \"cachet\") explains the event or anniversary being celebrated. Ideally the stamp or stamps affixed relate to the event. Cancels are obtained either from the location (e.g., Cape Canaveral, Anytown) or, in the case of the United States, from the Postal Service's Cancellation Services unit in Kansas City.\nPhilatelic covers.\nPhilatelic covers are envelope prepared with a stamp(s), addressed and sent through the mail delivery system to create a collectible item. Information about philatelic covers is available online in catalogs and collector websites.\nOther types.\nComputer vended postage stamps issued by Neopost had first-day-of-issue ceremonies sponsored by the company, not by an official stamp-issuing entity. Personalised postage stamps of different designs are sometimes also given first-day-of-issue ceremonies and cancellations by the private designer. The stamps issued by private local posts can also have first days of issue, as can artistamps.\nFeatures of a cover.\nPostmark.\nThe postmark is one of the most important features of a cover. Stamps are cancelled by a postmark, which shows they have been used and cannot be re-used to send a letter. Circular Date Stamps (CDS) are the 'bread-and-butter' postmarks used on everyday mail by Post Office counters across the UK. A CDS postmark is very straight forward and only features the town\u2019s name and the date. There is no picture. If one wanted to use a CDS postmark from a town relevant to the stamp's issue, one would have to go to the town\u2019s local Post Office to get it. On a cover, the postmark should touch each stamp and link them to the envelope.\nPostmarks came to the foreground in the early 1960s, when collectors started to demand more interesting cancellations on their first day covers. For the Red Cross issue in 1963, a special Florence Nightingale cover was posted at her birthplace, West Wellow. The Botanical Conference issue of 1964 featured primroses on the stamps, so one clever cover dealer posted his covers at Primrose Valley. This kind of relevant postmark made a cover worth often ten times more than the same cover with a standard postmark issued by the Philatelic Bureau at Edinburgh (a place with no connection to the stamps). In the US, the U.S. Postal Service chooses a city, or several, as 'official' first day cities. These have a special connection to the stamp issue being released, and these postmarks are the only ones that have the wording: 'First Day of Issue'.\nSpecial handstamps.\nWith postmarks becoming more and more important to the covers, pictorial postmarks became very popular. Pictorial postmarks are also known as Special Handstamps/Postmarks. In 1924, the first commemorative set of stamps for the British Empire Exhibition had both special postmarks and a special slogan, but it was not until the late 1960s and early 1970s that dealers and organisations really caught on that you could sponsor/design a connected postmark and it would make an ordinary cover something special. These days anyone can sponsor a postmark. They need to design the postmark, get it approved by Royal Mail and then pay a fee. The postmark then becomes the property of Royal Mail and anyone is allowed to use it on their covers. This means that to a certain extent, most cover producers \u201cborrow\u201d other people\u2019s postmarks. However, to be an \u201cofficial\u201d cover, a postmark has to be on the cover produced by the organisation that sponsored the postmark in the first place.\nCachet.\nAs the collecting of first day covers became more popular they began to appear on prepared envelopes, often with an illustration (commonly referred to by collectors as a cachet) that corresponded with the theme of the stamp. Several printing companies began producing such envelopes and often hired freelance illustrators to design their cachets such as Charles R. Chickering who in his earlier years designed postage stamps for the U.S. Post Office. Cachets, which should not be confused with postmarks, are basically rubber stamps. Postmarks can only be applied by official Post Offices whereas anyone can design a cachet and put it on their cover. A cachet makes a cover unique and helps tell the story of the cover. It can say whether the cover was carried (for example, covers were carried on the very last flight of the Concorde), who the signer was or information about the postmark. Royal Mail no longer counts pre-decimal stamps as valid and won\u2019t postmark them, a cachet can therefore be used to \"cancel\" a pre-decimal stamp on a cover. It provides a link between that stamp and the envelope. They can also be used to \"cancel\" Cinderella stamps.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55318", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55318", "title": "Semiconductor devices", "text": ""}
{"id": "55319", "revid": "42536815", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55319", "title": "Ambient music", "text": "Music genre\nAmbient music is a genre of music that emphasizes tone and atmosphere over traditional musical structure or rhythm. Often \"peaceful\" sounding and lacking composition, beat, and/or structured melody, ambient music uses textural layers of sound that can reward both passive and active listening, and encourage a sense of calm or contemplation. The genre evokes an \"atmospheric\", \"visual\", or \"unobtrusive\" quality. Nature soundscapes may be included, and some works use sustained or repeated notes, as in drone music. Bearing elements associated with new-age music, instruments such as the piano, strings and flute may be emulated through a synthesizer.\nThe genre originated in the 1960s and 1970s, when new musical instruments were being introduced to a wider market, such as the synthesizer. It was presaged by Erik Satie's furniture music and styles such as musique concr\u00e8te, minimal music, Jamaican dub music and German electronic music, but was prominently named and popularized by British musician Brian Eno in 1978 with his album \"\"; Eno opined that ambient music \"must be as ignorable as it is interesting\", however, in early years, there were artists that were pioneers in this genre, like Tangerine Dream, Klaus Schulze, Wendy Carlos, Kraftwerk, etc. It saw a revival towards the late 1980s with the prominence of house and techno music, growing a cult following by the 1990s.\nAmbient music has not achieved large commercial success. Nevertheless, it has attained a certain degree of acclaim throughout the years, especially in the Internet age. Due to its relatively open style, ambient music often takes influences from many other genres, ranging from classical, avant-garde music, experimental music, folk, jazz, and world music, amongst others.\nHistory.\nAs an early 20th-century French composer, Erik Satie used such Dadaist-inspired explorations to create an early form of ambient/background music that he labeled \"furniture music\" (\"Musique d'ameublement\"). This he described as being the sort of music that could be played during a dinner to create a background atmosphere for that activity, rather than serving as the focus of attention.\nIn his own words, Satie sought to create \"a music...which will be part of the noises of the environment, will take them into consideration. I think of it as melodious, softening the noises of the knives and forks at dinner, not dominating them, not imposing itself. It would fill up those heavy silences that sometime fall between friends dining together. It would spare them the trouble of paying attention to their own banal remarks. And at the same time it would neutralize the street noises which so indiscreetly enter into the play of conversation. To make such music would be to respond to a need.\"\nIn 1948, French composer &amp; engineer, Pierre Schaeffer coined the term musique concr\u00e8te. This experimental style of music used recordings of natural sounds that were then modified, manipulated or effected to create a composition. Shaeffer's techniques of using tape loops and splicing are considered to be the precursor to modern day sampling.\nIn 1952, John Cage released his famous three-movement composition \"4'33\" which is a performance of complete silence for four minutes and thirty-three seconds. The piece is intended to capture the ambient sounds of the venue/location of the performance and have that be the music played. Cage has been cited by seminal artists such as Brian Eno as influence.\n1960s.\nIn the 1960s, many music groups experimented with unusual methods, with some of them creating what would later be called ambient music.\nIn the summer of 1962, composers Ramon Sender and Morton Subotnick founded The San Francisco Tape Music Center which functioned both as an electronic music studio and concert venue. Other composers working with tape recorders became members and collaborators including Pauline Oliveros, Terry Riley and Steve Reich. Their compositions, among others, contributed to the development of minimal music (also called minimalism), which shares many similar concepts to ambient music such as repetitive patterns or pulses, steady drones, and consonant harmony.\nMany records were released in Europe and the United States of America between the mid-1960s and the mid-1990s that established the conventions of the ambient genre in the anglophone popular music market. Some 1960s records with ambient elements include \"Music for Yoga Meditation and Other Joys\" and \"Music for Zen Meditation\" by Tony Scott, \"Soothing Sounds for Baby\" by Raymond Scott, and the first record of the \"environments\" album series by Irv Teibel.\nIn the late 1960s, French composer \u00c9liane Radigue composed several pieces by processing tape loops from the feedback between two tape recorders and a microphone. In the 1970s, she then went on to compose similar music almost exclusively with an ARP 2500 synthesiser, and her long, slow compositions have often been compared to drone music. In 1969, the group COUM Transmissions were performing sonic experiments in British art schools. Pearls Before Swine's 1968 album \"Balaklava\" features the sounds of birdsong and ocean noise, which were to become tropes of ambient music.\"\n1970s.\nDeveloping in the 1970s, ambient music stemmed from the experimental and synthesizer-oriented styles of the period.\nBetween 1974 and 1976, American composer Laurie Spiegel created her seminal work \"The Expanding Universe\", created on a computer-analog hybrid system called GROOVE. In 1977, her composition, \"Music of the Spheres\" was included on Voyager 1 and 2's Golden Record.\nIn April 1975, Suzanne Ciani gave two performances on her Buchla synthesizer \u2013 one at the WBAI Free music store and one at Phil Niblock's loft. These performances were released on an archival album in 2016 entitled \"Buchla Concerts 1975\". According to the record label, these concerts were part live presentation, part grant application and part educational demonstration.\nHowever, it was not until Brian Eno coined the term in the mid-70s that ambient music was defined as a genre. Eno went on to record 1975's \"Discreet Music\" with this in mind, suggesting that it be listened to at \"comparatively low levels, even to the extent that it frequently falls below the threshold of audibility\", referring to Satie's quote about his \"musique d'ameublement\".\nOther contemporaneous musicians creating ambient-style music at the time included Jamaican dub musicians such as King Tubby, Japanese electronic music composers such as Isao Tomita and Ryuichi Sakamoto as well as the psychoacoustic soundscapes of Irv Teibel's \"Environments\" series, and German experimental bands such as Popol Vuh, Cluster, Kraftwerk, Harmonia, Ash Ra Tempel and Tangerine Dream. Mike Orme of \"Stylus Magazine\" describes the work of Berlin school musicians as \"laying the groundwork\" for ambient.\nThe impact the rise of the synthesizer in modern music had on ambient as a genre cannot be overstated; as Ralf Hutter of early electronic pioneers Kraftwerk said in a 1977 \"Billboard\" interview: \"Electronics is beyond nations and colors...with electronics everything is possible. The only limit is with the composer\". The Yellow Magic Orchestra developed a distinct style of ambient electronic music that would later be developed into ambient house music.\nBrian Eno.\nThe English producer Brian Eno is credited with coining the term \"ambient music\" in the mid-1970s. He said other artists had been creating similar music, but that \"I just gave it a name. Which is exactly what it needed ... By naming something you create a difference. You say that this is now real. Names are very important.\" He used the term to describe music that is different from forms of canned music like Muzak.\nIn the liner notes for his 1978 album , Eno wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Whereas the extant canned music companies proceed from the basis of regularizing environments by blanketing their acoustic and atmospheric idiosyncrasies, Ambient Music is intended to enhance these. Whereas conventional background music is produced by stripping away all sense of doubt and uncertainty (and thus all genuine interest) from the music, Ambient Music retains these qualities. And whereas their intention is to \"brighten\" the environment by adding stimulus to it (thus supposedly alleviating the tedium of routine tasks and leveling out the natural ups and downs of the body rhythms) Ambient Music is intended to induce calm and a space to think. Ambient Music must be able to accommodate many levels of listening attention without enforcing one in particular; it must be as ignorable as it is interesting.\nEno, who describes himself as a \"non-musician\", termed his experiments \"treatments\" rather than traditional performances. David Bowie created the \"Berlin Trilogy\" with Eno, both of whom were inspired during the production of the albums in the trilogy by German \"kosmische Musik\" bands and minimalist composers.\n1980s.\nIn the late 70s, new-age musician Laraaji began busking in New York parks and sidewalks, including Washington Square Park. It was there that Brian Eno heard Laraaji playing and asked him if he'd like to record an album. released in 1980, was the third album in Eno's Ambient series. Although Laraaji had already recorded a number of albums, this one gave him international recognition. Unlike other albums in the series, \"Day of Radiance\" featured mostly acoustic instruments instead of electronics.\nIn the mid-1980s, the possibilities to create a sonic landscape increased through the use of sampling. By the late 1980s, there was a steep increase in the incorporation of the computer in the writing and recording process of records. The sixteen-bit Macintosh platform with built-in sound and comparable IBM models would find themselves in studios and homes of musicians and record makers. However, many artists were still working with analogue synthesizers and acoustic instruments to produce ambient works.\nIn 1983, Midori Takada recorded her first solo LP \"Through the Looking Glass\" in two days. She performed all parts on the album, with diverse instrumentation including percussion, marimba, gong, reed organ, bells, ocarina, vibraphone, piano and glass Coca-Cola bottles. Between 1988 and 1993, \u00c9liane Radigue produced three hour-long works on the ARP 2500 which were subsequently issued together as \"La Trilogie De La Mort\".\nAlso in 1988, founding member and director of the San Francisco Tape Music Centre, Pauline Oliveros coined the term \"deep listening\" after she recorded an album inside a huge underground cistern in Washington which has a 45-second reverberation time. The concept of Deep Listening then went on to become \"an aesthetic based upon principles of improvisation, electronic music, ritual, teaching and meditation\".\n1990s.\nBy the early 1990s, artists such as the Orb, Aphex Twin, Seefeel, the Irresistible Force, Biosphere, and the Higher Intelligence Agency gained commercial success and were being referred to by the popular music press as ambient house, ambient techno, IDM or simply \"ambient\". The term chillout emerged from British ecstasy culture which was originally applied in relaxed downtempo \"chillout rooms\" outside of the main dance floor where ambient, dub and downtempo beats were played to ease the tripping mind.\nBritish artists such as Aphex Twin (specifically: \"Selected Ambient Works Volume II\", 1994), Global Communication (\"\", 1994), The Future Sound of London (\"Lifeforms\", 1994, \"ISDN\", 1994), the Black Dog (\"Temple of Transparent Balls\", 1993), Autechre (\"Incunabula\", 1993, \"Amber\", 1994), Boards of Canada, and The KLF's \"Chill Out\", (1990), all took a part in popularising and diversifying ambient music where it was used as a calming respite from the intensity of the hardcore and techno popular at that time. Other global ambient artists from the 1990s include American composers Stars of the Lid (who released 5 albums during this decade), and Japanese artist Susumu Yokota whose album \"Sakura\" (1999) featured what Pitchfork magazine called \"dreamy, processed guitar as a distinctive sound tool\".\n2000s.\nIn the early 2000s, offshoots of trance music oriented around ambient music garnered popularity. Established in France in 2001, Ultimae has become the go-to label for space ambient, and they included artists such as Carbon Based Lifeforms. DJs in Ibiza's Caf\u00e9 Del Mar began creating ambient house mixes that drew on jazz, classical, Hispanic, and New Age sources. Consequently, the popular understanding of \"chill-out music\" shifted away from \"ambient\" and into its own distinct genre. Producer Wolfgang Voigt co-runs the German label Kompakt, which has released installments of the influential ambient techno compilation series \"Pop Ambient\" annually since 2001.\nIn indie music, chillwave emerged, inspired by the atmosphere of dream pop. Atlas Sound debuted with the album \"Let the Blind Lead Those Who Can See but Cannot Feel\", which featured ambient pieces. Animal Collective's \"Merriweather Post Pavilion\" was an album released in January 2009 that was particularly influential for its ambient sounds and repetitive melodies.\n2010s\u2013present.\nYouTube.\nFrom the early 2010s to present, ambient music gained widespread recognition on YouTube, with uploaded pieces, usually ranging from one to eight hours long, getting over millions of hits. Ambient videos assist online listeners with yoga, study, sleep (see music and sleep), massage, meditation and gaining optimism, inspiration, and creating peaceful atmosphere in their rooms or other environments. Such videos may be titled \"relaxing music\".\nMany uploaded ambient videos may also be influenced by biomusic where they feature sounds of nature, though the sounds would be modified with reverbs and delay units to make spacey versions of the sounds as part of the ambience. Such natural sounds oftentimes include those of a beach, rainforest, thunderstorm and rainfall, among others, with vocalizations of animals such as bird songs being used as well. Pieces containing binaural beats are common and popular uploads as well, which provide music therapy and stress management for the listener.\nDigital releases.\niTunes and Spotify have digital radio stations that feature ambient music, which are mostly produced by independent labels.\nAcclaimed ambient music of this era (according to \"Pitchfork\" magazine) include works by Max Richter, Julianna Barwick, Grouper, William Basinski, Oneohtrix Point Never, and the Caretaker. In 2011, American composer Liz Harris recording as Grouper released the album \"AIA: Alien Observer\", listed by Pitchfork at number 21 on their \"50 Best Ambient Albums of All Time\". In 2011, Julianna Barwick released her first full-length album \"The Magic Place\". Heavily influenced by her childhood experiences in a church choir, Barwick loops her wordless vocals into ethereal soundscapes. It was listed at number 30 on Pitchfork's 50 Best Ambient Albums of All Time. After several self-released albums, Buchla composer, producer and performer Kaitlyn Aurelia Smith was signed to independent record label Western Vinyl in 2015.\nIn 2016, she released her second official album \"EARS\". It paired the Buchla synthesizer with traditional instruments and her compositions were compared to Laurie Spiegel and Alice Coltrane. Kaitlyn has also collaborated with other well-known Buchla performer, Suzanne Ciani. \"\" was released by American electronica musician Moby in 2016, as a free download. In March 2019, Moby released a follow-up ambient album, \"Long Ambients 2\". Iggy Pop's 2019 album \"Free\" features ambient soundscapes. Mallsoft, a subgenre of vaporwave, features various ambient influences, with artists such as Cat System Corp. and Groceries exploring ambient sounds typical of malls and grocery stores.\nIn 2019, Canadian composer Kyle Bobby Dunn released the 3 hour \"From Here To Eternity\" album. It was praised by Exclaim! magazine who wrote: \"Dunn's ability to subsume the subject into his detailed sonic landscapes with minor shifts in the onslaught of drones speaks to this album's ability to impact a wide-ranging listenership. From Here to Eternity serves as a masterful articulation of the power of ambient music.\"\nRelated and derivative genres.\nAmbient house.\nAmbient house is a musical category founded in the late 1980s that is used to describe acid house featuring ambient music elements and atmospheres. Tracks in the ambient house genre typically feature four-on-the-floor beats, synth pads, and vocal samples integrated in an atmospheric style.\nAmbient house tracks generally lack a diatonic center and feature much atonality along with synthesized chords. The Dutch Brainvoyager is an example of this genre. Illbient is another form of ambient house music.\nAmbient industrial.\nAmbient industrial is a hybrid genre of industrial and ambient music. A \"typical\" ambient industrial work (if there is such a thing) might consist of evolving dissonant harmonies of metallic drones and resonances, extreme low frequency rumbles and machine noises, perhaps supplemented by gongs, percussive rhythms, bullroarers, distorted voices or anything else the artist might care to sample (often processed to the point where the original sample is no longer recognizable).\nEntire works may be based on radio telescope recordings, the babbling of newborn babies, or sounds recorded through contact microphones on telegraph wires.\nAmbient pop.\nAmbient pop is a leftfield indie style that developed in the 1980s and 1990s contemporaneously with post-rock in the first wave, deriving from indie pop. It incorporates structures that are common to indie music, but extensively explores \"electronic textures and atmospheres that mirror the hypnotic, meditative qualities of ambient music\", which is also central to indie electronic music. Ambient pop utilizes the musical experimentation of psychedelia and the repetitive traits of minimalism, krautrock and techno as prevalent influences. It is distinguished by its adoption of \"contemporary electronic idioms, including sampling, although for the most part live instruments continue to define the sound\"; examples of bands in the style include Stereolab, Laika and Broadcast.\nDream pop band Slowdive's 1995 album \"Pygmalion\" was a major departure from the band's usual sound, heavily incorporating elements of ambient electronica and psychedelia with hypnotic, repetitive rhythms, influencing many ambient pop bands and subsequently being regarded as a landmark album in the genre; Pitchfork critic Nitsuh Abebe described the album's songs as \"ambient pop dreams that have more in common with [first wave] post-rock [bands] like Disco Inferno than shoegazers like Ride\". The genre continued to stylistically progress in the 2000s, often in conjunction with indietronica.\nAmbient techno.\nAmbient techno is a music category emerging in the late 1980s that is used to describe ambient music atmospheres with the rhythmic and melodic elements of techno. Notable artists include Aphex Twin, B12, Autechre, and the Black Dog.\nDark ambient.\nBrian Eno's original vision of ambient music as unobtrusive musical wallpaper, later fused with warm house rhythms and given playful qualities by the Orb in the 1990s, found its opposite in the style known as dark ambient. Populated by a wide assortment of personalities\u2014ranging from older industrial and metal experimentalists (Scorn's Mick Harris, Current 93's David Tibet, Nurse with Wound's Steven Stapleton) to electronic boffins (Kim Cascone/PGR, Psychick Warriors Ov Gaia), Japanese noise artists (K.K. Null, Merzbow), and latter-day indie rockers (Main, Bark Psychosis).\nDark ambient features toned-down or entirely missing beats with unsettling passages of keyboards, eerie samples, and treated guitar effects. Like most styles related in some way to electronic/dance music of the '90s, it's a very nebulous term; many artists enter or leave the style with each successive release. Related styles include ambient industrial (see below) and isolationist ambient.\nDrone music.\nDrone music is a minimalist genre of music that emphasizes the use of sustained sounds, notes, or tone clusters called \"drones\". It is typically characterized by lengthy compositions featuring relatively slight harmonic variations. La Monte Young, one of its 1960s originators, defined it in 2000 as \"the sustained tone branch of minimalism.\" Elements of drone music have been incorporated in diverse genres such as rock, ambient, and electronic music.\nNew-age music.\nAmbient music fused with new-age music styles has an explicit purpose of aiding meditation and relaxation, or aiding and enabling various alternative spiritual practices, such as alternative healing, yoga practice, guided meditation, or chakra auditing. The proponents of new age-ambient music are almost always musicians who create their music expressly for these purposes. To be useful for meditation, the music must have repetitive dynamic and texture without sudden loud chords or improvisation, which could disturb the meditator. It is minimalist in conception, and musicians in the genre are mostly instrumentalists rather than vocalists.\nSubliminal messages are also used in new-age music, and the use of instruments along with sounds of animals (like whales, wolves and eagles) and nature (waterfalls, ocean waves, rain) is also popular. Flautist Dean Evenson was one of the first musicians to combine peaceful music with the sounds of nature, launching a genre that became popular for massage and yoga.\nSpace music.\nSpace music, also spelled \"Spacemusic\", includes music from the ambient genre as well as a broad range of other genres with certain characteristics in common to create the experience of contemplative spaciousness.\nSpace music ranges from simple to complex sonic textures sometimes lacking conventional melodic, rhythmic, or vocal components, generally evoking a sense of \"continuum of spatial imagery and emotion\", beneficial introspection, deep listening and sensations of floating, cruising or flying.\nSpace music is used by individuals for both background enhancement and foreground listening, often with headphones, to stimulate relaxation, contemplation, inspiration and generally peaceful expansive moods and soundscapes. Space music is also a component of many film soundtracks and is commonly used in planetariums, as a relaxation aid and for meditation.\nSleep.\nAmbient has been selected by participants from online sleep surveys to aid sleep. The ambient music genre, among other genres, was used in a study pertaining to insomnia in adults, where it facilitated a large improvement in sleep quality for insomnia patients. Participants, who were between 20 and 45 years old, listened to Max Richter's album \"Sleep\", which was originally meant to work as a sleep aid. They used headphones and were able to shut their eyes, but they were instructed to stay in a sitting position so they do not fall asleep. Despite this, one participant fell asleep while listening to the music.\nFilm soundtracks.\nExamples of films with soundtracks that feature some, or extensive, usage of ambient music include, \"Forbidden Planet\" (1956), \"Solaris\" (1972), \"Blade Runner\" (1982), \"Dune\" (1984), \"Heathers\" (1988), \"Akira\" (1988), \"Titanic\" (1997), \"The Virgin Suicides\" (1999), \"Traffic\" (2000), \"Donnie Darko\" (2001), \"Solaris\" (2002), \"The Passion of the Christ\" (2004), \"Pride &amp; Prejudice\" (2005), \"The Social Network\" (2010), \"Her\" (2013), \"Enemy\" (2013), \"Drive\" (2011), \"Interstellar\" (2014), \"Gone Girl\" (2014), \"The Revenant\" (2015), \"Columbus\" (2017), \"Mandy\" (2018), \"Annihilation\" (2018), \"Ad Astra\" (2019), \"Chernobyl\" (2019) and \"Dune\" (2021), among many others.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55320", "revid": "6273", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55320", "title": "County of England", "text": ""}
{"id": "55321", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55321", "title": "Postcard", "text": "Type of postal stationery\nA postcard or post card is a piece of thick paper or thin cardboard, typically rectangular, intended for writing and mailing without an envelope. Non-rectangular shapes may also be used but are rare.\nIn some places, one can send a postcard for a lower fee than a letter. Stamp collectors distinguish between postcards (which require a postage stamp) and postal cards (which have the postage pre-printed on them). While a postcard is usually printed and sold by a private company, individual or organization, a postal card is issued by the relevant postal authority (often with pre-printed postage).\nProduction of postcards blossomed in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. As an easy and quick way for individuals to communicate, they became extremely popular. The study and collecting of postcards is termed \"deltiology\" (from Greek , small writing tablet, and the also Greek \"-logy\", the study of).\nHistory.\n1840 to 1864.\nCards with messages have been sporadically created and posted by individuals since the beginning of postal services. The earliest known picture postcard was a hand-painted design on card created by the writer Theodore Hook. Hook posted the card, which bears a Penny Black stamp, to himself in 1840 from Fulham (part of London). He probably did so as a practical joke on the postal service, since the image is a caricature of workers in the post office. In 2002 the postcard sold for a record \u00a331,750.\nIn the United States, the custom of sending through the mail, at letter rate, a picture or blank card stock that held a message, began with a card postmarked in December 1848 containing printed advertising. The first commercially produced card was created in 1861 by John P. Charlton of Philadelphia, who patented a private postal card, and sold the rights to Hymen Lipman, whose postcards, complete with a decorated border, were marketed as \"Lipman's Postal Card\". These cards had no images. While the United States government allowed privately printed cards as early as February 1861, they saw little use until 1870, when experiments were done on their commercial viability.\nFirst postals and private postcards (c. 1865 to 1880).\nA Prussian postal official, Heinrich von Stephan, first proposed an \"open post-sheet\" made of stiff paper in 1865. He proposed that one side would be reserved for a recipient address, and the other for a brief message. His proposal was denied on grounds of being too radical and officials did not believe anyone would willingly give up their privacy. In October 1869, the post office of Austria-Hungary accepted a similar proposal, also without images, and 3 million cards were mailed within the first three months. With the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War in July 1870, the government of the North German Confederation decided to take the advice of Austrian Emanuel Herrmann and issued postals for soldiers to inexpensively send home from the field.\nThe period from 1870 to 1874 saw a great number of countries begin the issuance of postals. In 1870, the North German Confederation was joined by Baden, Bavaria, Great Britain, Luxembourg and Switzerland. The year 1871 saw Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, the Netherlands, Norway, and Sweden introduce their own postals. Algeria, Chile, France and Russia did so in 1872, and were followed by France, Japan, Romania, Serbia, Spain and the United States between 1873 and 1874. Many of these postals included small images on the same side as the postage. Postcards began to be sent internationally after the first Congress of the General Postal Union, which met in Bern, Switzerland in October 1874. The Treaty of Bern was ratified in the United States in 1875.The first known printed picture postcard, with an image on one side, was created in France in 1870 at Camp Conlie by L\u00e9on Besnardeau (1829\u20131914). Conlie was a training camp for soldiers in the Franco-Prussian War. The cards had a lithographed design printed on them containing emblematic images of piles of armaments on either side of a scroll topped by the arms of the Duchy of Brittany and the inscription \"War of 1870. Camp Conlie. Souvenir of the National Defence. Army of Brittany\" (in French). While these are certainly the first known picture postcards, there was no space for stamps and no evidence that they were ever posted without envelopes.\nIn Germany, the bookdealer August Schwartz from Oldenburg is regarded as the inventor of the illustrated postcard. On July 16, 1870, he mailed a post correspondence card with an image of a man with a cannon, signaling the looming Franco-Prussian war.\nIn the following year the first known picture postcard in which the image functioned as a souvenir was sent from Vienna. The first advertising card appeared in 1872 in Great Britain and the first German card appeared in 1874. Private advertising cards started appearing in the United States around 1873, and qualified for a special postage rate of one cent. Private cards inspired Lipman's card were also produced concurrently with the U.S. government postal in 1873. The backs of these private cards contained the words \"Correspondence Card\", \"Mail Card\" or \"Souvenir Card\" and required two-cent postage if they were written upon.\nGolden age of postcards (c. 1890 to 1915).\nCards showing images increased in number during the 1880s. Images of the newly built Eiffel Tower in 1889 and 1890 gave impetus to the postcard, leading to the so-called \"golden age\" of the picture postcard. This golden age began slightly earlier in Europe than the United States, likely due to a depression in the 1890s. Still, the Chicago World's Fair in 1893 excited many attendees with its line of \"Official Souvenir\" postals, which popularized the idea of picture postcards. The stage was now set for private postcard industry to boom, which it did once the United States government changed the postage rate for private cards from two cents to one in May 1898.\nSpanning from approximately 1905 to 1915 in the United States, the golden age of postcards stemmed from a combination of social, economic, and governmental factors. Demand for postcards increased, government restrictions on production loosened, and technological advances (in photography, printing, and mass production) made the boom possible. In addition, the expansion of Rural Free Delivery allowed mail to be delivered to more American households than ever before. Billions of postcards were mailed during the golden age, including nearly a billion per year in United States from 1905 to 1915, and 7 billion worldwide in 1905. Many postcards from this era were in fact never posted but directly acquired by collectors themselves.\nDespite years of incredible success, economic and government forces would ultimately spell the end of the golden age. The peak came sometime between 1907 and 1910 for the United States. In 1909, American publishers successfully lobbied to place tariffs on high quality German imports with the Payne-Aldrich Tariff Act. The effects of tariffs really started to make a large impact, and escalating hostilities in Europe made it difficult to import cards and ink into the United States. The fad may have also simply run its natural course. The war disrupted production efforts in Europe, although postcard production did not entirely stop. Cards were still useful for propaganda, and for boosting troop morale.\nPost-World War I (1918 to present).\nAfter the war, the production of postcards continued, albeit in different styles than before. Demand for postcards decreased, especially as telephone usage grew. There was still a need for postcards, which would be dubbed the \"poor man's telephone\". As tastes changed, publishers began focusing on scenic views, humor, and fashion. \"White border\" cards, which existed prior to the war, were produced in greater numbers from roughly 1915 to 1930 in the United States. They required less ink and had lower production standards than fine German cards. These were later replaced by \"linen\" postcards in the 1930s and 1940s, which used a printing process popularized by Curt Teich. Finally, the modern era of Photochrom (often shortened simply to \"chrome\") postcards began in 1939, and gained momentum around 1950. These glossy, colorful postcards are what we most commonly encounter today. Postcard sales dropped to around 25% of 1990s levels, with the growing popularity of social media around 2007, resulting in closure of long-established printers such as J Salmon Ltd in 2017.\nCountry specifics.\nIndia.\nIn July 1879, the Post Office of India introduced a quarter anna postcard that could be posted from one place to another within British India. This was the cheapest form of post provided to the Indian people to date and proved a huge success. The establishment of a large postal system spanning India resulted in unprecedented postal access: a message on a postcard could be sent from one part of the country to another part (often to a physical address without a nearby post office) without additional postage affixed. This was followed in April 1880 by postcards meant specifically for government use and by reply postcards in 1890. The postcard facility continues to this date in independent India.\nJapan.\nOfficial postcards were introduced in December 1873, shortly after stamps were introduced to Japan. Return postcards were introduced in 1885, sealed postcards in 1900, and private postcards were allowed from 1900.\nOfficial Japanese postcards have one side dedicated exclusively to the address, and the other side for the content, though commemorative picture postcards and private picture postcards also exist. In Japan today, two particular idiosyncratic postcard customs exist: and . New Year's Day postcards serve as greeting cards, similar to Western Christmas cards, while return postcards function similarly to a self-addressed stamped envelope, allowing one to receive a reply without burdening the addressee with postage fees. Return postcards consist of a single double-size sheet, and cost double the price of a usual postcard \u2013 one addresses and writes one half as a usual postcard, writes one's own address on the return card, leaving the other side blank for the reply, then folds and sends. Return postcards are most frequently encountered by non-Japanese in the context of making reservations at certain locations that only accept reservations by return postcard, notably at Saih\u014d-ji (moss temple). For overseas purposes, an international reply coupon is used instead.\nRussia.\nIn the State Standard of the Russian Federation \"GOST 51507-99. Postal cards. Technical requirements. Methods of Control\" (2000) gives the following definition:\nPost Card is a standard rectangular form of a paper for public postings. According to the same state standards, cards are classified according to the type and kind.\nDepending on whether or not the image on the card printing postage stamp cards are divided into two types:\nDepending on whether or not the card illustrations, cards are divided into two types:\nCards, depending on the location of illustrations divided into:\nDepending on the walking area cards subdivided into:\nUnited Kingdom.\nHistory.\nIn Britain, postcards without images were issued by the Post Office in 1870, and were printed with a stamp as part of the design, which was included in the price of purchase. These cards came in two sizes. The larger size was found to be slightly too large for ease of handling, and was soon withdrawn in favour of cards 13mm (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 inch) shorter. 75 million of these cards were sent within Britain during 1870.\nIn 1973 the British Post Office introduced a new type of card, PHQ Cards, popular with collectors, especially when they have the appropriate stamp affixed and a first day of issue postmark obtained.\nSeaside postcards.\nIn 1894, British publishers were given permission by the Royal Mail to manufacture and distribute picture postcards, which could be sent through the post. It was originally thought that the first UK postcards were produced by printing firm Stewarts of Edinburgh but later research, published in Picture Postcard Monthly in 1991, has shown that the first UK picture card was published by ETW Dennis of Scarborough. Two postmarked examples of the September 1894 ETW Dennis card have survived but no cards of Stewarts dated 1894 have been found. Early postcards were pictures of landmarks, scenic views, photographs or drawings of celebrities and so on. With steam locomotives providing fast and affordable travel, the seaside became a popular tourist destination, and generated its own souvenir-industry.\nIn the early 1930s, cartoon-style saucy postcards became widespread, and at the peak of their popularity the sale of saucy postcards reached 16 million a year. They were often bawdy in nature, making use of innuendo and double entendres, and traditionally featured stereotypical characters such as vicars, large ladies, and put-upon husbands, in the same vein as the \"Carry On\" films.\nA notable artist of seaside postcards, often saucy, was the illustrator Thomas Henry, most known for his portrayal of William Brown in the Just William book series by Richmal Crompton. He started drawing postcards as early as 1913, continuing well into the 1950s.\nIn the early 1950s, the newly elected Conservative government were concerned at the apparent deterioration of morals in the UK and decided on a crackdown on these postcards. The main target of their campaign was the postcard artist Donald McGill. In the more liberal 1960s, the saucy postcard was revived and later came to be considered, by some, as an art form.\nOriginal postcards are now highly sought after, and rare examples can command high prices at auction. The best-known saucy seaside postcards were produced by the publishing company Bamforths of Holmfirth, West Yorkshire.\nDespite the decline in popularity of postcards that are overtly \"saucy\", postcards continue to be a significant economic and cultural aspect of British seaside tourism. Sold by newsagents and street vendors, as well as by specialist souvenir shops, modern seaside postcards often feature multiple depictions of the resort in unusually favourable weather conditions. John Hinde used saturated colour and meticulously planned his photographs, which made his postcards of the later twentieth century become collected and admired as kitsch. Such cards are also respected as important documents of social history, and have been influential on the work of Martin Parr.\nUnited States.\nThe United States Postal Service defines a postcard as: rectangular, at least high \u00d7 long \u00d7 thick and no more than high \u00d7 long \u00d7 thick. However, some postcards have deviated from this (for example, shaped postcards).\nControversies.\nLegalities and censorship.\nThe initial appearance of picture postcards (and the enthusiasm with which the new medium was embraced) raised some legal issues. Picture postcards allowed and encouraged many individuals to send images across national borders, and the legal availability of a postcard image in one country did not guarantee that the card would be considered \"proper\" in the destination country, or in the intermediate countries that the card would have to pass through. Some countries might refuse to handle postcards containing sexual references (in seaside postcards) or images of full or partial nudity (for instance, in images of classical statuary or paintings). For example, the United States Postal Service would only allow the delivery of postcards showing a back view of naked men from Britain if their posteriors were covered with a black bar. Early postcards often showcased photography of nude women. Illegal to produce in the United States, these were commonly known as French postcards, due to the large number of them produced in France. Other countries objected to the inappropriate use of religious imagery. The Ottoman Empire banned the sale or importation of some materials relating to the Islamic prophet Muhammad in 1900. Affected postcards that were successfully sent through the Ottoman Empire before this date (and are postmarked accordingly) have a high rarity value and are considered valuable by collectors.\nLynchings.\nIn 1873, the Comstock Act was passed in the United States, which banned the publication of \"obscene matter as well as its circulation in the mails\". In 1908, \u00a73893 was added to the Comstock Act, stating that the ban included material \"tending to incite arson, murder, or assassination\". Although this act did not explicitly ban lynching photographs or postcards, it banned the explicit racist texts and poems inscribed on certain prints. According to some, these texts were deemed \"more incriminating\" and caused their removal from the mail instead of the photograph itself because the text made \"too explicit what was always implicit in lynchings\". Some towns imposed \"self-censorship\" on lynching photographs, but section 3893 was the first step towards a national censorship. Despite the amendment, the distribution of lynching photographs and postcards continued. Though they were not sold openly, the censorship was bypassed when people sent the material in envelopes or mail wrappers.\nWorld War I.\nCensorship played an important role in the First World War. Each country involved utilized some form of censorship. This was a way to sustain an atmosphere of ignorance and give propaganda a chance to succeed. In response to the war, the United States Congress passed the Espionage Act of 1917 and Sedition Act of 1918. These gave broad powers to the government to censor the press through the use of fines, and later any criticism of the government, army, or sale of war bonds. The Espionage Act laid the groundwork for the establishment of a Central Censorship Board which oversaw censorship of communications including cable and mail.\nPostal control was eventually introduced in all of the armies, to find the disclosure of military secrets and test the morale of soldiers. In Allied countries, civilians were also subjected to censorship. French censorship was modest and more targeted compared to the sweeping efforts made by the British and Americans. In Great Britain, all mail was sent to censorship offices in London or Liverpool. The United States sent mail to several centralized post offices as directed by the Central Censorship Board. American censors would only open mail related to Spain, Latin America or Asia\u2014as their British allies were handling other countries. In one week alone, the San Antonio post office processed more than 75,000 letters, of which they controlled 77 percent (and held 20 percent for the following week).\nSoldiers on the front developed strategies to circumvent censors. Some would go on \"home leave\" and take messages with them to post from a remote location. Those writing postcards in the field knew they were being censored, and deliberately held back controversial content and personal matters. Those writing home had a few options including free, government-issued field postcards, cheap, picture postcards, and embroidered cards meant as keepsakes. Unfortunately, censors often disapproved of picture postcards. In one case, French censors reviewed 23,000 letters and destroyed only 156 (although 149 of those were illustrated postcards). Censors in all warring countries also filtered out propaganda that disparaged the enemy or approved of atrocities. For example, German censors prevented postcards with hostile slogans such as \"\" (\"Every hit a Frenchman\") among others.\nHistorical value.\nPostcards document the natural landscape as well as the built environment\u2014buildings, gardens, parks, cemeteries, and tourist sites. They provide snapshots of societies at a time when few newspapers carried images. Postcards provided a way for the general public to keep in touch with their friends and family, and required little writing. Anytime there was a major event, a postcard photographer was there to document it (including celebrations, disasters, political movements, and even wars). Commemorating popular humor, entertainment, fashion, and many other aspects of daily life, they also shed light on transportation, sports, work, religion, and advertising. Postcards, such as those researched and printed by the Helene Victoria Press set up in 1973 by Nancy Poore and Jocelyn Cohen, have also been used to rescue unsung heroines, such as Irene Herlocker-Meyer from historical oblivion. Cards have also been sent to convey news of death and birth, store purchases, and employment.\nAs a primary source, postcards are incredibly important to the types of historical research conducted by historians, historic preservationists, and genealogists alike. They give insight into both the physical world, and the social world of the time. During their heyday postcards revolutionized communication, similar to social media of today. For those studying communication, they highlight the adoption of media, its adaptation, and its ultimate discarding. Postcards have been used to study topics as diverse as theatre, racial attitudes, women's history and war.\nDigital collections.\nLibraries, archives, and museums have extensive collections of picture postcards; many of the postcards in these collections are digitized. Efforts are continuously being made by professionals in these fields to digitize these materials to make them more widely accessible to the public. For those interested, there are already several large collections viewable online. Some large digital collections of postcards include:\nCollecting.\nIt is likely that postcard collecting first began as soon as postcards were mailed. One could argue that actual collecting began with the acquisition of souvenir postcards from the world's fairs, which were produced specifically with the collector (souvenir hunter) in mind. Later, during the golden age of postcards, collecting became a mainstream craze. The frenzy of purchasing, mailing, and collecting postcards was often referred to as \"postcarditis\", with up to half purchased by collectors. Clubs such as \"The Jolly Jokers\", \"The Society for the Promulgation of Post Cards\", and the \"Post Card Union\" sprang up to facilitate postcard exchanges, each having thousands of members. Postcard albums were commonly seen in Victorian parlors, and had a place of prominence in many middle and upper class households.\nToday, postcard collecting is still a popular and widespread hobby. The value of a postcard is mainly determined by the image illustrated on it. Other important factors for collectors can be countries, issuers, and authors. Online catalogs can be found on collector websites and clubs. These catalogs provide detailed information about each postcard alongside their picture. In addition, these websites include collection management tools, trading platforms, and forums to assist with discussions between collectors. The oldest continuously run club in the United States is the \"Metropolitan Postcard Club of New York City\", founded in 1946.\nGlossary of terminology.\nMost of the terms on this list were devised by modern collectors to describe cards in their possession. For the most part, these terms were not used contemporaneously by publishers or others in the industry.\n Postcards with artwork that appears in 3D. This can be done with different techniques, such as lenticular printing or hologram.\n Specialist marketing companies in many countries produce and distribute advertising postcards which are available for free. These are normally offered on wire rack displays in plazas, coffee shops and other commercial locations, usually not intended to be mailed.\n A postcard that has some form of cloth, metal or other embellishment attached to it.\n Artistic style of the 1920s, recognizable by its symmetrical designs and straight lines.\n Artistic style of the turn of the century, characterized by flowing lines and flowery symbols, yet often depicting impressionist more than representational art.\n Postcards with artwork that has the artist's signature, and the art is often unique for postcards.\n Postcards with a heavily raised surface, giving a papier-m\u00e2ch\u00e9 appearance.\n A postcard that shows the name of a place in very big letters that do not have pictures inside each letter \"(see also Large Letter)\".\n A number of individual cards, that when placed together in a group, form a larger picture. Also called \"installment\" cards.\n The official size for British postcards between 1894 and 1899, measuring .\n Postcards with a back divided into two sections, one for the message, the other for the address. British cards were first divided in 1902 and American cards in 1907.\n Any card issued before the \"divided back\" was introduced (pre-1907).\n Postcards with a raised surface.\n Postcards featuring impossibly large animals and crops, created using trick photography and other methods.\n Postcards that are folded, so that they have at least 4 pages. Most folded cards need to be mailed inside an envelope, but there are some that can be mailed directly.\n Black-and-white images were tinted by hand using watercolors and stencils.\n Also referred to as 'HTL', postcards often of a night time scene with cut out areas to show the light.\n The link between Court Cards and Standard Size, measuring .\n Postcards with a rotating wheel that reveals a myriad of colours and patterns when turned.\n A postcard that has the name of a place shown as a series of very large letters, inside of each of which is a picture of that locale \"(see also Big Letter)\".\n Postcards with a postage stamp placed on the picture side of the card and tied by the cancellation, usually the first day of issue.\n Novelty cards of the size .\n Any postcard that deviates from the norm. These include cards which do something (such as mechanical postcards) or which have articles attached to them. They could also be printed in an unusual size or shape, or made of strange materials (including leather, wood, metal, silk, or coconut).\n A trade name used by London publisher Raphael Tuck &amp; Sons for postcards reproduced from original painting.\n A set of picture postcards, printed on light-weight paper, which fold out accordion-style from an outer envelope (folder). These typically contain more than 5 cards.\n The style of writing used on postcards; short sentences, jumping from one subject to another.\n Postcards that confirms a successful reception of a radio signal on amateur radio.\n \"Real photo postcards\", as collectors have dubbed them, are often abbreviated as \"RP\" or \"RPPC\". Most of these were produced in small batches from an original negative by an individual or a local store. They are not printed.\n Cards that were given away to school children for good work.\n Postcards that are made of a material other than cardboard or contains something made not of cardboard.\n Introduced in Britain in November 1899, measuring .\n Postcards showing street scenes and general views. Judges Postcards produced many British topographical views.\n Postcards with a plain back where all of this space was used for the address. This is usually in reference to \"early\" cards, although undivided were still in common use up until 1907. In 1907, the Universal Postal Congress published a series of decrees that permitted postcards to bear messages on the left half of the card's back. This allowed printers to eschew the vignette in favor of extending the picture to the edges, ensuing the divided-back \"Golden Age of Postcards.\"\n Usually found on \"undivided back\" cards, consisting of a design that does not occupy the whole of the picture side. Vignettes may be anything from a small sketch in one corner of the card, to a design cover three quarters of the card. The purpose is to leave some space for the message to be written, as the entire reverse of the card could only be used for the address.\n A card with the opening line of a sentence, which the sender would then complete. Often found on early comic cards.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55322", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55322", "title": "List of Battles", "text": ""}
{"id": "55323", "revid": "13833", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55323", "title": "CD Rom", "text": ""}
