{"id": "52328", "revid": "42861752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52328", "title": "Stock market", "text": "Place where stocks are traded\nA stock market, equity market, or share market is the aggregation of buyers and sellers of stocks (also called shares), which represent ownership claims on businesses; these may include \"securities\" listed on a public stock exchange as well as stock that is only traded privately, such as shares of private companies that are sold to investors through equity crowdfunding platforms. Investments are usually made with an investment strategy in mind.\nSize of the market.\nThe total market capitalization of all publicly traded stocks worldwide rose from US$2.5 trillion in 1980 to US$111 trillion by the end of 2023.\nAs of 2016[ [update]], there are 60 stock exchanges in the world. Of these, there are 16 exchanges with a market capitalization of $1 trillion or more, and they account for 87% of global market capitalization. Apart from the Australian Securities Exchange, these 16 exchanges are all in North America, Europe, or Asia.\nBy country, the largest stock markets as of January 2022 are in the United States of America (about 59.9%), followed by Japan (about 6.2%) and United Kingdom (about 3.9%).\nStock exchange.\nA stock exchange is an exchange (or bourse) where stockbrokers and traders can buy and sell shares (equity stock), bonds, and other securities. Many large companies have their stocks listed on a stock exchange. This makes the stock more liquid and thus more attractive to many investors. The exchange may also act as a guarantor of settlement. These and other stocks may also be traded \"over the counter\" (OTC), that is, through a dealer. Some large companies will have their stock listed on more than one exchange in different countries, so as to attract international investors.\nStock exchanges may also cover other types of securities, such as fixed-interest securities (bonds) or (less frequently) derivatives, which are more likely to be traded OTC.\nTrade in stock markets means the transfer (in exchange for money) of a stock or security from a seller to a buyer. This requires these two parties to agree on a price. Equities (stocks or shares) confer an ownership interest in a particular company.\nParticipants in the stock market range from small individual stock investors to larger investors, who can be based anywhere in the world, and may include banks, insurance companies, pension funds and hedge funds. Their buy or sell orders may be executed on their behalf by a stock exchange trader.\nSome exchanges are physical locations where transactions are carried out on a trading floor, by a method known as open outcry. This method is used in some stock exchanges and commodities exchanges, and involves traders shouting bid and offer prices. The other type of stock exchange has a network of computers where trades are made electronically. An example of such an exchange is the NASDAQ.\nA potential buyer \"bids\" a specific price for a stock, and a potential seller \"asks\" a specific price for the same stock. Buying or selling \"at the Market\" means you will accept \"any\" ask price or bid price for the stock. When the bid and ask prices match, a sale takes place, on a first-come, first-served basis if there are multiple bidders at a given price.\nThe purpose of a stock exchange is to facilitate the exchange of securities between buyers and sellers, thus providing a marketplace. The exchanges provide real-time trading information on the listed securities, facilitating price discovery.\nThe New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) is a physical exchange, with a hybrid market for placing orders electronically from any location as well as on the trading floor. Orders executed on the trading floor enter by way of exchange members and flow down to a floor broker, who submits the order electronically to the floor trading post for the Designated market maker (\"DMM\") for that stock to trade the order. The DMM's job is to maintain a two-sided market, making orders to buy and sell the security when there are no other buyers or sellers. If a bid\u2013ask spread exists, no trade immediately takes place \u2013 in this case, the DMM may use their own resources (money or stock) to close the difference. Once a trade has been made, the details are reported on the \"tape\" and sent back to the brokerage firm, which then notifies the investor who placed the order. Computers play an important role, especially for program trading.\nThe NASDAQ is an electronic exchange, where all of the trading is done over a computer network. The process is similar to the New York Stock Exchange. One or more NASDAQ market makers will always provide a bid and ask the price at which they will always purchase or sell 'their' stock.\nThe Paris Bourse, now part of Euronext, is an order-driven, electronic stock exchange. It was automated in the late 1980s. Prior to the 1980s, it consisted of an open outcry exchange. Stockbrokers met on the trading floor of the Palais Brongniart. In 1986, the CATS trading system was introduced, and the order matching system was fully automated.\nPeople trading stock will prefer to trade on the most popular exchange since this gives the largest number of potential counter parties (buyers for a seller, sellers for a buyer) and probably the best price. However, there have always been alternatives such as brokers trying to bring parties together to trade outside the exchange. Some third markets that were popular are Instinet, and later Island and Archipelago (the latter two have since been acquired by Nasdaq and NYSE, respectively). One advantage is that this avoids the commissions of the exchange. However, it also has problems such as adverse selection. Financial regulators have probed dark pools.\nMarket participant.\nMarket participants include individual retail investors, institutional investors (e.g., pension funds, insurance companies, mutual funds, index funds, exchange-traded funds, hedge funds, investor groups, banks and various other financial institutions), and also publicly traded corporations trading in their own shares. Robo-advisors, which automate investment for individuals, are also major participants.\nStock market participation post-2020 pandemic.\nIn 2021, the value of world stock markets experienced an increase of 26.5%, amounting to US$22.3 trillion. Developing countries contributed US$9.9 trillion and developed countries US$12.4 trillion. Asia and Oceania accounted for 45%, Europe had 37%, and America had 16%, while Africa had 2% of the global market.\nStock market participation factors.\nFactors such as high trading prices, market ratings, information about stock exchange dynamics, and financial institutions can influence individual and corporate participation in stock markets. Additionally, the appeal of stock ownership, driven by the potential for higher returns compared to other financial instruments, plays a crucial role in attracting individuals to invest in the stock market.\nRegional and country-specific factors can also impact stock market participation rates. For example, in the United States, stock market participation rates vary widely across states, with regional factors potentially influencing these disparities. It is noted that individual participation costs alone cannot explain such large differences in participation rates from state to state, indicating the presence of other regional factors at play.\nBehavioral factors are recognized as significant influences on stock market participation, as evidenced by the low participation rates observed in the Ghanaian stock market.\nFactors such as factor endowments, geography, political stability, liberal trade policies, foreign direct investment inflows, and domestic industrial capacity are also identified as important in determining participation.\nDemographics of market participation.\nIndirect versus direct investment.\nIndirect investment involves owning shares indirectly, such as via a mutual fund or an exchange traded fund. Direct investment involves direct ownership of shares.\nDirect ownership of stock by individuals rose slightly from 17.8% in 1992 to 17.9% in 2007, with the median value of these holdings rising from $14,778 to $17,000. Indirect participation in the form of retirement accounts rose from 39.3% in 1992 to 52.6% in 2007, with the median value of these accounts more than doubling from $22,000 to $45,000 in that time. Rydqvist, Spizman, and Strebulaev attribute the differential growth in direct and indirect holdings to differences in the way each are taxed in the United States. Investments in pension funds and 401ks, the two most common vehicles of indirect participation, are taxed only when funds are withdrawn from the accounts. Conversely, the money used to directly purchase stock is subject to taxation as are any dividends or capital gains they generate for the holder. In this way, the current tax code incentivizes individuals to invest indirectly.\nParticipation by income and wealth strata.\nRates of participation and the value of holdings differ significantly across strata of income. In the bottom quintile of income, 5.5% of households directly own stock and 10.7% hold stocks indirectly in the form of retirement accounts. The top decile of income has a direct participation rate of 47.5% and an indirect participation rate in the form of retirement accounts of 89.6%. The median value of directly owned stock in the bottom quintile of income is $4,000 and is $78,600 in the top decile of income as of 2007. The median value of indirectly held stock in the form of retirement accounts for the same two groups in the same year is $6,300 and $214,800 respectively. Since the Great Recession of 2008 households in the bottom half of the income distribution have lessened their participation rate both directly and indirectly from 53.2% in 2007 to 48.8% in 2013, while over the same period households in the top decile of the income distribution slightly increased participation 91.7% to 92.1%. The mean value of direct and indirect holdings at the bottom half of the income distribution moved slightly downward from $53,800 in 2007 to $53,600 in 2013. In the top decile, mean value of all holdings fell from $982,000 to $969,300 in the same time. The mean value of all stock holdings across the entire income distribution is valued at $269,900 as of 2013.\nParticipation by race and gender.\nThe racial composition of stock market ownership shows households headed by whites are nearly four and six times as likely to directly own stocks than households headed by blacks and Hispanics respectively. As of 2011 the national rate of direct participation was 19.6%, for white households the participation rate was 24.5%, for black households it was 6.4% and for Hispanic households it was 4.3%. Indirect participation in the form of 401k ownership shows a similar pattern with a national participation rate of 42.1%, a rate of 46.4% for white households, 31.7% for black households, and 25.8% for Hispanic households. Households headed by married couples participated at rates above the national averages with 25.6% participating directly and 53.4% participating indirectly through a retirement account. 14.7% of households headed by men participated in the market directly and 33.4% owned stock through a retirement account. 12.6% of female-headed households directly owned stock and 28.7% owned stock indirectly.\nDeterminants and possible explanations of stock market participation.\nA 2003 paper by Annette Vissing-J\u00f8rgensen attempts to explain disproportionate rates of participation along wealth and income groups as a function of fixed costs associated with investing. Her research concludes that a fixed cost of $200 per year is sufficient to explain why nearly half of all U.S. households do not participate in the market. Participation rates have been shown to strongly correlate with education levels, promoting the hypothesis that information and transaction costs of market participation are better absorbed by more educated households. Behavioral economists Harrison Hong, Jeffrey Kubik and Jeremy Stein suggest that sociability and participation rates of communities have a statistically significant impact on an individual's decision to participate in the market. Their research indicates that social individuals living in states with higher than average participation rates are 5% more likely to participate than individuals that do not share those characteristics. This phenomenon also explained in cost terms. Knowledge of market functioning diffuses through communities and consequently lowers transaction costs associated with investing.\nHistory.\nIn 12th-century France, the courtiers \"de change\" were concerned with managing and regulating the debts of agricultural communities on behalf of the banks. Because these men also traded with debts, they could be called the first brokers. The Italian historian Lodovico Guicciardini described how, in late 13th-century Bruges, commodity traders gathered outdoors at a market square containing an inn owned by a family called Van der Beurze, and in 1409 they became the \"Brugse Beurse\", institutionalizing what had been, until then, an informal meeting. The idea quickly spread around Flanders and neighboring countries and \"Beurzen\" soon opened in Ghent and Rotterdam. International traders, and specially the Italian bankers, present in Bruges since the early 13th-century, took back the word in their countries to define the place of a stock market exchange: first the Italians (borsa), but soon also the French (bourse), the Germans (b\u00f6rse), Russians (bir\u017ea), Czechs (burza), Swedes (b\u00f6rs), Danes and Norwegians (b\u00f8rs). In most languages, the word coincides with that for money bag, dating back to the Latin \"bursa\", from which also derives the name of the Van der Beurse family.\nIn the middle of the 13th century, Venetian bankers began to trade in government securities. In 1351 the Venetian government outlawed spreading rumors intended to lower the price of government funds. Bankers in Pisa, Verona, Genoa and Florence also began trading in government securities during the 14th century. This was only possible because these were independent city-states not ruled by a duke but a council of influential citizens. Italian companies were also the first to issue shares. Companies in England and the Low Countries followed in the 16th century. Around this time, a joint stock company\u2014one whose stock is owned jointly by the shareholders\u2014emerged and became important for the colonization of what Europeans called the \"New World\".\nThere are now stock markets in virtually every developed and most developing countries, with the world's largest markets being in the United States, United Kingdom, Japan, India, China, Canada, Germany, France, South Korea and the Netherlands.\nImportance.\nFunction and purpose.\nThe stock market is one of the most important ways for companies to raise money, along with debt markets which are generally more imposing but do not trade publicly. This allows businesses to be publicly traded, and raise additional financial capital for expansion by selling shares of ownership of the company in a public market. The liquidity that an exchange affords the investors enables their holders to quickly and easily sell securities. This is an attractive feature of investing in stocks, compared to other less liquid investments such as property and other immoveable assets.\nHistory has shown that the price of stocks and other assets is an important part of the dynamics of economic activity, and can influence or be an indicator of social mood. An country where the stock market is on the rise is considered to be an up-and-coming economy. The stock market is considered one of the economic indicators of a country's economic strength and development.\nRising share prices, for instance, tend to be associated with increased business investment and vice versa. Share prices also affect the wealth of households and their consumption. Therefore, central banks tend to keep an eye on the control and behavior of the stock market and, in general, on the smooth operation of financial system functions. Economic stability is one of the central bank mandates.\nExchanges also act as the clearinghouse for each transaction, meaning that they collect and deliver the shares, and guarantee payment to the seller of a security. This eliminates the risk to an individual buyer or seller that the counterparty could default on the transaction.\nThe smooth functioning of all these activities facilitates economic growth in that lower costs and enterprise risks promote the production of goods and services as well as possibly employment. In this way the financial system is assumed to contribute to increased prosperity, although some controversy exists as to whether the optimal financial system is bank-based or market-based.\nEvents such as the 2008 financial crisis have prompted a heightened degree of scrutiny of the impact of the structure of stock markets (called market microstructure), in particular to the stability of the financial system and the transmission of systemic risk.\nRelation to the modern financial system.\nA transformation is the move to electronic trading to replace human trading of listed securities.\nBehavior of stock prices.\nChanges in stock prices are mostly caused by external factors such as socioeconomic conditions, inflation, exchange rates. Intellectual capital does not affect a company stock's current earnings. Intellectual capital contributes to a stock's return growth. \nThe efficient-market hypothesis (EMH) is a hypothesis in financial economics that states that asset prices reflect all available information at the current time.\nThe 'hard' efficient-market hypothesis does not explain the cause of events such as the crash in 1987, when the Dow Jones Industrial Average plummeted 22.6 percent\u2014the largest-ever one-day fall in the United States.\nThis event demonstrated that share prices can fall dramatically even though no generally agreed upon definite cause has been found: a thorough search failed to detect \"any\" 'reasonable' development that might have accounted for the crash. (Such events are predicted to occur strictly by randomness, although very rarely.) It seems also to be true more generally that many price movements (beyond those which are predicted to occur 'randomly') are \"not\" occasioned by new information; a study of the fifty largest one-day share price movements in the United States in the post-war period seems to confirm this.\nA 'soft' EMH has emerged which does not require that prices remain at or near equilibrium, but only that market participants cannot \"systematically\" profit from any momentary 'market anomaly'. Moreover, while EMH predicts that all price movement (in the absence of change in fundamental information) is random (i.e. non-trending), many studies have shown a marked tendency for the stock market to trend over time periods of weeks or longer. Various explanations for such large and apparently non-random price movements have been promulgated. For instance, some research has shown that changes in estimated risk, and the use of certain strategies, such as stop-loss limits and value at risk limits, \"theoretically could\" cause financial markets to overreact. But the best explanation seems to be that the distribution of stock market prices is non-Gaussian (in which case EMH, in any of its current forms, would not be strictly applicable).\nOther research has shown that psychological factors may result in \"exaggerated\" (statistically anomalous) stock price movements (contrary to EMH which assumes such behaviors 'cancel out'). Psychological research has demonstrated that people are predisposed to 'seeing' patterns, and often will perceive a pattern in what is, in fact, just \"noise\", e.g. seeing familiar shapes in clouds or ink blots. In the present context, this means that a succession of good news items about a company may lead investors to overreact positively, driving the price up. A period of good returns also boosts the investors' self-confidence, reducing their (psychological) risk threshold.\nAnother phenomenon\u2014also from psychology\u2014that works against an objective assessment is \"group thinking\". As social animals, it is not easy to stick to an opinion that differs markedly from that of a majority of the group. An example with which one may be familiar is the reluctance to enter a restaurant that is empty; people generally prefer to have their opinion validated by those of others in the group.\nIn one paper the authors draw an analogy with gambling. In normal times the market behaves like a game of roulette; the probabilities are known and largely independent of the investment decisions of the different players. In times of market stress, however, the game becomes more like poker (herding behavior takes over). The players now must give heavy weight to the psychology of other investors and how they are likely to react psychologically.\nStock markets play an essential role in growing industries that ultimately affect the economy through transferring available funds from units that have excess funds (savings) to those who are suffering from funds deficit (borrowings) (Padhi and Naik, 2012). In other words, capital markets facilitate funds movement between the above-mentioned units. This process leads to the enhancement of available financial resources which in turn affects the economic growth positively.\nEconomic and financial theories argue that stock prices are affected by macroeconomic trends. Macroeconomic trends include such as changes in GDP, unemployment rates, national income, price indices, output, consumption, unemployment, inflation, saving, investment, energy, international trade, immigration, productivity, aging populations, innovations, international finance. increasing corporate profit, increasing profit margins, higher concentration of business, lower company income, less vigorous activity, less progress, lower investment rates, lower productivity growth, less employee share of corporate revenues, decreasing worker to beneficiary ratio (year 1960 5:1, year 2009 3:1, year 2030 2.2:1), and the increasing female to male ratio of college graduates.\nIrrational behavior.\nSometimes, the market seems to react irrationally to economic or financial news, even if that news is likely to have no real effect on the fundamental value of securities itself. However, this market behaviour may be more apparent than real, since often such news was anticipated, and a counter reaction may occur if the news is better (or worse) than expected. Therefore, the stock market may be swayed in either direction by press releases, rumors, euphoria and mass panic.\nOver the short term, stocks and other securities can be battered or bought by any number of fast market-changing events, making the stock market behavior difficult to predict. Emotions can drive prices up and down, people are generally not as rational as they think, and the reasons for buying and selling are generally accepted.\nBehaviorists argue that investors often behave \"irrationally\" when making investment decisions thereby incorrectly pricing securities, which causes market inefficiencies, which, in turn, are opportunities to make money. However, the whole notion of EMH is that these non-rational reactions to information cancel out, leaving the prices of stocks rationally determined.\nCrashes.\nA stock market crash is often defined as a sharp dip in share prices of stocks listed on the stock exchanges. In parallel with various economic factors, a reason for stock market crashes is also due to panic and investing public's loss of confidence. Often, stock market crashes end speculative economic bubbles.\nThere have been famous stock market crashes that have ended in the loss of billions of dollars and wealth destruction on a massive scale. An increasing number of people are involved in the stock market, especially since the social security and retirement plans are being increasingly privatized and linked to stocks and bonds and other elements of the market. There have been a number of famous stock market crashes like the Wall Street Crash of 1929, the stock market crash of 1973\u20134, Black Monday of 1987, the dot-com bubble of 2000, and the 2008 financial crisis.\n1929.\nOne of the most famous stock market crashes started October 24, 1929, on Black Thursday. The Dow Jones Industrial Average lost 50% during this stock market crash. It was the beginning of the Great Depression.\n1987.\nAnother famous crash took place on October 19, 1987 \u2013 Black Monday. The crash began in Hong Kong and quickly spread around the world.\nBy the end of October, stock markets in Hong Kong had fallen 45.5%, Australia 41.8%, Spain 31%, the United Kingdom 26.4%, the United States 22.68%, and Canada 22.5%. Black Monday itself was the largest one-day percentage decline in stock market history \u2013 the Dow Jones fell by 22.6% in a day. The names \"Black Monday\" and \"Black Tuesday\" are also used for October 28\u201329, 1929, which followed Terrible Thursday\u2014the starting day of the stock market crash in 1929.\nThe crash in 1987 raised some puzzles \u2013 main news and events did not predict the catastrophe and visible reasons for the collapse were not identified. This event raised questions about many important assumptions of modern economics, namely, the theory of rational human conduct, the theory of market equilibrium and the efficient-market hypothesis. For some time after the crash, trading in stock exchanges worldwide was halted, since the exchange computers did not perform well owing to enormous quantity of trades being received at one time. This halt in trading allowed the Federal Reserve System and central banks of other countries to take measures to control the spreading of a financial crisis. In the United States the SEC introduced several new measures of control into the stock market in an attempt to prevent a re-occurrence of the events of Black Monday.\n2007\u20132009.\nThis marked the beginning of the Great Recession. Starting in 2007 and lasting through 2009, financial markets experienced one of the sharpest declines in decades. It was more widespread than just the stock market as well. The housing market, lending market, and even global trade experienced unimaginable decline. Sub-prime lending led to the housing bubble bursting and was made famous by movies like The Big Short where those holding large mortgages were unwittingly falling prey to lenders. This saw banks and major financial institutions completely fail in many cases and took major government intervention to remedy during the period. From October 2007 to March 2009, the S&amp;P 500 fell 57% and wouldn't recover to its 2007 levels until April 2013.\n2020.\nThe 2020 stock market crash was a major and sudden global stock market crash that began on February 20, 2020, and ended on April 7. This market crash was due to the sudden outbreak of the global pandemic, COVID-19. The crash ended with a new deal that had a positive impact on the market.\nCircuit breakers.\nSince the early 1990s, many of the largest exchanges have adopted electronic 'matching engines' to bring together buyers and sellers, replacing the open outcry system. Electronic trading now accounts for the majority of trading in many developed countries. Computer systems were upgraded in the stock exchanges to handle larger trading volumes in a more accurate and controlled manner. The SEC modified the margin requirements in an attempt to lower the volatility of common stocks, stock options and the futures market. The New York Stock Exchange and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange introduced the concept of a circuit breaker. The circuit breaker halts trading if the Dow declines a prescribed number of points for a prescribed amount of time. In February 2012, the Investment Industry Regulatory Organization of Canada (IIROC) introduced single-stock circuit breakers.\nStock market index.\nThe movements of the prices in global, regional or local markets are captured in price indices called stock market indices, of which there are many, e.g. the S&amp;P, the FTSE, the Euronext indices and the NIFTY &amp; SENSEX of India. Such indices are usually market capitalization weighted, with the weights reflecting the contribution of the stock to the index. The constituents of the index are reviewed frequently to include/exclude stocks in order to reflect the changing business environment.\nDerivative instruments.\nFinancial innovation has brought many new financial instruments whose pay-offs or values depend on the prices of stocks. Some examples are exchange-traded funds (ETFs), stock index and stock options, equity swaps, single-stock futures, and stock index futures. These last two may be traded on futures exchanges (which are distinct from stock exchanges\u2014their history traces back to commodity futures exchanges), or traded over-the-counter. As all of these products are only \"derived\" from stocks, they are sometimes considered to be traded in a (hypothetical) derivatives market, rather than the (hypothetical) stock market.\nLeveraged strategies.\nStock that a trader does not actually own may be traded using short selling; margin buying may be used to purchase stock with borrowed funds; or, \"derivatives\" may be used to control large blocks of stocks for a much smaller amount of money than would be required by outright purchase or sales.\nShort selling.\nIn short selling, the trader borrows stock (usually from his brokerage which holds its clients shares or its own shares on account to lend to short sellers) then sells it on the market, betting that the price will fall. The trader eventually buys back the stock, making money if the price fell in the meantime and losing money if it rose. Exiting a short position by buying back the stock is called \"covering\". This strategy may also be used by unscrupulous traders in illiquid or thinly traded markets to artificially lower the price of a stock. Hence most markets either prevent short selling or place restrictions on when and how a short sale can occur. The practice of naked shorting is illegal in most (but not all) stock markets.\nMargin buying.\nIn margin buying, the trader borrows money (at interest) to buy a stock and hopes for it to rise. Most industrialized countries have regulations that require that if the borrowing is based on collateral from other stocks the trader owns outright, it can be a maximum of a certain percentage of those other stocks' value. In the United States, the margin requirements have been 50% for many years (that is, if you want to make a $1000 investment, you need to put up $500, and there is often a maintenance margin below the $500).\nA margin call is made if the total value of the investor's account cannot support the loss of the trade. (Upon a decline in the value of the margined securities additional funds may be required to maintain the account's equity, and with or without notice the margined security or any others within the account may be sold by the brokerage to protect its loan position. The investor is responsible for any shortfall following such forced sales.)\nRegulation of margin requirements (by the Federal Reserve) was implemented after the Crash of 1929. Before that, speculators typically only needed to put up as little as 10 percent (or even less) of the total investment represented by the stocks purchased. Other rules may include the prohibition of \"free-riding:\" putting in an order to buy stocks without paying initially (there is normally a three-day grace period for delivery of the stock), but then selling them (before the three-days are up) and using part of the proceeds to make the original payment (assuming that the value of the stocks has not declined in the interim).\nTypes of financial markets.\nFinancial markets can be divided into different subtypes:\nStock market and foreign exchange market.\nWhile the stock market is the marketplace for buying and selling company stocks, the foreign exchange market, also known as forex or FX, is the global marketplace for the purchase and sale of national currencies. It serves several functions, including facilitating currency conversions, managing foreign exchange risk through futures and forwards, and providing a platform for speculative investors to earn a profit on FX trading. The market includes various types of products, such as the spot market, futures market, forward market, swap market, and options market. For example, the spot market involves the immediate buying and selling of currencies, while the forward market allows for the buying and selling of currencies at an agreed exchange rate, with the actual exchange taking place at a future delivery date. The foreign exchange market is needed for facilitating global trade, including investments, the exchange of goods and services, and financial transactions, and it is considered one of the largest markets in the global economy.\nElectronic trading market.\nThe electronic trading market refers to the digital marketplace where financial instruments such as stocks, bonds, currencies, commodities, and derivatives are bought and sold through online platforms. This market operates via electronic trading platforms, also known as online trading platforms, which are software applications that enable the trading of financial products over a network, typically through a financial intermediary. Platforms, such as eToro, Plus500, Robinhood, and AvaTrade serve as a digital medium for trading financial instruments and make financial markets more accessible, allowing individual investors to participate in trading without the need for traditional brokers or substantial capital. They also provide features such as real-time market data, stock price analysis, research reports, and news updates, which support decision-making in trading activities.\nThese platforms often incorporate systems, such as the Martingale Trading System, used in forex trading. Additionally, online trading has evolved to include mobile trading apps, enabling transactions to be conducted remotely via smartphones.\nInvestment strategies.\nMany strategies can be classified as either fundamental analysis or technical analysis. Fundamental analysis refers to analyzing companies by their financial statements found in SEC filings, business trends, and general economic conditions. Technical analysis studies price actions in markets through the use of charts and quantitative techniques to attempt to forecast price trends based on historical performance, regardless of the company's financial prospects. One example of a technical strategy is the Trend following method, used by John W. Henry and Ed Seykota, which uses price patterns and is also rooted in risk management and diversification.\nAdditionally, many choose to invest via passive index funds. In this method, one holds a portfolio of the entire stock market or some segment of the stock market (such as the S&amp;P 500 Index or Wilshire 5000). The principal aim of this strategy is to maximize diversification, minimize taxes from realizing gains, and ride the general trend of the stock market to rise.\nResponsible investment emphasizes and requires a long-term horizon on the basis of fundamental analysis only, avoiding hazards in the expected return of the investment. Socially responsible investing is another investment preference.\nAnnual stock market growth.\nThe average annual growth rate of the stock market, as measured by the S&amp;P 500 index, has historically been around 10%. This figure represents the long-term average return and is often cited as a benchmark for assessing the performance of the stock market as a whole.\nThe market's results from one year to the next may vary substantially from the long-term average. For instance, in 2012\u20132021, the S&amp;P 500 index had an average annual return of 14.8%. However, individual annual returns can fluctuate widely, with some years experiencing negative growth and others seeing substantial gains.\nWhile the average stock market return is around 10% per year, there is also the impact of inflation, resulting in investors' losing purchasing power of 2% to 3% every year due to it, which reduces the real rate of return on investments.\nTaxation.\nTaxation is a consideration of all investment strategies; profit from owning stocks, including dividends received, is subject to different tax rates depending on the type of security and the holding period. Most profit from stock investing is taxed via a capital gains tax. In many countries, the corporations pay taxes to the government and the shareholders once again pay taxes when they profit from owning the stock, known as \"double taxation\".\nStock market scams.\nThe Indian stock exchanges, Bombay Stock Exchange and National Stock Exchange of India, have been rocked by several high-profile corruption scandals. At times, the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) has barred various individuals and entities from trading on the exchanges for stock manipulation, especially in illiquid small-cap and penny stocks.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52329", "revid": "51014885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52329", "title": "Allegany County, New York", "text": "County in New York, United States\nAllegany County is a county in the U.S. state of New York. As of the 2020 census, the population was 46,456. Its county seat is Belmont. Its name derives from a Lenape word, applied by European-American settlers of Western New York State to a trail that followed the Allegheny River; they also named the county after this. The county is part of the Western New York region of the state.\nThe county is bisected by the Genesee River, flowing north to its mouth on Lake Ontario. During the mid-nineteenth century, the Genesee Valley Canal was built to link southern markets to the Great Lakes and Mohawk River. The county was also served by railroads, which soon superseded the canals in their capacity for carrying freight. Part of the Oil Springs Reservation, controlled by the Seneca Nation, is located in the county.\nHistory.\nFor centuries, Allegany County was the territory of the Seneca people, at the westernmost nation of the Five Nations of the \"Haudenosaunee\", a confederacy of Iroquoian languages-speaking peoples. European-American permanent settlement did not take place until after the American Revolutionary War and the forced cession by the Seneca of most of their lands in western New York. New York State sold off the lands cheaply to attract new European-American settlers and agricultural development.\nAllegany County was created by the state legislature on April 7, 1806, when Genesee County, New York, was partitioned to set aside some to the new county. The first County Seat was established at Angelica, New York, where it remained for half a century. It was later moved to Belmont, a village located along the Genesee River. On March 11, 1808, the borders were adjusted so that of Steuben County passed to Allegany County, and of Allegany County passed to Genesee County. This established the current border between Genesee and Steuben counties, and reduced the size of Allegany County to .\nOn June 12, 1812, the legislature authorized the attachment of Cattaraugus County, New York, to Allegany County for administration reasons, but for practical reasons this action did not take place at that time. However, on April 13, 1814, the eastern half of Cattaraugus County was so attached and administered from Belmont. This attachment was ended on March 28, 1817. With continued settlement through the mid-nineteenth century, the legislature periodically adjusted county borders as new counties were organized in western New York. On April 1, 1846, Allegany County lost to Wyoming County, reducing the size of Allegany County to , and establishing the current border between Allegany and Wyoming counties. On May 11, 1846, Allegany County lost to Livingston County, reducing the total to , and establishing the western portion of the current border with Livingston County. On March 23, 1857, Allegany County lost another to Livingston County, passing the Ossian, New York, area to Livingston County, and establishing the current border between them.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.5%) is water.\nAllegany County is in the southwestern part of New York State, along the Pennsylvania border. Allegany County does not lie along the Allegheny River, as its name would suggest. The highest point in the county is Alma Hill, with an elevation of above sea level. This is the highest point in the state west of the Catskill Mountains. The highest point of Interstate 86 is located in the town of West Almond with an elevation of 2,110 feet. This is also believed to be the highest point of any interstate in New York. The county is unique from a watershed perspective as it is providing water to three major watersheds of North America: The eastern part near Alfred has Canacadea Creek that goes into the Canisteo River, Susquehanna River and eventually to Chesapeake Bay.\nThe Genesee River bisects the county from south to north, flowing north out of the County through Letchworth State Park with its three waterfalls on to Rochester over three more waterfalls to its mouth on Lake Ontario and then on to the St. Lawrence River and Atlantic Ocean. The southwestern part of the County flows into the Allegheny River that flows into the Ohio and then to the Mississippi River basin to the Gulf of Mexico.\nIn June 1972 the remnants of Hurricane Agnes stalled over the area, dropping more than of rain. Flooding took place in the valley communities of Wellsville, Belmont, Belfast, and others in the county.\nLong a necessary transportation waterway for the Seneca and other Native Americans, and successive European-American settlers, since the late 20th century, the Genesee River has been extremely popular with canoeists. The river is also favored by fishermen as it abounds in smallmouth bass, trout and panfish.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2020, there were 46,456 people. Based on earlier (2000) censuses, there were 18,009 households, and 12,192 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 24,505 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 97.03% White, 0.72% Black or African American, 0.28% Native American, 0.72% Asian, 0.37% from other races, and 0.88% from two or more races. 0.91% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 22.3% identified as being of German, 16.6% English, 13.8% Irish, 11.9% American and 7.0% Italian ancestry according to Census 2000. 96.5% spoke English and 1.3% Spanish as their first language.\nThere were 18,009 households, out of which 31.50% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 54.20% were married couples living together, 9.00% had a female householder with no husband present, and 32.30% were non-families. 26.00% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.30% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.53 and the average family size was 3.04.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 24.40% under the age of 18, 15.50% from 18 to 24, 23.90% from 25 to 44, 22.20% from 45 to 64, and 14.00% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 35 years. For every 100 females there were 99.80 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 98.10 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $32,106, and the median income for a family was $38,580. Males had a median income of $30,401 versus $21,466 for females. The per capita income for the county was $14,975. About 10.50% of families and 15.50% of the population were below the poverty line, including 19.20% of those under age 18 and 7.50% of those age 65 or over.\nGovernment and politics.\nAllegany County is part of New York's 23rd congressional district and is represented by Republican Nick Langworthy. In the New York State Senate, it is part of the 57th district and is represented by Republican George M. Borrello, and the 58th district is represented by Thomas F. O'Mara. In the New York State Assembly, the county is in the 148th Assembly District represented by Republican Joseph Sempolinski.\nAllegany County is divided into five districts, delineated by town borders. The Allegany County Board of Legislators consists of 15 members, three from each of the five legislative districts:\nDistrict 1: Angelica, Belfast, Caneadea, Centerville, Granger, Hume, Rushford, and the village of Angelica.\nDistrict 2: Amity, Clarksville, Cuba, Friendship, New Hudson, Ward, and the villages of Belmont and Cuba.\nDistrict 3: Alma, Bolivar, Genesee, Independence, Scio, Willing, Wirt, and the villages of Bolivar and Richburg.\nDistrict 4: Andover, Wellsville, and the villages of Andover and Wellsville.\nDistrict 5: Alfred, Allen, Almond, Birdsall, Burns, Grove, West Almond, and the villages of Alfred, Almond, and Canaseraga.\nThe current chairperson of the legislature is W. Brooke Harris. The County Administrator is Carissa M. Knapp.\nAllegany County is considered to be a strongly Republican county. In 2004, it voted for George W. Bush over John Kerry 63% to 34%, and in 2008 it voted for John McCain over Barack Obama 59% to 39%. It has been reported that in the last 170 years, the only Democratic candidates to win were Franklin Pierce in 1852 and Lyndon B. Johnson in 1964. \nEven in 1964, when Republican nominee Barry Goldwater lost the county by 14 points, he still managed to carry the towns of Centerville, Caneadea, Granger, Hume, and Rushford. In 2006, neither Democrat Eliot Spitzer nor Hillary Clinton carried it in their otherwise landslide elections for governor and US senator, respectively. Eliot Spitzer lost 48.98% to John Faso's 49.03%. Hillary Clinton lost the county by 3 points. In 2010, Andrew Cuomo lost by a wide margin while Senator Chuck Schumer carried it by a narrow margin of 49.46% to Jay Townsend's 48.86% a margin of 78 votes. It was one of only two counties that Senator Kirsten Gillibrand lost to Wendy Long in 2012. In the 2016, 2020, and 2024 presidential elections, Republican Donald Trump received over two-thirds, the first for a Republican since 1988.\nEducation.\nPrimary Education.\nThe county has twelve school districts with their buildings in the county and parts of an additional seven districts located outside the county. Districts include: Alfred-Almond Central and Canaseraga Central that are part of the http:// with a facility in Hornell. Districts in association with the https:// include: Andover Central, Whitesville Central, Wellsville Central, Bolivar-Richburg Central, Scio Central, Genesee Valley Central, Belfast Central, Fillmore Central, Friendship Central, and Cuba-Rushford Central. Districts with their buildings outside the County include Arkport, Hinsdale, Portville, Yorkshire-Pioneer, Letchworth, Canisteo-Greenwood, and Keshequa. There are two private schools: Immaculate Conception in Wellsville and Houghton Academy in Houghton. There are also two Montessori Schools which are located in Wellsville and Alfred\nCommunities.\nAllegany County comprises 29 towns and 10 villages.\n\u2020 - County seat\n\u2021 - Not wholly in this county\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHamlets.\nIn New York, the term hamlet, while not defined in law, is used to describe an unincorporated community and geographic location within a town. The town in which each hamlet is located is in parentheses.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIndian reservations.\nThe Oil Springs Reservation is an Indian reservation of the Seneca Nation shared with Cattaraugus County having a total area of only . This is the site of the famed spring described by the Franciscan Missionary Joseph DeLa Roch D'Allion in 1627, the first recorded mention of oil on the North American Continent. In 1927, the New York State Oil Producers Association sponsored the dedication of a monument at the site describing the history of the oil industry in North America. There is a small park with parking and a footbridge to the monument. The remainder of the reservation is mostly utilized for cottages on Cuba Lake, Seneca-run gas stations, and woodlands.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52330", "revid": "4082870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52330", "title": "Robber baron (feudalism)", "text": "Feudal landowner who engaged in banditry\nA robber baron or robber knight () was an unscrupulous feudal landowner who, protected by his fief's legal status, imposed high taxes and tolls out of keeping with the norm without authorization by some higher authority. Some resorted to actual banditry. The German term for robber barons, \" (robber knights), was coined by Friedrich Bottschalk in 1810.\nSome robber barons violated the custom under which tolls were collected on the Rhine either by charging higher tolls than the standard or by operating without authority from the Holy Roman Emperor altogether. During the period in the history of the Holy Roman Empire known as the Great Interregnum (1250\u20131273), the number of such tolling stations exploded in the absence of Imperial authority.\nMedieval robber barons most often imposed high or unauthorized tolls on rivers or roads passing through their territory. Some robbed merchants, land travelers, and river traffic\u2014seizing money, cargoes, even entire ships\u2014or engaged in kidnapping for ransom.\nGermany.\nEarly development.\nTolls were collected from ships sailing on the River Rhine in Europe for one thousand years from around 800 AD to 1800 AD. During this time, various feudal lords (among them archbishops who held fiefs from the Holy Roman Emperor) collected tolls from passing cargo ships to bolster their finances. Only the Holy Roman Emperor could authorise the collection of such tolls. Allowing the nobility and Church to collect tolls from the busy traffic on the Rhine seems to have been an attractive alternative to other means of taxation and funding of government functions.\nIron chains were often stretched across the river to prevent passage without paying the toll, and strategic towers were built to facilitate this.\nThe Holy Roman Emperor and the various noblemen and archbishops who were authorised to levy tolls seem to have worked out an informal way of regulating this process. Among the decisions involved in managing the collection of tolls on the Rhine were how many toll stations to have, where they should be built, how high the tolls should be, and the advantages/disadvantages. While this decision process was made no less complex by being informal, common factors included the local power structure (archbishops and nobles being the most likely recipients of a charter to collect tolls), space between toll stations (authorized toll stations seem to have been at least five kilometres apart), and ability to be defended from attack (some castles through which tolls were collected were tactically useful until the French invaded in 1689 and levelled them). Tolls were standardized either in terms of an amount of silver coin allowed to be charged or an \"in-kind\" toll of cargo from the ship.\nThe men who came to be known as robber barons or robber knights () violated the structure under which tolls were collected on the Rhine either by charging higher tolls than the standard or by operating without authority from the Holy Roman Emperor altogether.\nWriters of the period referred to these practices as \"unjust tolls,\" and not only did the robber barons thereby violate the prerogatives of the Holy Roman Emperor, they also went outside of the society's behavioural norms, since merchants were bound both by law and religious custom to charge a \"just price\" for their wares.\nGreat Interregnum.\nDuring the period in the history of the Holy Roman Empire known as the Great Interregnum (1250\u20131273), when there was no Emperor, the number of tolling stations exploded in the absence of imperial authority. In addition, robber barons began to earn their \"opprobrium\" by robbing ships of their cargoes, stealing entire ships, and even kidnapping.\nIn response to this organized, military lawlessness, the \"Rheinischer Bund,\" or Rhine League was formed by 100 Cities, and from several princes and prince-prelates (lords of the Church), all of whom held large stakes in the restoration of law and order to the Rhine.\nOfficially launched in 1254, the Rhine League wasted no time putting robber barons out of business by the simple expedient of taking and destroying their castles. In the next three years, four robber barons were targeted and between ten and twelve robber castles destroyed or inactivated.\nThe Rhine League was not only successful in suppressing illicit collection of tolls and river robbery, they also took action against other state aggression. For example, they are documented as having intervened to rescue a victim of abduction by the Baron of Rietberg.\nThe procedure pioneered by the Rhine League for dealing with robber barons\u00a0\u2013 to besiege, capture and destroy their castles\u00a0\u2013 survived long after the League self-destructed from political strife over the election of a new Emperor and military reversals against unusually strong robber barons.\nWhen the Interregnum ended, the new king Rudolf of Habsburg applied the lessons learned by the Rhine League to the destruction of the highway robbers at Sooneck, torching their castles and hanging them. While robber barony never entirely ceased, especially during the Hundred Years' War, the excesses of their heyday during the Interregnum never recurred.\nEngland.\nThe reign of King Stephen of England (1135\u20131154) was a long period of civil unrest commonly known as \"The Anarchy\". In the absence of strong central kingship, the nobility of England were a law unto themselves, as characterised in this excerpt from the Second Continuation of the \"Peterborough Chronicle\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When the traitors understood that he [i.e. Stephen] was a gentle man, and soft and good, and did not execute justice, they committed all manner of atrocity. Every chieftain made castles and held them against the king; and they filled the land full of castles. They viciously oppressed the poor men of the land with castle-building work; when the castles were made, then they filled the land with devils and evil men. Then they seized those who had any goods, both by night and day, working men and women, and threw them into prison and tortured them for gold and silver with uncountable tortures, for never was there a martyr so tortured as these men were. One they hung by his feet and filled his lungs with smoke. One was hung up by the thumbs and another by the head and had coats of mail hung on his feet. One they put a knotted cord about his head and twisted it so that it went into the brains ... I neither can nor may recount all the atrocities nor all the tortures that [i.e. the barons] did on the wretched men of this land.\nLiterature references.\nMichael Heller refers to the original robber barons to illustrate his tragedy of the anticommons in his 2008 book. The tragedy of the anticommons is a type of coordination breakdown, in which a single resource has numerous rightsholders who prevent others from using it, frustrating what would be a socially desirable outcome.\nIn Ken Follett's historical novel \"The Pillars of the Earth\", taking place in England during The Anarchy, the main villain is a vicious and ruthless earl who behaves as described in the quote above.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52331", "revid": "4848309", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52331", "title": "Broome County, New York", "text": "County in New York, United States\nBroome County is a county in the U.S. state of New York. As of the 2020 United States census, the county had a population of 198,683. Its county seat is Binghamton. The county was named for John Broome, the state's lieutenant governor when Broome County was created. The county is part of the Southern Tier region of the state.\nThe county is part of the Binghamton, New York Metropolitan Statistical Area. It is home to Binghamton University, one of four university centers in the State University of New York (SUNY) system.\nHistory.\nWhen counties were established in the Province of New York in 1683, the present Broome County was part of the enormous Albany County, including the northern part of New York State as well as all of the present State of Vermont and, in theory, extending westward to the Pacific Ocean. This county was reduced in size on July 3, 1766, by the creation of Cumberland County, and further on March 16, 1770, by the creation of Gloucester County, both containing territory now in Vermont.\nOn March 12, 1772, what was left of Albany County was split into three parts, one remaining under the name Albany County. One of the other pieces, Tryon County, contained the western portion (and thus, since no western boundary was specified, theoretically still extended west to the Pacific). The eastern boundary of Tryon County was approximately five miles west of the present city of Schenectady, and the county included the western part of the Adirondack Mountains and the area west of the West Branch of the Delaware River. The area then designated as Tryon County now is organized as 37 counties of New York State. The county was named for William Tryon, colonial governor of New York.\nIn the years prior to 1776, most of the Loyalists in Tryon County fled to Canada. In 1784, following the peace treaty that ended the American Revolutionary War, the name of Tryon County was changed to Montgomery County, for General Richard Montgomery, who had captured several places in Canada and died attempting to capture the city of Quebec, thus replacing the name of the hated British governor.\nIn 1789, Montgomery County was reduced in size by the splitting off of Ontario County. The actual area split off from Montgomery County was much larger than the present county, also including the present Allegany, Cattaraugus, Chautauqua, Erie, Genesee, Livingston, Monroe, Niagara, Orleans, Steuben, Wyoming, Yates, and part of Schuyler and Wayne Counties.\nIn 1791, Tioga County split off from Montgomery County, along with Herkimer and Otsego Counties. Tioga County was at this time much larger than the present county and included the present Broome and Chemung Counties and parts of Chenango and Schuyler Counties.\nIn 1798, Tioga County was reduced in size by the splitting off of Chemung County (which also included part of the present Schuyler County) and by the combination of a portion with a portion of Herkimer County to create Chenango County.\nOn March 28, 1806, Broome County was formed by splitting several towns off from Tioga County. At the time, this included all of Broome County's current area, as well as the then-named town of Tioga (renamed the town of Owego in 1813) and the town of Berkshire. Small portions of land were lost to Cortland County and Tompkins County in 1815 and 1817, respectively. The towns of Owego and Berkshire were returned to Tioga County on March 21, 1822, establishing the present-day boundaries of Broome County.\nGeography.\nBroome County lies on the southern line of New York. Its southern border abuts the northern boundary of the state of Pennsylvania. The Susquehanna River flows southward through the eastern part of the county, enters Susquehanna County in Pennsylvania, then re-enters Broome and flows northwestward to meet the Chenango River at Binghamton. The combined flow moves west-southwestward into Tioga County to the west. The West Branch Delaware River flows southward along the lower portion of the county's east border, delineating that portion of the border between Broome and Delaware counties.\nThe county's western portion is hilly, with wide valleys that accommodate Binghamton and its suburbs. In the northern portion, Interstate 81 traverses a wide glacial valley. The eastern part of the county is much more rugged, as the land rises to the Catskill Mountains. The terrain generally slopes to the west. The county's highest point is in the southeast of the county, a U.S. National Geodetic Survey benchmark known as Slawson atop an unnamed hill in the Town of Sanford. It is approximately above sea level. An area due east on the Delaware County line in Oquaga Creek State Park also lies within the same elevation contour line. The lowest point is above sea level, along the Susquehanna River, at the Pennsylvania state line.\nThe county has a total area of , of which is land and (1.4%) is water.\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProtected areas.\nSource:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLakes.\nSource:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2000 census.\nAs of the 2000 United States census, there were 200,536 people, 80,749 households, and 50,225 families in the county. The population density was . There were 88,817 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 91.33% white, 3.28% black or African American, .19% Native American, 2.79% Asian, .03% Pacific Islander, .79% from other races, and 1.59% from two or more races. 1.99% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 16.1% were of Irish, 13.3% Italian, 12.3% German, 11.6% English, 6.4% American and 5.7% Polish ancestry according to the census. 91.4% spoke English, 2.0% Spanish and 1.1% Italian as their first language.\nThere were 80,749 households, out of which 28.20% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 47.60% were married couples living together, 10.80% had a female householder with no husband present, and 37.80% were non-families. 31.00% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.40% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.37 and the average family size was 2.97.\nThe county population contained 23.00% under the age of 18, 11.00% from 18 to 24, 26.80% from 25 to 44, 22.80% from 45 to 64, and 16.40% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females there were 93.20 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 89.90 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $35,347, and the median income for a family was $45,422. Males had a median income of $34,426 versus $24,542 for females. The per capita income for the county was $19,168. About 8.80% of families and 12.80% of the population were below the poverty line, including 15.90% of those under age 18 and 7.20% of those age 65 or over.\nClimate.\nBroome has a warm-summer humid continental climate (\"Dfb\") and the hardiness zone is mainly 5b.\nGovernment and politics.\nFor the past few decades, Broome County has been a swing county. Since 1964 the county has selected Democratic and Republican party candidates at approximately the same rate in national elections (as of 2024). The more recent elections had favored the Democratic candidate, until Donald Trump carried the county in 2016, the first Republican to win the county since Ronald Reagan in 1984. Joe Biden carried Broome with 50.5% of the vote in 2020. In 2024, the county went for Democrat Kamala Harris, although she only managed to carry it by a 379-vote plurality. In Broome County, Democratic strength comes primarily from Binghamton and its suburbs, such as Johnson City and Endicott, while Republicans dominate the outer, rural parts of the county. \nBroome County's offices are housed in the Edwin L. Crawford County Office Building of Government Plaza located at 60 Hawley Street in Downtown Binghamton.\nLegislature.\nThe Broome County Legislature consists of 15 members. The 15 legislature members are elected from individual districts. As of 2024, there are 9 Republicans and 6 Democrats.\nLaw enforcement.\nIn Broome County, law enforcement services are provided by local, county, state, and federal law enforcement professionals.\nAt the federal level:\nAt the state level:\nAt the county level:\nAt the local level:\nAdditionally, the 536-bed Broome County Jail is operated by the Broome County sheriff's office.\nThe Broome County Law Enforcement Academy facilitates the New York State-mandated basic course for police officers, which includes over 700 hours of instruction. All municipal police officers and deputy sheriffs within Broome County attend this academy. In addition, oftentimes officers from outside Greater Binghamton attend the academy. The academy frequently hosts officers from the Elmira-Corning area, Syracuse metropolitan area, and other regions within New York State.\nEducation.\nThe primary institutes of higher education in Broome County include:\nCommunities.\nCities, villages, census-designated places.\n\u2020 \u2013 County seat, \u2021 \u2013 Partially in Delaware County\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHamlets.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52332", "revid": "13892963", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52332", "title": "Cattaraugus County, New York", "text": "County in New York, United States\nCattaraugus County (locally known as Catt County) is a county in Western New York, with one side bordering Pennsylvania. As of the United States 2020 census, the population was 77,042. The county seat is Little Valley. The county was created in 1808 and later organized in 1817. The county is part of the Western New York region of the state.\nCattaraugus County comprises the Olean, NY Micropolitan Statistical Area, which is included in the Buffalo-Cheektowaga-Olean, NY Combined Statistical Area. Within its boundaries are the Allegany Indian Reservation of the Seneca Nation of New York, and the Allegany State Park. The Allegheny River runs through the county.\nHistory.\nIn the pre-Columbian era, the territory was known to be included in the traditional homelands of the now-extinct Wenrohronon Indians. It later became the territory of the Seneca people, one of the five Nations of the Haudenosaunee.\nDuring the colonial era, it was claimed by at least three British colonies: New York Colony, Massachusetts Bay Colony, and the Province of Pennsylvania, each of which extended their colonial claims to the west until after the Revolutionary War.\nWhen counties were established in the Province of New York in 1683, the territory of Cattaraugus County was included within Albany County. This was an enormous county, including the northern part of New York as well as all of the modern-day state of Vermont and, in theory, extending westward to the Pacific Ocean. As additional areas were settled, the county was reduced on July 3, 1766, by the creation of Cumberland County, and on March 16, 1770, by the creation of Gloucester County, both containing territory now in Vermont.\nOn March 12, 1772, what was left of Albany County was split into three parts, one remaining under the name Albany County. One of the other pieces, Tryon County, contained the western portion (and thus, since no western boundary was specified, theoretically still extended west to the Pacific). The eastern boundary of Tryon County was approximately five miles west of the present city of Schenectady. The county included the western part of the Adirondack Mountains and the area west of the West Branch of the Delaware River. The area then designated as Tryon County is represented in the 21st century by 37 counties of New York. The county was named for William Tryon, colonial governor of New York.\nIn the years before 1776, most of the Loyalists in Tryon County fled across the Niagara Frontier into modern day Ontario, Canada. In 1784, following the peace treaty that ended the Revolutionary War (and a treaty with Massachusetts that finally settled who owned Western New York), the name of Tryon County was changed to Montgomery County in honor of the general, Richard Montgomery, who had captured several places in Canada and died attempting to capture the city of Quebec. This replaced the name of the hated British governor.\nIn practice, however, these counties did not cover modern Cattaraugus County or Western New York. Most of that area lay within the Indian Reserve established in the Treaty of Fort Stanwix by the British; it was intended to be reserved for Native Americans and was ruled off-limits to European settlement.\nThe newly independent United States sought to extinguish Native reserves after the British ceded their territory east of the Mississippi River and south of the Great Lakes to the United States. This included Iroquois territory in New York; the four nations that had been allies of the British mostly relocated to Ontario, Canada where the Crown gave them land grants in some compensation for losses. The Treaty of Canandaigua, in 1794, extinguished what was left of native title, with the exception of several reservations, three of which were at least partially located in what is now Cattaraugus County.\nOntario County was split from Montgomery County in 1789 as a result of the establishment of the Morris Reserve. In turn, Genesee County was split from Ontario County in 1802 as a result of the Holland Purchase. This period was the beginning of more significant European-American settlement of this western territory. Shortly afterward, Genesee County was reduced in 1806 by the creation of Allegany County.\nCattaraugus County was formed in 1808, split off from Genesee County. At first there was no county government due to the sparse population. From 1812 to 1814, Cattaraugus County was incorporated in Allegany County; from 1814 to 1817, records of the county were divided between Belmont (Allegany County) and Buffalo (then in Niagara County).\nThe name \"Cattaraugus\" derives from a Seneca word for \"bad smelling banks,\" in reference to the odor of natural gas leaking from rock seams. In 1817, a county government was established for Cattaraugus County in the southwestern corner of the town of Hebe, now Ellicottville.\nNumerous towns in the county are named after agents of the Holland Land Company, including Ellicottville (Joseph Ellicott), Franklinville (William Temple Franklin, a speculator and grandson of Benjamin Franklin), and Otto and East Otto (Jacob Otto).\nThe first settlement in the county was in Olean. After 1860, in response to the construction of a railroad (where the Pat McGee Trail is now), the county seat was moved to Little Valley.\nThe Allegany Indian Reservation is within the county boundaries and is one of two controlled by the federally recognized Seneca Nation of New York in the western part of the state; the Seneca's other territories, Cattaraugus Reservation and Oil Springs Reservation, are both partially within county boundaries. South of Salamanca, New York, a small city located within the reservation, is Allegany State Park, which is contiguous with the Allegheny National Forest in Pennsylvania.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (1.1%) is water.\nCattaraugus County is in the southwestern part of the state, immediately north of the Pennsylvania border, bordering the counties of McKean County, Pennsylvania and Warren County, Pennsylvania. The southern part of Cattaraugus County is the only area of western New York that was not covered by the last ice age glaciation. It is noticeably more rugged than neighboring areas that had peaks rounded and valleys filled by the glacier. The entire area is a dissected plateau of Pennsylvanian and Mississippian age, but appears mountainous to the casual observer. It is this string of mountain-like peaks that gives the county its promotional name, the \"Enchanted Mountains\".\nThe plateau is an extension of the Allegany Plateau from nearby Pennsylvania. Southern Cattaraugus County is part of the same oil field, and petroleum was formerly a resource of the area. It is now mostly played out, but natural gas continues to be extracted.\nA continental divide between the Mississippi River and Great Lakes watersheds runs through Cattaraugus County.\nThe northern border of the county is formed by Cattaraugus Creek and the Allegheny River flows through the county.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2000 Census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 83,955 people, 32,023 households, and 21,647 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 39,839 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 94.63% White, 1.06% Black or African American, 2.60% Native American, 0.46% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.23% from other races, and 1.01% from two or more races. 0.94% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 26.8% were of German, 13.2% Irish, 11.3% English, 9.1% Polish, 8.2% Italian and 7.4% American ancestry according to Census 2000. 95.2% spoke English and 1.4% Spanish as their first language.\nThere were 32,023 households, out of which 32.10% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 52.30% were married couples living together, 10.80% had a female householder with no husband present, and 32.40% were non-families. 26.80% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.60% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.52 and the average family size was 3.05.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 26.20% under the age of 18, 9.30% from 18 to 24, 26.50% from 25 to 44, 23.50% from 45 to 64, and 14.60% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females there were 95.90 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.50 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $33,404, and the median income for a family was $39,318. Males had a median income of $30,901 versus $22,122 for females. The per capita income for the county was $15,959. About 10.00% of families and 13.70% of the population were below the poverty line, including 18.60% of those under age 18 and 9.90% of those age 65 or over.\nTransportation.\nAirports.\nGreat Valley Airport is located in Cattaraugus County, one nautical mile (1.85\u00a0km) southeast of the central business district of Great Valley.\nCattaraugus County-Olean Airport is located outside of Olean located in the Town of Ischua.\nBus service.\nIntercity bus service is provided through Coach USA, which runs through the county on its twice-daily Jamestown to Olean route (with connections to Buffalo and New York City). Trailways offers a once-daily north-to-south run between Buffalo and points south in Pennsylvania.\nThe county does not have a unified public transit system. The Seneca Nation serves much of the county through its own bus line, which connects its reservations; another service, the Olean Area Transit System, connects the cities of Salamanca and Olean.\nRail.\nThere is no regular passenger rail service in Cattaraugus County; Amtrak does not serve the county. The WNY &amp; PA Railroad, based in Olean, provides freight service on most of the rail routes in Cattaraugus County; the New York and Lake Erie Railroad serves the northwest corner and the Buffalo and Pittsburgh Railroad runs a north-to-south route.\nGovernment and politics.\nCattaraugus County is run by a unicameral legislature who appoint a county \"administrator\". This individual serves many executive duties of a county executive but has no legislative veto power and is not elected.\nThe legislators are elected independently by districts (while some also serve as mayors of the villages they represent, their status as mayors does not affect in any way their seats on the legislature and thus it is not a Board of Supervisors). The county uses a system of proportional representation in which each legislator's vote is weighted to the number of persons in their district; each district can have between one and three legislators. This system was imposed in the 1960s in the wake of the one man, one vote federal court rulings of the era; before this, the county operated under a true board of supervisors model. There are currently 17 members of the legislature with 16 Republicans and 1 Democrat. Each legislator serves a four-year term, with a limit of three terms.\nAll but one of those serving on the county council are Republicans, and only two years in the entire history of the county legislature (1992 to 1994) have seen the Democrats in the majority. Howard VanRensselaer, Sr. of Randolph serves as chairman, and Andy Burr serves as vice-chairman. In 2023, the lone Democrat's seat was redistricted out of existence, prompting the local Democratic Party to withdraw from all county legislature races that year in protest.\nCattaraugus County is entirely within the boundaries of the 148th New York State Assembly District (served currently by Joseph Giglio), the 57th New York State Senate District served currently by George Borrello, and the U.S. House of Representatives 23rd district represented by Nick Langworthy. In the last of these, Cattaraugus County's votes proved pivotal in the 2008 elections: incumbent Republican Randy Kuhl, who had strongly carried the county in 2004 and 2006, lost Cattaraugus County to Democrat Eric Massa in the 2008 elections.\nThe county generally votes for Republicans in most statewide and national offices. For instance, in 2004 George W. Bush defeated John Kerry in Cattaraugus County by a 60\u201340 margin, although Bill Clinton won Cattaraugus County very narrowly in 1996. In 2006, the county narrowly chose Eliot Spitzer over John Faso by a margin of about 1 percent in the governor's race, and Hillary Clinton defeated John Spencer in the county by a 10 percentage point margin. In all other positions up for office in 2006, Republicans won all congressional and state legislature representatives. In 2008, the county voted for the Republican presidential candidate, with John McCain defeating Barack Obama by a 55-44% margin. In 2010, Republican Carl Paladino carried Cattaraugus County over Democrat (and eventual winner) Andrew Cuomo 65% to 31%. Senator Kirsten Gillibrand and Senator Chuck Schumer, both incumbent Democrats, carried the county by 51% to 46% and 54% to 43% margins, respectively. The county regularly has high turnout for presidential elections, with upwards of 70 percent of eligible voters typically voting in the county. Only three Democrats have carried the county since 1900, with Democrats winning in 1912, 1964, and 1996.\nAn emerging trend among Cattaraugus County's villages has been consolidation with their surrounding towns. Limestone voters approved dissolution into the Town of Carrollton in September 2009; that took effect at the beginning of 2011. On March 18, 2010, three other villages (East Randolph, Randolph and Perrysburg) followed suit and approved dissolution into their surrounding towns (Town of Randolph for the first two, and Town of Perrysburg for the third); these three villages dissolved at the beginning of 2012.\nAdditional facts.\nTwo geological formations, both called \"Rock City,\" have the appearance of a town laid out with streets. One is in Olean and the other is in Little Valley.\nOlean is the largest city in the county and is the major center for business. Ski country runs through Cattaraugus County; two ski resorts, popular with Canadians, lie in the town of Ellicottville: Holiday Valley Resort and HoliMont; Cattaraugus County once had numerous ski resorts within its bounds, scattered throughout the county, before contracting into Ellicottville alone by 1980. In addition, several snowmobile trails cross the county, including the Pat McGee Trail, a flagship for the county's trail system, and the North Country Trail.\nCattaraugus County is considered part of Appalachia, as well as Western New York, upstate New York, the Southern Tier, the Twin Tiers and the Buffalo-Cheektowaga-Olean Combined Statistical Area. As a result of being at a geographic crossroads, the people of Cattaraugus County speak a variety of accents, ranging from mild variants of Appalachian English to Inland Northern American English, with a handful of people speaking in the more loud and nasal Buffalo English.\nThe sales tax in Cattaraugus County is 8% (4% from New York, 4% from the county).\nA large Amish community is located in the western part of the county; with an estimated 2,500 residents, they constitute slightly under 3% of the county's population. A portion of this community maintains an exceptionally older order that eschews indoor plumbing, which, combined with a small number of Seneca who still live on traditional subsistence, gives the county a high rate of homes without indoor plumbing compared to nearby counties.\nMedia.\nRadio stations.\nWCOR previously operated from 2008 to 2021 out of Portville on 96.7. It has since been relicensed to Lewis Run, Pennsylvania.\nPrior to 2014, WKEG-LP operated on 104.7 out of Limestone.\nTelevision stations.\nWWHC-LD (channel 20), WVTT-CD (then channel 25) and WBUO-LD (channel 30) were all previously licensed to Olean. All have since been relicensed to Buffalo.\nEducation.\nA branch of Jamestown Community College, in Olean provides higher education for residents. Olean Business Institute provided specialized education and is also in Olean; it closed in 2013 due to financial and enrollment declines. Jamestown Business College operates a satellite campus in Salamanca. Cornplanter College, a tribally controlled college, opened in 2014 in Salamanca. St. Bonaventure University is located in its own census-designated place just west of Olean.\nGeographical K-12 school districts include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAdditionally Randolph Academy Union Free School District includes two institutions that care for children, with one of them being in the county.\nCommunities.\nLarger Settlements.\n\u2020\u2020 - Former Village\n\u2020 - County Seat\n\u2021 - Not Wholly in this county\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52333", "revid": "13892963", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52333", "title": "Cayuga County, New York", "text": "County in New York, United States\nCayuga County is a county in the U.S. state of New York. As of the 2020 census, the population was 76,248. Its county seat and largest city is Auburn. The county was named for the Cayuga people, one of the Native American tribes in the Iroquois Confederation. The county is part of the Central New York region of the state.\nCayuga County comprises the Auburn, NY Micropolitan Statistical Area, which is also included in the Syracuse-Auburn, NY Combined Statistical Area.\nHistory.\nWhen counties were established in the Province of New York in 1683, the present Cayuga County was part of Albany County. This was an enormous county, including the northern part of the present state of New York and all of the present state of Vermont and, in theory, extending westward to the Pacific Ocean. This county was reduced in size on July 3, 1766, by the creation of Cumberland County, and further on March 16, 1770, by the creation of Gloucester County, both containing territory now in Vermont.\nOn March 12, 1772, what was left of Albany County was split into three parts, one remaining under the name Albany County. One of the other pieces, Tryon County, contained the western portion (and thus, since no western boundary was specified, theoretically still extended west to the Pacific). The eastern boundary of Tryon County was approximately five miles west of the present city of Schenectady, and the county included the western part of the Adirondack Mountains and the area west of the West Branch of the Delaware River. The area then designated as Tryon County now includes 37 counties of New York State. The county was named for William Tryon, colonial governor of New York.\nIn the years prior to 1776, most of the Loyalists in Tryon County fled to Canada.\nIn 1784, following the peace treaty that ended the American Revolutionary War, the name of Tryon County was changed to Montgomery County in honor of the general, Richard Montgomery, who had captured several places in Canada and died attempting to capture the city of Quebec, replacing the name of the hated British governor.\nIn 1789, Montgomery County was reduced in size by the splitting off of Ontario County. The actual area split off from Montgomery County was much larger than the present county, also including the present Allegany, Cattaraugus, Chautauqua, Erie, Genesee, Livingston, Monroe, Niagara, Orleans, Steuben, Wyoming, Yates, and part of Schuyler and Wayne Counties.\nHerkimer County was one of three counties split off from Montgomery County (the others being Otsego and Tioga Counties) in 1791.\nOnondaga County was formed in 1794 by the splitting of Herkimer County.\nCayuga County was formed in 1799 by the splitting of Onondaga County. This county was, however, much larger than the present Cayuga County. It then included the present Seneca and Tompkins Counties.\nIn 1804, Seneca County was formed by the splitting of Cayuga County. Then in 1817, in turn, a portion of Seneca County was combined with a piece of the remainder of Cayuga County to form Tompkins County.\nIn the late 19th and early 20th century, this region attracted European immigrants who developed farms or took over existing ones, particularly from Italy and Poland.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (20%) is water.\nCayuga County is located in the west central part of the state, in the Finger Lakes region. Owasco Lake is in the center of the county, and Cayuga Lake forms part of the western boundary. Lake Ontario is on the northern border, and Skaneateles Lake and Cross Lake form part of the eastern border. Cayuga County has more waterfront land than any other county in the state not adjacent to the Atlantic Ocean.\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2000 Census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 81,963 people, 30,558 households, and 20,840 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 35,477 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 93.34% White, 3.99% Black or African American, 0.31% Native American, 0.42% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.88% from other races, and 1.03% from two or more races. 1.97% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 16.3% were of Irish, 16.0% English, 15.7% Italian, 11.3% German, 9.5% American and 6.3% Polish ancestry according to Census 2000. 94.9% spoke English, 2.0% Spanish and 1.0% Italian as their first language.\nThere were 30,558 households, out of which 32.60% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 52.00% were married couples living together, 11.00% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.80% were non-families. 26.20% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.90% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.53 and the average family size was 3.04.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 25.10% under the age of 18, 8.20% from 18 to 24, 29.70% from 25 to 44, 22.60% from 45 to 64, and 14.40% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females there were 102.20 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 101.80 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $37,487, and the median income for a family was $44,973. Males had a median income of $33,356 versus $23,919 for females. The per capita income for the county was $18,003. About 7.80% of families and 11.10% of the population were below the poverty line, including 14.90% of those under age 18 and 8.20% of those age 65 or over.\nAt 2.3%, Cayuga County has the highest share of Ukrainian Americans of any county in New York State. The Ukrainian-American population in Cayuga County is heavily concentrated in the Auburn area.\nGovernment and politics.\nCayuga County is considered a swing county in national elections. In 2000, Democrat Al Gore won Cayuga County with 50% of the vote to George W. Bush's 44%. In 2004, however, incumbent President Bush defeated John Kerry by a narrow margin of only 0.58%, or 49.22% to 48.64%. In 2008, it was won by Democrat Barack Obama, with 53% of the vote to Republican John McCain's 45%. In 2012, Obama won the county again by a slightly larger margin over Republican Mitt Romney.\nHowever, like most of upstate New York, Cayuga County swung right in 2016. Republican Donald Trump carried it with 52.41% of the vote to Hillary Clinton's 40.76%, the largest Republican vote share since 1988 and the largest margin of victory for a Republican since 1984. In 2020, Trump carried the county again, this time taking 53.49% of the vote (the largest vote share for any Republican since 1984) to Joe Biden's 44.27%. Biden became the first Democrat to win the presidency without carrying Cayuga County since Jimmy Carter in 1976. In 2024 this trend continued, with Donald Trump winning the highest percentage of the vote for any candidate of either party since Reagan in 1984.\nIn statewide elections it has gone for Democrats: both Eliot Spitzer and Hillary Clinton won it in 2006 with more than 60% of the vote. In 2010, Democrat Andrew Cuomo defeated Republican Carl Paladino 53% to 40% for the governorship, with 3% going to Green Party candidate Howie Hawkins. Also in 2010, both Democratic U.S. Senators, Kirsten Gillibrand and Chuck Schumer, carried Cayuga County. Gillibrand won 54% of the vote, while Schumer won 61%.\nThe Cayuga County Legislature consists of 15 members, each of whom are elected from single-member districts.\nCommunities.\nLarger Settlements.\n\u2020 - County Seat\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52334", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52334", "title": "Chautauqua County, New York", "text": "County in New York State, US\nChautauqua County is the westernmost county in the U.S. state of New York. As of the 2020 census, the population was 127,657. Its county seat is Mayville, and its largest city is Jamestown. Its name is believed to be the lone surviving remnant of the Erie language, a tongue lost in the 17th century Beaver Wars; its meaning is unknown and a subject of speculation. The county was created in 1808 and organized in 1811. The county is part of the Western New York region of the state.\nChautauqua County comprises the Jamestown\u2013Dunkirk\u2013Fredonia, NY Micropolitan Statistical Area. It is located south east of Lake Erie and includes a small portion of the Cattaraugus Reservation of the Seneca.\nHistory.\nPrior to European colonization, most of what is now Chautauqua County was inhabited by the indigenous Erie people prior to the Beaver Wars in the 1650s. French forces traversed the territory beginning in 1615. The Seneca Nation conquered the territory during the Beaver Wars and held it through the next century until siding with the British crown, their allies for most of the 18th century, against the American revolutionaries in the American Revolutionary War.\nChautauqua County was organized by the state legislature during the development of western New York after the American Revolutionary War and the ratification of The Treaty of Canandaigua, between the United States and the Council of the Six Nations. It was officially separated from Genesee County on March 11, 1808. This partition was performed under the same terms that produced Cattaraugus and Niagara counties. The partition was done for political purposes, but the counties were not properly organized for self-government, so they were all administered as part of Niagara County.\nOn February 9, 1811, Chautauqua was completely organized, and its separate government was launched. This established Chautauqua as a county of of land. Chautauqua has not been altered since.\nThe first New York Chautauqua Assembly was organized in 1874 by Methodist minister John Heyl Vincent and businessman Lewis Miller in the county at a campsite on the shores of Chautauqua Lake.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (29%) is water.\nChautauqua County, in the southwestern corner of New York State, along the New York-Pennsylvania border, is the westernmost of New York's counties. Chautauqua Lake is located in the center of the county, and Lake Erie is its northern border.\nPart of the Eastern Continental Divide runs through Chautauqua County. The area that drains into the Conewango Creek (including Chautauqua Lake) eventually empties into the Gulf of Mexico; the rest of the county's watershed empties into Lake Erie and via Lake Ontario and the St. Lawrence Seaway into the North Atlantic Ocean. This divide, known as the Chautauqua Ridge, can be used to mark the border between the Southern Tier and the Niagara Frontier. It is also a significant dividing point in the county's geopolitics, with the \"North County\" being centered on Dunkirk and the \"South County\" centered on Jamestown each having their own interests.\nThe county is generally composed of rolling hills and valleys, with elevations ranging anywhere between 1100 and 2100 feet, although the land within a few miles of Lake Erie is generally flat and at an elevation of 1000 feet or lower. The lowest point in the county is Lake Erie, at , and the highest point is Gurnsey Benchmark at .\nAdjacent counties.\nChautauqua County is one of the few counties in the US to border two counties of the same name in different states (Erie County in New York and Pennsylvania).\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2000 census.\nAs of the 2000 census, there were 139,750 people, 54,515 households, and 35,979 families in the county. The population density was . There were 64,900 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 94.04% White, 2.18% Black or African American, 0.43% Native American, 0.36% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 1.73% from other races, and 1.23% from two or more races. 4.22% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. In terms of ancestry, 17.3% were German, 15.1% were Italian, 11.6% were Swedish, 10.9% were English, 9.3% were Polish, 9.2% were Irish and 5.6% were of American ancestry according to Census 2000. 93.0% spoke English and 3.8% Spanish as their first language.\nOf the 54,515 households 30.50% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 50.90% were married couples living together, 10.80% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.00% were non-families. 28.10% of households were one person and 12.60% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.45 and the average family size was 2.99.\nThe age distribution was 24.50% under the age of 18, 10.30% from 18 to 24, 26.30% from 25 to 44, 23.00% from 45 to 64, and 16.00% 65 or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females there were 95.20 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.20 males.\nThe median household income was $33,458 and the median family income was $41,054. Males had a median income of $32,114 versus $22,214 for females. The per capita income for the county was $16,840. About 9.70% of families and 13.80% of the population were below the poverty line, including 19.30% of those under age 18 and 8.20% of those age 65 or over.\nAs of the 2010 census, there were 134,905 people in the county. The population density was . The racial makeup of the county was 92.57% (124,875 people) white, 2.37% (3,197 people) African-American, 0.51% (688 people) Asian, 0.51% (689 people) Native American/Alaskan, 0.03% (34 people) Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander, 1.98% (2,669 people) other, and 2.04% (2,751 people) two or more races. The Hispanic/Latino population of any race was 6.11% (8,241 people). In terms of ancestry, 25% were German, 16% were Italian, 12.8% were Swedish, 16% were English, 10.6% were Polish, 14.9% were Irish and 3.2% were of American ancestry according to the 2010 Census. 92.9% spoke English and 4.1% Spanish as their first language.\nThe age distribution was 21.83% of the population under the age of 18, 3.82% (5,155 people) ages 18 and 19, 7.50% (10,113 people) ages 20\u201324, 10.37% (13,985 people) ages 25\u201334, 18.83% (25,406 people) ages 35\u201349, 21.07% (28,419 people) ages 50\u201364, and 16.59% (22,381 people) over the age of 65. Of the population, 49.3% (66,509 people) were male and 50.7% (68,396 people) were female.\nGovernment and politics.\nAll of the county is in the 150th New York State Assembly district, represented by Andy Goodell, and the New York State Senate 57th district represented by George Borrello. The entire county is within the bounds of New York's 23rd congressional district which is represented by Nick Langworthy.\nThe 2012 redistricting process moved all of Chautauqua County into Goodell's assembly district, while the county also rejoined the former 31st (renumbered again as the 23rd) congressional district along with Cattaraugus and Allegany Counties. Prior to 2013, the county was part of New York's 27th congressional district. Prior to 2003, the county was part of New York's 31st congressional district, but it was controversially redistricted out of that district and into what was the 27th, and was replaced in the 29th district (the old 31st) by Rochester suburbs that had never before been part of the district. Chautauqua County, at the same time, joined southern Erie County and portions of the City of Buffalo in the 27th, areas that had also never been in the same district with each other. In both cases, the suburban additions had significantly more Democratic populations than before, leading to Democrats winning both districts, which led to accusations of cracking-based gerrymandering.\nThough the Republican Party has historically been dominant in Chautauqua County politics, the county had been a perfect bellwether county from 1980 to 2008, correctly voting for the winner of each presidential election in all eight elections during that time. However, in 2012, it voted for Republican Mitt Romney even as Democrat Barack Obama won re-election, marking its first miss since 1976. In 2016 the county reverted back to being solidly Republican, as Donald Trump won the county by the largest margin since Ronald Reagan in 1984.\nChautauqua County is one of nineteen \u201ccharter counties\u201d in New York, which grants the county greater leeway in conducting its own affairs. A board of supervisors governed Chautauqua County until 1975, when a new county charter went into effect with provisions for a county executive and a 13-seat county legislature. The county council currently consists of 19 members each elected from single-member districts. As of 2024, there are 14 Republicans and 5 Democrats.\nNew York State Assembly.\nPrior to changes in representation of the New York State Assembly, each county had a given number of representatives. The following were representatives of Chautauqua County.\nEducation.\nJamestown Community College has two campuses in the county at Jamestown and Dunkirk. The State University of New York at Fredonia is located in the northern part of the county. Jamestown Business College offered two year degrees, certificates, and a four-year degree in Jamestown, prior to its decision to cease new enrollments in 2024.\nCommunities.\n\u2020 - county seat\n\u2020\u2020 - former village\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther hamlets.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn literature.\nJoyce Carol Oates' 1996 novel, \"We Were the Mulvaneys\" is set in rural Chautauqua County, near the fictional town of Mt. Ephraim.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52335", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52335", "title": "Idiolect", "text": "An individual's patterns of pronunciation and grammar of a language\nIdiolect is an individual's unique use of language, including speech. This unique usage encompasses vocabulary, grammar, and pronunciation. This differs from a dialect, a common set of linguistic characteristics shared among a group of people.\nThe term is etymologically derived from the prefix \"idio-\", from Ancient Greek ; and \"-lect\", abstracted from \"dialect\", ultimately from Ancient Greek .\nLanguage.\nLanguage consists of sentence constructs, word choices, and expressions of style, and an idiolect comprises an individual's uses of these facets. Every person has a unique idiolect influenced by their language, socioeconomic status, and geographical location. Forensic linguistics psychologically analyzes idiolects.\nThe notion of \"language\" is used as an abstract description of the \"language use\", and of the abilities of individual speakers and listeners. According to this view, a language is an \"ensemble of idiolects ... rather than an entity per se\". Linguists study particular languages by examining the utterances produced by native speakers.\nThis contrasts with a view among non-linguists, at least in the United States, that languages as ideal systems exist outside the actual practice of language users. Based on work done in the US, Nancy Niedzielski and Dennis Preston describe a language ideology seemingly common among American English speakers. According to Niedzielski and Preston, many of their subjects believe that there is one \"correct\" pattern of grammar and vocabulary that underlies Standard English, and that individual usage comes from this external system.\nLinguists who understand particular languages as a composite of unique, individual idiolects must nonetheless account for the fact that members of large speech communities, and even speakers of different dialects of the same language, can understand one another. All human beings seem to produce language in essentially the same way. This has led to searches for universal grammar, as well as attempts to further define the nature of particular languages.\nForensic linguistics.\nForensic linguistics includes attempts to identify whether a person produced a given text by comparing the style of the text with the idiolect of the individual in question. The forensic linguist may conclude that the text is consistent with the individual, rule out the individual as the author, or deem the comparison inconclusive.\nIn 1995, Max Appedole relied in part on an analysis of Rafael Sebasti\u00e1n Guill\u00e9n Vicente's writing style to identify him as Subcomandante Marcos, a leader of the Zapatista movement. Although the Mexican government regarded Subcomandante Marcos as a dangerous guerrilla, Appedole convinced the government that Guill\u00e9n was a pacifist. Appedole's analysis is considered an early success in the application of forensic linguistics to criminal profiling in law enforcement.\nIn 1998, Ted Kaczynski was identified as the \"Unabomber\" by means of forensic linguistics. The FBI and Attorney General Janet Reno pushed for the publication of an essay of Kaczynski's, which led to a tip-off from Kaczynski's brother, who recognized the writing style, his idiolect.\nIn 1978, four men were convicted of murdering Carl Bridgewater. No forensic linguistics was involved in their case at the time. Today, forensic linguistics reflects that the idiolect used in the interview of one of the men was very similar to that man's reported statement. Since idiolects are unique to an individual, forensic linguistics reflects that it is very unlikely that one of these files was not created by using the other.\nDetecting idiolect with corpora.\nIdiolect analysis is different for an individual depending on whether the data being analyzed is from a corpus made up entirely from texts or audio files, since written work is more thought out in planning and precise in wording than in spontaneous speech, which is full of informal language and conversation fillers, e.g. \"umm...\" and \"you know\". Corpora with large amounts of input data allow for the generation of word frequency and synonym lists, normally through the use of the top ten bigrams created from it. In such a situation, the context of word usage is considered, particularly when determining the legitimacy of a given bigram.\nWhether a word or phrase is part of an idiolect is determined by the word's location compared with the window's \"head word\", the edge of the window. This window is kept to 7-10 words, with a sample that is being considered as a feature of the idiolect being possibly +5/-5 words away from the \"head\" word of the window (which is normally in the middle). Data in corpus pertaining to idiolect get sorted into three categories: irrelevant, personal discourse marker(s), and informal vocabulary. Samples at the end of the frame and far from this head word are often deemed superfluous. Superfluous and non-superfluous data are then run through different functions to see if given words or phrases are a part of an individual's idiolect.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52337", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52337", "title": "Finite language", "text": ""}
{"id": "52339", "revid": "1317716", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52339", "title": "Transcendental Meditation program", "text": ""}
{"id": "52340", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52340", "title": "Aitutaki", "text": "Island in the Cook Islands\nAitutaki, also traditionally known as Ara\u02bbura and Utataki, is the second most-populated island in the Cook Islands, after Rarotonga. It is an \"almost atoll\", with fifteen islets in a lagoon adjacent to the main island. Total land area is , and the lagoon has an area of between . A major tourist destination, Aitutaki is the second most visited island of the Cook Islands archipelago.\nAitutaki had a population of 1,782 in 2021. The main village is Arutanga (Arutunga) on the west side.\nGeography.\nAitutaki is sometimes described as an \"almost atoll\", for it consists of a lagoon within an encircling atoll, with a significant area of high land on one side. It has a maximum elevation of approximately with the hill known as Maunga Pu close to its northernmost point. The land area of the atoll is , of which the main island occupies . The Ootu Peninsula, protruding east from the main island in a southerly direction along the eastern rim of the reef, makes up of the main island. For the lagoon, area figures between are found. Satellite image measurement suggests that the larger figure also includes the reef flat, which is commonly not considered part of a lagoon.\nThe barrier reef that forms the basis of Aitutaki is roughly the shape of an equilateral triangle with sides in length. The southern edge of the triangle is almost totally below the surface of the ocean, and the eastern side is composed of a string of small islands including Mangere, Akaiami, and Tekopua.\nThe western side of the atoll contains many of Aitutaki's important features, including a boat passage through the barrier reef, allowing for anchorage close to shore at Arutanga. Towards the south of the side is a small break in the barrier reef, allowing access for small boats to the lagoon, which covers most of the southern part of the triangle. Further to the north is the bulk of the main island. Its fertile volcanic soil provides tropical fruits and vegetables. Two of Aitutaki's 15 islets (motus) are also volcanic; the rest are made of coral.\nAitutaki Airport is near the triangle's northern point. The southeastern part of the lagoon near Akaiami was once used as a landing area for TEAL flying boats on the \"coral route\".\nHistory.\nPolynesians first settled Aitutaki around AD 1225\u20131430. They maintained voyaging contact over a wide area, for the geochemical source of basalt adze heads found in this island can be traced back to quarries on Samoa to the west and the Society Islands to the east. According to oral tradition, the island was named by Te Erui, who raised it from the ocean after traveling from Avaiki. Other traditions identify various settlers, including Ru, Te Munakorero, Kai, Ui-tario, and Ruatapu.\nThe first known European contact was with Captain Bligh and the crew of when they also arrived in Aitutaki on 11 April 1789, prior to the infamous mutiny.\nAitutaki was the first of the Cook Islands to practice Christianity, after London Missionary Society (LMS) missionary John Williams visited in 1821. The oldest church in the country, the Cook Islands Christian Church in Arutanga, was built by Papeiha (Bora Bora) and Vahapata (Raiatea), two LMS teachers Williams had left behind.\nOn 8\u20139 October 1900 seven instruments of cession of Rarotonga and other islands were signed by their chiefs and people; and by a British Proclamation issued at the same time the cessions were accepted, the islands being declared parts of Her Britannic Majesty's dominions. Uniquely, these instruments did not include Aitutaki. It appears that, though the inhabitants of Aitutaki regarded themselves as British subjects, the Crown's title was uncertain, and the island was formally annexed by Proclamation dated 9 October 1900. It was the only island in the Cook Islands that was annexed rather than ceded.\nIn 1942 New Zealand and American forces were stationed on the island. The American engineering firm Sverdrup &amp; Parcel, the New Zealand Ministry of Works, US military personnel and many locals combined to build two airstrips which were completed on 14 November 1942. This airport, and one on the northernmost Penrhyn Island, were to be used as bases by the Allies during World War II. The first aircraft, an American light bomber, landed on 22 November 1942. When the war ended some of the servicemen remained and married the locals.\nDuring the 1950s Aitutaki's lagoon was used as a stopover for TEAL (Tasman Empire Airways Limited) flying boats on the famous Coral Route. The islet of Akaiami was used as a resting stop for passengers, who often lay about until the aircraft was refueled for two hours. These operations ceased in 1960, and the only reminder are the remains of the purpose-built jetty on Akaiami. The flying boat \"Aranui\", which was part of this service, is now on display at the Museum of Transport and Technology in Auckland, New Zealand.\nCommercial banana-growing was introduced to the island in the late 1960s, but suffered a rapid decline due to wind damage, low prices, and inadequate shipping. The industry was revived in the late 1970s, but collapsed after New Zealand adopted Rogernomics and removed privileged market access. A tourism boom began in the early 1990s, with tourist numbers doubling to 10,000 visitors a year in 1994.\nOn 10\u201311 February 2010, Aitutaki was hit by Cyclone Pat. The high winds of the storm ripped the roofs off of most houses and damaged other buildings including a school and a hospital. At least 60% of houses were damaged. There were no reported deaths but a few minor injuries were reported. An Air Force Hercules cargo plane and an army engineering team were provided by New Zealand along with an initial $200,000. Cook Island MP Teina Bishop said \"New Zealand aid should have been sent to the devastated area much sooner\".\nIn June 2010 the island was nominated \"the world's most beautiful island\" by Tony Wheeler the founder of Lonely Planet travel guide.\nThe delegates of the 2012 Pacific Islands Forum, which had its main venue in Rarotonga, travelled to One Foot Island for a 2-day retreat.\nDemographics and settlement.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe population of Aitutaki was 1,782 in 2021.\nAitutaki is subdivided in 8 districts. The districts are further subdivided into 19 tapere (land holdings by tribe lineages).\nThe eight districts are:\nThe eight districts are subdivided into 19 tapere as follows:\nEconomy.\nAitutaki is the second largest tourist destination in the Cook Islands, after Rarotonga, receiving 38,777 visitors in 2018. As a result, tourism dominates the economy, with 36% of the labour force employed in the restaurant and accommodation sector. The government is the next largest employer, employing 21%, with retail and wholesale employing 18% and agriculture, forestry and fishing 6%.\nAitutaki is connected to the rest of the Cook Islands by Aitutaki Airport and a port at Arutanga. In September 2020 Aitutaki was connected to the Manatua One Polynesia Fibre Cable, becoming one of the smallest fibre-connected islands in the world.\nSince 2000 Aitutaki has served as a filming location for a variety of TV shows, including \"Shipwrecked\", \"\", and \"Survivorman\".\nIn 2019 a 750\u00a0kW solar array was installed as part of a plan to transition the island to 100% renewable energy.\nEcology.\nFlora.\nThe flora of Aitutaki is highly modified, and on the main island only a few patches of degraded native forest survive near the airstrip. The main island's ecology can be divided into four zones. The coastal flat is dominated by \"Guettarda speciosa\", coconuts, Hibiscus, Pandanus, and \"Hernandia moerenhoutiana\". The slopes are mostly \"Hibiscus tiliaceus\" interspersed with taro patches. The inland plateau is extensively cultivated, with plantations of coconuts, banana, citrus, and other food plants, as well as assorted introduced decorative shrubs. The high ground on the island was cleared during World War 2 for military installations and now consists of grasses and weedy species. The \"motu\" have \"Pemphis acidula\" scrub on the seaward side, phasing to \"Suriana\" scrub and coconut forest, with the volcanic islands containing forests of \"Calophyllum inophyllum\" which are not found on the other \"motu\".\nFauna.\nAitutaki is home to numerous species of sea- and shorebirds, including the red-tailed tropicbird, white-tailed tropicbird, brown booby, great frigatebird, brown noddy, black noddy, white tern, and Pacific reef heron. Land birds include the common myna and the blue lorikeet. The latter were badly affected by Cyclone Pat, losing over 50% of their population and virtually all juveniles. Subfossil remains show that Kuhl's lorikeet, the spotless crake, and an undescribed species of whistling duck once existed on Aitutaki. The main island has been designated an Important Bird Area (IBA) by BirdLife International because it supports a population of blue lorikeets.\nMinor islands.\nThe main island of Aitutaki occupies the northern part of the atoll, which is roughly triangular in shape. The minor islands form part of the perimeter of the lagoon. All islands, including the main island and its peninsula Ootu, are listed starting clockwise from the northernmost point of the atoll:\nTapuaetai (One Foot Island), a small islet in the south-east of the lagoon, is often said to be the most important attraction. It is regarded as providing the visitor with the best views of the Aitutaki lagoon and, depending on the tide, one is able to walk on a sandbank a decent distance away from Tapuaetai. The trip to this island is the most frequented trip available on Aitutaki. One Foot Island was awarded \"Australasia's Leading Beach\" at the World Travel Awards held in Sydney in June 2008.\nOotu Peninsula is of coral formation, but attached to the main volcanic island, thus a peninsula. If it were an island, it would be the largest of the minor islands. Ootu Peninsula does belong to tapere and district of \"Vaitupa\". The minor islands are not allocated to any districts or tapere, but they do form part of the larger constituencies.\nAll minor islets, except Akitua and Maina, are part of Vaipae\u2013Tautu Constituency. Akitua is part of Amuri\u2013Ureia Constituency, as is Ootu Peninsula, just north of Akitua. Maina is part of Arutanga\u2013Reureu\u2013Nikaupara Constituency. The main island is equally divided among the three constituencies Arutanga-Reureu-Nikaupara (southwest), Vaipae-Tautu (southeast), and Amuri-Ureia (north).\nCulture.\nSport.\nThe most popular sports on Aitutaki are rugby union and netball, followed closely by volleyball. With a population of 2,000 residing on the island and 50,000 overseas, there are four clubs on Aitutaki and eight teams (each club having a first team and a reserve team). The best players on the island play for the Aitutaki island team against their main rivals Rarotonga.\nEducation.\nAraura College is the only secondary school on Aitutaki. The school has the role of teaching approximately 200 students from Year 7 (Form 1) to Year 13 (Form 7).\nThe island has two government schools and one church school: Araura Primary school, Vaitau Primary School and Tekaaroa Primary School. Tekaaroa Primary School is a private special character school which is the designated Seventh Day Adventist school. Araura Primary is the larger of the primary schools, catering for the mostly populated part of the island and Vaitau Primary caters mostly for the Vaipae and Tautu villages. Tekaaroa Primary School caters for the Seventh Day Adventist children on the island.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52341", "revid": "82329", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52341", "title": "USS Merrimac", "text": ""}
{"id": "52343", "revid": "1318529615", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52343", "title": "Brahmic scripts", "text": "Family of abugida writing systems\nThe Brahmic scripts, also known as Indic scripts, are a family of abugida writing systems. They are descended from the Brahmi script of ancient India and are used by various languages in several language families in South, East and Southeast Asia: Indo-Aryan, Dravidian, Tibeto-Burman, Mongolic, Austroasiatic, Austronesian, and Tai. They were also the source of the dictionary order (\"goj\u016bon\") of Japanese \"kana\".\nHistory.\nBrahmic scripts descended from the Brahmi script. Brahmi is clearly attested from the 3rd century BCE during the reign of Ashoka, who used the script for imperial edicts. Northern Brahmi gave rise to the Gupta script during the Gupta period, which in turn diversified into a number of cursives during the medieval period. Notable examples of such medieval scripts, developed by the 7th or 8th century, include Nagari, Siddham and Sharada.\nThe Siddha\u1e43 script was especially important in Buddhism, as many sutras were written in it. The art of Siddham calligraphy survives today in Japan. The tabular presentation and dictionary order of the modern \"kana\" system of Japanese writing is believed to be descended from the Indic scripts, most likely through the spread of Buddhism.\nSouthern Brahmi evolved into the Kadamba, Pallava and Vatteluttu scripts, which in turn diversified into other scripts of South India and Southeast Asia. Brahmic scripts spread in a peaceful manner, Indianization, or the spread of Indian learning. The scripts spread naturally to Southeast Asia, at ports on trading routes. At these trading posts, ancient inscriptions have been found in Sanskrit, using scripts that originated in India. At first, inscriptions were made in Indian languages, but later the scripts were used to write the local Southeast Asian languages. Hereafter, local varieties of the scripts were developed. By the 8th century, the scripts had diverged and separated into regional scripts.\nCharacteristics.\nSome characteristics, which are present in most but not all the scripts, are:\nComparison.\nBelow are comparison charts of several of the major Indic scripts, organised on the principle that glyphs in the same column all derive from the same Brahmi glyph. Accordingly:\nThe transliteration is indicated in ISO 15919.\nConsonants.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sticky table start/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:row hover highlight/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVowels.\nVowels are presented in their independent form on the left of each column, and in their corresponding dependent form (vowel sign) combined with the consonant \"k\" on the right. A glyph for \"ka\" is an independent consonant letter itself without any vowel sign, where the vowel \"a\" is inherent.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNumerals.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nList of Brahmic scripts.\nHistorical.\nThe Brahmi script was already divided into regional variants at the time of the earliest surviving epigraphy around the 3rd century BC. Cursives of the Brahmi script began to diversify further from around the 5th century AD and continued to give rise to new scripts throughout the Middle Ages. The main division in antiquity was between northern and southern Brahmi. In the northern group, the Gupta script was very influential, and in the southern group the Vatteluttu and Kadamba/Pallava scripts with the spread of Buddhism sent Brahmic scripts throughout Southeast Asia.\nUnicode of Brahmic scripts.\nAs of Unicode version 17.0, the following Brahmic scripts have been encoded:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52346", "revid": "6525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52346", "title": "Nebuchadnezzar II", "text": "King of Babylon from 605 to 562 BC\nNebuchadnezzar II, also Nebuchadrezzar II, meaning \"Nabu, watch over my heir\", was the second king of the Neo-Babylonian Empire, ruling from the death of his father Nabopolassar in 605 BC to his own death in 562 BC. Often titled Nebuchadnezzar the Great, he is regarded as the empire's greatest king, famous for his military campaigns in the Levant and their role in Jewish history, and for his construction projects in his capital of Babylon, including the Hanging Gardens of Babylon. Ruling for 43 years, Nebuchadnezzar was the longest-reigning king of the Babylonian dynasty. By the time of his death, he was among the most powerful rulers in the world.\nPossibly named after his grandfather of the same name or after Nebuchadnezzar I, one of Babylon's greatest warrior-kings, Nebuchadnezzar II had already secured renown for himself during his father's reign, leading armies in the Medo-Babylonian conquest of the Assyrian Empire. At the Battle of Carchemish in 605 BC, Nebuchadnezzar inflicted a crushing defeat on an Egyptian army led by Pharaoh Necho II and ensured that the Neo-Babylonian Empire would succeed the Neo-Assyrian Empire as the dominant power in the ancient Near East. Shortly after this victory, Nabopolassar died and Nebuchadnezzar became king.\nDespite his successful military career during his father's reign, Nebuchadnezzar's early reign saw few achievements and witnessed a disastrous failed invasion of Egypt. This performance led some of Babylon's vassals to doubt Babylon's power and was the cause of brewing rebellion across his empire. After first putting down some insurrections in the east, Nebuchadnezzar turned his attention to the Levant and in the 580s BC engaged in a string of campaigns against his rebellious vassal states. In 587 BC Nebuchadnezzar besieged Jerusalem and destroyed it and the Kingdom of Judah, deporting much of its population in what became known as the Babylonian captivity. This episode earned Nebuchadnezzar a position of notoriety in Jewish history. Through this conquest, the subsequent capture of the Phoenician city of Tyre, and other campaigns in the Levant, Nebuchadnezzar restored the Neo-Babylonian Empire's fortunes in the ancient Near East.\nBeyond his military campaigns, Nebuchadnezzar is remembered as a great builder who erected many of Babylon's religious buildings, including the Esagila and Etemenanki, embellished its palaces and beautified its ceremonial centre through renovations to the city's processional street and the Ishtar Gate. He is also accredited with the construction of the Hanging Gardens of Babylon. As most of Nebuchadnezzar's inscriptions deal with his building projects rather than military accomplishments, he was for a time seen by historians mostly as a builder rather than a warrior.\nSources.\nThere are few cuneiform sources for the period between 594 BC and 557 BC, which covers much of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar II and the reigns of his three immediate successors, Amel-Marduk, Neriglissar and Labashi-Marduk. This lack of sources has had the effect that even though Nebuchadnezzar's reign was the longest among the Neo-Babylonian kings, less is confidently known about it than others. Though the handful of cuneiform sources recovered (notably the Babylonian Chronicle) confirm some events of his reign (such as conflicts with the Kingdom of Judah) other events\u2014such as the 586 BC destruction of Solomon's Temple and other military campaigns Nebuchadnezzar possibly conducted\u2014are not covered in any known cuneiform documents.\nAs a result, historical reconstructions of this period generally follow secondary sources in Hebrew, Greek and Latin to determine what events transpired at the time, in addition to contract tablets from Babylonia. Though some see the use of the sources written by later authors\u2014many of them created several centuries after Nebuchadnezzar's time and often reflecting their own cultural attitudes to the events and figures discussed\u2014 as presenting problems in and of itself, blurring the line between history and tradition, it is also true that these sources are less likely to present the bias bound to be present in contemporary sources written by authors subject to the king\u2019s authority. As is often the case with ancient history the best approach is to use the existing written sources and archaeological evidence to gain insight into Nebuchadnezzar's reign.\nBackground.\nName.\nNebuchadnezzar II's name in Akkadian was \"Nab\u00fb-kudurri-u\u1e63ur\", meaning \"Nabu, watch over my heir\". The name was often interpreted in earlier scholarship as \"Nabu, protect the boundary\", given that the word \"kudurru\" can also mean 'boundary' or 'line'. Modern historians support the 'heir' interpretation over the 'boundary' interpretation in terms of this name. There is no reason to believe that the Babylonians intended the name to be difficult to interpret or to have a double meaning.\n\"Nab\u00fb-kudurri-u\u1e63ur\" is typically anglicised to 'Nebuchadnezzar', following how the name is most commonly rendered in Hebrew and Greek, particularly in most of the Bible. In Hebrew, the name was rendered as \u05e0\u05b0\u05d1\u05d5\u05bc\u05db\u05b7\u05d3\u05b0\u05e0\u05b6\u05d0\u05e6\u05b7\u05bc\u05e8 (\"N\u0259\u1e07\u016b\u1e35a\u1e0fne\u02be\u1e63\u1e63ar\") and in Greek it was rendered as \u039d\u03b1\u03b2\u03bf\u03c5\u03c7\u03bf\u03b4\u03bf\u03bd\u03cc\u03c3\u03bf\u03c1 (\"Nabouchodonosor\"). Some scholars, such as Donald Wiseman, prefer the anglicisation \"Nebuchadrezzar\", with an \"r\" rather than an \"n\", following the assumption that \"Nebuchadnezzar\" is a later, corrupted form of the contemporary \"Nab\u00fb-kudurri-u\u1e63ur\".\nThe alternative anglicisation \"Nebuchadrezzar\" derives from how the name is rendered in the books of Jeremiah and Ezekiel, \u05e0\u05b0\u05d1\u05d5\u05bc\u05db\u05b7\u05d3\u05b0\u05e8\u05b6\u05d0\u05e6\u05b7\u05bc\u05e8 (\"N\u0259\u1e07\u016b\u1e35a\u1e0fre\u02be\u1e63\u1e63ar\"), a more faithful transliteration of the original Akkadian name. Assyriologist Adrianus van Selms suggested in 1974 that the variant with an \"n\" rather than an \"r\" was a rude nickname, deriving from an Akkadian rendition like \"Nab\u00fb-k\u016bdanu-u\u1e63ur\", which means 'Nabu, protect the mule', though there is no concrete evidence for this idea. Van Selms believed that a nickname like that could derive from Nebuchadnezzar's early reign, which was plagued by political instability.\nNebuchadnezzar II's name, \"Nab\u00fb-kudurri-u\u1e63ur\", was identical to the name of his distant predecessor, Nebuchadnezzar I (r.c. 1125\u20131104 BC), who ruled more than five centuries before Nebuchadnezzar II's time. Like Nebuchadnezzar II, Nebuchadnezzar I was a renowned warrior-king who appeared in a time of political upheaval and defeated the forces of Babylon's enemies, in Nebuchadnezzar I's case the Elamites. Although theophoric names using the god Nabu are common in texts from the early Neo-Babylonian Empire, the name Nebuchadnezzar is relatively rare, being mentioned only four times with certainty. Though there is no evidence that Nabopolassar named his son after Nebuchadnezzar I, Nabopolassar was knowledgeable in history and actively worked to connect his rule to the rule of the Akkadian Empire, which preceded him by nearly two thousand years. The significance of his son and heir bearing the name of one of Babylon's greatest kings would not have been lost on Nabopolassar. If Jursa's theory concerning Nabopolassar's origin is correct, it is alternatively possible that Nebuchadnezzar II was named after his grandfather of the same name, as the Babylonians employed patronymics, rather than after the previous king.\nAncestry and early life.\nNebuchadnezzar was the eldest son of Nabopolassar (r.626\u2013605 BC), the founder of the Neo-Babylonian Empire. This is confirmed by Nabopolassar's inscriptions, which explicitly name Nebuchadnezzar as his \"eldest son\", as well as inscriptions from Nebuchadnezzar's reign, which refer to him as the \"first\" or \"chief son\" of Nabopolassar, and as Nabopolassar's \"true\" or \"legitimate heir\". The Neo-Babylonian Empire was founded through Nabopolassar's rebellion, and later war, against the Neo-Assyrian Empire, which liberated Babylonia after nearly a century of Assyrian control. The war resulted in the complete destruction of Assyria, and the Neo-Babylonian Empire which rose in its place was powerful, but hastily built and politically unstable.\nAs Nabopolassar never clarified his ancestry in lineage in any of his inscriptions, his origin is not entirely clear. Subsequent historians have variously identified Nabopolassar as a Chaldean, an Assyrian or a Babylonian. Although no evidence conclusively confirms him as being of Chaldean origin, the term \"Chaldean dynasty\" is frequently used by modern historians for the royal family he founded, and the term \"Chaldean Empire\" remains in use as an alternate historiographical name for the Neo-Babylonian Empire.\nRegardless of his ethnic origin, Nabopolassar appears to have been strongly connected to the city of Uruk, located south of Babylon. It is possible that he was a member of its ruling elite before becoming king, and there is a growing body of evidence that Nabopolassar's family originated in Uruk, for instance that Nebuchadnezzar's daughters lived in the city. \nIn 2007, Michael Jursa advanced the theory that Nabopolassar was a member of a prominent political family in Uruk, whose members are attested since the reign of Esarhaddon (r.681\u2013669 BC). To support his theory, Jursa points to how documents describe how the grave and body of \"Kudurru\", a deceased governor of Uruk, was desecrated due to the anti-Assyrian activities of Kudurru's two sons, Nabu-shumu-ukin and a son whose name is mostly missing. The desecration went so far as to drag Kudurru's body through the streets of Uruk. Kudurru can be identified with Nebuchadnezzar (\"Nab\u00fb-kudurri-u\u1e63ur\", \"Kudurru\" simply being a common and shortened nickname), a prominent official in Uruk who served as its governor under the Assyrian king Ashurbanipal (r.669\u2013631 BC) in the 640s BC. In Assyrian tradition, the desecration of a dead body showed that the deceased individual and their surviving family were traitors and enemies of the state, and that they had to be completely eradicated, serving to punish them even after death. The name of the son whose name is unpreserved in the letter ended with either \"ahi\", \"n\u00e2sir\" or \"u\u1e63ur\", and the remaining traces can fit with the name \"Nab\u00fb-apla-u\u1e63ur\", meaning that Nabopolassar could be the other son mentioned in the letter and thus a son of Kudurru. Strengthening this connection is that Nebuchadnezzar II is attested very early during his father's reign, from 626/625 to 617 BC, as high priest of the Eanna temple in Uruk, where he is often attested under the nickname \"Kudurru\". Nebuchadnezzar must have been made high priest at a very young age, considering that his year of death, 562 BC, is 64 years after 626 BC. The original Kudurru's second son, Nabu-shumu-ukin, also appears to be attested as a prominent general under Nabopolassar, and the name was also used by Nebuchadnezzar II for one of his sons, possibly honoring his dead uncle.\nCrown prince.\nNebuchadnezzar's military career began in the reign of his father, though little information survives. Based on a letter sent to the temple administration of the Eanna temple, it appears that Nebuchadnezzar participated in his father's campaign to take the city of Harran in 610 BC. Harran was the seat of Ashur-uballit II, who had rallied what remained of the Assyrian army and ruled the Neo-Assyrian rump state. The Babylonian victory in the Harran campaign and the defeat of Ashur-uballit in 609 BC marked the end of the ancient Assyrian monarchy, which would never be restored. According to the \"Babylonian Chronicles\", Nebuchadnezzar also commanded an army in an unspecified mountainous region for several months in 607 BC.\nIn the war against the Babylonians and Medes, Assyria had allied with Pharaoh Psamtik I of the Twenty-sixth Dynasty of Egypt, who had been interested in ensuring Assyria's survival so that Assyria could remain as a buffer state between his own kingdom and the Babylonian and Median kingdoms. After the fall of Harran, Psamtik's successor, Pharaoh Necho II, personally led a large army into former Assyrian lands to turn the tide of the war and restore the Neo-Assyrian Empire, even though it was more or less a lost cause as Assyria had already collapsed. As Nabopolassar was occupied with fighting Urartu in the north, the Egyptians took control of the Levant largely unopposed, capturing territories as far north as the city of Carchemish in Syria, where Necho established his base of operations.\nNebuchadnezzar's greatest victory from his time as crown prince came at the Battle of Carchemish in 605 BC, which put an end to Necho's campaign in the Levant by inflicting a crushing defeat on the Egyptians. Nebuchadnezzar had been the sole commander of the Babylonian army at this battle as his father had chosen to stay in Babylon, perhaps on account of illness. Necho's forces were completely annihilated by Nebuchadnezzar's army, with Babylonian sources claiming that not a single Egyptian escaped alive. The account of the battle in the Babylonian Chronicle reads as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The king of Akkad stayed home (while) Nebuchadnezzar, his eldest son (and) crown prince mustered [the army of Akkad]. He took his army's lead and marched to Carchemish, which is on the bank of the Euphrates. He crossed the river at Carchemish. [...] They did battle together. The army of Egypt retreated before him. He inflicted a [defeat] upon them (and) finished them off completely. In the district of Hamath the army of Akkad overtook the remainder of the army of [Egypt which] managed to escape [from] the defeat and which was not overcome. They inflicted a defeat upon them (so that) a single (Egyptian) man [did not return] home. At that time Nebuchadnezzar conquered all of Ha[ma]th.\nThe story of Nebuchadnezzar's victory at Carchemish reverberated through history, appearing in many later ancient accounts, including in the Book of Jeremiah and the Books of Kings in the Bible. It is possible to conclude, based on subsequent geopolitics, that the victory resulted in all of Syria and Israel coming under the control of the Neo-Babylonian Empire, a feat which the Assyrians under Tiglath-Pileser III (r.745\u2013727 BC) only accomplished after five years of protracted military campaigns. The defeat of Egypt at Carchemish ensured that the Neo-Babylonian Empire would grow to become the major power of the ancient Near East, and the uncontested successor of the Neo-Assyrian Empire.\nReign.\nAccession to the throne.\nNabopolassar died just a few weeks after Nebuchadnezzar's victory at Carchemish. At this point in time, Nebuchadnezzar was still away on his campaign against the Egyptians, having chased the retreating Egyptian forces to the region around the city of Hamath. The news of Nabopolassar's death reached Nebuchadnezzar's camp on 8 Abu (late July), and Nebuchadnezzar quickly arranged affairs with the Egyptians and rushed back to Babylon, where he was proclaimed king on 1 Ul\u016blu (mid-August). \nThe speed in which Nebuchadnezzar returned to Babylon might be due to the threat that one of his brothers (two are known by name: Nabu-shum-lishir and Nabu-zer-ushabshi) could claim the throne in his absence. Though Nebuchadnezzar had been recognised as the eldest son and heir by Nabopolassar, Nabu-shum-lishir, Nabopolassar's second-born son, had been recognised as \"his equal brother\", a dangerously vague title. Despite these possible fears, there were no attempts made at usurping his throne at this time.\nOne of Nebuchadnezzar's first acts as king was to bury his father. Nabopolassar was laid in a huge coffin, adorned with ornamented gold plates and fine dresses with golden beads, which was then placed within a small palace he had constructed in Babylon. Shortly thereafter, before the end of the month in which he had been crowned, Nebuchadnezzar returned to Syria to resume his campaign. The Babylonian Chronicle records that \"he marched about victoriously\", meaning that he faced little to no resistance, returning to Babylon after several months of campaigning. The Syrian campaign, though it resulted in a certain amount of plunder, was not a complete success in that it did not ensure Nebuchadnezzar's grasp on the region. He had seemingly failed to inspire fear, given that none of the westernmost states in the Levant swore fealty to him and paid tribute.\nEarly military campaigns.\nThough little information survives concerning them, the Babylonian Chronicle preserves brief accounts of Nebuchadnezzar's military activities in his first eleven years as king. In 604 BC, Nebuchadnezzar campaigned in the Levant once again, conquering the city of Ascalon. According to the Babylonian Chronicle, Ascalon's king was captured and taken to Babylon, and the city was plundered and levelled to the ground. Modern excavations at Ascalon have confirmed that the city was more or less destroyed at this point in time. The Ascalon campaign was preceded by a campaign in Syria, which was more successful than Nebuchadnezzar's first, resulting in oaths of fealty from the rulers of Phoenicia.\nIn 603 BC, Nebuchadnezzar campaigned in a land whose name is not preserved in the surviving copy of the chronicle. The chronicle records that this campaign was extensive, given that the account mentions the construction of large siege towers and a siege of a city, the name of which does not survive either. Anson Rainey speculated in 1975 that the city taken was Gaza, whereas Nadav Na'aman thought in 1992 that it was Kummuh in south-eastern Anatolia. In the second half of the 5th century BC, some documents mentioned the towns Isqalanu (the name derived from Ascalon) and Hazzatu (the name possibly derived from Gaza) near the city of Nippur, indicating that deportees from both of these cities lived near Nippur, and as such possibly that they had been captured at around the same time.\nIn both 602 BC and 601 BC, Nebuchadnezzar campaigned in the Levant, though little information survives beyond that a \"vast\" amount of booty was brought from the Levant to Babylonia in 602 BC. On account of the entry for 602 BC also referring to Nabu-shum-lishir, Nebuchadnezzar's younger brother, in a fragmentary and unclear context, it is possible that Nabu-shum-lishir led a revolt against his brother in an attempt to usurp the throne in that year, especially since he is no longer mentioned in any sources after 602 BC. The damage to the text however makes this idea speculative and conjectural.\nIn the 601 BC campaign, Nebuchadnezzar departed from the Levant and then marched into Egypt. Despite the defeat at Carchemish in 605 BC, Egypt still had a great amount of influence in the Levant, even though the region was ostensibly under Babylonian rule. Thus, a campaign against Egypt was logical in order to assert Babylonian dominance, and also carried enormous economic and propagandistic benefits, but it was also risky and ambitious. The path into Egypt was difficult, and the lack of secure control of either side of the Sinai Desert could spell disaster. \nNebuchadnezzar's invasion of Egypt failed \u2013 the Babylonian Chronicle states that both the Egyptian and Babylonian armies suffered a huge number of casualties. Though Egypt was not conquered, the campaign did result in momentarily curbing Egyptian interest in the Levant, given that Necho II gave up his ambitions in the region. In 599 BC, Nebuchadnezzar marched his army into the Levant and then attacked and raided the Arabs in the Syrian desert. Though apparently successful, it is unclear what the achievements gained in this campaign were.\nIn 598 BC, Nebuchadnezzar campaigned against the Kingdom of Judah, succeeding in capturing the city of Jerusalem. Judah represented a prime target of Babylonian attention given that it was at the epicenter of competition between Babylon and Egypt. By 601 BC, Judah's king, Jehoiakim, had begun to openly challenge Babylonian authority, counting on the fact that Egypt would lend support to his cause. Nebuchadnezzar's first, 598\u2013597 BC, assault on Jerusalem is recorded in the Bible, but also in the Babylonian Chronicle, which describes it as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The seventh year [of Nebuchadnezzar], in the month of Kislimu, the king of Akkad mustered his troops, marched to the Levant, and set up quarters facing the city of Judah [Jerusalem]. In the month of Addaru [early in 597 BC], the second day, he took the city and captured the king. He installed there a king of his choice. He colle[cted] its massive tribute and went back to Babylon.\nJehoiakim had died during Nebuchadnezzar's siege and been replaced by his son, Jeconiah, who was captured and taken to Babylon, with his uncle Zedekiah installed in his place as king of Judah. Jeconiah is recorded as being alive in Babylonia thereafter, with records as late as 592 or 591 BC listing him among the recipients of food at Nebuchadnezzar's palace and still referring to him as the 'king of the land of Judah'.\nIn 597 BC, the Babylonian army departed for the Levant again, but appears to not have engaged in any military activities as they turned back immediately after reaching the Euphrates. The following year, Nebuchadnezzar marched his army along the Tigris river to do battle with the Elamites, but no actual battle happened as the Elamites retreated out of fear once Nebuchadnezzar was a day's march away. In 595 BC, Nebuchadnezzar stayed at home in Babylon but soon had to face a rebellion against his rule there, though he defeated the rebels, with the chronicle stating that the king \"put his large army to the sword and conquered his foe.\" Shortly thereafter, Nebuchadnezzar again campaigned in the Levant and secured large amounts of tribute. In the last year recorded in the chronicle, 594 BC, Nebuchadnezzar campaigned in the Levant yet again.\nThere were several years without any noteworthy military activity at all. Notably, Nebuchadnezzar spent all of 600 BC in Babylon, when the chronicle excuses the king by stating that he stayed in Babylon to \"refit his numerous horses and chariotry\". Some of the years when Nebuchadnezzar was victorious can also hardly be considered real challenges. Raiding the Arabs in 599 BC was not a major military accomplishment and the victory over Judah and the retreat of the Elamites were not secured on the battlefield. It thus appears that Nebuchadnezzar achieved little military success after the failure of his invasion of Egypt. Nebuchadnezzar's poor military record had dangerous geopolitical consequences. According to the Bible, in Zedekiah's fourth year as king of Judah (594 BC), the kings of Ammon, Edom, Moab, Sidon and Tyre met in Jerusalem to deal with the possibility of throwing off Babylonian control. \nEvidence that Babylonian control was beginning to unravel is also clear from contemporary Babylonian records, such as the aforementioned rebellion in Babylonia itself, as well as records of a man being executed in 594 BC at Borspippa for \"breaking his oath to the king\". The oath-breaking was serious enough that the judge in the trial was Nebuchadnezzar himself. It is also possible that Babylonian\u2013Median relations were becoming strained, with records of a \"Median defector\" being housed in Nebuchadnezzar's palace and some inscriptions indicating that the Medes were beginning to be seen as \"enemies\". By 594 BC, the failure of the Egyptian invasion, and the lacklustre state of Nebuchadnezzar's other campaigns, loomed high. According to the Assyriologist Israel Eph\u02bfal, Babylon at this time was seen by its contemporaries more like a \"paper tiger\" (i. e. an ineffectual threat) than a great empire, like Assyria just a few decades prior.\nDestruction of Jerusalem.\nFrom his appointment as king of Judah, Zedekiah waited for the opportune moment to throw off Babylonian control. After Pharaoh Necho II's death in 595 BC, Egyptian intervention in affairs in the Levant increased once again under his successors, Psamtik II (r.595\u2013589 BC) and Apries (r.589\u2013570 BC), who both worked to encourage anti-Babylonian rebellions. It is possible that the Babylonian failure to invade Egypt in 601 BC helped inspire revolts against the Babylonian Empire. The outcome of these efforts was Zedekiah's open revolt against Nebuchadnezzar's authority. Unfortunately, no cuneiform sources are preserved from this time and the only known account of the fall of Judah is the biblical account.\nIn 589 BC, Zedekiah refused to pay tribute to Nebuchadnezzar, and he was closely followed in this by Ithobaal III, the king of Tyre. In 587 BC, Ammon, Edom and Moab likewise rebelled. In response to Zedekiah's uprising, Nebuchadnezzar conquered and destroyed the Kingdom of Judah in 586 BC, one of the great achievements of his reign. The campaign, which probably ended in the summer of 586 BC, resulted in the plunder and destruction of the city of Jerusalem, a permanent end to Judah, and it led to the Babylonian captivity, as the Jews were captured and deported to Babylonia. Archaeological excavations confirm that Jerusalem and the surrounding area was destroyed and depopulated. It is possible that the intensity of the destruction carried out by Nebuchadnezzar at Jerusalem and elsewhere in the Levant was due to the implementation of something akin to a scorched earth-policy, aimed at stopping Egypt from gaining a foothold there.\nSome Jewish administration was allowed to remain in the region under the governor Gedaliah, governing from Mizpah under close Babylonian monitoring. According to the Bible, and the 1st-century AD Jewish historian Flavius Josephus, Zedekiah attempted to flee after resisting the Babylonians, but was captured at Jericho and suffered a terrible fate. According to the narrative, Nebuchadnezzar wanted to make an example out of him given that Zedekiah was not an ordinary vassal, but a vassal directly appointed by Nebuchadnezzar. As such, Zedekiah was supposedly taken to Riblah in northern Syria, where he had to watch his sons being executed before having his eyes gouged out and sent to be imprisoned in Babylon.\nPer the Books of Kings in the Bible, the campaign against Judah was longer than typical Mesopotamian wars, with the siege of Jerusalem lasting 18\u201330 months (depending on the calculation), rather than the typical length of less than a year. Whether the unusual length of the siege indicates that the Babylonian army was weak, unable to break into the city for more than a year, or that Nebuchadnezzar by this time had succeeded in stabilising his rule in Babylonia and could thus wage war patiently without being pressured by time to escalate the siege, is not certain.\nLater military campaigns.\nIt is possible that the Egyptians took advantage of the Babylonians being preoccupied with besieging Jerusalem. Herodotus describes Pharaoh Apries as campaigning in the Levant, taking the city of Sidon and fighting the Tyrians, which indicates a renewed Egyptian invasion of the Levant. Apries is unlikely to have been as successful as Herodotus describes, given that it is unclear how the Egyptian navy would have defeated the superior navies of the Phoenician cities, and even if some cities had been taken, they must have shortly thereafter fallen into Babylonian hands again. Tyre had rebelled against Nebuchadnezzar at around the same time as Judah, and Nebuchadnezzar moved to retake the city after his successful subduing of the Jews.\nThe biblical Book of Ezekiel describes Tyre in 571 BC as if it had been recently captured by the Babylonian army. The supposed length of the siege, 13 years, is only given by Flavius Josephus, and is subject to debate among modern scholars. Josephus's account of Nebuchadnezzar's reign is obviously not entirely historic, as he describes Nebuchadnezzar as, five years after the destruction of Jerusalem, invading Egypt, capturing the Pharaoh and appointing another Pharaoh in his place. A stele from Tahpanhes uncovered in 2011 records that Nebuchadnezzar attempted to invade Egypt in 582 BC, although Apries' forces managed to repel the invasion. \nJosephus states that Nebuchadnezzar besieged Tyre in the seventh year of \"his\" reign, though it is unclear whether \"his\" in this context refers to Nebuchadnezzar or to Ithobaal III of Tyre. If it refers to Nebuchadnezzar, a siege begun in 598 BC and lasting for thirteen years, later simultaneously with the siege of Jerusalem, is unlikely to have gone unmentioned in Babylonian records. If the seventh year of Ithobaal is intended, the beginning of the siege may conjecturally be placed after Jerusalem's fall. If the siege lasting 13 years is taken at face value, the siege would then not have ended before 573 or 572 BC. The supposed length of the siege can be ascribed to the difficulty in besieging the city: Tyre in the ancient world was 2 cities: one was located on an island 800 metres from the coast, and could not be taken without naval support. The second city was on land. This was the part that Babylon placed a siege on and broke through and took in 571 BC. Nebuchadnezzar finding the city empty because most of the city had retreated to the island, ordered the land city leveled to the ground. Though the island part of Tyre withstood numerous sieges, it would not be captured until Alexander the Great's siege in 332 BC.\nIn the end, the siege was resolved with the land portion of Tyre destroyed. The island portion of the city was left alone. It seems Tyre's king and Nebuchadnezzar came to an agreement for Tyre to continue to be ruled by vassal kings, though probably under heavier Babylonian control than before. Documents from Tyre near the end of Nebuchadnezzar's reign demonstrate that the city had become a centre for Babylonian military affairs in the region. According to later Jewish tradition, it is possible that Ithobaal III was deposed and taken as a prisoner to Babylon, with another king, Baal II, proclaimed by Nebuchadnezzar in his place.\nIt is possible that Nebuchadnezzar campaigned against Egypt in 568\u2013567 BC, given that a fragmentary Babylonian inscription, given the modern designation BM 33041, from that year records the word \"Egypt\" as well as possibly traces of the name \"Amasis\" (the name of the then incumbent Pharaoh, Amasis II, r.570\u2013526 BC). A stele of Amasis from the 4th year of his reign in 567 BC, also fragmentary, may also describe a combined naval and land attack by the Babylonians. Recent evidence suggests that the Babylonians were initially successful during the invasion and gained a foothold in Egypt, but they were repelled by Amasis' forces. If Nebuchadnezzar did campaign against Egypt again, he was unsuccessful again, given that Egypt did not come under Babylonian rule.\nNebuchadnezzar's campaigns in the Levant, most notably those directed towards Jerusalem and Tyre, completed the Neo-Babylonian Empire's transformation from a rump state of the Neo-Assyrian Empire to the new dominant power of the ancient Near East. Still, Nebuchadnezzar's military accomplishments can be questioned, given that the borders of his empire, by the end of his reign, had not noticeably increased in size and that he had not managed to conquer Egypt. Even after a reign of several decades, Nebuchadnezzar's greatest victory remained his victory over the Egyptians at Carchemish in 605 BC, before he even became king.\nBuilding projects.\nThe Babylonian king was traditionally a builder and restorer, and as such large-scale building projects were important as a legitimizing factor for Babylonian rulers. Nebuchadnezzar extensively expanded and rebuilt his capital city of Babylon and the most modern historical and archaeological interpretations of the city reflect it as it appeared after Nebuchadnezzar's construction projects. The projects were made possible through the prospering economy during Nebuchadnezzar's reign, sustained by his conquests. His building inscriptions record work done to numerous temples, notably the restoration of the Esagila, the main temple of Babylon's national deity Marduk, and the completion of the Etemenanki, a great ziggurat dedicated to Marduk.\nExtensive work was also conducted on civil and military structures. Among the most impressive efforts was the work done surrounding the city's northern ceremonial entrance, the Ishtar Gate. These projects included restoration work on the South Palace, inside the city walls, the construction of a completely new North Palace, on the other side of the walls facing the gate, as well as the restoration of Babylon's Processional Street, which led through the gate, and of the gate itself. The ruins of Nebuchadnezzar's North Palace are poorly preserved and as such its structure and appearance are not entirely understood. Nebuchadnezzar also constructed a third palace, the Summer Palace, built some distance north of the inner city walls in the northernmost corner of the outer walls.\nThe restored Ishtar Gate was decorated with blue and yellow glazed bricks and depictions of bulls (symbols of the god Adad) and dragons (symbols of the god Marduk). Similar bricks were used for the walls surrounding the Processional Street, which also featured depictions of lions (symbols of the goddess Ishtar). Babylon's Processional Street, the only such street yet excavated in Mesopotamia, ran along the eastern walls of the South Palace and exited the inner city walls at the Ishtar Gate, running past the North Palace. To the south, this street went by the Etemenanki, turning to the west and going over a bridge constructed either under the reign of Nabopolassar or Nebuchadnezzar.\nSome of the bricks of the Processional Street bear the name of the Neo-Assyrian king Sennacherib (r.705\u2013681 BC) on their underside, perhaps indicating that construction of the street had begun already during his reign, but the fact that the upper side of the bricks all bear the name of Nebuchadnezzar suggests that construction of the street was completed under Nebuchadnezzar's reign. Glazed bricks such as the ones used in the Procession Street were also used in the throne room of the South Palace, which was decorated with depictions of lions and tall, stylized palm trees.\nNebuchadnezzar also directed building efforts on the city of Borsippa, with several of his inscriptions recording restoration work on that city's temple, the Ezida, dedicated to the god Nabu. Additionally, Nebuchadnezzar also restored the ziggurat of the Ezida, the E-urme-imin-anki, and also worked on the temple of Gula, Etila, as well as numerous other temples and shrines in the city. Nebuchadnezzar also repaired Borsippa's walls.\nOther great building projects by Nebuchadnezzar include the Nar-Shamash, a canal to bring water from the Euphrates close to the city of Sippar, and the Median Wall, a large defensive structure built to defend Babylonia against incursions from the north. The Median Wall was one of two walls built to protect Babylonia's northern border. Further evidence that Nebuchadnezzar believed the north to be the most likely point of attack for his enemies comes from that he fortified the walls of northern cities, such as Babylon, Borsippa and Kish, but left the walls of southern cities, such as Ur and Uruk, as they were. Nebuchadnezzar also began work on the Royal Canal, also known as Nebuchadnezzar's Canal, a great canal linking the Euphrates to the Tigris which in time completely transformed the agriculture of the region, but the structure was not completed until the reign of Nabonidus, who ruled as the last king of the Neo-Babylonian Empire from 556 to 539 BC.\nDeath and succession.\nNebuchadnezzar died at Babylon in 562 BC. The last known tablet dated to Nebuchadnezzar's reign, from Uruk, is dated to the same day, 7 October, as the first known tablet of his successor, Amel-Marduk, from Sippar. Amel-Marduk's administrative duties probably began before he became king, during the last few weeks or months of his father's reign when Nebuchadnezzar was ill and dying. Having ruled for 43 years, Nebuchadnezzar's reign was the longest of his dynasty and he would be remembered favourably by the Babylonians.\nAmel-Marduk's accession does not appear to have gone smoothly. Amel-Marduk was not the eldest living son of Nebuchadnezzar and the reason why he was picked as crown prince is not known. The choice is especially strange given that some sources suggest that the relationship between Nebuchadnezzar and Amel-Marduk was particularly poor, with one surviving text describing both as parties in some form of conspiracy and accusing one of them (the text is too fragmentary to determine which one) of failing in the most important duties of Babylonian kingship through exploiting Babylon's populace and desecrating its temples. Amel-Marduk also at one point appears to have been imprisoned by his father, possibly on account of the Babylonian aristocracy having proclaimed him as king while Nebuchadnezzar was away. It is possible that Nebuchadnezzar intended to replace Amel-Marduk as heir with another son, but died before doing so.\nIn one of Nebuchadnezzar's late inscriptions, written more than forty years into his reign, he wrote that he had been chosen for the kingship by the gods before he was even born. Mesopotamian rulers typically only stressed divine legitimacy in this fashion when their actual legitimacy was questionable, a method often employed by usurpers. Given that Nebuchadnezzar at this point had been king for several decades and was the legitimate heir of his predecessor, the inscription is very strange, unless it was intended to help legitimize Nebuchadnezzar's successor, Amel-Marduk, who as a younger son and a former conspirator could be seen as politically problematic.\nFamily and children.\nNo surviving contemporary Babylonian documents provide the name of Nebuchadnezzar's wife. According to Berossus, her name was Amytis, daughter of Cyaxares, king of the Medes. Berossus writes that '[Nabopolassar] sent troops to the assistance of Astyages, the tribal chieftain and satrap of the Medes in order to obtain a daughter of Astyages, Amyitis, as wife for his son [Nebuchadnezzar]'. Though the ancient Greek historian Ctesias instead wrote that Amytis was the name of a daughter of Astyages who had married Cyrus I of Persia, it seems more likely that a Median princess would marry a member of the Babylonian royal family, considering the good relations established between the two during Nabopolassar's reign. \nGiven that Astyages was still too young during Nabopolassar's reign to already have children, and was not yet king, it seems more probable that Amytis was Astyages's sister, and thus a daughter of his predecessor, Cyaxares. By marrying his son to a daughter of Cyaxares, Nebuchadnezzar's father Nabopolassar likely sought to seal the alliance between the Babylonians and the Medes. \nAccording to tradition, Nebuchadnezzar constructed the Hanging Gardens of Babylon, one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, featuring exotic shrubs, vines and trees as well as artificial hills, watercourses and knolls, so that Amytis would feel less homesick for the mountains of Media. No archaeological evidence for these gardens has yet been found.\nNebuchadnezzar had six known sons. Most of the sons, with the exceptions of Marduk-nadin-ahi and Eanna-sharra-usur, are attested very late in their father's reign. It is possible that they might have been the product of a second marriage and that they could have been born relatively late in Nebuchadnezzar's reign, possibly after his known daughters. The known sons of Nebuchadnezzar are:\nThree of Nebuchadnezzar's daughters are known by name:\nIt is possible that one of Nebuchadnezzar's daughters married the high official Nabonidus, although there is no evidence for this. Marriage to a daughter of Nebuchadnezzar could explain how Nabonidus could become king, and also explain why certain later traditions, such as the Book of Daniel in the Bible, describe Nabonidus's son, Belshazzar, as Nebuchadnezzar's son (descendant). Alternatively, these later traditions might instead derive from royal propaganda. \nThe ancient Greek historian Herodotus names the \"last great queen\" of the Babylonian Empire as \"Nitocris\", though that name, nor any other name, is not attested in contemporary Babylonian sources. Herodotus's description of Nitocris contains a wealth of legendary material that makes it difficult to determine whether he uses the name to refer to Nabonidus's wife or mother. In 1982, William H. Shea proposed that Nitocris may tentatively be identified as the name of Nabonidus's wife and Belshazzar's mother.\nLegacy.\nAssessment by historians.\nBecause of the scarcity of sources, assessment by historians of Nebuchadnezzar's character and the nature of his reign have differed considerably over time. He has typically been regarded as the greatest and most prestigious king of the Neo-Babylonian Empire.\nSince military activity was not a major issue described in the inscriptions of any Neo-Babylonian king regardless of their actual military accomplishments, in sharp contrast to the inscriptions of their Neo-Assyrian predecessors, Nebuchadnezzar's own inscriptions record very little about his wars. Out of the fifty or so known inscriptions by the king, only a single one deals with military action, and in this case only small-scale conflicts in the Lebanon region. Many Assyriologists, such as Wolfram von Soden in 1954, thus initially assumed that Nebuchadnezzar had mainly been a builder-king, devoting his energy and efforts to building and restoring his country.\nA major change in evaluations of Nebuchadnezzar came with the publication of the tablets of the Babylonian Chronicle by Donald Wiseman in 1956, which cover the geopolitical events of Nebuchadnezzar's first eleven years as king. From the publication of these tablets and onwards, historians have shifted to perceiving Nebuchadnezzar as a great warrior, devoting special attention to the military achievements of his reign.\nAccording to the historian Josette Elayi, writing in 2018, Nebuchadnezzar is somewhat difficult to characterise on account of the scarcity of Babylonian source material. Elayi wrote, about Nebuchadnezzar, that \"[h]e was a conqueror, even though reservations can be had about his military capabilities. There was no lack of statesmanlike qualities, given his success in building the Babylonian Empire. He was a great builder, who restored a country that for a long time had been devastated by war. That is roughly all we know about him because the Babylonian Chronicles and other texts say little about his personality.\"\nIn Jewish and biblical tradition.\nThe Babylonian captivity initiated by Nebuchadnezzar came to an end with the fall of Babylon to the Achaemenid king Cyrus the Great in 539 BC. Within a year of their liberation, some exiled Jews returned to their homeland. Their liberation did little to erase the memory of five decades of imprisonment and oppression. Instead, Jewish literary accounts ensured that accounts of the hardship endured by the Jews, as well as of the monarch responsible for it, would be remembered for all time. The Book of Jeremiah calls Nebuchadnezzar a \"lion\" and a \"destroyer of nations\".\nNebuchadnezzar's story thus found its way into the Old Testament of the Bible. The Bible narrates how Nebuchadnezzar destroyed the Kingdom of Judah, besieged, plundered and destroyed Jerusalem, and how he took away the Jews in captivity, portraying him as a cruel enemy of the Jewish people. The Bible also portrays Nebuchadnezzar as the erstwhile legitimate ruler of all the nations of the world, appointed to rule the world by God. As such, Judah, through divine ruling, should have obeyed Nebuchadnezzar and should not have rebelled. Nebuchadnezzar is also depicted as carrying out death sentences pronounced by God, slaying two false prophets. Nebuchadnezzar's campaigns of conquest against other nations are portrayed as being in-line with God's will for Nebuchadnezzar's dominance.\nNebuchadnezzar is referred to three times in the Book of Jeremiah using the epithet 'my servant' [God's servant] \u2013 a title usually limited to some of the most positively portrayed figures, such as Jacob and David. Klaas A. D. Smelik noted in 2004 that \"in the Hebrew Bible, there is no better company conceivable than these; at the same time, there is no candidate less likely for this title of honour than the Babylonian king Nebuchadnezzar\". \nIt is possible that the epithet is a later addition, as it is missing in the Septuagint version of the Old Testament, perhaps added after Nebuchadnezzar began to be seen in a slightly more favourable light than immediately after Jerusalem's destruction. Alternatively, possible theological explanations include Nebuchadnezzar being seen, despite his cruelty, as an instrument in fulfilling God's universal plan; or perhaps that designating him as a \"servant\" of God was to show that readers should not fear Nebuchadnezzar, but his true master, God.\nIn the Book of Daniel, widely considered by scholars to be a work of historical fiction, the figure of Nebuchadnezzar differs considerably from his portrayal in the Book of Jeremiah. He is for the most part depicted as a merciless and despotic ruler. The king has a nightmare, and asks his wise men, including Daniel and his three companions Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, to interpret the dream, but refuses to state the dream's contents. When the servants protest, Nebuchadnezzar sentences all of them, including Daniel and his companions, to death.\nBy the end of the story, when Daniel has successfully interpreted the dream, Nebuchadnezzar shows much gratitude, showering Daniel with gifts, appointing him the governor of the \"province of Babylon\" and making him the chief of the kingdom's wise men. A second story again casts Nebuchadnezzar as a tyrannical and pagan king, who, after Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego refuse to worship a newly erected golden statue, sentences them to death through being thrown into a fiery furnace. They are miraculously delivered, and Nebuchadnezzar then acknowledges God as the \"lord of kings\" and \"god of gods\".\nThough Nebuchadnezzar is also mentioned as acknowledging the Hebrews' God as the true god in other passages of the Book of Daniel, it is apparent that his supposed conversion to Judaism does not change his violent character, given that he proclaims that anyone who speaks amiss of God \"shall be cut in pieces and their houses shall be made a dunghill\". In a third story, Daniel interprets another dream as meaning that Nebuchadnezzar will lose his mind and live like an animal for seven years before being restored to his normal state (Daniel 1-4). The Nebuchadnezzar in the Book of Daniel, a fickle tyrant who is not particularly consistent in his faith, contrasts with the typical \"servant of God\" in other books of the Bible.\nGiven that Nebuchadnezzar is referred to as the father of Belshazzar in the Book of Daniel, it is probable that this portrayal of Nebuchadnezzar, especially the story of his madness, was actually based on Belshazzar's actual father, Nabonidus, the last king of the Neo-Babylonian Empire (r.556\u2013539 BC). Separate Jewish and Hellenistic traditions exist concerning Nabonidus having been mad, and it is likely that this madness was simply reattributed to Nebuchadnezzar in the Book of Daniel through conflation. \nSome later traditions conflated Nebuchadnezzar with other rulers as well, such as the Assyrian Ashurbanipal (r.669\u2013631 BC), the Persian Artaxerxes III (r.358\u2013338 BC), the Seleucids Antiochus IV Epiphanes (r.175\u2013164 BC) and Demetrius I Soter (r.161\u2013150 BC) and the Armenian Tigranes the Great (r.95\u201355 BC). The apocryphal Book of Judith, which probably applies the name \"Nebuchadnezzar\" to Tigranes the Great of Armenia, refers to Nebuchadnezzar as a \"king of the Assyrians\", rather than of the Babylonians, and demonstrates that Nebuchadnezzar was still viewed as an evil king, responsible for destroying Jerusalem, looting its temple, taking the Jews hostage in Babylon, and for the various misdeeds ascribed to him in later Jewish writings.\nOther.\nNebuchadnezzar is referred to as () in works of the mediaeval scholar al-\u1e6cabar\u012b, where he is credited with conquering Egypt, Syria, Phoenicia and Arabia. The historical Nebuchadnezzar never conquered Egypt, and it appears that al-\u1e6cabar\u012b transferred to him the achievements of the Assyrian king Esarhaddon (r.\u2009681\u00a0\u2013\u00a0669). In similar fashion Strabo, citing Megasthenes, mentioned in a list of mythical and semi-legendary conquerors, a \"Nabocodrosor\" as having led an army to the Pillars of Hercules and being revered by the Chaldaeans.\nTitles.\nIn most of his inscriptions, Nebuchadnezzar is typically only titled as \"Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, son of Nabopolassar, king of Babylon\" or \"Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, the one who provides for Esagil and Ezida, son of Nabopolassar, king of Babylon\". In economic documents, Nebuchadnezzar is also ascribed the ancient title \"king of the Universe\", and he sometimes also used the title \"king of Sumer and Akkad\", used by all the Neo-Babylonian kings. Some inscriptions accord Nebuchadnezzar more elaborate version of his titles, including the following variant, attested in an inscription from Babylon:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, pious prince, the favorite of the god Marduk, exalted ruler who is the beloved of the god Nab\u00fb, the one who deliberates (and) acquires wisdom, the one who constantly seeks out the ways of their divinity (and) reveres their dominion, the indefatigable governor who is mindful of provisioning Esagil and Ezida daily and (who) constantly seeks out good things for Babylon and Borsippa, the wise (and) pious one who provides for Esagil and Ezida, foremost heir of Nabopolassar, king of Babylon, am I.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWeb sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52347", "revid": "43739691", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52347", "title": "Irish Election Results", "text": ""}
{"id": "52350", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52350", "title": "Gaspar Corte-Real", "text": "Portuguese explorer\nGaspar Corte-Real (1450\u2013 disappeared 1501) was a Portuguese explorer who, alongside his father Jo\u00e3o Vaz Corte-Real and brother Miguel, participated in various exploratory voyages sponsored by the Portuguese Crown. These voyages are said to have been some of the first to reach Newfoundland and possibly other parts of eastern Canada.\nEarly life.\nGaspar was born into the noble Corte-Real family on Terceira in the Azores Islands, the youngest of three sons of Portuguese explorer Jo\u00e3o Vaz Corte-Real (c. 1420\u20131496). Gaspar accompanied his father on expeditions to North America. His brothers were explorers as well.\nCareers.\nIn 1498, King Manuel I of Portugal took an interest in western exploration, likely believing that the lands recently discovered by John Cabot (the coast of North America) were within the realm of Portuguese control under the Treaty of Tordesillas. Corte-Real was one of several explorers to sail west on behalf of Portugal.\nIn 1500, Corte-Real reached Greenland, believing it to be east Asia (as Christopher Columbus had regarded the New World), but was unable to land. He set out on a second voyage in 1501, taking three caravels. The expedition was again prevented from landing at Greenland due to frozen seas. They changed course, and landed in a country of large rivers, pine trees, and berries, believed to be Labrador. There it is believed they captured 57 indigenous people, who were taken back to Portugal to be sold into slavery to assist in financing the voyage. Two of the expedition's three ships made the return trip to Portugal, but the ship carrying Corte-Real was lost.\nNothing more was heard of Gaspar Corte-Real after 1501. His brother Miguel attempted to find him in 1502, but he too was lost.\nLegacy.\nThere is debate amongst historians about the relative importance of Corte-Real. Memorial University of Newfoundland historian Jeff Webb stated in 2017 that \"He is a minor figure about whom very, very little is known with confidence.\" The 20th-century myth-building of Corte-Real was largely the work of historian-diplomat Eduardo Braz\u00e3o, the former National Secretary of Portugal's propaganda ministry, the Secretariado Nacional de Informa\u00e7\u00e3o, Cultura Popular e Turismo, during the regime of Ant\u00f3nio de Oliveira Salazar.\nA statue of Corte-Real was erected in front of the Confederation Building in St. John's, Newfoundland and Labrador in 1965, and has more recently been the subject of controversy. A street in Mount Pearl is named for the explorer. A building at Memorial University of Newfoundland's St. John's campus was formerly named after him. In December 2019, the Board of Regents voted to change its name to the Global Learning Centre, after prompting by the Internationalization Office that the building presently houses.\nSt. John's statue.\nIn May 1963, Braz\u00e3o, then the Portuguese Ambassador to Canada, visited St. John's to meet with premier Joseph Smallwood. Following conversations with Braz\u00e3o, Smallwood announced on 28 May 1963 that the Portuguese fishing fleet \"with the hearty approval of the government of Portugal\" would commission \"a famous Portuguese sculptor\" to create a statue that would depict both Gaspar Corte-Real and his brother Miguel. Following their meeting, Braz\u00e3o invited Smallwood to Portugal, where Smallwood met with Salazar in October of that year.\nTwo years later, a statue of Corte-Real (minus Miguel) was presented under the banner of the Canadian Portuguese Fisheries Organisation in 1965 to commemorate the hospitality of Newfoundlanders towards Portuguese Grand Banks fishermen.\nIn early 1999, a car, apparently chauffeured by a speeding tourist, slammed into the pedestal that supports the statue. The statue itself was unscathed, but its base was mangled. Later that year, Ottawa bronze restoration specialist Craig Johnson subcontracted local foundry sculptors to undertake the repairs while Johnson himself repainted the statue. According to local sculptor Will Gill, who did some of the work, no scars remain from the accident and the statue was returned to its original condition.\nIn 2020, it was noted that the statue, designed by Estado Novo propagandist Joaquim Martins Correia, was erected as part of a behind-the-scenes fisheries rights conflict between Salazar and Spain's Francisco Franco. In 1968, Smallwood had announced that \"Generalissimo Franco is to present a statue to the province\" which would have been erected beside the statue of Corte-Real; this second statue was never delivered.\nOn June 11, 2020, Newfoundland and Labrador Premier Dwight Ball was quoted as saying the government would review politically sensitive provincial statues. Author Edward Riche noted on June 20, 2020, \"If enough people now see the statue of Corte-Real as memorializing a character who enslaved Indigenous people during his imperial ventures, we have a problem.\" \nOn June 28, 2020, it was reported that Todd Russell, president of NunatuKavut, which represents Inuit in central and southern Labrador, \"doesn't need any more consultation \u2014 he wants it taken down.\" On July 8, 2020, it was reported that the statue had been spray-painted with the phrases \"Slaver\" and \"Why is this guy still here?\" Various opinion pieces and letters to the editor called for the statue's removal. The statue was further vandalized in July 2021, following the discovery of unmarked graves of Indigenous children on properties part of the Canadian Indian residential school system. A government working group made recommendations on the statue in February 2022; no action had been taken by July 2023.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52351", "revid": "85402", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52351", "title": "Ogimachi", "text": "Ogimachi may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "52352", "revid": "22802661", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52352", "title": "La Nina", "text": ""}
{"id": "52354", "revid": "43208482", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52354", "title": "Trinity College", "text": "Trinity College may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the UK, Trinity College is generally used as a term to refer to the colleges at one of the English \"ancient universities\":\nIt may also refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about schools, colleges, or other educational institutions which are associated with the same title. If an [ internal link] led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article."}
{"id": "52356", "revid": "1544984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52356", "title": "German Museum of Technology", "text": "Museum in Berlin, Germany\n (German Museum of Technology) in Berlin, Germany is a museum of science and technology, and exhibits a large collection of historical technical artifacts. The museum's main emphasis originally was on rail transport, but today it also features exhibits of various sorts of industrial technology. In 2003, it opened both maritime and aviation exhibition halls in a newly built extension. The museum also contains a science center called Spectrum.\nHistory.\nThe Museum of Traffic and Technology (') was founded in 1982 and assumed the tradition of the Royal Museum of Traffic and Construction (') which was opened in the former station building in 1906. The present-day museum is located on the former freight yard attached to the in the district of Berlin, including two historic roundhouses and several office buildings.\nRenamed \"\" in 1996, the exhibition area was gradually expanded. An adjacent new building complex was inaugurated in 2003, topped by a prominent US Air Force Douglas C-47B \"Raisin Bomber\", which can be seen with ease from the top of the and formerly at the Tempelhof Airport.\nCollections.\nLocomotives.\nAn extensive railway collection opened in 1987/88 in the rebuilt 19th century roundhouses of the Anhalter Bahnhof locomotive depot (') that had lain derelict for about 30 years. The 33 tracks illustrate the history of rail transport, including the deportations of Jews and others by the ' in The Holocaust. The exhibition also features a H0 scale model of the track installations.\nLocomotives on display include:\nAircraft.\nA large aviation section beside the C-47 houses numerous aircraft from the single to a \"Lufthansa\" Junkers Ju 52 (Spanish aircraft built by CASA under license) and an Arado Ar 79. The museum addresses the flight enthusiasm of the early 20th century and its abuse in the German re-armament building up the \"Luftwaffe\", documented by an Arado Ar 96, a wrecked Junkers Ju 87 \"Stuka\" dive bomber and the current restoration of a Focke-Wulf Fw 200 Condor as well as by one of three preserved Messerschmitt Bf 110, a Flak cannon, and a V-1 flying bomb built by Mittelbau-Dora concentration camp inmates at the Mittelwerk site. Post-war aircraft including a VFW-Fokker 614 and the Cessna 172P that Mathias Rust flew to the Moscow Red Square during the Cold War have also been added to the exhibition.\nThe remains of Avro Lancaster B III \"JA914\" are displayed. This aircraft served with 57 Squadron as DX-O. It was shot down over Berlin in September 1943 and crashed into a lake opposite Zahrensdorf.\nComputers.\nOn 15 May 2002, a special exhibition opened which featured the inventions of computer pioneer Konrad Zuse, including a replica of the Z1 and several other Zuse computers.\nBuildings.\nThe museum has two windmills (one German, one Dutch), a brewery, and a forge powered by a water wheel.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52357", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52357", "title": "Eroticism", "text": "Quality that causes sexual feelings\nEroticism (from grc \" \"\" ()\"\u00a0'love, desire' and \" -ism\") is a quality that causes sexual feelings, as well as a philosophical contemplation concerning the aesthetics of sexual desire, sensuality, and romantic love. That quality may be found in any form of artwork, including painting, sculpture, photography, drama, film, music, or literature. It may also be found in advertising. The term may also refer to a state of sexual arousal or anticipation of such \u2013 an insistent sexual impulse, desire, or pattern of thoughts.\nAs French novelist Honor\u00e9 de Balzac stated, eroticism is dependent not just upon an individual's sexual morality, but also the culture and time in which an individual resides.\nDefinitions.\nBecause the nature of what is erotic is fluid, early definitions of the term attempted to conceive eroticism as some form of sensual or romantic love or as the human sex drive (libido); for example, the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\" of 1755 states that the erotic \"is an epithet which is applied to everything with a connection to the love of the sexes; one employs it particularly to characterize...a dissoluteness, an excess\". Libertine literature such as those by John Wilmot, 2nd Earl of Rochester evoked eroticism to the readers.\nBecause eroticism is wholly dependent on the viewer's culture and personal tastes pertaining to what, exactly, defines the erotic, critics have often confused eroticism with pornography, with anti-pornography activist Andrea Dworkin saying, \"Erotica is simply high-class pornography; better produced, better conceived, better executed, better packaged, designed for a better class of consumer.\" This confusion, as Lynn Hunt writes, \"demonstrate[s] the difficulty of drawing... a clear generic demarcation between the erotic and the pornographic\": \"the history of the separation of pornography from eroticism... remains to be written\".\nAudre Lorde recognises eroticism and pornography as \u201ctwo diametrically opposed uses of the sexual\u201d, defining the erotic as \u201ca measure between the beginnings of our sense of self and the chaos of our strongest feelings.\u201d In her 1978 essay, \"Uses of the Erotic: The Erotic as Power\", Lorde identifies the erotic as a source of creative power that is deeply rooted in a spiritual plane of unrecognised or unexpressed feeling and sensation.\nPsychoanalytical approach.\nInfluenced by Sigmund Freud, psychotherapists have turned to Greek philosophy for an understanding of eros' heightened aesthetic. For Plato, Eros takes an almost transcendent manifestation when the subject seeks to go beyond itself and form a communion with the object/other: \"the true order of going...to the things of love, is to use the beauties of earth as steps...to all fair forms, and from fair forms to fair actions, and from fair actions to fair notions, until from fair notions he arrives at the notion of absolute beauty\".\nFrench philosophy.\nModern French conceptions of eroticism can be traced to the Age of Enlightenment, when \"in the eighteenth century, dictionaries defined the erotic as that which concerned love...eroticism was the intrusion into the public sphere of something that was at base private\". This theme of intrusion or transgression was taken up in the twentieth century by the French philosopher Georges Bataille, who argued that eroticism performs a function of dissolving boundaries between human subjectivity and humanity, a transgression that dissolves the rational world but is always temporary, as well as that, \"Desire in eroticism is the desire that triumphs over the taboo. It presupposes man in conflict with himself\". For Bataille, as well as many French theorists, \"Eroticism, unlike simple sexual activity, is a psychological quest...eroticism is assenting to life even in death\".\nNon-heterosexual.\nQueer theory and LGBTQ studies consider the concept from a non-heterosexual perspective, viewing psychoanalytical and modernist views of eroticism as both archaic and heterosexist, written primarily by and for a \"handful of elite, heterosexual, bourgeois men\" who \"mistook their own repressed sexual proclivities\" as the norm.\nTheorists like Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick, Gayle S. Rubin and Marilyn Frye all write extensively about eroticism from a heterosexual, lesbian and separatist point of view, respectively, seeing eroticism as both a political force and cultural critique for marginalized groups, or as Mario Vargas Llosa summarized: \"Eroticism has its own moral justification because it says that pleasure is enough for me; it is a statement of the individual's sovereignty\".\nAudre Lorde, a lesbian Caribbean-American writer and outspoken feminist, called the erotic a source of power specifically identified with the female, often corrupted or distorted by oppression, since it poses the challenge of change. \"For women, this has meant a suppression of the erotic as a considered source of power and information within our lives\". In \"The Uses of the Erotic\" within \"Sister Outsider\", she discusses how the erotic comes from the sharing of joy, \"whether physical, emotional, psychic, or intellectual\" and provides the basis on which understanding provides a foundation for acknowledging difference. Lorde suggests that if we suppress the erotic rather than recognize its presence, it takes on a different form. Rather than enjoying and sharing with one another, it becomes objectifying, which she says translates into abuse as we attempt to hide and suppress our experiences.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52358", "revid": "13974845", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52358", "title": "Imaginary unit", "text": "Principal square root of minus 1\nThe imaginary unit, usually denoted by i, is a mathematical constant that is a solution to the quadratic equation \"x\"2 = \u22121, which is not solved by any real number. Any real-number multiple of the imaginary unit is called an \"imaginary number\".\nCombining the real numbers with the imaginary unit using addition and multiplication generates a new number system called the complex numbers, which consists of all numbers of the form \"a\" + \"bi\" with real numbers a and b. \nThere are two complex square roots of \u22121: the imaginary unit i and its additive inverse \u2212\"i\". More generally, every complex number has two complex-valued square roots which are additive inverses of each other, except for zero, which has zero as its (double) square root.\nHistorically the imaginary unit was denoted by &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, though this is now rare. In contexts in which use of the letter i is ambiguous or problematic, the letter j is sometimes used instead. For example, in electrical engineering the imaginary unit is normally denoted by j instead of i, because i is commonly used to denote electric current.\nTerminology.\nSquare roots of negative numbers are called \"imaginary\" because in early-modern mathematics, only what are now called real numbers, obtainable by physical measurements or basic arithmetic, were considered to be numbers at all \u2013 even negative numbers were treated with skepticism \u2013 so the square root of a negative number was previously considered undefined or nonsensical. The name \"imaginary\" is generally credited to Ren\u00e9 Descartes, and Isaac Newton used the term as early as 1670. The i notation was introduced by Leonhard Euler.\nA \"unit\" is an undivided whole, and \"unity\" or the \"unit number\" is the number one (1).\nDefinition.\nThe imaginary unit i is defined solely by the property that its square is \u22121:\nformula_1\nWith i defined this way, it follows directly from algebra that i and \u2212\"i\" are both square roots of \u22121.\nAlthough the construction is called \"imaginary\", and although the concept of an imaginary number may be intuitively more difficult to grasp than that of a real number, the construction is valid from a mathematical standpoint. Real number operations can be extended to imaginary and complex numbers, by treating i as an unknown quantity while manipulating an expression (and using the definition to replace any occurrence of \"i\"2 with \u22121). Higher integral powers of i are thus\nformula_2\nand so on, cycling through the four values 1, i, \u22121, and \u2212\"i\". As with any non-zero real number, \"i\"0 = 1.\nAs a complex number, i can be represented in rectangular form as 0 + 1\"i\", with a zero real component and a unit imaginary component. In polar form, i can be represented as 1 \u00d7 \"e\"\"\u03c0i\" /2 (or just \"e\"\"\u03c0i\" /2), with an absolute value (or magnitude) of 1 and an argument (or angle) of formula_3 radians. (Adding any integer multiple of 2\"\u03c0\" to this angle works as well.) In the complex plane, which is a special interpretation of a Cartesian plane, i is the point located one unit from the origin along the imaginary axis (which is perpendicular to the real axis).\n\"i\" vs. \u2212\"i\".\nBeing a quadratic polynomial with no multiple root, the defining equation \"x\"2 = \u22121 has two distinct solutions, which are equally valid and which happen to be additive and multiplicative inverses of each other. Although the two solutions are distinct numbers, their properties are indistinguishable; there is no property that one has that the other does not. One of these two solutions is labelled +\"i\" (or simply i) and the other is labelled \u2212\"i\", though it is inherently ambiguous which is which.\nThe only differences between +\"i\" and \u2212\"i\" arise from this labelling. For example, by convention +\"i\" is said to have an argument of formula_4 and \u2212\"i\" is said to have an argument of formula_5 related to the convention of labelling orientations in the Cartesian plane relative to the positive x-axis with positive angles turning anticlockwise in the direction of the positive y-axis. Also, despite the signs written with them, neither +\"i\" nor \u2212\"i\" is inherently positive or negative in the sense that real numbers are.\nA more formal expression of this indistinguishability of +\"i\" and \u2212\"i\" is that, although the complex field is unique (as an extension of the real numbers) up to isomorphism, it is not unique up to a unique isomorphism. That is, there are two field automorphisms of the complex numbers formula_6 that keep each real number fixed, namely the identity and complex conjugation. For more on this general phenomenon, see Galois group.\nMatrices.\nUsing the concepts of matrices and matrix multiplication, complex numbers can be represented in linear algebra. The real unit 1 and imaginary unit i can be represented by any pair of matrices I and J satisfying \"I\"2 = \"I\", \"IJ\" = \"JI\" = \"J\", and \"J\"2 = \u2212\"I\". Then a complex number \"a\" + \"bi\" can be represented by the matrix \"aI\" + \"bJ\", and all of the ordinary rules of complex arithmetic can be derived from the rules of matrix arithmetic.\nThe most common choice is to represent 1 and i by the 2&amp;hairsp;\u00d7&amp;hairsp;2 identity matrix I and the matrix J,\nformula_7\nThen an arbitrary complex number \"a\" + \"bi\" can be represented by:\nformula_8\nMore generally, any real-valued 2&amp;hairsp;\u00d7&amp;hairsp;2 matrix with a trace of zero and a determinant of one squares to \u2212\"I\", so could be chosen for J. Larger matrices could also be used; for example, 1 could be represented by the 4&amp;hairsp;\u00d7&amp;hairsp;4 identity matrix and i could be represented by any of the Dirac matrices for spatial dimensions.\nRoot of \"x\"2 + 1.\nPolynomials (weighted sums of the powers of a variable) are a basic tool in algebra. Polynomials whose coefficients are real numbers form a ring, denoted formula_9 an algebraic structure with addition and multiplication and sharing many properties with the ring of integers.\nThe polynomial formula_10 has no real-number roots, but the set of all real-coefficient polynomials divisible by formula_10 forms an ideal, and so there is a quotient ring formula_12 This quotient ring is isomorphic to the complex numbers, and the variable formula_13 expresses the imaginary unit.\nGraphic representation.\nThe complex numbers can be represented graphically by drawing the real number line as the horizontal axis and the imaginary numbers as the vertical axis of a Cartesian plane called the \"complex plane\". In this representation, the numbers 1 and i are at the same distance from 0, with a right angle between them. Addition by a complex number corresponds to translation in the plane, while multiplication by a unit-magnitude complex number corresponds to rotation about the origin. Every similarity transformation of the plane can be represented by a complex-linear function formula_14\nGeometric algebra.\nIn the geometric algebra of the Euclidean plane, the geometric product or quotient of two arbitrary vectors is a sum of a scalar (real number) part and a bivector part. (A scalar is a quantity with no orientation, a vector is a quantity oriented like a line, and a bivector is a quantity oriented like a plane.) The square of any vector is a positive scalar, representing its length squared, while the square of any bivector is a negative scalar.\nThe quotient of a vector with itself is the scalar 1 = \"u\"/\"u\", and when multiplied by any vector leaves it unchanged (the identity transformation). The quotient of any two perpendicular vectors of the same magnitude, \"J\" = \"u\"/\"v\", which when multiplied rotates the divisor a quarter turn into the dividend, \"Jv\" = \"u\", is a unit bivector which squares to \u22121, and can thus be taken as a representative of the imaginary unit. Any sum of a scalar and bivector can be multiplied by a vector to scale and rotate it, and the algebra of such sums is isomorphic to the algebra of complex numbers. In this interpretation points, vectors, and sums of scalars and bivectors are all distinct types of geometric objects.\nMore generally, in the geometric algebra of any higher-dimensional Euclidean space, a unit bivector of any arbitrary planar orientation squares to \u22121, so can be taken to represent the imaginary unit i.\nProper use.\nThe imaginary unit was historically written formula_15 and still is in some modern works. However, great care needs to be taken when manipulating formulas involving radicals. The radical sign notation formula_16 is reserved either for the principal (positive) square root of a positive real number or for the principal square root of a complex number. Attempting to apply the calculation rules of square roots of positive real numbers to manipulate square roots of complex numbers can produce false results:\nformula_17\nGenerally, the calculation rules\nformula_18\nand\nformula_19\nare guaranteed to be valid only when x and y are both positive real numbers.\nWhen x or y is real but negative, these problems can be avoided by writing and manipulating expressions like formula_20, rather than formula_21. For a more thorough discussion, see the articles Square root and Branch point.\nProperties.\nAs a complex number, the imaginary unit follows all of the rules of complex arithmetic.\nImaginary integers and imaginary numbers.\nWhen the imaginary unit is repeatedly added or subtracted, the result is some integer times the imaginary unit, an \"imaginary integer\"; any such numbers can be added and the result is also an imaginary integer:\nformula_22\nThus, the imaginary unit is the generator of a group under addition, specifically an infinite cyclic group.\nThe imaginary unit can also be multiplied by any arbitrary real number to form an imaginary number. These numbers can be pictured on a number line, the \"imaginary axis\", which as part of the complex plane is typically drawn with a vertical orientation, perpendicular to the real axis which is drawn horizontally.\nGaussian integers.\nInteger sums of the real unit 1 and the imaginary unit i form a square lattice in the complex plane called the Gaussian integers. The sum, difference, or product of Gaussian integers is also a Gaussian integer:\nformula_23\nQuarter-turn rotation.\nWhen multiplied by the imaginary unit i, any arbitrary complex number in the complex plane is rotated by a quarter turn (formula_24 radians or 90\u00b0) anticlockwise. When multiplied by \u2212\"i\", any arbitrary complex number is rotated by a quarter turn clockwise. In polar form:\nformula_25\nIn rectangular form,\nformula_26\nInteger powers.\nThe powers of i repeat in a cycle expressible with the following pattern, where n is any integer:\nformula_27\nThus, under multiplication, i is a generator of a cyclic group of order 4, a discrete subgroup of the continuous circle group of the unit complex numbers under multiplication.\nWritten as a special case of Euler's formula for an integer n,\nformula_28\nWith a careful choice of branch cuts and principal values, this last equation can also apply to arbitrary complex values of n, including cases like \"n\" = \"i\".\nRoots.\nJust like all nonzero complex numbers, formula_29 has two distinct square roots which are additive inverses. In polar form, they are\nformula_30\nformula_34\nSquaring either expression yields\nformula_35\nThe three cube roots of i are\nformula_36\nFor a general positive integer n, the n-th roots of i are, for \"k\" = 0, 1, ..., \"n\" \u2212 1,\nformula_37\nThe value associated with \"k\" = 0 is the principal n-th root of i. The set of roots equals the corresponding set of roots of unity rotated by the principal n-th root of i. These are the vertices of a regular polygon inscribed within the complex unit circle.\nExponential and logarithm.\nThe complex exponential function relates complex addition in the domain to complex multiplication in the codomain. Real values in the domain represent scaling in the codomain (multiplication by a real scalar) with 1 representing multiplication by e, while imaginary values in the domain represent rotation in the codomain (multiplication by a unit complex number) with i representing a rotation by 1 radian. The complex exponential is thus a periodic function in the imaginary direction, with period 2\"\u03c0i\" and image 1 at points 2\"k\u03c0i\" for all integers k, a real multiple of the lattice of imaginary integers.\nThe complex exponential can be broken into even and odd components, the hyperbolic functions cosh and sinh or the trigonometric functions cos and sin:\nformula_38\nEuler's formula decomposes the exponential of an imaginary number representing a rotation:\nformula_39\nThis fact can be used to demonstrate, among other things, the apparently counterintuitive result that formula_40 is a real number.\nThe quotient coth \"z\" = cosh \"z\" / sinh \"z\", with appropriate scaling, can be represented as an infinite partial fraction decomposition as the sum of reciprocal functions translated by imaginary integers:\nformula_41\nOther functions based on the complex exponential are well-defined with imaginary inputs. For example, a number raised to the ni power is:\nformula_42 \nBecause the exponential is periodic, its inverse the complex logarithm is a multi-valued function, with each complex number in the domain corresponding to multiple values in the codomain, separated from each-other by any integer multiple of 2\"\u03c0i\". One way of obtaining a single-valued function is to treat the codomain as a cylinder, with complex values separated by any integer multiple of 2\"\u03c0i\" treated as the same value; another is to take the domain to be a Riemann surface consisting of multiple copies of the complex plane stitched together along the negative real axis as a branch cut, with each branch in the domain corresponding to one infinite strip in the codomain. Functions depending on the complex logarithm therefore depend on careful choice of branch to define and evaluate clearly.\nFor example, if one chooses any branch where formula_43 then when x is a positive real number,\nformula_44\nFactorial.\nThe factorial of the imaginary unit i is most often given in terms of the gamma function evaluated at 1 + \"i\":\nformula_45\nThe magnitude and argument of this number are:\nformula_46\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52359", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52359", "title": "Antiviral", "text": ""}
{"id": "52360", "revid": "48199454", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52360", "title": "Arapaho", "text": "Native American tribe\nThe Arapaho ( ; , ) are a Native American people historically living on the plains of Colorado and Wyoming. They were close allies of the Cheyenne tribe and loosely aligned with the Lakota and Dakota.\nBy the 1850s, Arapaho bands formed two tribes, namely the Northern Arapaho and Southern Arapaho. Since 1878, the Northern Arapaho have lived with the Eastern Shoshone on the Wind River Reservation in Wyoming and are federally recognized as the Northern Arapaho Tribe of the Wind River Reservation. The Southern Arapaho live with the Southern Cheyenne in Oklahoma. Together, their members are enrolled as the federally recognized Cheyenne and Arapaho Tribes.\nNames.\nIt is uncertain where the word \"Arapaho\" came from. Europeans may have derived it from the Pawnee word for \"trader\", \"iriiraraapuhu\", or it may have been a corruption of a Crow word for \"tattoo\", \"alap\u00fauxaache\". The Arapaho autonym is or (\"our people\" or \"people of our own kind\"). They refer to their tribe as (Arapaho Nation). The Cheyenne called them or (\"People of the Sky\" or \"Cloud People\"); the Dakota as (\"Blue Cloud Men\"), and the Lakota and Nakota referred to them as (\"Blue Sky People\").\nThe Caddo ( or \u2013 \"pierced nose people\") called them , the Wichita () , and the Comanche , all names signifying \"dog-eaters\". The Pawnee, Ute and other tribes also referred to them with names signifying \"dog-eaters\".\nThe Northern Arapaho, who called themselves or (\"white sage men\"), were known as or (\"red willow men\") to the Southern Arapaho, whereas the latter were called by their northern kin or (\"Southerners\"). The Northern Arapaho were also known as (\"blood-soup men\").\nThe Cheyenne adapted the Arapaho terms and referred to the Northern Arapaho as \"Vanohetan\" or \"Vanohetaneo / V\u00e1no'\u00e9taneo'o\" (\"Sage (Brush) People\") and to the Southern Arapaho as \"Nomsen'nat\" or \"Nomsen'eo\" (\"Southerners\").\nHistoric political and dialect Arapaho divisions and bands.\nThe Arapaho recognize five main divisions among their people, each speaking a different dialect and apparently representing as many originally distinct but cognate tribes. Through much of Arapaho history, each tribal nation maintained a separate ethnic identity, although they occasionally came together and acted as political allies.\nEach spoke mutually intelligible dialects, which differed from Arapaho proper. Dialectally, the Haa'ninin, Beesowuunenno', and Hinono'eino were closely related. Arapaho elders claimed that the H\u00e1nahawuuena dialect was the most difficult to comprehend of all the dialects.\nIn his classic ethnographic study, Alfred Kroeber identified these five nations from south to north:\nBefore their historic geo-political ethnogenesis, each tribal-nation had a principal\nheadman. The exact date of the ethnic fusion or fission of each social division is not known. The elders say that the \"Hinono'eino\" (\"Arapaho proper\") and \"Beesowuunenno'\" (\"Big Lodge People\" or \"Brush-Hut/Shelter People\") fought over the tribal symbols \u2013 the sacred pipe and lance. Both sacred objects traditionally were kept by the \"Beesowuunenno'\". The different tribal-nations lived together and the \"Beesowuunenno'\" have dispersed for at least 150 years among the formerly distinct Arapaho tribal groups.\nBy the late 18th century, the four divisions south of the \"Haa'ninin\" (\"White Clay People\" or \"Lime People\") or \"Gros Ventre (Atsina)\" consolidated into the Arapaho. Only the Arapaho and Gros Ventre (Atsina) identified as separate tribal nations.\nWhile living on the Great Plains, the \"Hinono'eino\" (all Arapaho bands south of the \"Haa'ninin\") divided historically into two geopolitical social divisions:\nLanguage.\nThe Arapaho language is currently spoken in two different dialects, and it is considered to be a member of the Algonquian language family. The number of fluent speakers of Northern Arapaho has dwindled to 250, most living on the Wind River Reservation in Wyoming, while the number of Southern Arapaho speakers is even more scarce, with only a handful of people who speak it, all advanced in age.\nAccording to Cowell &amp; Moss's 2008 study of the Arapaho language, the Northern Arapaho have made a great effort to maintain the language through establishing the Language and Culture Commission. By producing audio and visual materials, they have provided ways for younger generations to learn the language. In 1995 this effort was matched by Dr. S. N. Greymorning, who established an Arapaho language immersion preschool program. Arapaho language instruction is also offered all throughout grade school. However, the number of students that take the subject is wavering and those who learn typically only retain a selection of memorized vocabulary. There is widespread interest in keeping the language alive for the Northern Arapaho, and their outlook remains positive in their endeavors to perpetuate the learning of Arapaho in schools and among their children and young people. However, this attitude is often counteracted by the lack of true commitment and willingness to really learn and become fluent, underscored by a misunderstanding of its deep roots and purpose.\nFor Southern Arapaho, the language is not quite as valued as it is on the Wind River Reservation. Most have lost interest in learning or maintaining it, and until recently, there were little to no efforts to preserve their dialect. There is a small number who have begun online courses conducted via video in an attempt to revitalize a desire to learn it, and popularity has increased over the past few years.\nHistories.\nEarly history.\nAround 3,000 years ago, the ancestral Arapaho-speaking people (\"Heeteinono'eino'\") lived in the western Great Lakes region along the Red River Valley in what is classified as present-day Manitoba, Canada and Minnesota, United States. There the Arapaho were an agricultural people who grew crops, including maize. Following European colonization in eastern Canada, together with the early Cheyenne people (\"Hitesiino\"'), the Arapaho were forced to migrate westward onto the eastern Great Plains by the Ojibwe. They were numerous and powerful, having obtained guns from their French trading allies.\nThe ancestors of the Arapaho people entered the Great Plains from the western Great Lakes region sometime before 1700. During their early history on the plains, the Arapaho lived on the northern plains from the South Saskatchewan River in Canada south to Montana, Wyoming, and western South Dakota. Before the Arapaho acquired horses, they used domestic dogs as pack animals to pull their travois. The Arapaho acquired horses in the early 1700s from other tribes, which changed their way of life. They became nomadic people, using the horses as pack and riding animals. They could transport greater loads, and travel more easily by horseback to hunt more easily and widely, increasing their success in hunting on the Plains.\nGradually, the Arapaho moved farther south, split into the closely allied Northern and Southern Arapaho, and established a large joint territory spanning land in southern Montana, most of Wyoming, the Nebraska Panhandle, central and eastern Colorado, western Oklahoma, and extreme western Kansas. A large group of Arapaho split from the main tribe and became an independent people, commonly known as the Gros Ventre (as named by the French) or Atsina. The name Gros Ventre, meaning \"Big Bellies\" in French, was a misinterpretation of sign language between an Indian guide and French explorers. The Gros Ventre spoke an Algonquian language similar to Arapaho after the division; they identified as \"A'aninin\", meaning \u2033White Clay people\u2033. The Arapaho often viewed the Gros Ventre as inferior and referred to them as \"Hit\u00fan\u0115na\" or \"Hitouuteen\", meaning \"beggars\". \nExpansion on the plains.\nOnce established, the Arapaho began to expand on the plains through trade, warfare, and alliances with other plains tribes. Around 1811, the Arapaho made an alliance with the Cheyenne (\"H\u00edtes\u00ed\u00edno\u02bc\" \u2013 'scarred one'). Their strong alliance with the Cheyenne allowed the Arapaho to greatly expand their hunting territory. By 1826, the Lakota, Dakota, Cheyenne, and Arapaho pushed the Kiowa (\"Niiciiheihiinenno\u02bc\"; Kiowa tribe: \"Niiciiheihiiteen\") and invading Comanche to the south. Conflict with the allied Comanche and Kiowa ended in 1840 when the two large tribes made peace with the Arapaho and Southern Cheyenne and became their allies.\nChief Little Raven was the most notable Arapaho chief; he helped mediate peace among the nomadic southern plains tribes and would retain his reputation as a peace chief throughout the Indian Wars and reservation period. The alliance with the Comanche and Kiowa made the most southern Arapaho bands powerful enough to enter the Llano Estacado in the Texas Panhandle. One band of Southern Arapaho became so closely allied with the Comanche that they were absorbed into the tribe, adopted the Comanche language, and became a band of Comanche known as the \"Saria T\u0289hka (Sata Teichas)\" 'dog-eaters'.\nAlong the upper Missouri River, the Arapaho actively traded with the farming villages of the Arikara, Mandan, and Hidatsa, trading meat and hides for corn, squash, and beans. The Arikara referred to the Arapaho as the \"Colored Stone Village (People)\", possibly because gemstones from the Southwest were among the trade items. The Hidatsa called them \"E-tah-leh\" or \"Ita-Iddi\" ('buffalo-path people'), referring to their hunting of bison.\nConflict with Euro-American traders and explorers was limited at the time. The Arapaho freely entered various trading posts and trade fairs to exchange mostly bison hides and beaver furs for European goods such as firearms. The Arapaho frequently encountered fur traders in the foothills of the Rocky Mountains, and the headwaters of the Platte and Arkansas. They became well-known traders on the plains and bordering Rocky Mountains. The name \"Arapaho\" may have been derived from the Pawnee word \"Tirapihu\" (or \"Larapihu\"), meaning \"he buys or trades\" or \"traders\". The Arapaho were a prominent trading group in the Great Plains region. The term may also have come from European-American traders referring to them by their Crow (Aps\u00e1alooke alil\u00e1au) name of \"Alappaho\u02bc\", which meant 'people with many tattoos'. By custom the Arapaho tattooed small circles on their bodies. The name Arapaho became widespread among the white traders.\nEnemies and warrior culture.\nA large part of Arapaho society was based around the warrior. Most young men sought this role. After adopting use of the horse, the Arapaho quickly became master horsemen and highly skilled at fighting on horseback. Warriors had larger roles than combat in the society. They were expected to keep peace among the camps, provide food and wealth for their families, and guard the camps from attacks.\nLike other plains Indians, including their Cheyenne allies, the Arapaho have a number of distinct military societies. Each of the eight Arapaho military societies had their own unique initiation rites, pre- and post- battle ceremonies and songs, regalia, and style of combat. Unlike their Cheyenne, Lakota, and Dakota allies, the Arapaho military societies were age based. Each age level had its own society for prestigious or promising warriors of the matching age. As the warriors aged, they may graduate to the next society.\nWarriors often painted their face and bodies with war paint, as well as their horses, for spiritual empowerment. Each warrior created a unique design for the war paint which they often wore into battle. Feathers from birds, particularly eagle feathers, were also worn in battle as symbols of prestige and for reasons similar to war paint. Before setting out for war, the warriors organized into war parties. War parties were made up of individual warriors and a selected war chief. The title of war chief must be earned through a specific number of acts of bravery in battle known as counting coup. Coups may include stealing horses while undetected, touching a living enemy, or stealing a gun from an enemy's grasp. Arapaho warriors used a variety of weapons, including war-clubs, lances, knives, tomahawks, bows, shotguns, rifles, and pistols. They acquired guns through trade at trading posts or trade fairs, in addition to raiding soldiers or other tribes.\nThe Arapaho fought with the Pawnee (\"Hooxeihiinenno'\" \u2013 \"wolf people\"), Omaha (\"Howohoono'\"), Ho-chunk, Osage (\"Wosootiinen\", \"Wosoo3iinen\" or \"Wosoosiinen\"), Ponca (same as Omaha: \"Howohoono'\"), and Kaw (\"Honoho'\") east of their territory. North of Arapaho territory they fought with the Crow (\"Houunenno'\"), Blackfoot Confederacy (\"Woo'teenixteet\" or \"Woo'teenixtee3i\"' \u2013 \u2033people wearing black-feet\u2033), Gros Ventre (\"Hitouunenno'\", Gros Ventre tribe: \"Hitouuteen\"), Flathead (\"Kookee'ei3i'\"), Arikara (\"Koonoonii3i'\" \u2013 \u2033people whose jaws break in pieces\u2033), Iron Confederacy (Nehiyaw-Pwat) (Assiniboine (\"Nihooneihteenootineihino'\" - \"yellow-footed Sioux\"), Plains/Woods Cree (\"Nooku(h)nenno'\"; Plains Cree tribe: \"Nookuho'\" - \"rabbit people\"), Saulteaux (Plains Ojibwa) and Nakoda (Stoney)). To the west they fought with eastern Shoshone (\"Sosoni'ii\"; Shoshone tribe: \"Sosoni'iiteen\") and the Ute (\"Wo'(o)teenehi3i'\" - \u2033cut throats\u2033; Ute tribe: \"Wo'(o)teennehhiiteen\"). South of their territory they occasionally fought with the Navajo (\"Coohoh'oukutoo3i'\" \u2013 \u2033those who tie their hair in back of the head or in bunches\u2033), Apache (\"Coo3o'\" \u2013 \"enemy\" or \"Teebe'eisi3i'\" \u2013 \"they have their hair cut straight, hanging straight down\", \"Ti'iihiinen\" \u2013 \"killdeer people\" refers especially to Jicarilla Apache) and various Pueblo peoples (\"Cooh'ookutoo3i'\" \u2013 \"they tie their hair in a bundle\").\nThe Cheyenne (\"Hitesiino'\"), Sioux (\"Nootineihino'\"), Kiowa (\"Niiciiheihiinenno'\" \u2013 \u2033river people\u2033 or \"Koh'\u00f3wuun\u00e9nno\"' \u2013 \u2033creek people\u2033; Kiowa tribe: \"Niiciiheihiiteen\" or \"Koh'\u00f3wuunteen\"), Plains Apache (\"3oxooheinen\" \u2013 \"pounder people\"), and Comanche (\"Coo3o'\" \u2013 sg. and pl., means: \"enemy\", like Apache) were enemies of the Arapaho initially but became their allies. Together with their allies, the Arapaho also fought with invading US soldiers, miners, and settlers across Arapaho territory and the territory of their allies.\nSand Creek Massacre.\nEvents Leading to the Sand Creek Massacre.\nSeveral skirmishes had ignited hatred from white settlers that lived in the area, and left Arapaho and Cheyenne tribes in constant fear of being attacked by American troops. For example, on April 12, 1864, a rancher brought troops to attack a group of 15 warriors who had asked to be rewarded for bringing his mules back to him. The warriors acted in self-defense and sent the troops running. Word got back to Colonel John Chivington, and they had told him the Indians shot first. He also heard there were 175 cattle head stolen from the government. Chivington \"ordered troops to find and 'chastise' the 'Indians'.\" Soldiers burned villages and sought out to kill Indians, the violence escalating months before the Sand Creek Massacre.\nIn an effort to establish peace, John Evans attempted to extend an offer of refuge and protection to \"friendly\" Indians. However, these efforts were trampled by General Curtis' military expedition against tribes between the Platte and Arkansas Rivers. By this point, both Arapaho and Cheyenne tribes thought that an all out war of extermination was about to rage against them, so they quickly fled, and Curtis and his men never met them.\nSand Creek Massacre.\nIn November 1864, the Colorado militia, led by Colonel John Chivington, massacred a small village of Cheyenne and Arapaho in the Sand Creek massacre. According to a historical narrative on the event titled \"Chief Left Hand\", by Margaret Coel, there were several events that led to the Colorado militia's attack on the village. Governor Evans desired to hold title to the resource-rich Denver-Boulder area. The government trust officials avoided Chief Left Hand, a linguistically gifted Southern Arapaho chief, when executing their treaty that transferred the title of the area away from Indian Trust. The local cavalry was stretched thin by the demands of the Civil War while Indian warriors, acting independently of Chief Left Hand, raided their supply lines. A group of Arapaho and Cheyenne elders with women and children had been denied their traditional wintering grounds in Boulder by the cavalry and were ordered to come to Fort Lyon for food and protection or be considered hostile.\nOn arrival at Lyon, Chief Left Hand and his followers were accused of violence by Colonel Chivington. Chief Left Hand and his people got the message that only those Indians that reported to Fort Lyon would be considered peaceful and all others would be considered hostile and ordered killed. Confused, Chief Left Hand and his followers turned away and traveled a safe distance away from the fort to camp. A traitor gave Colonel Chivington directions to the camp. He and his battalion stalked and attacked the camp early the next morning. Rather than heroic, Colonel Chivington's efforts were considered a gross embarrassment to the Cavalry since he attacked peaceful elders, women, and children. As a result of his war efforts, instead of receiving the promotion to which he aspired, he was relieved of his duties.\nOn October 14, 1865, almost a year after the Sand Creek Massacre, The Arapaho and Cheyenne signed a new treaty with the US government. The treaty addressed the future of conflict between the two tribes and the US government, it outlined new boundaries, it forced the tribe to relinquish claims to other lands, amongst many other demands. The treaty, spanning nine articles, was ratified on May 22, 1866, and then later proclaimed on February 2, 1867.\nEugene Ridgely, a Cheyenne\u2013Northern Arapaho artist, is credited with bringing to light the fact that Arapahos were among the victims of the massacre. His children, Gail Ridgely, Benjamin Ridgley, and Eugene \"Snowball\" Ridgely, were instrumental in having the massacre site designated as a National Historic Site. In 1999, Benjamin and Gail Ridgley organized a group of Northern Arapaho runners to run from Limon, Colorado, to Ethete, Wyoming, in memory of their ancestors who were forced to run for their lives after being attacked and pursued by Colonel Chivington and his battalion. Their efforts will be recognized and remembered by the \"Sand Creek Massacre\" signs that appear along the roadways from Limon to Casper, Wyoming, and then to Ethete.\nWhy the Sand Creek Massacre Occurred.\nThe violence that ensued was deeply rooted in the Indian-hating by American settlers in the area. Their perception was that \"their nascent settlements were indeed surrounded by Indians\", and their inexperience in dealing with Indians was what sparked the Sand Creek Massacre.\nIndian Wars on the Southern Plains.\nThe events at Sand Creek sparked outrage among the Arapaho and Cheyenne, resulting in three decades of war between them and the United States. Much of the hostilities took place in Colorado, leading to many of the events being referred to as part of the so-called Colorado War. Battles and hostilities elsewhere on the southern plains such as in Kansas and Texas are often included as part of the \"Comanche Wars\". During the wars, the Arapaho and Cheyenne allies\u2014the Kiowa, Comanche, and Plains Apache\u2014would participate in some battles alongside them. The Lakota from the north came down into northern Colorado to help the Arapaho and Cheyenne there. The Battle of Julesburg resulted from a force of about 1,000 allied Northern Arapaho, Cheyenne (mostly from the Dog Soldiers warrior society), and Lakota from the Sicangu and Oglala sub-tribes. The point of the raid was retaliation for the events at the Sand Creek Massacre months earlier. The allied Indian forces attacked settlers and US Army forces around the valley of the South Platte River near Julesburg, Colorado. The battle was a decisive Indian victory, resulting in 14 soldiers and four civilians dead and probably no Indian casualties. A force of around 3,000 Southern Arapaho, Northern Cheyenne, and Lakota attacked soldiers and civilians at a bridge crossing the North Platte River, known as the Battle of Platte Bridge. The battle was another victory for the Indians, with 29 soldiers killed and at least eight Indian casualties. Arapaho, Cheyenne, Comanche, Kiowa, and Plains Apaches seeking peace were offered to sign the Medicine Lodge Treaty in October 1867. The treaty allotted the Southern Arapaho a reservation with the Southern Cheyenne between the Arkansas and Cimarron rivers in Indian Territory (present-day Oklahoma). Among those that signed the treaty was Chief Little Raven. Those that did not sign the treaty were called \"hostile\" and were continually pursued by the US Army and their Indian scouts. The last major battle between the Arapaho and the US on the southern plains was the Battle of Summit Springs in northernmost Colorado. The battle involved a force of around 450 Arapaho, Cheyenne, and Lakota warriors and 244 US soldiers and around 50 Pawnee scouts under Frank North. The most prominent Indian leader at the battle was Tall Bull, a leader of the Dog Soldiers warrior society of the Cheyenne. The battle was a US victory with around 35 warriors killed (including Tall Bull) and a further 17 captured. The soldiers suffered only a single casualty. The death of Tall Bull was a major loss for the Dog Soldiers.\nPowder River Expedition.\nAfter the Sand Creek Massacre and a number of other skirmishes, the Northern Arapaho, Cheyenne, and Lakota moved many of their bands to the remote Powder River country in Wyoming and southern Montana. Along the way, they participated in the Battle of Mud Springs, a minor incident in the Nebraska Panhandle involving a force of between 500 and 1,000 Arapaho, Cheyenne, and Lakota warriors and 230 US soldiers. The battle resulted in the capture of some army horses and a herd of several hundred cattle with a single US casualty. An attempt was made by the army to recapture their stolen livestock and attack the Indians, which resulted in the Battle of Rush Creek. The battle was inconclusive, resulting in only one Indian casualty and three US soldiers dead (with a further eight wounded). Lt. Col. William O. Collins, commander of the army forces, stated that pursuing the Indian forces any further through the dry Sand Hills area would be \"injudicious and useless\". Once in the area of the Powder River, the Arapaho noticed an increase in travelers moving along the established Bozeman trail, which led to the Montana goldfields. Settlers and miners traveling on the Bozeman Trail through the Powder River country were viewed as threats by the Indians as they were numerous and were often violent towards encountered Indians and competed for food along the trail.\nHostilities in the Powder River area led Major General Grenville M. Dodge to order the Powder River Expedition as a punitive campaign against the Arapaho, Lakota, and Cheyenne. The expedition was inconclusive with neither side gaining a definitive victory. The allied Indian forces mostly evaded the soldiers except for raids on their supplies which left most soldiers desperately under-equipped. The most significant battle was the Battle of the Tongue River where Brigadier General Patrick Edward Connor ordered Frank North and his Pawnee Scouts to find a camp of Arapaho Indians under the leadership of Chief Black Bear. Once located, Connor sent in 200 soldiers with two howitzers and 40 Omaha and Ho-Chunk and 30 Pawnee scouts, and marched toward the village that night. Indian warriors acting as scouts for the US Army came from the Pawnee, Omaha, and Ho-Chunk (Winnebago) tribes who were traditional enemies of the Arapaho and their Cheyenne and Lakota allies. With mountain man Jim Bridger leading the forces, they charged the camp. Most of the Arapaho warriors were gone on a raid against the Crow, and the battle was a US victory resulting in 63 Arapaho dead, mostly women and children. The few warriors present at the camp put up a strong defense and covered the women and children as most escaped beyond the reach of the soldiers and Indian scouts. After the battle, the soldiers burned and looted the abandoned tipis. Connor singled out four Ho-CHunk, including chief Little Priest, plus North and 15 Pawnee for bravery. The Pawnee made off with 500 horses from the camp's herd as payback for previous raids by the Arapaho. The Arapaho were not intimidated by the attack and launched a counterattack resulting in the Sawyers Fight where Arapaho warriors attacked a group of surveyors, resulting in three dead and no Arapaho losses.\nRed Cloud's War.\nRed Cloud's War was a war fought between soldiers of the United States and the allied Lakota, Northern Cheyenne, and Northern Arapaho from 1866 to 1868. The war was named after the prominent Oglala Lakota chief Red Cloud who led many followers into battle with the invading soldiers. The war was a response to the large number of miners and settlers passing through the Bozeman Trail, which was the fastest and easiest trail from Fort Laramie to the Montana goldfields. The Bozeman Trail passed right through the Powder River Country which was near the center of Arapaho, Cheyenne, Lakota, and Dakota territory in Wyoming and southern Montana. The large number of miners and settlers competed directly with the Indians for resources such as food along the trail.\nThe most significant battle during Red Cloud's War was the Fetterman Fight, also known as Battle of The Hundred in the Hand to the Indian forces fought on December 21, 1866. The Battle involved Capt. William J. Fetterman who led a force of 79 soldiers and two civilians after a group of 10 Indian decoys planning on luring Fetterman's forces into an ambush. The 10 decoys consisted of two Arapaho, two Cheyenne, and six Lakota. Fetterman was well known for his boastful nature and his inexperience fighting Indian warriors and despite orders to not pursue the decoys did so anyway. Jim Bridger, famous Mountain Man and guide to the soldiers stationed at Fort Laramie, commented on how the soldiers \"don't know anything about fighting Indians\". After about a half-mile pursuit, the decoys signaled the hidden warriors to ambush Fetterman and his forces. Warriors from both sides of the trail charged Fetterman and forced them into nearby rocks where the battle soon became hand-to-hand combat, giving the Indians the upper hand due to their skill in fighting with handheld weapons such as tomahawks and war clubs. The Indian forces killed all of Fetterman's infantry, as well as the following cavalry, with a total of 81 killed. The battle was the greatest military defeat by the US on the Great Plains until the Battle of the Little Bighorn 10 years later. Red Cloud's War ended in a victory for the Arapaho, Cheyenne, Lakota, and Dakota. The Treaty of Fort Laramie guaranteed legal control of the Powder River country to the Indians.\nGreat Sioux War of 1876\u201377.\nThe Great Sioux War of 1876\u201377, also known as the Black Hills War or Great Cheyenne War, was a major conflict that was fought between the Lakota Sioux, Cheyenne, and Arapaho alliance and the US Army. The war was started after miners and settlers traveled into the Black Hills area and found gold, resulting in increased numbers of non-Indians illegally entering designated Indian lands. A large part of Cheyenne and Arapaho territory and most of Sioux territory known as the Great Sioux Reservation was guaranteed legally to the tribes by the Treaty of Fort Laramie after they defeated the US during Red Cloud's War in 1868. The Black Hills in particular are viewed as sacred to the Lakota and Dakota peoples, and the presence of settlers illegally occupying the area caused great unrest within the tribes. Instead of evicting the settlers, the US Army broke the treaty and invaded Sioux, Cheyenne, and Arapaho territory in order to protect American settlers and put the allied tribes on smaller reservations or wiped them out.\nAfter Red Cloud's War, many Northern Arapaho moved to the Red Cloud Agency in Dakota Territory and lived among the Lakota, as well as many Cheyenne. Among the most influential and respected Arapaho chiefs living on the Agency was Chief Black Coal (Northern Arapaho), who gained prominence as a warrior and leader against white settlers in the Powder River country. Other important Arapaho chiefs living in the area included Medicine Man, Chief Black Bear, Sorrel Horse, Little Shield, Sharp Nose, Little Wolf, Plenty Bear, and Friday. The Arapaho chief Friday was well regarded for his intelligence and served as an interpreter between the tribe and the Americans. Black Coal guaranteed to the Americans that he and his people would remain peaceful during the tense times when the settlers were illegally entering Indian land in hopes of securing recognized territory of their own in Wyoming. Many of the warriors and families that disagreed with Black Coal's ideals drifted southward to join up with the southern division of Arapahos. Many Arapaho, particularly those in Chief Medicine Man's band, did not wish to reside among the Sioux \"for fear of mixing themselves up with other tribes\". Their peaceful stance and willingness to help American soldiers strained once strong relations between them and the Lakota and Cheyenne, who took an aggressive stance and fled the reservation. Attitudes towards the Arapaho from the \"hostile\" Lakota and Cheyenne were similar to the attitudes they had towards members of their own tribes which took similar peaceful stances and remained as \"reservation Indians\". Despite their unwillingness to take up the warpath, the Arapaho were unwilling to cede their territory, particularly the Black Hills area to which they have a strong spiritual attachment similar to the Lakota.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You have come here to speak with us about the Black Hills, and, without discussing anything that we say, and without changing anything that we say, we wish to tell the Great father [President of the United States] when you get back that this is the country in which we were brought up, and it has also been given to us by treaty by the great father. And I am here to take care of the country, and therefore, not only the Dakota [Sioux] Indians, but my people have an interest in the Black Hills that we have come to speak about today.\u2014\u200a\nDuring this time of great unrest, the tribe found itself deteriorating in leadership with many chiefs holding little sway among their bands. In order to regain strength as leaders and further negotiations for land in Wyoming, many chiefs and their warriors enlisted as army scouts for the United States and campaigned against their allies. Chief Sharp Nose, who was considered as influential and equal to Black Coal, was noted as \"the inspiration of the battlefield\u00a0 ... He handled men with rare judgment and coolness, and was as modest as he was brave\". Despite their overall stance as allies for the Americans, a handful of Arapaho warriors fought against the United States in key battles during the war.\nLike in previous wars, the US recruited Indian warriors from tribes that were enemies with the Arapaho\u2013Cheyenne\u2013Lakota\u2013Dakota alliance to act as Indian scouts, most notably from the Crow, Arikara, and Shoshone. Unlike previous conflicts involving the Lakota\u2013Dakota\u2013Cheyenne\u2013Arapaho alliance and the United States, the Great Sioux War ended in a victory for the United States. The bison herds which were the center of life for the Indians were considerably smaller due to government-supported whole-scale slaughter in order to prevent collisions with railroads, conflict with ranch cattle, and to force nomadic plains Indians to adopt reservation life living off government handouts. Decreased resources and starvation was the major reason for the surrendering of individual Indian bands and the end of the Great Sioux War.\nThe most significant battle of the war was the Battle of The Little Bighorn on June 25\u201326, 1876. The battle was fought between warriors from the Lakota, Cheyenne, and Arapaho (as well as individual Dakota warriors) and the 7th Cavalry Regiment of the US Army. The battle was fought along the Little Bighorn River in eastern Montana. The soldiers attempted to ambush the large camp of Indians along the river bottom despite the warnings from the Crow Scouts who knew that Custer severely underestimated the number of warriors in the camp. The US Seventh Cavalry, including the Custer Battalion, a force of 700 men led by George Armstrong Custer, suffered a severe defeat. Five of the Seventh Cavalry's companies were annihilated. The total US casualty count, including scouts, was 268 dead including Custer and 55 injured. Only five Arapaho were present at the battle and their presence was by chance. The Arapaho present were four Northern Arapaho warriors named Yellow Eagle, Yellow Fly, Left Hand, and Water Man. The fifth Arapaho was a Southern Arapaho named Well-Knowing One (Sage) but also known as Green Grass. The five Arapaho set out as a war party from near Fort Robinson to raid the Shoshone, but by chance came across a small party of young Sioux warriors. The Sioux thought that the Arapaho were United States Army Indian Scouts and invited them back to their camp along the Little Bighorn River, where they were captured and had their guns taken from them. The Lakota and Dakota threatened to kill the Arapaho, but the Cheyenne chief Two Moons recognized the men as Arapaho and ordered their release. The next day was the battle and, despite being viewed with suspicion, the five Arapaho actively fought in the battle. Water Man wore a large eagle feather headdress, a white shirt, beaded leggings, a breechcloth, and painted his face red and yellow during the battle. Water Man claimed killing one soldier while charging up the steep river banks but did not take his scalp because most Arapaho refused to take a scalp from someone with short hair. Water Man claimed to have watched Custer die.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When I reached the top of the hill I saw Custer. He was dressed in buckskin, coat and pants, and was on his hands and knees. He had been shot through the side and there was blood coming from his mouth. He seemed to be watching the Indians moving around him. Four soldiers were sitting up around him, but they were all badly wounded. All the other soldiers were down. Then the Indians closed in around him, and I did not see any more. Most of the dead soldiers had been killed by arrows, as they had arrows sticking in them. The next time I saw Custer he was dead, and some Indians were taking his buckskin clothes.\u2014\u200a\nThe Arapaho warrior Left Hand accidentally killed a Lakota warrior that he mistook for an Arikara scout, and despite further anger from the Lakota, left the battle alive along with the other four Arapaho. After the battle, the five Arapaho quietly slipped away and headed back to the Fort Robinson area.\nCulture.\nCreation story.\nThe creation story of the Arapaho people shows a connection with the Algonquian people. Both cultures have an \"earth-diver creation story\". The Arapaho myth begins with a being called Flat Pipe who exists alone upon the water. The Great Spirit suggests to Flat Pipe that he create creatures to build a world. He first conceives of ducks and other water birds who dive beneath the surface of the water but are not able to find land. With guidance from the Great Spirit, Flat Pipe creates a turtle who can live on both land or in the water. The Turtle dives and returns, spitting out a piece of land that grows into the earth. Flat Pipe then goes about creating men, women, and animals to populate the earth. The turtle is common to many \"earth-diver\" creation stories.\nThis story is an example of \"creation by thought\". Flat Pipe creates the creatures by thinking of them.\nGender and division of labor.\nTraditionally, men are responsible for hunting. After horses were introduced, buffalo became the main food source\u2014the meat, organs, and the blood all being consumed. Blood was drunk or made into pudding. Women (and \"haxu'xan\" (Two Spirits)) are traditionally in charge of food preparation and dressing hides to make clothing and bedding, saddles, and housing materials.\nThe Arapaho have historically had social and spiritual roles for those who are known in contemporary Native cultures as Two Spirit or third gender. Anthropologist Alfred Kroeber wrote about male-bodied individuals who lived as women, the \"haxu'xan\", who he says were believed to have \"the natural desire to become women, and as they grew up gradually became women\" (and could marry men); he further stated that the Arapaho believed that the \"haxu'xan\"'s gender was a supernatural gift from birds or other animals, that they had miraculous powers, and they were also noted for their inventiveness, such as making the first intoxicant from rainwater.\nClothing.\nOn the Plains, women (and \"haxu'xan\") historically wore moccasins, leggings, and ankle-length buckskin-fringed dresses, ornamented with porcupine quills, paint, elk teeth, and beads. Men have also worn moccasins, leggings, buckskin breechclothes (drawn between the legs, tied around the waist), and sometimes shirts; warriors have often worn necklaces. Many of these items are still part of contemporary dress for both casual and formal wear, or as regalia.\nEconomic development.\nIn July 2005, Northern Arapahos won a contentious court battle with the State of Wyoming to get into the gambling or casino industry. The 10th Circuit Court ruled that the State of Wyoming was acting in bad faith when it would not negotiate with the Arapahos for gaming. The Northern Arapaho Tribe opened the first casinos in Wyoming. Presently, the Arapaho Tribe owns and operates high-stakes, Class III gaming at the Wind River Casino, the Little Wind Casino, and the 789 Smoke Shop and Casino. In 2012, The Wind River Hotel, which is attached to the Wind River Casino, features a cultural room called the Northern Arapaho Experience. They are regulated by a Gaming Commission composed of three tribal members.\nMeanwhile, the Cheyenne and Arapaho Tribes operate four casinos in Oklahoma: the Lucky Star Casino in Clinton, the Lucky Star Casino in Watonga, the Feather Warrior Casino in Canton, and the newest casino which opened in 2018, the Lucky Star Casino in Hammon.\nPopulation history.\nThere are no references to the numbers of the Arapaho previous to the 19th century. M. R. Stuart in 1812 estimated the Arapaho at 3,050 warriors (therefore around 15,250 people). Jedidiah Morse in 1822 reported 10,000 Arrapahays, 7,000 Kaninavisch (another name for the Arapaho), 1,500 Castahana and 1,500 Pastanownas (possibly related tribes). Indian Affairs gave the Arapaho at 3,045 people in year 1880, 2,298 in year 1885, 1,925 in 1890, 1,869 in 1895, 1,782 in 1900, 1,768 in 1905 and 1,753 in 1910.\nDuring the 20th and 21st centuries Arapaho population has rebounded and they numbered 12,192 in 2020.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52366", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52366", "title": "War of Austrian succession", "text": ""}
{"id": "52367", "revid": "33583241", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52367", "title": "War of Austrian Succession", "text": ""}
{"id": "52368", "revid": "835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52368", "title": "University of Detroit-Mercy", "text": ""}
{"id": "52369", "revid": "45266726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52369", "title": "Lincoln Memorial", "text": "National memorial in Washington, DC\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Lincoln Memorial is a U.S. national memorial honoring Abraham Lincoln, the 16th president of the United States, located on the western end of the National Mall of Washington, D.C. The memorial is built in a neoclassical style in the form of a classical temple. The memorial's architect was Henry Bacon. In 1920, Daniel Chester French designed the large interior \"Abraham Lincoln\" statue, which was carved in marble by the Piccirilli brothers. Jules Gu\u00e9rin painted the interior murals, and the epitaph above the statue was written by Royal Cortissoz. Dedicated on May 30, 1922, it is one of several memorials built to honor an American president. It has been a major tourist attraction since its opening, and over the years, has occasionally been used as a symbolic center focused on race relations and civil rights.\nDoric style columns line the temple exterior, and the inscriptions inside include two well-known speeches by Lincoln, the Gettysburg Address, and his second inaugural address. The memorial has been the site of many famous speeches, including Martin Luther King Jr.'s \"I Have a Dream\" speech delivered on August 28, 1963, during the rally at the end of the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom.\nLike other monuments on the National Mall, including the nearby Vietnam Veterans Memorial, Korean War Veterans Memorial, and World War II Memorial, the national memorial is administered by the National Park Service under its National Mall and Memorial Parks group. It has been listed on the National Register of Historic Places since October 15, 1966, and was ranked seventh on the American Institute of Architects' 2007 list of America's Favorite Architecture. The memorial is open to the public 24 hours a day, and more than seven million people visit it annually.\nHistory.\nConstruction and dedication.\nThe first public memorial to U.S. President Abraham Lincoln in Washington, D.C., was a statue by Lot Flannery erected in front of the District of Columbia City Hall in 1868, three years after Lincoln's assassination in Ford's Theatre. Demands for a fitting national memorial had been voiced since the time of Lincoln's death. In 1867, Congress passed the first of many bills incorporating a commission to erect a monument for the sixteenth president. An American sculptor, Clark Mills, was chosen to design the monument. His plans reflected the nationalistic spirit of the time and called for a structure adorned with six equestrian and 31 pedestrian statues of colossal proportions, crowned by a statue of Abraham Lincoln. Subscriptions for the project were insufficient.\nThe matter lay dormant until the start of the 20th century, when, under the leadership of Senator Shelby M. Cullom of Illinois, six separate bills were introduced in Congress for the incorporation of a new memorial commission. The first five bills, proposed in the years 1901, 1902, and 1908, met with defeat because of opposition from Speaker Joe Cannon. The sixth bill (Senate Bill 9449), introduced on December 13, 1910, passed. The Lincoln Memorial Commission met for the first time the following year and President William H. Taft was chosen as the commission's president. Progress continued steadily, and in 1913 Congress approved the commission's choice of design and location.\nThere were questions regarding the commission's plan. Many thought architect Henry Bacon's Greek temple design was far too ostentatious for a man of Lincoln's humble character. Instead, they proposed a simple log cabin shrine. The site too did not go unopposed. The recently reclaimed land in West Potomac Park was seen by many as either too swampy or too inaccessible. Other sites, such as Washington Union Station, were put forth, but the commission stood firm in its recommendation, feeling that the Potomac Park location, situated on the axis connecting the Washington Monument and Capitol, overlooking the Potomac River and surrounded by open land, was ideal. Furthermore, the Potomac Park site was already designated in the McMillan Plan of 1901 to be the location of a future monument comparable to that of the Washington Monument.\nWith Congressional approval and a $300,000 allocation, the project got underway. On February 12, 1914, contractor M. F. Comer of Toledo, Ohio; resident member of the memorial's commission, former Senator Joseph C. S. Blackburn of Kentucky; and the memorial's designer, Henry Bacon, conducted a groundbreaking ceremony by turning over a few spadefuls of earth. The following month is when actual construction began. Work progressed steadily according to schedule. Some changes were made to the plan. The statue of Lincoln, originally designed to be tall, was enlarged to to prevent it from being overwhelmed by the huge chamber. As late as 1920, the decision was made to substitute an open portal for the bronze and glass grille which was to have guarded the entrance. Despite these changes, the Memorial was finished on schedule. Commission president William H. Taft \u2013 who was then Chief Justice of the United States \u2013 dedicated the Memorial on May 30, 1922, and presented it to President Warren G. Harding, who accepted it on behalf of the American people. Lincoln's only surviving son, 78-year-old Robert Todd Lincoln, was in attendance. Prominent African Americans were invited to the event and discovered upon arrival they were assigned a segregated section guarded by U.S. Marines, a policy implemented by director of the Office of Public Buildings and Grounds, Lieutenant Colonel Clarence O. Sherrill.\nSubsequent history.\nThe Memorial has become a symbolically sacred venue, especially for the Civil Rights Movement. In 1939, the Daughters of the American Revolution refused to allow the African-American contralto Marian Anderson to perform before an integrated audience at the organization's Constitution Hall. At the suggestion of Eleanor Roosevelt, the wife of President Franklin D. Roosevelt, Harold L. Ickes, the Secretary of the Interior, arranged for a performance on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial on Easter Sunday of that year, to a live audience of 75,000 and a nationwide radio audience. On June 29, 1947, Harry Truman became the first president to address the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP). The speech took place at the Lincoln Memorial during the NAACP convention and was carried nationally on radio. In that speech, Truman laid out the need to end discrimination, which would be advanced by the first comprehensive, presidentially proposed civil rights legislation.\nOn August 28, 1963, the memorial grounds were the site of the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom, which proved to be a high point of the American Civil Rights Movement. It is estimated that approximately 250,000 people came to the event, where they heard Martin Luther King Jr., deliver his historic \"I Have a Dream\" speech before the memorial honoring the president who issued the Emancipation Proclamation 100 years earlier. King's speech, with its language of patriotism and its evocation of Lincoln's Gettysburg Address, was meant to match the symbolism of the Lincoln Memorial as a monument to national unity. Labor leader Walter Reuther, an organizer of the march, persuaded the other organizers to move the march to the Lincoln Memorial from the Capitol Building. Reuther believed the location would be less threatening to Congress and that the occasion would be especially appropriate underneath the gaze of Abraham Lincoln's statue. The D.C. police also appreciated the location because it was surrounded on three sides by water, so that any incident could be easily contained.\nThe Memorial was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on October 15, 1966.\nAt the memorial on May 9, 1970, President Richard Nixon had a middle-of-the-night impromptu, brief meeting with protesters who, just days after the Kent State shootings, were preparing to march against the Vietnam War.\nOn August 28, 1983, crowds gathered again to mark the 20th Anniversary Mobilization for Jobs, Peace and Freedom, to reflect on progress in gaining civil rights for African Americans and to commit to correcting continuing injustices. King's speech is such a part of the Lincoln Memorial story, that the spot on which King stood, on the landing eighteen steps below Lincoln's statue, was engraved in 2003 in recognition of the 40th anniversary of the event.\nExterior.\nThe exterior of the Memorial echoes a classic Greek temple and features Yule marble quarried from Colorado. The structure measures and is tall. It is surrounded by a peristyle of 36 fluted Doric columns, one for each of the 36 states in the Union at the time of Lincoln's death, and two columns in-antis at the entrance behind the colonnade. The columns stand tall with a base diameter of . Each column is built from 12 drums including the capital. The columns, like the exterior walls and facades, are inclined slightly toward the building's interior. This is to compensate for perspective distortions which would otherwise make the memorial appear to bulge out at the top when compared with the bottom, a common feature of Ancient Greek architecture.\nAbove the colonnade, inscribed on the frieze, are the names of the 36 states in the Union at the time of Lincoln's death and the dates in which they entered the Union. Their names are separated by double wreath medallions in bas-relief. The cornice is composed of a carved scroll regularly interspersed with projecting lions' heads and ornamented with palmetto cresting along the upper edge. Above this on the attic frieze are inscribed the names of the 48 states present at the time of the Memorial's dedication. A bit higher is a garland joined by ribbons and palm leaves, supported by the wings of eagles. All ornamentation on the friezes and cornices was done by Ernest C. Bairstow.\nThe Memorial is anchored in a concrete foundation, in depth, constructed by M. F. Comer and Company and the National Foundation and Engineering Company, and is encompassed by a rectangular granite retaining wall measuring in height.\nLeading up to the shrine on the east side are the main steps. Beginning at the edge of the Reflecting Pool, the steps rise to the Lincoln Memorial Circle roadway surrounding the edifice, then to the main portal, intermittently spaced with a series of platforms. Flanking the steps as they approach the entrance are two buttresses each crowned with an tall tripod carved from pink Tennessee marble by the Piccirilli Brothers. There are a total of 87 steps (58 steps from the chamber to the plaza and 29 steps from the plaza to the Reflecting Pool).\nInterior.\nThe Memorial's interior is divided into three chambers by two rows of four Ionic columns, each tall and at their base. The central chamber, housing the statue of Lincoln, is wide, deep, and high. The north and south chambers display carved inscriptions of Lincoln's second inaugural address and his Gettysburg Address. Bordering these inscriptions are pilasters ornamented with fasces, eagles, and wreaths. The inscriptions and adjoining ornamentation are by Evelyn Beatrice Longman.\nThe Memorial is replete with symbolic elements. The 36 columns represent the states of the Union at the time of Lincoln's death; the 48 stone festoons above the columns represent the 48 states in 1922. Inside, each inscription is surmounted by a mural by Jules Gu\u00e9rin portraying principles seen as evident in Lincoln's life: Freedom, Liberty, Morality, Justice, and the Law on the south wall; Unity, Fraternity, and Charity on the north. Cypress trees, representing Eternity, are in the murals' backgrounds. The murals' paint incorporated kerosene and wax to protect the exposed artwork from fluctuations in temperature and moisture.\nThe ceiling consists of bronze girders ornamented with laurel and oak leaves. Between these are panels of Alabama marble, saturated with paraffin to increase translucency. But feeling that the statue required even more light, Bacon and French designed metal slats for the ceiling to conceal floodlights, which could be modulated to supplement the natural light; this modification was installed in 1929. The one major alteration since was the addition of an elevator for the disabled in the 1970s.\nStatue.\nLying between the north and south chambers of the open-air Memorial is the central hall, which contains the large solitary figure of Abraham Lincoln sitting in contemplation. Its sculptor, Daniel Chester French, supervised the six Piccirilli brothers (Ferruccio, Attilio, Furio, Masaniello, Orazio, and Getulio) in its construction, and it took four years to complete.\nThe statue, carved from Georgia white marble, was shipped in 28 pieces. Originally intended to be only tall, the sculpture was enlarged to from head to foot considering it would look small within the extensive interior space. If Lincoln were depicted standing, he would be tall.\nThe widest span of the statue corresponds to its height, and it rests upon an oblong pedestal of Tennessee marble high, wide, and deep. Directly beneath this lies a platform of Tennessee marble about long, wide, and high. Lincoln's arms rest on representations of Roman fasces, a subtle touch that associates the statue with the Augustan (and imperial) theme (obelisk and funerary monuments) of the Washington Mall. The statue is discreetly bordered by two pilasters, one on each side. Between these pilasters, and above Lincoln's head, is engraved an epitaph of Lincoln by Royal Cortissoz. It is important to note that regardless of the aforementioned design intent of the \"Roman\" fasces, the fasces are features of Etruscan political institutions that were adopted by the Romans, and according to Silius Italicus, these fasce originate from the city of Vetulonia, Italy.\nSculptural features.\nAn urban legend holds that the face of General Robert E. Lee is carved onto the back of Lincoln's head, and looks back across the Potomac toward his former home, Arlington House (now within the bounds of Arlington National Cemetery). Another popular legend is that Lincoln's hands are shown using sign language to represent his initials, his left hand signing an \"A\" and his right signing an \"L\". The National Park Service denies both legends.\nHowever, historian Gerald Prokopowicz writes that, while it is not clear that sculptor Daniel Chester French intended Lincoln's hands to be formed into sign language versions of his initials, it is possible that French did intend it. French was familiar with American Sign Language, and he would have had a reason to do so, to pay tribute to Lincoln for having signed the federal legislation giving Gallaudet University, a university for the deaf, the authority to grant college degrees. The National Geographic Society's publication \"Pinpointing the Past in Washington, D.C.\" states that Daniel Chester French had a son who was deaf and that the sculptor was familiar with sign language. Historian James A. Percoco has observed that, although there are no extant documents showing that French had Lincoln's hands carved to represent the letters \"A\" and \"L\" in American Sign Language, \"I think you can conclude that it's reasonable to have that kind of summation about the hands.\"\nUndercroft.\nBelow the memorial is an undercroft. During construction, graffiti was scrawled on it by workers, which is considered historical by the National Park Service. During the 1970s and 1980s, there were regular tours of the undercroft. The tours stopped abruptly in 1989 after a visitor noticed asbestos and notified the Service. Due to water seeping through the calcium carbonate within the marble, over time stalactites and stalagmites have formed within it. \nFor the memorial's centennial in 2022, the undercroft was planned to be open to visitors following a rehabilitation project funded by David Rubenstein. Work started on the $69 million project in 2023 with expected completion by 2026.\nThrough the renovation, the undercroft will become a visitor area with a museum, theater, store and exhibit section. It is expected to only take up 15,000 square feet of the 50,000 square-foot undercroft. The plan, as of 2024, is for the space to include six floor-to-ceiling glass walls that will provide views of the cathedral-like interior of the undercroft, and an immersive theater presentation that will project images of historic events onto screens and the undercroft's pillars.\nIn popular culture.\nAs one of the most prominent American monuments, the Lincoln Memorial is often featured in books, films, videogames, and television shows that take place in Washington; by 2003 it had appeared in over 60 films, and in 2009, Mark S. Reinhart compiled some short sketches of dozens of uses of the Memorial in film and television.\nSome examples of films include Frank Capra's 1939 film \"Mr. Smith Goes to Washington\", where in a key scene the statue and the Memorial's inscription provide inspiration to freshman Senator Jefferson Smith, played by James Stewart. The Park Service did not want Capra to film at the Memorial, so he sent a large crew elsewhere as a distraction while a smaller crew filmed Stewart and Jean Arthur inside the Memorial.\nMany of the appearances of the Lincoln Memorial are actually digital visual effects, due to restrictive filming rules. As of 2017, according to the National Park Service, \"Filming/photography is prohibited above the white marble steps and the interior chamber of the Lincoln Memorial.\"\nMitchell Newton-Matza said in 2016 that \"Reflecting its cherished place in the hearts of Americans, the Lincoln Memorial has often been featured prominently in popular culture, especially motion pictures.\" According to Tracey Gold Bennett, \"The majesty of the Lincoln Memorial is a big draw for film location scouts, producers, and directors because this landmark has appeared in a considerable number of films.\"\nJay Sacher writes:\nFrom high to low, the memorial is cultural shorthand for both American ideals and 1960s radicalism. From Forrest Gump's Zelig-like insertion into anti-war rallies on the steps of the memorial, to the villainous Decepticon robots discarding the Lincoln statue and claiming it as a throne. ... The memorial's place in the culture is assured even as it is parodied.\nDepictions on U.S. currency.\nFrom 1959 (the 150th anniversary of Lincoln's birth) to 2008, the memorial, with statue visible through the columns, was depicted on the reverse of the United States one-cent coin, which since 1909 has depicted a bust of Lincoln on its front.\nThe memorial has appeared on the back of the U.S. five-dollar bill since 1929. The front of the bill bears Lincoln's portrait.\nReferences.\nInformational notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52370", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52370", "title": "Manzanar Japanese internment camp", "text": ""}
{"id": "52371", "revid": "36941121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52371", "title": "Titanic (1997 film)", "text": "1997 American film by James Cameron\nTitanic is a 1997 American epic romantic disaster film written and directed by James Cameron. Incorporating both historical and fictionalized aspects, it is based on accounts of the sinking of in 1912. Leonardo DiCaprio and Kate Winslet star as members of different social classes who fall in love during the ship's ill-fated maiden voyage. The ensemble cast includes Billy Zane, Kathy Bates, Frances Fisher, Bernard Hill, Jonathan Hyde, Danny Nucci, David Warner and Bill Paxton.\nCameron's inspiration came from his fascination with shipwrecks. He felt a love story interspersed with human loss would be essential to convey the emotional impact of the disaster. Production began on September 1, 1995, when Cameron shot footage of the \"Titanic\" wreck. The modern scenes on the research vessel\" \"were shot on board the \"Akademik Mstislav Keldysh\", which Cameron had used as a base when filming the wreck. Scale models, computer-generated imagery (CGI), and a reconstruction of the \"Titanic\" built at Baja Studios were used to recreate the sinking. \"Titanic\" was initially in development at 20th Century Fox, but delays and a mounting budget resulted in Fox partnering with Paramount Pictures for financial help. It was the most expensive film ever made at the time, with a production budget of $200\u00a0million. Filming took place from July 1996 to March 1997.\n\"Titanic\" premiered at the Tokyo International Film Festival on November 1, 1997, and was released in the United States on December 19, 1997. It was distributed by Paramount Pictures in the United States and Canada and by 20th Century Fox in other territories. It was praised for its visual effects, performances (particularly those of DiCaprio, Winslet, and Gloria Stuart), production values, direction, score, cinematography, story, and emotional depth. Among other awards, it was nominated for 14 Academy Awards and won a record-tying 11, including Best Picture and Best Director, tying \"Ben-Hur\" (1959) for the most Academy Awards won by a film. With an initial worldwide gross of over $1.84\u00a0billion, \"Titanic\" was the first film to reach the billion-dollar mark. It was the highest-grossing film of all time until Cameron's next film, \"Avatar\" (2009), surpassed it in 2010. Income from the initial theatrical release, retail video, and soundtrack sales and US broadcast rights exceeded $3.2 billion. Releases pushed the worldwide theatrical total to $2.264\u00a0billion, making \"Titanic\" the second film to gross more than $2\u00a0billion worldwide after \"Avatar\". In 2017, the Library of Congress selected it for preservation in the United States National Film Registry as \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nPlot.\nIn 1996, aboard the research vessel \"Akademik Mstislav Keldysh\", treasure hunter Brock Lovett and his team explore the wreck of RMS \"Titanic\", hoping to find a necklace known as the Heart of the Ocean. Instead, they recover a safe containing a drawing of a young woman wearing the necklace. The sketch is dated April 14, 1912, the day the \"Titanic\" struck an iceberg and sank, resulting in about 1,500 deaths. After seeing a television report about the discovery, centenarian Rose Dawson Calvert contacts Lovett, revealing she is the woman in the drawing. Hoping she can help locate the necklace, Lovett brings Rose and her granddaughter aboard the \"Keldysh\", where Rose recounts her experience on \"Titanic.\"\nIn 1912, 17-year-old Rose DeWitt Bukater boards the \"Titanic\" in Southampton with her wealthy fianc\u00e9, Cal Hockley, and her mother, Ruth. Rose is unhappy in the loveless engagement, but Ruth stresses that the marriage will resolve their financial problems. Rose contemplates suicide by jumping from the ship's stern, but is stopped by Jack Dawson, a poor nomadic artist. Jack and Rose form a friendship, and Jack confesses his feelings for her. Though initially resistant, Rose realizes she has fallen in love with Jack, despite Cal's and Ruth's disapproval.\nRose brings Jack to her stateroom and asks him to draw her nude wearing only the necklace. Afterward, they evade Cal's valet, Spicer Lovejoy, and have sex in a car in the cargo hold. On the forward deck, they witness the ship's collision with an iceberg and overhear officers discussing the severity of the situation. When Cal discovers Jack's sketch of Rose, he has Lovejoy plant the necklace on Jack, framing him for theft. Jack is arrested and locked in the master-at-arms' office and Cal pockets the necklace.\nAs \"Titanic\" sinks, women and children are prioritized for the lifeboats. Rose rescues Jack and they return to the deck, where Cal urges Rose to board a lifeboat, claiming he and Jack will board another. Cal unwittingly wraps his coat, containing the necklace, around her. As her lifeboat is lowered, Rose jumps back onto the ship, unwilling to leave Jack behind. Enraged, Cal grabs a pistol and chases them through the flooding ship, but gives up when they escape. Cal joins a lifeboat by pretending to be a child's father.\nAs the flooded bow sinks, the stern rises into the air and Jack and Rose cling to the railing. The ship splits in two, and the stern sinks into the freezing water with the remaining passengers. Jack helps Rose onto floating debris and makes her promise to survive and live a full life. Jack dies from hypothermia, but Rose is saved by a returning lifeboat and rescued by the . Rose hides from Cal and her mother and gives her name as Rose Dawson on her arrival in New York City.\nIn the present, Rose reveals that Cal committed suicide after losing his fortune in the 1929 stock market crash. She tells the \"Keldysh\" crew that Jack saved her in every possible way, and laments that her memories are all that she has left of him. Touched by her account, Lovett abandons his search for the necklace. Alone at night on the stern of the \"Keldysh\", Rose, who has kept the necklace in her possession, drops it into the sea above the wreck. Later, as she lies in her bed, photographs on her dresser depict a life of freedom and adventure inspired by Jack. Aboard the pristine \"Titanic\", a young Rose reunites with Jack at the Grand Staircase, applauded by the passengers and crew who died in the sinking.\nCast.\nHistorical characters.\nAlthough not intended to be an entirely accurate depiction of events, the film includes portrayals of various historical figures:\nCameos.\nSeveral crew members of the \"Akademik Mstislav Keldysh\" appear, including Anatoly Sagalevich, the creator and pilot of the \"Mir\" self-propelled Deep Submergence Vehicle. Van Ling portrayed real-life Chinese survivor Fang Lang; his backstory inspired Cameron to produce a documentary \"The Six\", based on a group of Chinese survivors who survived the sinking. Anders Falk, who filmed a documentary about the film's sets for the \"Titanic\" Historical Society, makes a cameo as a Swedish immigrant whom Jack Dawson meets when he enters his cabin; Edward Kamuda and Karen Kamuda, then President and Vice President of the Society, who served as film consultants, were cast as extras.\nProduction.\nPre-production.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \nThe story could not have been written better had it been fiction...The juxtaposition of rich and poor, the gender roles played out unto death (women first), the stoicism and nobility of a bygone age, the magnificence of the great ship matched in scale only by the folly of the men who drove her hell-bent through the darkness. And above all the lesson: that life is uncertain, the future unknowable... the unthinkable possible. \n\u2014James Cameron\nCameron had long been fascinatined by shipwrecks and felt \"Titanic\" was \"the Mount Everest of shipwrecks\". He was almost past the point in his life when he felt he could consider an undersea expedition, but was restless to explore the life he had turned away from when he switched from the sciences to the arts in college. After an IMAX film, \"Titanica\" (1992), was made from footage of the \"Titanic\" wreck, Cameron saught Hollywood funding for his own expedition. He said he was more motivated by a desire to see the shipwreck than to make a film.\nCameron wrote a scriptment for a \"Titanic\" film, met 20th Century Fox executives including Peter Chernin, and pitched it as \"\"Romeo and Juliet\" on the \"Titanic\"\". Cameron said the executives were unconvinced of the commercial potential, and had instead hoped for action scenes similar to his previous films. They approved the project as they hoped for a long-term relationship with Cameron.\nCameron convinced Fox to promote the film based on the publicity afforded by shooting the \"Titanic\" wreck, and organized several dives over two years. He also convinced Fox that shooting the real wreck, instead of simulating it with special effects, would provide value: \"We can either do [the shots] with elaborate models and motion control shots and CG and all that, which will cost X amount of money \u2013 or we can spend X plus 30 per cent and actually go shoot it at the real wreck.\"\nUndersea footage.\nThe crew shot at the wreck, which lies in the Atlantic Ocean, 12 times in 1995. The work was risky, as the water pressure could kill the crew if there were a tiny flaw in the submersible structure. Additionally, adverse conditions prevented Cameron from getting footage. During one dive, one of the submersibles collided with \"Titanic\"'s hull, damaging both and leaving fragments of the submersible's propeller shroud scattered around the superstructure. The external bulkhead of the captain's quarters collapsed, exposing the interior, and the area around the entrance to the Grand Staircase was damaged.\nDescending to the site emphasized to the crew that the \"Titanic\" disaster was not simply a story of fiction, but a real event with real loss of life. Cameron said: \"Working around the wreck for so much time, you get such a strong sense of the profound sadness and injustice of it, and the message of it.\" He felt a \"great mantle of responsibility\" to convey the emotional message of the story, as he was aware there might never be another filmmaker to visit the wreck.\nWriting.\nAfter filming the underwater shots, Cameron began writing the screenplay. He wanted to honor the people who died, and spent six months researching the \"Titanic\"'s crew and passengers. He created a detailed timeline of the events of the voyage and sinking and had it verified by historical experts. From the beginning of the shoot, the team had \"a very clear picture\" of what happened on the ship. Cameron said, \"That set the bar higher in a way \u2013 it elevated the movie in a sense. We wanted this to be a definitive visualization of this moment in history as if you'd gone back in a time machine and shot it.\" Cameron was influenced by the 1958 British film about the \"Titanic\" \"A Night to Remember\" which he had seen as a youth. He liberally copied some dialogue and scenes, including the lively party of the passengers in steerage, and the musicians playing on the deck during the sinking.\nCameron felt the \"Titanic\" sinking was \"like a great novel that really happened\", but that the event had become a mere morality tale; the film would give audiences the experience of living the history. The treasure hunter Brock Lovett represented those who never connected with the human element of the tragedy. He believed that the romance of Jack and Rose would be the most engaging element: when their love is finally destroyed, the audience would mourn the loss. He said: \"All my films are love stories, but in \"Titanic\" I finally got the balance right. It's not a disaster film. It's a love story with a fastidious overlay of real history.\" Cameron created the character of the modern-day Rose, a survivor of the \"Titanic\", to \"see the present and the past\" and \"connects us in a way through history\". He framed the romance with the elderly Rose to make the intervening years palpable and poignant. While Winslet and Stuart believed Rose dies at the end, Cameron said, \"The answer has to be something you supply personally, individually.\" \nScale modeling.\nHarland &amp; Wolff, \"Titanic\"'s builders, opened their private archives to the crew, sharing blueprints that were previously thought lost. Fox acquired 40 acres of waterfront south of Playas de Rosarito in Mexico and began building a new studio on May 31, 1996. A horizon tank of 17 million gallons was built for the exterior of the reconstructed ship, providing 270 degrees of ocean view. The ship was built to full scale, but Lamont removed redundant sections on the superstructure and forward well deck for the ship to fit in the tank, with the remaining sections filled with digital models. The lifeboats and funnels were shrunk by ten percent. The boat deck and A-deck were working sets, but the rest of the ship was steel plating. Within was a 50-foot lifting platform for the ship to tilt during the sinking sequences. The 60-foot 1/8th scale model of the stern section was designed by the naval architect Jay Kantola using plans of the \"Titanic\"'s sister ship . Above the model was a tower crane on of rail track, acting as a combined construction, lighting, and camera platform.\nThe sets representing the interior rooms of the \"Titanic\" were reproduced exactly using photographs and plans from the \"Titanic\"'s builders. The Grand Staircase, which features prominently in the film, was recreated to a high standard, but widened by 30% and reinforced with steel girders. Craftsmen from Mexico and Britain sculpted the ornate paneling and plasterwork based on \"Titanic\"'s original designs. The carpeting, upholstery, pieces of furniture, light fixtures, chairs, cutlery and crockery with the White Star Line crest on each piece were among the objects recreated according to original designs. For the ship's interiors, production designer Peter Lamont's team looked for artifacts from the era. The newness of the ship meant every prop had to be made from scratch. Cameron hired two \"Titanic\" historians, Don Lynch and Ken Marschall, to authenticate the historical detail.\nCasting.\nCameron said he needed the cast to feel they were really on the \"Titanic\", to relive its liveliness, and \"to take that energy and give it to Jack ... an artist who is able to have his heart soar\". Established actors including Matthew McConaughey, Chris O'Donnell, Billy Crudup, and Stephen Dorff were considered, but Cameron felt they were too old for the part of a 20-year-old. Tom Cruise was interested, but his asking price was too high. Cameron considered Jared Leto, but he refused to audition. Jeremy Sisto filmed a series of screen tests with Winslet and three other actresses vying for the role of Rose. Mark Wahlberg met Cameron to discuss the part but Cameron was not interested. Ethan Hawke, Christian Bale, and Paul Rudd also auditioned. \nLeonardo DiCaprio, then 21 years old, was brought to Cameron's attention by the casting director, Mali Finn. Initially, DiCaprio did not want the role and refused to read his first romantic scene. Cameron said, \"He read it once, then started goofing around, and I could never get him to focus on it again. But for one split second, a shaft of light came down from the heavens and lit up the forest.\" Cameron believed in DiCaprio's ability and told him, \"Look, I'm not going to make this guy brooding and neurotic. I'm not going to give him a tic and a limp and all the things you want.\" Cameron envisioned the character as like those played by James Stewart or Gregory Peck. After she screen-tested with DiCaprio, Winslet was so impressed she whispered to Cameron, \"He's great. Even if you don't pick me, pick him.\" DiCaprio turned down the lead role in \"Boogie Nights\" (1997) to star in \"Titanic.\" In 2025, he said he regretted this decision, saying \"Boogie Nights\" was \"a profound movie of my generation\". \nCameron described Rose as \"an Audrey Hepburn type\". As with DiCaprio, Finn brought Winslet to Cameron's attention. Gwyneth Paltrow, Winona Ryder, Claire Danes (who had worked with DiCaprio in \"Romeo + Juliet\" the previous year), Gabrielle Anwar, and Reese Witherspoon were considered for the role. When they turned it down, Winslet campaigned for the role. She sent Cameron daily notes from England, which led Cameron to invite her to Hollywood for auditions. He was initially uncertain even after her screen test impressed him. Winslet sent Cameron a single rose with a card signed, \"From Your Rose\", and lobbied him by phone. \"You don't understand!\" she pleaded one day when she reached him by mobile phone in his Humvee. \"I am Rose! I don't know why you're even seeing anyone else!\" Her persistence and talent eventually convinced him to cast her. Cameron said Winslet \"had the thing that you look for\" and that there was \"a quality in her face, in her eyes\" that he \"just knew people would be ready to go the distance with her\". Winslet said of Rose: \"She has got a lot to give, and she's got a very open heart. And she wants to explore and adventure the world, but she [feels] that's not going to happen.\" \nAt 87, Gloria Stuart had to be made up to look older for the role of the elderly Rose. Cameron instructed Finn to \"find retired actresses from the Golden Age of the thirties and forties\". Cameron did not know who Stuart was. Fay Wray was also considered, but Cameron said, \"[Stuart] was just so into it, and so lucid, and had such a great spirit. And I saw the connection between her spirit and [Winslet's] spirit. I saw this \"joie de vivre\" in both of them, that I thought the audience would be able to make that cognitive leap that it's the same person.\" \nCameron considered Michael Biehn for the role of Cal Hockley, whom he had previously collaborated with on \"The Terminator, Aliens\", and \"The Abyss\", before offering it to Matthew McConaughey. Rob Lowe said he also pursued it. Reba McEntire turned down the role of Margaret Brown because it conflicted with her touring schedule.\nFilming.\nPrincipal photography began on July 31, 1996 at Dartmouth, Nova Scotia. The modern-day expedition scenes were shot aboard the \"Akademik Mstislav Keldysh\". In September, the production moved to the newly built Fox Baja Studios in Rosarito, Mexico, where a full-scale \"Titanic\" replica had been constructed. The poop deck was built on a hinge that could rise from zero to 90 degrees in a few seconds, just as the ship's stern rose during the sinking. For the safety of the stuntmen, many props were made of foam rubber. By November 15, the boarding scenes were being shot. Cameron built his \"Titanic\" on the starboard side as a study of weather data revealed it was a prevailing north-to-south wind, which blew the funnel smoke aft. This posed a problem for shooting the ship's departure from Southampton, as it was docked on its port side. Implementation of written directions, as well as props and costumes, had to be reversed; for example, if someone walked to their right in the script, they had to walk left during shooting. In post-production, the film was flipped to the correct direction. A full-time etiquette coach was hired to instruct the cast in the manners of the upper class gentility in 1912. Despite this, several critics noted anachronisms.\nCameron sketched Jack's portrait of Rose; Winslet posed in a bathing suit. Cameron felt the scene had a backdrop of repression and freedom: \"You know what it means for her, the freedom she must be feeling. It's kind of exhilarating for that reason,\" he said. The sketching scene was DiCaprio and Winslet's first scene together. Cameron said: \"It wasn't by any kind of design, although I couldn't have designed it better. There's a nervousness and an energy and a hesitance in them. They had rehearsed together, but they hadn't shot anything together. If I'd had a choice, I probably would have preferred to put it deeper into the body of the shoot.\" Cameron said he and his crew \"were just trying to find things to shoot\" because the big set \"wasn't ready for months, so we were scrambling around trying to fill in anything we could get to shoot.\" Cameron felt the final scene worked well.\nThe shoot was an arduous experience that \"cemented Cameron's formidable reputation as 'the scariest man in Hollywood\". He became known as an \"uncompromising, hard-charging perfectionist\" and a \"300-decibel screamer, a modern-day Captain Bligh with a megaphone and walkie-talkie, swooping down into people's faces on a 162ft crane\". Winslet chipped a bone in her elbow during filming and worried that she would drown in the 17m-gallon water tank in which the ship would sink. She said she was sometimes afraid of Cameron's temper and that he would shout angrily at crew members. Bill Paxton was familiar with Cameron's work ethic from his earlier experience, and said: \"There were a lot of people on the set. Jim is not one of those guys who has the time to win hearts and minds.\" The crew felt Cameron had an evil alter ego and nicknamed him \"Mij\" (Jim spelled backwards). In response to the criticism, Cameron said, \"Film-making is war. A great battle between business and aesthetics.\" More than 800 crew members worked on the film.\nOn August 9, 1996, during the \"Akademik Mstislav Keldysh\" shoot in Canada, an unknown person, suspected to be a crew member, put the dissociative drug PCP into the soup that Cameron and various others ate one night in Dartmouth, Nova Scotia. It sent more than 50 people to the hospital. Paxton and Cameron ate the soup and went to the hospital but Paxton left, saying it was \"bedlam\". The actor Lewis Abernathy said \"there were people just rolling around, completely out of it. Some of them said they were seeing streaks and psychedelics.\" Cameron vomited before the drug took a full hold. Abernathy was shocked at the way he looked. \"One eye was completely red, like the Terminator eye. A pupil, no iris, beet red. The other eye looked like he'd been sniffing glue since he was four.\" The Nova Scotia Department of Health confirmed that the soup had contained PCP on August 27, and the Halifax Regional Police Service announced a criminal investigation the next day. The investigation was closed in February 1999. The person behind the poisoning was never caught.\nThe filming schedule was intended to last 138 days but grew to 160 (filming officially wrapped on March 23, 1997). Many cast members came down with colds, flu, or kidney infections after spending hours in cold water, including Winslet. She decided she would not work with Cameron again unless she earned \"a lot of money\". Several others left the production, and three stuntmen broke their bones, but the Screen Actors Guild decided, following an investigation, that nothing was inherently unsafe about the set. DiCaprio said there was no point when he felt he was in danger during filming. Cameron believed in a passionate work ethic and never apologized for the way he ran his sets. He said:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I'm demanding, and I'm demanding on my crew. In terms of being kind of militaresque, I think there's an element of that in dealing with thousands of extras and big logistics and keeping people safe. I think you have to have a fairly strict methodology in dealing with a large number of people.\nThe filming costs reached $200\u00a0million, around $1\u00a0million per minute of screen time. Fox executives panicked and suggested an hour of cuts from the three-hour film. They argued the extended length would mean fewer showings, thus less revenue, even though long epics are more likely to win Oscars. Cameron refused, telling Fox, \"You want to cut my movie? You're going to have to fire me! You want to fire me? You're going to have to kill me!\" The executives did not want to start over, because it would mean the loss of their entire investment. They initially rejected Cameron's offer to forfeit his share of the profits as an empty gesture, as they predicted profits would be unlikely. Instead, they accepted his offer to give up his $8 million salary and his share of the initial gross profits. Cameron said: \"The short version is that the film cost proportionally much more than \"\" and \"True Lies.\" Those films went up seven or eight percent from the initial budget. \"Titanic\" also had a large budget to begin with, but it went up a lot more. As the producer and director, I take responsibility for the studio that's writing the checks, so I made it less painful for them. I did that on two different occasions. They didn't force me to do it; they were glad that I did.\" In July 2024, Cameron said that the co-producer Jon Landau \"bore the brunt of the studio pressure\" when \"Titanic\" was made. According to Cameron, Landau \"gave his all to provide the time and resources for me to make the film I saw in my head\".\nWorried about the mounting costs, Fox wanted to find a partner studio to co-finance the film. Fox first approached Universal Pictures as they had picked up the international distribution rights to Cameron's \"True Lies\" (1994) when production costs began to mount; however Universal would turn Fox down. Instead, Fox and Paramount Pictures came together in May 1996 following the success both studios had collaborating on the distribution for Mel Gibson's \"Braveheart\" (1995), and agreed to co-finance the film and split the distribution rights. In an effort to recoup their $135 million investment, Fox sold the domestic rights to Paramount in return for Paramount providing Fox an additional $65 million for production, while retaining international rights; Fox remained responsible for any further budget overruns, but would retain all profits from any merchandise as part of the deal with Paramount. Amidst the film's successful box office run, the Fox executive William Mechanic said: \"Jim Cameron told us we could have an expensive bad movie or a more expensive potentially great movie. We made our judgment. And we made the best choice.\"\nPost-production.\nEffects.\nCameron wanted to push the boundary of special effects, and enlisted Digital Domain and Pacific Data Images to continue the developments in digital technology he pioneered on \"The Abyss\" and \"\". Many previous films about \"Titanic\" shot water in slow motion, which did not look wholly convincing. Cameron encouraged his crew to shoot their miniature of the ship as if \"we're making a commercial for the White Star Line\". Afterwards, digital water and smoke were added, as were extras captured on a motion capture stage. Visual effects supervisor Rob Legato scanned the faces of many actors, including himself and his children, for the digital extras and stuntmen. There was also a model of the ship's stern that could break in two repeatedly, the only miniature to be used in water. For scenes set in the ship's engines, footage of the SS \"Jeremiah O'Brien\"'s engines were composited with miniature support frames, and actors shot against a greenscreen. To save money, the first-class lounge was a miniature set incorporated into a greenscreen backdrop behind the actors. The miniature of the lounge was crushed to simulate the destruction of the room and a scale model of a first-class corridor flooded with jets of water while the camera pans out.\nAn enclosed tank was used for sinking interiors, in which the entire set could be tilted into the water. To sink the Grand Staircase, of water were dumped into the set as it was lowered into the tank. Unexpectedly, the waterfall ripped the staircase from its steel-reinforced foundations, although no one was hurt. The exterior of \"Titanic\" had its first half lowered into the tank, but as the heaviest part of the ship it acted as a shock absorber against the water; to get the set into the water, Cameron had much of the set emptied and smashed some of the promenade windows himself. After submerging the dining saloon, three days were spent shooting Lovett's ROV traversing the wreck in the present. The scenes in the freezing Atlantic were shot in a tank. The frozen corpses were created by applying on actors a powder that crystallized when exposed to water, and wax was coated on hair and clothes.\nThe climactic scene, which features the breakup of the ship directly before it sinks and its plunge to the bottom of the Atlantic, involved a tilting full-sized set, 150 extras, and 100 stunt performers. Cameron criticized previous \"Titanic\" films for depicting the liner's final plunge as a graceful slide underwater. He \"wanted to depict it as the terrifyingly chaotic event that it really was\". The actors needed to fall off the increasingly tilting deck, plunging hundreds of feet below and bouncing off railings and propellers on the way down. A few attempts to film this sequence with stunt actors resulted in minor injuries, and Cameron halted the more dangerous stunts. The risks were eventually minimized \"by using computer-generated people for the dangerous falls\". A Linux-based operating system was used for the effects.\nEditing.\nCameron said there were aspects of the \"Titanic\" story that seemed important in pre- and post-production but became less important as the film evolved. He omitted the SS \"Californian\", the ship that was close to the \"Titanic\" the night she sank but had turned off its radio for the night, did not hear her crew's SOS calls, and did not respond to their distress flares. A scene involving the \"Californian\" was cut, according to Cameron, \"because it focuses you back onto that world. If \"Titanic\" is powerful as a metaphor, as a microcosm, for the end of the world in a sense, then that world must be self-contained.\" He said its omission was not \"a compromise to mainstream filmmaking\" but \"about emphasis, creating an emotional truth to the film\".\nDuring the first assembly cut, Cameron altered the ending. In the original version, Brock and Lizzy see the elderly Rose at the stern of the boat and fear she is about to commit suicide. Rose reveals that she has possessed the Heart of the Ocean diamond all along but never sold it, to live on her own without Cal's money. She allows Brock to hold it but tells Brock that life is priceless and throws the diamond into the ocean. After accepting that treasure is worthless, Brock laughs at his stupidity. Cameron decided that the audience would no longer be interested in Lovett and cut the scene, so that Rose is alone when she drops the diamond. He also did not want to disrupt the audience's melancholy after the \"Titanic\"'s sinking. Paxton agreed that his scene with Brock's epiphany and laugh was unnecessary, saying: \"I would have shot heroin to make the scene work better... Our job was done by then... If you're smart and you take the ego and the narcissism out of it, you'll listen to the film, and the film will tell you what it needs and what it does not need.\"\nThe version used for the first test screening featured a fight between Jack and Lovejoy after Jack and Rose escape into the flooded dining saloon. The scene was written to add suspense, and had Cal offering to give Lovejoy, his valet, the Heart of the Ocean if he can get it from Jack and Rose. Lovejoy goes after the pair in the sinking first-class dining room. Jack attacks him and smashes his head against a window; this is why Lovejoy has a gash later. Cameron cut the scene for pacing reasons, and as test audiences found it unrealistic to risk one's life for wealth. Many other scenes were cut for pacing reasons.\nHeart of the Ocean.\nFor the Heart of the Ocean design, London-based jewelers Asprey &amp; Garrard used cubic zirconias set in white gold to create an Edwardian-style necklace to be used as a prop. The studio designed and produced three variations, very similar but unique and distinguishable in character. The third went unused until after the film had been released. The three necklaces are commonly known as the original prop, the J. Peterman necklace and the Asprey necklace.\nThe third and final design was not used. After the film's success, Asprey &amp; Garrard were commissioned to create an authentic Heart of the Ocean necklace using the original design. The result was a platinum-set, heart-shaped Ceylon sapphire surrounded by 103 diamonds. This design featured a much larger inverted pear-shaped Ceylon sapphire with a subtle cleft to resemble a heart. The chain for this necklace also featured a mix of round, pear, and marquise cut white diamonds. The bail also featured a heart cut white diamond with another round cut diamond attached to an inverted pear shape diamond which was then attached to the cage of the main stone. The necklace was donated to Sotheby's auction house in Beverly Hills for an auction benefiting the Diana, Princess of Wales Memorial Fund and Southern California's Aid For AIDS. It was sold to an unidentified Asprey client for $1.4\u00a0million (equivalent to $\u00a0million in 2024), under the agreement that Dion would wear it two nights later at the 1998 Academy Awards ceremony. The necklace has not been made available for public viewing.\nSoundtrack.\nCameron wrote \"Titanic\" while listening to the work of the Irish new-age musician Enya. After Enya declined an invitation to compose for the film, Cameron chose James Horner. The two had parted ways after a tumultuous working experience on \"Aliens,\" but \"Titanic\" cemented a successful collaboration that lasted until Horner's death. For the vocals heard throughout the film, Horner chose the Norwegian singer Sissel Kyrkjeb\u00f8, commonly known as \"Sissel\". Horner knew Sissel from her album \"Innerst i sjelen\", and particularly liked how she sang \"Eg veit i himmerik ei borg\" (\"I Know in Heaven There Is a Castle\"). He tried around 30 singers before choosing Sissel.\nHorner wrote the end theme, \"My Heart Will Go On\", in secret with Will Jennings because Cameron did not want any songs in the film. C\u00e9line Dion agreed to record a demo at the persuasion of her husband Ren\u00e9 Ang\u00e9lil. Horner waited until Cameron was in an appropriate mood before presenting him with the song. After playing it several times, Cameron declared his approval, although worried that he would have been criticized for \"going commercial at the end of the movie\". Cameron also wanted to appease anxious studio executives and \"saw that a hit song from his movie could only be a positive factor in guaranteeing its completion\". The soundtrack was the best-selling album of 1998, with sales of over 27 million.\nRelease.\nTheatrical.\nDistribution for \"Titanic\" was split between Paramount Pictures and 20th Century Fox; Paramount handling the domestic distribution, and Fox handling the foreign release. Both studios expected Cameron to complete it for release on July 2, 1997, \"to exploit the lucrative summer season ticket sales when blockbuster films usually do better\". In April, Cameron said the special effects were too complicated and that releasing the film on that date would not be possible. The studios considered pushing it to late July or the first week of August, but Harrison Ford, whose film \"Air Force One\" was to be released on July 25, is reported to have informed Paramount, which had produced his lucrative \"Indiana Jones\" and \"Jack Ryan\" franchises, that he would never work with them again if they released \"Titanic\" so close to his own film. On May 29, 1997, Paramount pushed back the release date to December 19, 1997. The new release date would be shared by \"Tomorrow Never Dies\" and \"Mouse Hunt\". \"This fueled speculation that the film itself was a disaster.\" A preview screening in Minneapolis on July 14 \"generated positive reviews\" and \"[c]hatter on the internet was responsible for more favorable word of mouth about the [film]\". This eventually led to more positive media coverage.\nCameron refused to hold the world premiere in Los Angeles. Paramount disagreed with Cameron's decision, but Fox acquiesced and went ahead and held the premiere on November 1, 1997, at the Tokyo International Film Festival, where reaction was described as \"tepid\" by \"The New York Times\". Positive reviews started to appear back in the United States; the official Hollywood premiere occurred on December 14, 1997, where \"the big movie stars who attended the opening were enthusiastically gushing about the film to the world media\". The film had a London premiere as a Royal Film Performance attended by Prince Charles.\nHome media.\n\"Titanic\" was released worldwide in widescreen and pan and scan formats on VHS on September 1, 1998. There are two separate cassettes on this release, as the film is divided into two parts. More than $50\u00a0million was spent to market the home video release. Both VHS formats were also made available in a deluxe boxed gift set with a mounted filmstrip and six lithograph prints from the movie. In the first 3 months, the film sold 25\u00a0million copies in North America with a total sales value of $500\u00a0million, becoming the best selling live-action video, beating \"Independence Day\". In that time, it sold 58\u00a0million copies worldwide, outselling \"The Lion King\" for a total worldwide revenue of $995\u00a0million. By March 2005, \"Titanic\" had sold 8\u00a0million DVD and 59\u00a0million VHS units. In the United Kingdom, it sold 1.1\u00a0million copies on its first day of release, making it the country's fastest-selling home video release. It held this record until May 2002, when \"Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone\" sold 1.2\u00a0million home video units on its first day. \"Titanic\" remained the fastest-selling DVD in the United Kingdom until \"Mamma Mia!\" took it in 2008. Within the first week of release, \"Titanic\" quickly beat \"The Full Monty\", selling a total of 1.8\u00a0million home video copies. NBC acquired the US television broadcast rights for $30 million, which was considered a bargain.\nA DVD version was released on August 31, 1999, in a widescreen-only (non-anamorphic) single-disc edition with no special features other than a theatrical trailer. Cameron stated at the time that he intended to release a special edition with extra features later. This release became the best-selling DVD of 1999 and early 2000, becoming the first DVD ever to sell one million copies. At the time, less than 5% of all U.S. homes had a DVD player. \"When we released the original \"Titanic\" DVD, the industry was much smaller, and bonus features were not the standard they are now,\" said Meagan Burrows, Paramount's president of domestic home entertainment, which made the DVD performance even more impressive.\n\"Titanic\" was re-released to DVD on October 25, 2005, when a three-disc \"Special Collector's Edition\" was made available in the United States and Canada. This edition contained a newly restored transfer, a 6.1 DTS-ES Discrete surround sound mix and various special features. In PAL regions, two-disc and four-disc variants were released, marketed as the \"Special Edition\" and \"Deluxe Collector's Edition\" respectively. They were released in the United Kingdom on November 7, 2005. A limited 5-disc \"Deluxe Limited Edition\" was also only released in the United Kingdom with only 10,000 copies manufactured. The fifth disc contains Cameron's documentary \"Ghosts of the Abyss\", which was distributed by Walt Disney Pictures. Unlike the individual release of \"Ghosts of the Abyss\", which contained two discs, only the first disc was included in the set. In 2007, for the film's tenth anniversary, a \"10th Anniversary Edition\" was released on DVD, which consists of the first two discs from the three-disc 2005 set containing the movie and the special features on those discs.\n\"Titanic\" was released by Paramount Home Entertainment on Blu-ray and Blu-ray 3D on September 10, 2012. The 3D presentation is split over two discs and is also THX-certified. Special features on another disc included many of those featured on the 2005 \"Special Collector's Edition\" DVD along with two new documentaries titled \"Reflections on Titanic\" and \"Titanic: The Final Word with James Cameron.\" The latter aired on National Geographic on April 9, 2012, and was executively produced by Cameron. A 4K release was released on December 5, 2023, on both digital and Ultra HD Blu-ray.\nAfter being on the Amazon Prime Video streaming service in the U.S. in April 2023, \"Titanic\" became available on Netflix in July 2023 shortly after the Titan submersible implosion. It became available on Paramount+ in October 2023 and on Prime Video for a period starting in April 2024 and April 2025. It was announced as coming to Hulu in February 2025. It was available on the free ad-supported streaming service Pluto TV in June 2023.\nReception.\nBox office.\nIncluding revenue from the 2012, 2017 and 2023 reissues, \"Titanic\" earned $674.3\u00a0million in North America and $1.590\u00a0billion in other countries, for a worldwide total of $2.264\u00a0billion. It became the highest-grossing film of all time worldwide in 1998, beating \"Jurassic Park\" (1993). The film remained so for twelve years, until \"Avatar\" (2009), also written and directed by Cameron, surpassed it in 2010. It would hold the record for being Paramount's highest-grossing film domestically until it was dethroned by \"\" (2022) twenty-five years later. On March 1, 1998, it became the first film to earn more than $1\u00a0billion worldwide and on the weekend April 13\u201315, 2012\u2014a century after the original vessel's foundering, \"Titanic\" became the second film to cross the $2\u00a0billion threshold during its 3D re-release. Box Office Mojo estimates that \"Titanic\" is the fifth-highest-grossing film of all time in North America when adjusting for ticket price inflation. The site also estimates that the film sold over 128\u00a0million tickets in the US in its initial theatrical run.\n\"Titanic\" was the first foreign-language film to succeed in India, which claims to have the largest movie-going audience in the world. A \"Hindustan Times\" report attributes this to its similarities and shared themes with most Bollywood films.\nInitial theatrical run.\n\"Titanic\" received steady attendance after opening in North America on Friday, December 19, 1997. By the end of the weekend, theaters were beginning to sell out. The film earned $8,658,814 on its opening day and $28,638,131 over the opening weekend from 2,674 theaters, averaging to about $10,710 per venue, and ranking number one at the box office, ahead of \"Mouse Hunt\", \"Scream 2\" and \"Tomorrow Never Dies\". It would go on to surpass \"The Godfather Part III\"'s record for having the highest Christmas Day gross, generating a total of $9.2\u00a0million. For its second weekend, the film made $35.6\u00a0million, making it the biggest December weekend gross, surpassing \"Scream 2\". By New Year's Day, \"Titanic\" had made over $120\u00a0million, had increased in popularity and theaters continued to sell out. In just 44 days, it became the fastest film to approach the $300\u00a0million mark at the domestic box office, surpassing the former record held by \"Jurassic Park\", which took 67 days to do so. \"Titanic\" would hold this record until 1999 when it was taken by \"\". Additionally, the film reached the $400\u00a0million mark within 66 days, which was the fastest at the time, a record matched by \"Spider-Man\" in 2002. Both films were surpassed in 2004 by \"Shrek 2\".\n\"Titanic\"'s highest-grossing day was Saturday, February 14, 1998, on which it earned $13,048,711, more than eight weeks after its North American debut. On March 14, it surpassed \"Star Wars\" as the highest-grossing film ever in North America. It stayed at number one for 15 consecutive weeks in North America, a record for any film. By April 1998, the film's number one spot was overtaken by \"Lost in Space\". It stayed in theaters in North America for almost 10 months before finally closing on Thursday, October 1, 1998, with a final domestic gross of $600,788,188, equivalent to $\u00a0million in 2024. Outside North America, the film made double its North American gross, generating $1,242,413,080 and accumulating a grand total of $1,843,201,268 worldwide from its initial theatrical run.\nCommercial analysis.\nVarious film critics predicted \"Titanic\" would be a major commercial failure, especially since it was the most expensive film ever made at the time. When it was shown to the press in late 1997, \"it was with massive forebodings\", since the \"people in charge of the screenings believed they were on the verge of losing their jobs \u2013 because of this great albatross of a picture on which, finally, two studios had to combine to share the great load of its making\". Cameron also thought he was \"headed for disaster\" at one point during filming. \"We labored the last six months on \"Titanic\" in the absolute knowledge that the studio would lose $100\u00a0million. It was a certainty.\" As the film neared release, \"particular venom was spat at Cameron for what was seen as his hubris and monumental extravagance\". A critic for the \"Los Angeles Times\" wrote that \"Cameron's overweening pride has come close to capsizing this project\" and that the film was \"a hackneyed, completely derivative copy of old Hollywood romances\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n It's hard to forget the director on the stage of the Shrine Auditorium in LA, exultant, pumping a golden Oscar statuette into the air and shouting: \"I'm the king of the world!\" As everyone knew, that was the most famous line in \"Titanic\", exclaimed by Leonardo DiCaprio's character as he leaned into the wind on the prow of the doomed vessel. Cameron's incantation of the line was a giant \"eff off\", in front of a television audience approaching a billion, to all the naysayers, especially those sitting right in front of him.\n \u2014Christopher Goodwin of \"The Times\" on Cameron's response to \"Titanic\"'s criticism\n\"Titanic\" was playing on 3,200 screens ten weeks after it opened, and out of its fifteen straight weeks on top of the charts, jumped 43% in total sales in its ninth week of release. It earned over $20 million for each of its first 10 weekends, and after 14 weeks was still bringing in more than $1 million on weekdays. 20th Century Fox estimated that seven percent of American teenage girls had seen \"Titanic\" twice by its fifth week. Although young women who saw the film several times and subsequently caused \"Leo-Mania\" were often credited for taking it to its all-time box office record, other reports have attributed the success to positive word of mouth and repeat viewership due to the love story combined with the ground-breaking special effects. \"The Hollywood Reporter\" estimated that after a combined production and promotion cost of $487\u00a0million, \"Titanic\" turned a net profit of $1.4\u00a0billion, with a modern profit of as much as $4\u00a0billion after ancillary sources.\n\"Titanic\"'s impact on men has also been especially credited. It is considered one of the films that make men cry, with MSNBC's Ian Hodder stating that men admire Jack's sense of adventure and his ambitious behavior to win over Rose, which contributes to their emotional attachment to Jack. This was parodied in the 2009 film \"Zombieland\", where character Tallahassee (Woody Harrelson), when recalling the death of his young son, states: \"I haven't cried like that since \"Titanic\".\"\nScott Meslow of \"The Atlantic\" stated while \"Titanic\" initially seems to need no defense, given its success, it is considered a film \"for 15-year-old girls\" by its main detractors. He argued that dismissing \"Titanic\" as fodder for teenage girls fails to consider the film's accomplishment: \"that [this] grandiose, 3+ hour historical romantic drama is a film for everyone\u2014including teenage boys.\" Meslow stated that though the film is ranked high by males under the age of 18, matching the ratings for teenage boy-targeted films like \"Iron Man\", it is common for boys and men to deny liking \"Titanic\". He acknowledged his own rejection of the film as a child while secretly loving it. \"It's this collection of elements\u2014the history, the romance, the action\u2014that made (and continues to make) \"Titanic\" an irresistible proposition for audiences of all ages across the globe,\" he stated. \"\"Titanic\" has flaws, but for all its legacy, it's better than its middlebrow reputation would have you believe. It's a great movie for 15-year-old girls, but that doesn't mean it's not a great movie for everyone else too.\"\nQuotes in the film aided its popularity. \"Titanic\"'s catchphrase \"I'm the king of the world!\" became one of the film industry's more popular quotations. According to Richard Harris, a psychology professor at Kansas State University, who studied why people like to cite films in social situations, using film quotations in everyday conversation is similar to telling a joke and a way to form solidarity with others. \"People are doing it to feel good about themselves, to make others laugh, to make themselves laugh\", he said.\nCameron explained the success as having significantly benefited from the experience of sharing. \"When people have an experience that's very powerful in the movie theatre, they want to go share it. They want to grab their friend and bring them, so that they can enjoy it,\" he said. \"They want to be the person to bring them the news that this is something worth having in their life. That's how \"Titanic\" worked.\" Media Awareness Network stated, \"The normal\nrepeat viewing rate for a blockbuster theatrical film is about 5%. The repeat rate for \"Titanic\" was over 20%.\" The box office receipts \"were even more impressive\" when factoring in \"the film's 3-hour-and-14-minute length meant that it could only be shown three times a day compared to a normal movie's four showings\". In response to this, \"[m]any theatres started midnight showings and were rewarded with full houses until almost 3:30\u00a0am\".\n\"Titanic\" held the record for box office gross for 12 years. Cameron's follow-up film, \"Avatar\", was considered the first film with a genuine chance at surpassing its worldwide gross, and did so in 2010. Various explanations for why \"Avatar\" was able to challenge \"Titanic\" were given. For one, \"Two-thirds of \"Titanic\"'s haul was earned overseas, and \"Avatar\" [tracked] similarly... \"Avatar\" opened in 106 markets globally and was no. 1 in all of them\" and the markets \"such as Russia, where \"Titanic\" saw modest receipts in 1997 and 1998, are white-hot today\" with \"more screens and moviegoers\" than ever before. Brandon Gray, president of Box Office Mojo, said that while \"Avatar\" may beat \"Titanic\"'s revenue record, the film is unlikely to surpass \"Titanic\" in attendance. \"Ticket prices were about $3 cheaper in the late 1990s.\" In December 2009, Cameron had stated, \"I don't think it's realistic to try to topple \"Titanic\" off its perch. Some pretty good movies have come out in the last few years. \"Titanic\" just struck some kind of chord.\" In a January 2010 interview, he gave a different take on the matter once \"Avatar\"'s performance was easier to predict, saying \"It's gonna happen. It's just a matter of time,\".\nAuthor Alexandra Keller, when analyzing \"Titanic\"'s success, stated that scholars could agree that its popularity \"appears dependent on contemporary culture, on perceptions of history, on patterns of consumerism and globalization, as well as on those elements experienced filmgoers conventionally expect of juggernaut film events in the 1990s\u00a0\u2013 awesome screen spectacle, expansive action, and, more rarely seen, engaging characters and epic drama.\"\nCritical response.\nInitial.\n\"Titanic\" garnered mostly positive reviews from film critics, and was positively reviewed by audiences and scholars, who commented on its cultural, historical, and political impacts. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, it has an approval rating of 88% based on 255 reviews, with an average rating of 8.1/10. The site's critical consensus reads, \"A mostly unqualified triumph for James Cameron, who offers a dizzying blend of spectacular visuals and old-fashioned melodrama.\" Metacritic, which assigned a weighted average score of 75 out of 100, based on 35 critics, reports the film has \"generally favorable reviews\". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave it a rare \"A+\" grade, one of fewer than 60 films in the history of the service from 1982 to 2011 to earn the score.\nWith regard to the overall design, Roger Ebert stated: \"It is flawlessly crafted, intelligently constructed, strongly acted, and spellbinding... Movies like this are not merely difficult to make at all, but almost impossible to make well.\" He credited the \"technical difficulties\" with being \"so daunting that it's a wonder when the filmmakers are also able to bring the drama and history into proportion\" and \"found [himself] convinced by both the story and the sad saga\". He named it his ninth-best film of 1997. The television program \"Siskel &amp; Ebert\" gave \"Titanic\" \"two thumbs up\" and praised its accuracy in recreating the ship's sinking; Ebert described it as \"a glorious Hollywood epic\" and \"well worth the wait,\" and Gene Siskel found Leonardo DiCaprio \"captivating\".\nJames Berardinelli stated: \"Meticulous in detail, yet vast in scope and intent, \"Titanic\" is the kind of epic motion picture event that has become a rarity. You don't just watch \"Titanic\", you experience it.\" It was named his second best film of 1997. Joseph McBride of \"Boxoffice Magazine\" concluded: \"To describe \"Titanic\" as the greatest disaster movie ever made is to sell it short. James Cameron's recreation of the 1912 sinking of the 'unsinkable' liner is one of the most magnificent pieces of serious popular entertainment ever to emanate from Hollywood.\"\nThe romantic and emotionally charged aspects were equally praised. Andrew L. Urban of \"Urban Cinefile\" said: \"You will walk out of \"Titanic\" not talking about budget or running time, but of its enormous emotive power, big as the engines of the ship itself, determined as its giant propellers to gouge into your heart, and as lasting as the love story that propels it.\" Owen Gleiberman of \"Entertainment Weekly\" described the film as \"a lush and terrifying spectacle of romantic doom. Writer-director James Cameron has restaged the defining catastrophe of the early 20th century on a human scale of such purified yearning and dread that he touches the deepest levels of popular moviemaking.\" Janet Maslin of \"The New York Times\" commented that \"Cameron's magnificent \"Titanic\" is the first spectacle in decades that honestly invites comparison to \"Gone With the Wind\".\" Adrian Turner of \"Radio Times\" awarded it four stars out of five, stating \"Cameron's script wouldn't have sustained Clark Gable and Vivien Leigh for 80 minutes, but, somehow, he and his magical cast revive that old-style studio gloss for three riveting hours. \"Titanic\" is a sumptuous assault on the emotions, with a final hour that fully captures the horror and the freezing, paralysing fear of the moment. And there are single shots, such as an awesome albatross-like swoop past the steaming ship, when you sense Cameron hugging himself with the fun of it all.\"\n\"Titanic\" suffered backlash in addition to its success. Some reviewers felt that while the visuals were spectacular, the story and dialogue were weak. Richard Corliss of \"Time\" magazine wrote a mostly negative review, criticizing the lack of interesting emotional elements. Kenneth Turan's review in the \"Los Angeles Times\" was particularly scathing. Dismissing the emotive elements, he stated, \"What really brings on the tears is Cameron's insistence that writing this kind of movie is within his abilities. Not only is it not, it is not even close.\" He later argued that the only reason that the film won Oscars was because of its box office total. Barbara Shulgasser of \"The San Francisco Examiner\" gave \"Titanic\" one star out of four, citing a friend as saying, \"The number of times in this unbelievably badly written script that the two [lead characters] refer to each other by name was an indication of just how dramatically the script lacked anything more interesting for the actors to say.\"\nRetrospective.\nAccording to Dalin Rowell of \"/Film\", \"With complaints about its lengthy runtime, observations that certain characters could have easily fit onto pieces of floating furniture, and jokes about its melodramatic nature, \"Titanic\" is no stranger to modern-day criticism.\" In 2002, filmmaker Robert Altman called it \"the most dreadful piece of work I've ever seen in my entire life\". Similarly, French New Wave director and former \"Cahiers du Cin\u00e9ma\" editor Jacques Rivette referred to it as \"garbage\" in a 1998 interview with Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Bonnaud and was particularly critical of Winslet's performance, who he said was \"unwatchable, the most slovenly girl to appear on the screen in a long, long time.\" In 2003, \"Titanic\" topped a poll of \"Best Film Endings\", but it also topped a poll by \"Film 2003\" as \"the worst movie of all time\".\nIn his 2012 study of the lives of the passengers on the \"Titanic\", historian Richard Davenport-Hines said, \"Cameron's film diabolized rich Americans and educated English, anathematizing their emotional restraint, good tailoring, punctilious manners and grammatical training, while it made romantic heroes of the poor Irish and the unlettered.\" The British film magazine \"Empire\" reduced their rating from the maximum five stars and an enthusiastic review, to four stars with a less positive review in a later edition, to accommodate its readers' tastes, who wanted to disassociate themselves from the hype, and the reported activities of its fans, such as those attending multiple screenings. In addition to this, positive and negative parodies and other such spoofs abounded and circulated on the internet, often inspiring passionate responses from fans of various opinions. Benjamin Willcock of DVDActive.com did not understand the backlash or the passionate hatred. \"What really irks me...,\" he said, \"are those who make nasty stabs at those who do love it.\" Willcock stated, \"I obviously don't have anything against those who dislike \"Titanic\", but those few who make you feel small and pathetic for doing so (and they do exist, trust me) are way beyond my understanding and sympathy.\"\nIn 1998, Cameron responded to the backlash, and Kenneth Turan's review in particular, by writing \"\"Titanic\" is not a film that is sucking people in with flashy hype and spitting them out onto the street feeling let down and ripped off. They are returning again and again to repeat an experience that is taking a 3-hour and 14-minute chunk out of their lives, and dragging others with them, so they can share the emotion.\" Cameron emphasized that people from all ages (ranging from 8 to 80) and from all backgrounds were \"celebrating their own essential humanity\" by seeing it. He described the script as earnest and straightforward, and said it intentionally \"incorporates universals of human experience and emotion that are timeless \u2013 and familiar because they reflect our basic emotional fabric\" and that the film was able to succeed in this way by dealing with archetypes. He did not see it as pandering. \"Turan mistakes archetype for clich\u00e9,\" he said. \"I don't share his view that the best scripts are only the ones that explore the perimeter of human experience, or flashily pirouette their witty and cynical dialogue for our admiration.\"\nIn 2000, Almar Haflidason of the BBC wrote that \"the critical knives were out long before James Cameron's \"Titanic\" was complete. Spiralling costs that led to it becoming the most expensive motion picture of the 20th Century, and a cast without any big stars seemed to doom the film before release. But box office and audience appreciation proved Cameron right and many critics wrong.\" He added that \"the sinking of the great ship is no secret, yet for many exceeded expectations in sheer scale and tragedy\" and that \"when you consider that [the film] tops a bum-numbing three-hour running time, then you have a truly impressive feat of entertainment achieved by Cameron\". \"Empire\" eventually reinstated its original five-star rating, writing: \"It should be no surprise[,] then[,] that it became fashionable to bash James Cameron's \"Titanic\" at approximately the same time it became clear that this was the planet's favourite film. Ever.\"\nIn 2017, on the 20th anniversary of its release, \"Titanic\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". The same year, Cameron reviewed the accuracy of the film for the National Geographic program \"Titanic: 20 Years Later with James Cameron\".\nThe climax has sparked many debates about whether both Jack and Rose should have been able to fit on the floating door and survive, becoming among the most talked about aspects of the film. At the film's 20th anniversary, Cameron stated that it was \"kind of silly, really, that we\u2019re having this discussion 20 years later\". In 2023 he conducted a study for the film's 25th anniversary that aired as part of an updated National Geographic retrospective, which suggested it was possible but unlikely and depended on numerous variables, after a previous test had been conducted in 2012 by \"MythBusters\".\n\"Titanic\" was listed among the 100 best films in an \"Empire\" poll and in a later poll of members of the film industry. In 2021, Dalin Rowell of \"/Film\" ranked it the third-best film of Cameron's career, stating that it is \"easily one of his best films, simply because it defied the odds\", and considering it \"a legitimately remarkable achievement \u2014 one that, despite its large budget, has a humble, earnest center. Even with all of the jokes the Internet loves to throw its way, \"Titanic\" demonstrates that Cameron is truly capable of everything he can imagine.\"\nIn 2024, \"Looper\" ranked it number 44 on its list of the \"50 Best PG-13 Movies of All Time,\" writing &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Cameron's immersive visuals, achieved using groundbreaking special effects, transport viewers back in time to the opulence of the Titanic and the heart-wrenching chaos of its final hours. The sheer grandness of the film, combined with its tragic tale, pushed the boundaries of storytelling and visual effects, paving the way for future blockbusters.\nIn 1998, the Chinese president Jiang Zemin praised the film during an address to the National People's Congress in order to demonstrate his endorsement of Western cultural imports. In 2025, \"The Hollywood Reporter\" listed \"Titanic\" as having the best stunts of 1997.\nAccolades.\nAt the Golden Globes, \"Titanic\" won Best Motion Picture \u2013 Drama, Best Director, Best Original Score, and Best Original Song. Winslet and Stuart were also nominated. At the 70th Academy Awards, \"Titanic\" garnered fourteen Academy Award nominations, tying the record set in 1950 by Joseph L. Mankiewicz's \"All About Eve\" and won eleven: Best Picture (the second film about the \"Titanic\" to win that award, after 1933's \"Cavalcade\"), Best Director, Best Art Direction, Best Cinematography, Best Visual Effects, Best Film Editing, Best Costume Design, Best Sound (Gary Rydstrom, Tom Johnson, Gary Summers, Mark Ulano), Best Sound Effects Editing, Best Original Dramatic Score, Best Original Song. Winslet, Stuart and the make-up artists were nominated, but lost to Helen Hunt in \"As Good as It Gets\", Kim Basinger in \"L.A. Confidential\" and \"Men in Black\". \"Titanic\" was the second film to receive eleven Academy Awards, after \"Ben-Hur (1959).\" \"\" matched the record in 2004. In 2017, \"La La Land\" would tie the record for having the most Academy Award nominations.\n\"Titanic\" won the 1997 Academy Award for Best Original Song, as well as four Grammy Awards for Record of the Year, Song of the Year, Best Song Written Specifically for a Motion Picture or Television, and Best Female Pop Vocal Performance. The soundtrack became the best-selling primarily orchestral soundtrack of all time, spending sixteen weeks at number-one in the United States, and was certified diamond for over eleven million copies sold in the United States alone. It was also the best-selling album of 1998 in the US. \"My Heart Will Go On\" won the Grammy Awards for Best Song Written Specifically for a Motion Picture or for Television.\n\"Titanic\" also won various awards outside the United States, including the Awards of the Japanese Academy as the Best Foreign Film of the Year. It eventually won nearly ninety awards and had an additional forty-seven nominations from various award-giving bodies around the world. The book about the making of the film was at the top of \"The New York Times\"' bestseller list for several weeks, \"the first time that such a tie-in book had achieved this status\".\n\"Titanic\" has appeared on the American Film Institute's award-winning 100 Years... series six times.\nLegacy and re-releases.\n3D conversion.\nA 2012 3D re-release was created by re-mastering the original to 4K resolution and post-converting to stereoscopic 3D format. The \"Titanic\" 3D version took 60 weeks and $18\u00a0million to produce, including the 4K restoration. The 3D conversion was performed by Stereo D. Digital 2D and 2D IMAX versions were also struck from the new 4K master created in the process. The only scene entirely redone for the re-release was Rose's view of the night sky at sea on the morning of April 15, 1912. The scene was replaced with an accurate view of the night-sky star pattern, including the Milky Way, adjusted for the location in the North Atlantic Ocean in April 1912. The change was prompted by the astrophysicist Neil deGrasse Tyson, who had criticized the unrealistic star pattern. He agreed to send Cameron a corrected view of the sky, which was the basis of the new scene.\nThe 3D version of \"Titanic\" premiered at the Royal Albert Hall in London on March 27, 2012, with James Cameron and Kate Winslet in attendance, and entered general release on April 4, 2012, six days before the centenary of \"Titanic\" embarking on her maiden voyage.\n\"Rolling Stone\" film critic Peter Travers rated the reissue &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3+1\u20442 stars out of 4, explaining he found it \"pretty damn dazzling\". He said, \"The 3D intensifies \"Titanic\". You are there. Caught up like never before in an intimate epic that earns its place in the movie time capsule.\" Writing for \"Entertainment Weekly\", Owen Gleiberman gave the film an A grade. He wrote, \"For once, the visuals in a 3-D movie don't look darkened or distracting. They look sensationally crisp and alive.\" Richard Corliss of \"Time\", who was very critical in 1997, remained in the same mood: \"I had pretty much the same reaction: fitfully awed, mostly water-logged.\" In regards to the 3D effects, he noted the \"careful conversion to 3D lends volume and impact to certain moments... [but] in separating the foreground and background of each scene, the converters have carved the visual field into discrete, not organic, levels.\" Ann Hornaday for \"The Washington Post\" found herself asking \"whether the film's twin values of humanism and spectacle are enhanced by Cameron's 3-D conversion, and the answer to that is: They aren't.\" She added that the \"3-D conversion creates distance where there should be intimacy, not to mention odd moments in framing and composition.\"\nThe film grossed an estimated $4.7\u00a0million on the first day of its re-release in North America (including midnight preview showings) and went on to make $17.3\u00a0million over the weekend, finishing in third place behind \"The Hunger Games\" and \"American Reunion\". Outside North America it earned $35.2\u00a0million, finishing second, and it improved on its performance the following weekend by topping the box office with $98.9\u00a0million. China has proven to be its most successful territory, where it earned $11.6\u00a0million on its opening day, going on to earn a record-breaking $67\u00a0million in its opening week and taking more money in the process than it did in the entirety of its original theatrical run.\nThe reissue earned $343.4\u00a0million worldwide, with $145\u00a0million coming from China and $57.8\u00a0million from Canada and the United States. With a worldwide box office of nearly $350\u00a0million, the 3D re-release of \"Titanic\" remains the highest grossing re-released film of all time, ahead of \"The Lion King\", \"Star Wars\", and \"Avatar\".\nThe 3D conversion of the film was also released in the 4DX format in selected international territories, which allows the audience to experience the film's environment using motion, wind, fog, lighting, and scent-based special effects.\n20th anniversary.\nFor the 20th anniversary of the film, \"Titanic\" was re-released in cinemas in Dolby Vision (in both 2D and 3D) for one week beginning December 1, 2017.\n25th anniversary.\n\"Titanic\" was re-released in theaters by Paramount domestically and Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures (through the 20th Century Studios and Buena Vista International labels) internationally on February 10, 2023, in a remastered 3D 4K HDR render, with high frame rate, as part of the film's 25th anniversary. For this version, the international prints update 20th Century's logo with the studio's current name, as a result of Disney's 2019 acquisition of the studio.\n\"Titanic Live\".\n\"Titanic Live\" was a live performance of Horner's original score by a 130-piece orchestra, choir and Celtic musicians, accompanying a showing of the film. In April 2015, \"Titanic Live\" premiered at the Royal Albert Hall, London, where the 2012 3D re-release had premiered.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52373", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52373", "title": "Center-pivot irrigation", "text": "Method of crop irrigation\nCenter-pivot irrigation (sometimes called central pivot irrigation), also called water-wheel and circle irrigation, is a method of crop irrigation in which equipment rotates around a pivot and crops are watered with sprinklers. A circular area centered on a pivot is irrigated, often creating a circular pattern in crops when viewed from above (sometimes referred to as \"crop circles\", not to be confused with those formed by circular flattening of a section of a crop in a field). Most center pivots were initially water-powered, however today most are propelled by electric motors. \nCenter-pivot irrigation systems are beneficial due to their ability to efficiently use water and optimize a farm's yield. The systems are highly effective on large land fields.\nHistory.\nOn March 23, 1914 James A. Norton of Odebolt, Iowa, filed the patent for the center pivot irrigation system. On August 17, 1915, it was granted as patent #1150144. The patent drawings shows multiple pairs of wheels supporting a pipe that is moved in a circle around a center pivot point. The description is: Watering arrangements making use of movable installations on wheels or the like movable around a pivot centre.\nCenter-pivot irrigation was invented in 1940 by the farmer Frank Zybach, who lived in Strasburg, Colorado. It is recognized as an effective method to improve water distribution to fields.\nIn 1952, Zybach went into business with A. E. Trowbridge, a friend, Ethan James Olson, from Columbus, Nebraska. Trowbridge put up $25,000 () and got 49% of the patent rights. Zybach moved back from Colorado to Columbus, opened a shop, hired a few men, moved the height of the pipe up to , and went into business. In the first two years of operation, they sold only 19 systems. The early designs were finicky and few farmers understood the systems. Zybach kept improving his designs and focused on making his machines better, rather than attempting to sell systems with problems.\nZybach saw success with modified designs, which improved the systems operational efficiency. In 1954, he licensed his patent to Robert Daugherty and his company, Valley Manufacturing. Daugherty's engineers spent the next decade refining Zybach's innovation, making it sturdier, taller, and more reliable, and converting it from a hydraulic power system to electric drive. Daugherty's company went on to grow into Valmont Industries, with Valley Irrigation being its subsidiary.\nOverview.\nCenter pivot irrigation is a form of overhead sprinkler irrigation consisting of several segments of pipe (usually galvanized steel or aluminum) with sprinklers positioned along their length, joined together and supported by trusses, and mounted on wheeled towers. The machine moves in a circular pattern and is fed with water from the pivot point at the center of the circle.\nFor a center pivot to be used, the terrain needs to be reasonably flat; but one major advantage of center pivots over alternative systems that use gravity flow is the ability to function in undulating country. This advantage has resulted in increased irrigated acreage and water use in some areas. The system is used in parts of the United States, Australia, New Zealand, Brazil, and in desert areas such as the Sahara and the Middle East.\nCenter pivots are typically less than in length (circle radius), with the most common size being the standard machine, which covers about of land.\nOriginally, most center pivots were water-powered. These were replaced by hydraulic systems and electric motor-driven systems, usually driven by a motor mounted at each tower.\nThe outside set of wheels sets the pace for the rotation. The inner sets of wheels are mounted at hubs between two segments and use angle sensors (microswitches) to detect when the bend at the joint exceeds a certain threshold. When the angle is too large, the wheels rotate to keep the segments aligned. Typical periods for a full rotation include three days; while other sources have the outer edge of the structure moving at per minute, which would equate to 14 to 21 hours for one full rotation of a system.\nTo achieve uniform application, center pivots require a variable emitter flow rate across the radius of the machine. Since the outer-most spans (or towers) travel farther in a given time period than the innermost spans, nozzle sizes are smallest at the inner spans and increase with distance from the pivot point. Aerial views show fields of circles created by tracings of quarter-mile or half-mile (400 or 800\u00a0m) radial irrigation pipes, which consume up to several thousands of gallons per minute.\"\nMost center pivot systems now have drops hanging from a U-shaped pipe called a \"gooseneck\" attached at the top of the pipe with sprinkler heads that are positioned a few feet (at most) above the crop, thus limiting evaporative losses and wind drift. There are many different nozzle configurations available including static plate, moving plate and part circle. Pressure regulators are typically installed upstream of each nozzle to ensure each is operating at the correct design pressure.\nDrops can also be used with drag hoses or bubblers that deposit the water directly on the ground between crops. This type of system is known as LEPA (Low Energy Precision Application) and is often associated with the construction of small dams along the furrow length (termed furrow diking/dyking). Crops may be planted either in straight rows or in circles to conform to the travel of the irrigation system.\nLinear or lateral move irrigation machines.\nIrrigation equipment can also be configured to move in a straight line, where it is termed a \"lateral move\", \"linear move\", \"wheel move\" or \"side-roll\" irrigation system. In these systems the water is supplied by an irrigation channel running the length of the field. The channel is positioned either at one side or in a line through the center. The motor and pump equipment are mounted on a cart by the supply channel. The cart travels with the machine.\nFarmers might choose lateral-move irrigation to keep existing rectangular fields. This can help them convert from furrow irrigation. Lateral-move irrigation is far less common, relies on more complex guidance systems, and requires additional management compared to center pivot irrigation. Lateral-move irrigation is common in Australia. There, systems are usually between 500 and 1,000 meters long.\nBenefits.\nCenter-pivot irrigation uses less labor than many other surface irrigation methods, such as furrow irrigation. It also has lower labor costs than ground-irrigation techniques that require digging of channels. Also, center-pivot irrigation can reduce the amount of soil tillage. Therefore, it helps reduce water runoff and soil erosion that can occur with ground irrigation. Less tillage also encourages more organic materials and crop residue to decompose back into the soil. It also reduces soil compaction.\nIn the United States early settlers of the semiarid High Plains were plagued by crop failures due to cycles of drought, culminating in the disastrous Dust Bowl of the 1930s. Only after World War II when center pivot irrigation became available did the land mass of the High Plains aquifer system transform into one of the most agriculturally productive regions in the world.\nNegative effects.\nGroundwater levels decrease when the rate of extraction by irrigation exceeds the rate of recharge. By 2013 it was shown that counterintuitively, as the water consumption efficiency of center-pivot irrigation improved over the years, farmers planted more intensively, irrigated more land, and grew thirstier crops. This is an example of Jevons paradox.\nIn parts of the United States, sixty years of the profitable business of intensive farming using huge center-pivot irrigators has emptied parts of the Ogallala Aquifer (also known as the High Plains Aquifer). One of the world's largest aquifers, it covers an area of approximately in portions of the eight states of South Dakota, Nebraska, Wyoming, Colorado, Kansas, Oklahoma, New Mexico, and Texas, beneath the Great Plains in the United States. The total water extraction from center-pivot irrigation in the area is estimated to be about 5.42 million acre-feet of water per year.\nIn 1950, irrigated cropland covered . With the use of center-pivot irrigation, nearly of land were irrigated in Kansas alone. At some places, during maximum extraction, the water table dropped more than per year. In extreme cases, wells had to be greatly deepened to reach the steadily falling water table. In some places in the Texas Panhandle, the water table has been drained (dewatered). \"Vast stretches of Texas farmland lying over the aquifer no longer support irrigation. In west-central Kansas, up to a fifth of the irrigated farmland along a swath of the aquifer has already gone dry.\" It would take hundreds to thousands of years of rainfall to replace the groundwater in the dried up aquifer.\nRole in culture.\nIn the 21st century, recognition of the significance of the High Plains Aquifer has led to increased coverage from regional and international journalists. A May 2013 \"New York Times\" article \"Wells dry, fertile plains turn to dust\" recounts the relentless decline of parts of the High Plains Aquifer System.\nWriter Emily Woodson characterized the increased use of the center pivot irrigation system as part of a profound attitude shift towards modernism (expensive tractors, center-pivot irrigation, dangerous new pesticides) and away from traditional farming that took place in the mid-1970s and 1980s in the United States. A new generation chose high-risk, high-reward crops such as irrigated corn or peanuts, which require large quantities of groundwater, fertilizer and chemicals. The new family farm corporations turned many pastures into new cropland and were more interested in rising land prices than water conservation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52376", "revid": "9021902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52376", "title": "Axiom of extensionality", "text": "Axiom used in set theory\nThe axiom of extensionality, also called the axiom of extent, is an axiom used in many forms of axiomatic set theory, such as Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory. The axiom defines what a set is. Informally, the axiom means that the two sets \"A\" and \"B\" are equal if and only if \"A\" and \"B\" have the same members.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"extensionality\", as used in \"'Axiom of Extensionality\"' has its roots in logic. An intensional definition describes the necessary and sufficient conditions for a term to apply to an object. For example: \"An even number is an integer which is divisible by 2.\" An extensional definition instead lists all objects where the term applies. For example: \"An even number is any one of the following integers: 0, 2, 4, 6, 8..., -2, -4, -6, -8...\" In logic, the extension of a predicate is the set of all things for which the predicate is true.\nThe logical term was introduced to set theory in 1893, Gottlob Frege attempted to use this idea of an extension formally in his \"Basic Laws of Arithmetic\" (German: \"Grundgesetze der Arithmetik\"), where, if formula_1 is a predicate, its extension (German: \"Umfang\") formula_2, is the set of all objects satisfying formula_1. For example if formula_4 is \"x is even\" then formula_2 is the set formula_6. In his work, he defined his infamous \"Basic Law V\" as:formula_7Stating that if two predicates have the same extensions (they are satisfied by the same set of objects) then they are logically equivalent, however, it was determined later that this axiom led to Russell's paradox. The first explicit statement of the modern Axiom of Extensionality was in 1908 by Ernst Zermelo in a paper on the well-ordering theorem, where he presented the first axiomatic set theory, now called Zermelo set theory, which became the basis of modern set theories. The specific term for \"Extensionality\" used by Zermelo was \"Bestimmtheit\".The specific English term \"extensionality\" only became common in mathematical and logical texts in the 1920s and 1930s, particularly with the formalization of logic and set theory by figures like Alfred Tarski and John von Neumann.\nIn ZF set theory.\nIn the formal language of the Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel axioms, the axiom reads:\nformula_8\nor in words:\nIf the sets formula_9 and formula_10 have the same members, then they are the same set.\nIn &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;pure set theory&lt;/dfn&gt;, all members of sets are themselves sets, but not in set theory with urelements. The axiom's usefulness can be seen from the fact that, if one accepts that formula_11, where formula_12 is a set and \"formula_13\" is a formula that formula_9 occurs free in but formula_12 doesn't, then the axiom assures that there is a unique set formula_12 whose members are precisely whatever objects (urelements or sets, as the case may be) satisfy the formula \"formula_13.\"\nThe converse of the axiom, formula_18, follows from the substitution property of equality. Despite this, the axiom is sometimes given directly as a biconditional, i.e., as formula_19.\nIn NF set theory.\nQuine's New Foundations (NF) set theory, in Quine's original presentations of it, treats the symbol formula_20 for equality or identity as shorthand either for \"if a set contains the left side of the equals sign as a member, then it also contains the right side of the equals sign as a member\" (as defined in 1937), or for \"an object is an element of the set on the left side of the equals sign if, and only if, it is also an element of the set on the right side of the equals sign\" (as defined in 1951). That is, formula_21 is treated as shorthand either for formula_22, as in the original 1937 paper, or for formula_23, as in Quine's \"Mathematical Logic\" (1951). The second version of the definition is exactly equivalent to the antecedent of the ZF axiom of extensionality, and the first version of the definition is still very similar to it. By contrast, however, the ZF set theory takes the symbol formula_20 for identity or equality as a primitive symbol of the formal language, and defines the axiom of extensionality in terms of it. (In this paragraph, the statements of both versions of the definition were paraphrases, and quotation marks were only used to set the statements apart.)\nIn Quine's \"New Foundations for Mathematical Logic\" (1937), the original paper of NF, the name \"principle of extensionality\" is given to the postulate P1, formula_25, which, for readability, may be restated as formula_26. The definition D8, which defines the symbol formula_20 for identity or equality, defines formula_28 as shorthand for formula_29. In his \"Mathematical Logic\" (1951), having already developed quasi-quotation, Quine defines formula_30 as shorthand for formula_31 (definition D10), and does not define an axiom or principle \"of extensionality\" at all.\nThomas Forster, however, ignores these fine distinctions, and considers NF to accept the axiom of extensionality in its ZF form.\nIn ZU set theory.\nIn the Scott\u2013Potter (ZU) set theory, the \"extensionality principle\" formula_32 is given as a theorem rather than an axiom, which is proved from the definition of a \"collection\".\nIn set theory with ur-elements.\nAn ur-element is a member of a set that is not itself a set.\nIn the Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel axioms, there are no ur-elements, but they are included in some alternative axiomatisations of set theory.\nUr-elements can be treated as a different logical type from sets; in this case, formula_33 makes no sense if formula_12 is an ur-element, so the axiom of extensionality simply applies only to sets.\nAlternatively, in untyped logic, we can require formula_33 to be false whenever formula_12 is an ur-element.\nIn this case, the usual axiom of extensionality would then imply that every ur-element is equal to the empty set.\nTo avoid this consequence, we can modify the axiom of extensionality to apply only to nonempty sets, so that it reads:\nformula_37\nThat is:\nGiven any set \"A\" and any set \"B\", \"if \"A\" is a nonempty set\" (that is, if there exists a member \"X\" of \"A\"), \"then\" if \"A\" and \"B\" have precisely the same members, then they are equal.\nYet another alternative in untyped logic is to define formula_12 itself to be the only element of formula_12\nwhenever formula_12 is an ur-element. While this approach can serve to preserve the axiom of extensionality, the axiom of regularity will need an adjustment instead.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52377", "revid": "13262827", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52377", "title": "Squashed Bugs", "text": ""}
{"id": "52378", "revid": "13262827", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52378", "title": "Squashed bugs", "text": ""}
{"id": "52381", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52381", "title": "Thermite", "text": "Pyrotechnic composition of metal powder and metal oxide\nThermite () is a pyrotechnic composition of metal powder and metal oxide. When ignited by heat or chemical reaction, thermite undergoes an exothermic reduction-oxidation (redox) reaction. Most varieties are not explosive, but can create brief bursts of heat and high temperature in a small area. Its form of action is similar to that of other fuel-oxidizer mixtures, such as black powder.\nThermites have diverse compositions. Fuels include aluminum, magnesium, titanium, zinc, silicon, and boron. Aluminum is common because of its high boiling point and low cost. Oxidizers include bismuth(III) oxide, boron(III) oxide, silicon(IV) oxide, chromium(III) oxide, manganese(IV) oxide, iron(III) oxide, iron(II,III) oxide, copper(II) oxide, and lead(II,IV) oxide. In a thermochemical survey comprising twenty-five metals and thirty-two metal oxides, 288 out of 800 binary combinations were characterized by adiabatic temperatures greater than 2000 K. Combinations like these, which possess the thermodynamic potential to produce very high temperatures, are either already known to be reactive or are plausible thermitic systems.\nThe first thermite reaction was discovered in 1893 by the German chemist Hans Goldschmidt, who obtained a patent for his process. Today, thermite is used mainly for thermite welding, particularly for welding together railway tracks. Thermites have also been used in metal refining, disabling munitions, and in incendiary weapons. Some thermite-like mixtures are used as pyrotechnic initiators in fireworks.\nChemical reactions.\nIn the following example, elemental aluminum reduces the oxide of another metal, in this common example iron oxide, because aluminum forms stronger and more stable bonds with oxygen than iron:\n Fe2O3 + 2 Al \u2192 2 Fe + Al2O3\nThe products are aluminum oxide, elemental iron, and a large amount of heat. The reactants are commonly powdered and mixed with a binder to keep the material solid and prevent separation.\nOther metal oxides can be used, such as chromium oxide, to generate the given metal in its elemental form. For example, a copper thermite reaction using copper oxide and elemental aluminum can be used for creating electric joints in a process called cadwelding, that produces elemental copper (it may react violently):\n 3 CuO + 2 Al \u2192 3 Cu + Al2O3\nThermites with nanosized particles are described by a variety of terms, such as metastable intermolecular composites, super-thermite, nano-thermite, and nanocomposite energetic materials.\nHistory.\nThe thermite () reaction was discovered in 1893 and patented in 1895 by German chemist Hans Goldschmidt. Consequently, the reaction is sometimes called the \"Goldschmidt reaction\" or \"Goldschmidt process\". Goldschmidt was originally interested in producing very pure metals by avoiding the use of carbon in smelting, but he soon discovered the value of thermite in welding.\nThe first commercial application of thermite was the welding of tram tracks in Essen in 1899.\nTypes.\nRed iron(III) oxide (Fe2O3, commonly known as rust) is the most common iron oxide used in thermite. Black iron(II,III) oxide (Fe3O4, magnetite) also works. Other oxides are occasionally used, such as MnO2 in manganese thermite, Cr2O3 in chromium thermite, SiO2 (quartz) in silicon thermite, or copper(II) oxide in copper thermite, but only for specialized purposes. All of these examples use aluminum as the reactive metal. Fluoropolymers can be used in special formulations, Teflon with magnesium or aluminum being a relatively common example. Magnesium/Teflon/Viton is another pyrolant of this type.\nCombinations of dry ice (frozen carbon dioxide) and reducing agents such as magnesium, aluminum and boron follow the same chemical reaction as with traditional thermite mixtures, producing metal oxides and carbon. Despite the very low temperature of a dry ice thermite mixture, such a system is capable of being ignited with a flame. When the ingredients are finely divided, confined in a pipe and armed like a traditional explosive, this cryo-thermite is detonatable and a portion of the carbon liberated in the reaction emerges in the form of diamond.\nIn principle, any reactive metal could be used instead of aluminum. This is rarely done, because the properties of aluminum are nearly ideal for this reaction:\nAlthough the reactants are stable at room temperature, they burn with an extremely intense exothermic reaction when they are heated to ignition temperature. The products emerge as liquids due to the high temperatures reached (up to 2500\u00a0\u00b0C (4532\u00b0F) with iron(III) oxide)\u2014although the actual temperature reached depends on how quickly heat can escape to the surrounding environment. Thermite contains its own supply of oxygen and does not require any external source of air. Consequently, it cannot be smothered, and may ignite in any environment given sufficient initial heat. It burns well while wet, and cannot be easily extinguished with water\u2014though enough water to remove sufficient heat may stop the reaction. Small amounts of water boil before reaching the reaction. Even so, thermite is used for welding under water.\nThe thermites are characterized by almost complete absence of gas production during burning, high reaction temperature, and production of molten slag. The fuel should have high heat of combustion and produce oxides with low melting point and high boiling point. The oxidizer should contain at least 25% oxygen, have high density, low heat of formation, and produce metal with low melting and high boiling points (so the energy released is not consumed in evaporation of reaction products). Organic binders can be added to the composition to improve its mechanical properties, but they tend to produce endothermic decomposition products, causing some loss of reaction heat and production of gases.\nThe temperature achieved during the reaction determines the outcome. In an ideal case, the reaction produces a well-separated melt of metal and slag. For this, the temperature must be high enough to melt both reaction products, the resulting metal and the fuel oxide. Too low a temperature produces a mixture of sintered metal and slag; too high a temperature (above the boiling point of any reactant or product) leads to rapid production of gas, dispersing the burning reaction mixture, sometimes with effects similar to a low-yield explosion. In compositions intended for production of metal by aluminothermic reaction, these effects can be counteracted. Too low a reaction temperature (e.g., when producing silicon from sand) can be boosted with addition of a suitable oxidizer (e.g., sulfur in aluminum-sulfur-sand compositions); too high a temperature can be reduced by using a suitable coolant or slag flux. The flux often used in amateur compositions is calcium fluoride, as it reacts only minimally, has relatively low melting point, low melt viscosity at high temperatures (therefore increasing fluidity of the slag) and forms a eutectic with alumina. Too much flux, however, dilutes the reactants to the point of not being able to sustain combustion. The type of metal oxide also has dramatic influence to the amount of energy produced; the higher the oxide, the higher the amount of energy produced. A good example is the difference between manganese(IV) oxide and manganese(II) oxide, where the former produces too high temperature and the latter is barely able to sustain combustion; to achieve good results, a mixture with proper ratio of both oxides can be used.\nThe reaction rate can be also tuned with particle sizes; coarser particles burn slower than finer particles. The effect is more pronounced with the particles requiring heating to higher temperature to start reacting. This effect is pushed to the extreme with nano-thermites.\nThe temperature achieved in the reaction in adiabatic conditions, when no heat is lost to the environment, can be estimated using Hess's law \u2013 by calculating the energy produced by the reaction itself (subtracting the enthalpy of the reactants from the enthalpy of the products) and subtracting the energy consumed by heating the products (from their specific heat, when the materials only change their temperature, and their enthalpy of fusion and eventually enthalpy of vaporization, when the materials melt or boil). In real conditions, the reaction loses heat to the environment, the achieved temperature is therefore somewhat lower. The heat transfer rate is finite, so the faster the reaction is, the closer to adiabatic condition it runs and the higher is the achieved temperature.\nIron thermite.\nThe most common composition is iron thermite. The oxidizer used is usually either iron(III) oxide or iron(II,III) oxide. The former produces more heat. The latter is easier to ignite, likely due to the crystal structure of the oxide. Addition of copper or manganese oxides can significantly improve the ease of ignition.\nThe density of prepared thermite is often as low as 0.7\u00a0g/cm3. This, in turn, results in relatively poor energy density (about 3 kJ/cm3), rapid burn times, and spray of molten iron due to the expansion of trapped air. Thermite can be pressed to densities as high as 4.9\u00a0g/cm3 (almost 16\u00a0kJ/cm3) with slow burning speeds (about 1\u00a0cm/s). Pressed thermite has higher melting power, i.e. it can melt a steel cup where a low-density thermite would fail. Iron thermite with or without additives can be pressed into cutting devices that have heat-resistant casing and a nozzle.\nOxygen-balanced iron thermite 2Al + Fe2O3 has theoretical maximum density of 4.175\u00a0g/cm3 an adiabatic burn temperature of 3135 K or 2862\u00a0\u00b0C or 5183\u00a0\u00b0F (with phase transitions included, limited by iron, which boils at 3135\u00a0K), the aluminum oxide is (briefly) molten and the produced iron is mostly liquid with part of it being in gaseous form - 78.4 g of iron vapor per kg of thermite are produced. The energy content is 945.4\u00a0cal/g (3 956 J/g). The energy density is 16,516\u00a0J/cm3.\nThe original mixture, as invented, used iron oxide in the form of mill scale. The composition was very difficult to ignite.\nCopper thermite.\nCopper thermite can be prepared using either copper(I) oxide (Cu2O, red) or copper(II) oxide (CuO, black). The burn rate tends to be very fast and the melting point of copper is relatively low, so the reaction produces a significant amount of molten copper in a very short time. Copper(II) thermite reactions can be so fast that it can be considered a type of flash powder. An explosion can occur, which sends a spray of copper drops to considerable distances.\nOxygen-balanced mixture has theoretical maximum density of 5.109\u00a0g/cm3, adiabatic flame temperature 2843 K (phase transitions included) with the aluminum oxide being molten and copper in both liquid and gaseous form; 343\u00a0g of copper vapor per kg of this thermite are produced. The energy content is 974 cal/g.\nCopper(I) thermite has industrial uses in e.g., welding of thick copper conductors (cadwelding). This kind of welding is being evaluated also for cable splicing on the US Navy fleet, for use in high-current systems, e.g., electric propulsion.\nOxygen-balanced mixture has theoretical maximum density of 5.280\u00a0g/cm3, adiabatic flame temperature 2843\u00a0K (phase transitions included) with the aluminum oxide being molten and copper in both liquid and gaseous form; 77.6\u00a0g of copper vapor per kg of this thermite are produced. The energy content is 575.5\u00a0cal/g.\nThermates.\nThermate composition is a thermite enriched with a salt-based oxidizer (usually nitrates, e.g., barium nitrate, or peroxides). In contrast with thermites, thermates burn with evolution of flame and gases. The presence of the oxidizer makes the mixture easier to ignite and improves penetration of target by the burning composition, as the evolved gas is projecting the molten slag and providing mechanical agitation. This mechanism makes thermate more suitable than thermite for incendiary purposes and for emergency destruction of sensitive equipment (e.g., cryptographic devices), as thermite's effect is more localized.\nIgnition.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMetals, under the right conditions, burn in a process similar to the combustion of wood or gasoline. In fact, rust is the result of oxidation of steel or iron at very slow rates. A thermite reaction results when the correct mixtures of metallic fuels combine and ignite. Ignition itself requires extremely high temperatures.\nIgnition of a thermite reaction normally requires a sparkler or easily obtainable magnesium ribbon, but may require persistent efforts, as ignition can be unreliable and unpredictable. These temperatures cannot be reached with conventional black powder fuses, nitrocellulose rods, detonators, pyrotechnic initiators, or other common igniting substances. Even when the thermite is hot enough to glow bright red, it does not ignite, as it has a very high ignition temperature. Starting the reaction is possible using a propane torch if done correctly.\nOften, strips of magnesium metal are used as fuses. Because metals burn without releasing cooling gases, they can potentially burn at extremely high temperatures. Reactive metals such as magnesium can easily reach temperatures sufficiently high for thermite ignition. Magnesium ignition remains popular among amateur thermite users, mainly because it can be easily obtained, but a piece of the burning strip can fall off into the mixture, resulting in premature ignition.\nThe reaction between potassium permanganate and glycerol or ethylene glycol is used as an alternative to the magnesium method. When these two substances mix, a spontaneous reaction begins, slowly increasing the temperature of the mixture until it produces flames. The heat released by the oxidation of glycerine is sufficient to initiate a thermite reaction.\nApart from magnesium ignition, some amateurs also choose to use sparklers to ignite the thermite mixture. These reach the necessary temperatures and provide enough time before the burning point reaches the sample. This can be a dangerous method, as the iron sparks, like the magnesium strips, burn at thousands of degrees and can ignite the thermite, though the sparkler itself is not in contact with it. This is especially dangerous with finely powdered thermite.\nMatch heads burn hot enough to ignite thermite. Use of match heads enveloped with aluminum foil and a sufficiently long viscofuse/electric match leading to the match heads is possible.\nSimilarly, finely powdered thermite can be ignited by a flint spark lighter, as the sparks are burning metal (in this case, the highly reactive rare-earth metals lanthanum and cerium). Therefore, it is unsafe to strike a lighter close to thermite.\nCivilian uses.\nThermite reactions have many uses. It is not an explosive; instead, it operates by exposing a very small area to extremely high temperatures. Intense heat focused on a small spot can be used to cut through metal or weld metal components together both by melting metal from the components, and by injecting molten metal from the thermite reaction itself. \nThermite may be used for repair by the welding in-place of thick steel sections such as locomotive axle-frames where the repair can take place without removing the part from its installed location.\nThermite can be used for quickly cutting or welding steel such as rail tracks, without requiring complex or heavy equipment. However, defects such as slag inclusions and voids (holes) are often present in such welded junctions, so great care is needed to operate the process successfully. The numerical analysis of thermite welding of rails has been approached similar to casting cooling analysis. Both this finite element analysis and experimental analysis of thermite rail welds has shown that weld gap is the most influential parameter affecting defect formation. Increasing weld gap has been shown to reduce shrinkage cavity formation and cold lap welding defects, and increasing preheat and thermite temperature further reduces these defects. However, reducing these defects promotes a second form of defect: microporosity. Care must also be taken to ensure that the rails remain straight, without resulting in dipped joints, which can cause wear on high speed and heavy axle load lines. Studies to make the hardness of thermite welds to repair tracks have made improvements to the hardness to compare more to the original tracks while keeping its portable nature.\nAs the reaction of thermite is oxidation-reduction and environmentally friendly, it has started to be adapted into use for sealing oil wells instead of using concrete. Though thermite is usually in a powder-state, a diluted mixture can reduce damage to the surroundings during the process, though too much alumina can risk hurting the integrity of the seal. A higher concentration of mixture was needed to melt the plastic of a model tube, making it a favorable mixture. Other experiments have been done to simulate the heat flux of the well sealing to predict the temperature on the surface of the seal over time.\nA thermite reaction, when used to purify the ores of some metals, is called the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;thermite process, or aluminothermic reaction. An adaptation of the reaction, used to obtain pure uranium, was developed as part of the Manhattan Project at Ames Laboratory under the direction of Frank Spedding. It is sometimes called the Ames process.\nCopper thermite is used for welding together thick copper wires for the purpose of electrical connections. It is used extensively by the electrical utilities and telecommunications industries (exothermic welded connections).\nMilitary uses.\nThermite hand grenades and charges are typically used by armed forces in both an anti-materiel role and in the partial destruction of equipment, the latter being common when time is not available for safer or more thorough methods. For example, thermite can be used for the emergency destruction of cryptographic equipment when there is a danger that it might be captured by enemy troops. Because standard iron-thermite is difficult to ignite, burns with practically no flame and has a small radius of action, standard thermite is rarely used on its own as an incendiary composition. In general, an increase in the volume of gaseous reaction products of a thermite blend increases the heat transfer rate (and therefore damage) of that particular thermite blend. It is usually used with other ingredients that increase its incendiary effects. Thermate-TH3 is a mixture of thermite and pyrotechnic additives that have been found superior to standard thermite for incendiary purposes. Its composition by weight is generally about 68.7% thermite, 29.0% barium nitrate, 2.0% sulfur, and 0.3% of a binder (such as PBAN). The addition of barium nitrate to thermite increases its thermal effect, produces a larger flame, and significantly reduces the ignition temperature. Although the primary purpose of Thermate-TH3 by the armed forces is as an incendiary anti-materiel weapon, it also has uses in welding together metal components.\nA classic military use for thermite is disabling artillery pieces, and it has been used for this purpose since World War II, such as at Pointe du Hoc, Normandy. Because it permanently disables artillery pieces without the use of explosive charges, thermite can be used when silence is necessary to an operation. This can be accomplished by inserting one or more armed thermite grenades into the breech, then quickly closing it; this welds the breech shut and makes loading the weapon impossible.\nDuring World War II, both German and Allied incendiary bombs used thermite mixtures. Incendiary bombs usually consisted of dozens of thin, thermite-filled canisters (bomblets) ignited by a magnesium fuse. Incendiary bombs created massive damage in numerous cities due to the fires started by the thermite. Cities that primarily consisted of wooden buildings were especially susceptible. These incendiary bombs were used primarily during nighttime air raids. Bombsights could not be used at night, creating the need for munitions that could destroy targets without requiring precision placement.\nSo called Dragon drones equipped with thermite munitions were used by the Ukrainian army during the Russian invasion of Ukraine against Russian positions.\nHazards.\nThermite usage is hazardous due to the extremely high temperatures produced and the extreme difficulty in smothering a reaction once initiated. Small streams of molten iron released in the reaction can travel considerable distances and may melt through metal containers, igniting their contents. Additionally, flammable metals with relatively low boiling points such as zinc (with a boiling point of 907\u00a0\u00b0C, which is about 1,370\u00a0\u00b0C below the temperature at which thermite burns) could potentially spray superheated boiling metal violently into the air if near a thermite reaction.\nIf, for some reason, thermite is contaminated with organics, hydrated oxides and other compounds able to produce gases upon heating or reaction with thermite components, the reaction products may be sprayed. Moreover, if the thermite mixture contains enough empty spaces with air and burns fast enough, the super-heated air also may cause the mixture to spray. For this reason it is preferable to use relatively crude powders, so the reaction rate is moderate and hot gases could escape the reaction zone.\nPreheating of thermite before ignition can easily be done accidentally, for example by pouring a new pile of thermite over a hot, recently ignited pile of thermite slag. When ignited, preheated thermite can burn almost instantaneously, releasing light and heat energy at a much higher rate than normal and causing burns and eye damage at what would normally be a reasonably safe distance.\nThe thermite reaction can take place accidentally in industrial locations where workers use abrasive grinding and cutting wheels with ferrous metals. Using aluminum in this situation produces a mixture of oxides that can explode violently.\nMixing water with thermite or pouring water onto burning thermite can cause a steam explosion, spraying hot fragments in all directions.\nThermite's main ingredients were also utilized for their individual qualities, specifically reflectivity and heat insulation, in a paint coating or dope for the German zeppelin \"Hindenburg\", possibly contributing to its fiery destruction. This was a theory put forward by the former NASA scientist Addison Bain, and later tested in small scale by the scientific reality-TV show \"MythBusters\" with semi-inconclusive results (it was proven not to be the fault of the thermite reaction alone, but instead conjectured to be a combination of that and the burning of hydrogen gas that filled the body of the \"Hindenburg\"). The \"MythBusters\" program also tested the veracity of a video found on the Internet, whereby a quantity of thermite in a metal bucket was ignited while sitting on top of several blocks of ice, causing a sudden explosion. They were able to confirm the results, finding huge chunks of ice as far as 50 m from the point of explosion. Co-host Jamie Hyneman conjectured that this was due to the thermite mixture aerosolizing, perhaps in a cloud of steam, causing it to burn even faster. Hyneman also voiced skepticism about another theory explaining the phenomenon: that the reaction somehow separated the hydrogen and oxygen in the ice and then ignited them. This explanation claims that the explosion is due to the reaction of high temperature molten aluminum with water. aluminum reacts violently with water or steam at high temperatures, releasing hydrogen and oxidizing in the process. The speed of that reaction and the ignition of the resulting hydrogen can easily account for the explosion verified.&lt;ref name=\"Aluminum Times Vol 11 n 3 Jul/Aug 2009\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; This process is akin to the explosive reaction caused by dropping metallic potassium into water.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52382", "revid": "32647130", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52382", "title": "Watergate scandal", "text": "1970s political scandal in the U.S.\nThe Watergate scandal, or simply Watergate, was a political scandal in the United States involving the administration of President Richard Nixon. The affair began on June 17, 1972, when members of a group associated with Nixon's 1972 re-election campaign were caught burglarizing and planting listening devices in the Democratic National Committee headquarters at Washington, D.C.'s Watergate complex. Nixon's attempts to conceal his administration's involvement led to an impeachment process and his resignation in August 1974.\nEmerging from the White House's intelligence efforts to stop leaks, the Watergate break-in was an implementation of Operation Gemstone, enacted by mostly Cuban burglars led by former intelligence agents E. Howard Hunt and G. Gordon Liddy. After the burglars' arrests, investigators traced their funding to the Committee for the Re-Election of the President, the fundraising arm of Nixon's campaign. Further revelations from investigators and reporters like the \"Washington Post\"'s Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein\u2014who were guided by \"Deep Throat\", the leaking FBI Associate Director Mark Felt\u2014revealed a political espionage campaign illegally funded by donor contributions. Nixon denied responsibility, but his administration destroyed evidence, obstructed investigators, and bribed the arrested burglars. This cover-up was initially successful and allowed Nixon to win a landslide reelection. Revelations from the burglars' trial in early 1973 led to a Senate investigation. In April, Nixon denied wrongdoing and accepted top aides' resignations.\nIn May, Attorney General Elliot Richardson appointed Archibald Cox as special prosecutor for Watergate. Cox subpoenaed Nixon's Oval Office tapes, but Nixon cited executive privilege and refused to release them, sparking a constitutional crisis. In the \"Saturday Night Massacre\" in October, Nixon ordered Richardson to fire Cox, after which Richardson resigned, as did his deputy William Ruckelshaus; Solicitor General Robert Bork carried out the order. The incident bolstered a growing public belief that Nixon had something to hide, but he continued to proclaim innocence. The first batch of surrendered tapes revealed that two were missing and another had an intentional 18-minute erasure. In April 1974, Cox's replacement Leon Jaworski reissued a subpoena for the tapes, but Nixon only released redacted transcripts. In July, the Supreme Court ordered Nixon to release the tapes, and the House Judiciary Committee recommended that he be impeached for obstructing justice, abuse of power, and contempt of Congress. In one tape, known as the \"Smoking Gun\", he ordered aides to make the CIA stop the FBI's investigation. On the verge of being impeached, Nixon resigned on August 9, 1974, becoming the only U.S. president to do so. In total, 69 people were charged with Watergate-related crimes\u2014including two cabinet members\u2014and most pleaded guilty or were convicted, but Nixon was pardoned by his vice president and successor Gerald Ford.\nWatergate, often considered the greatest presidential scandal, tarnished Nixon's legacy and had electoral ramifications for the Republican Party: the loss of four Senate seats and 48 House seats in the 1974 midterms. President Ford's pardon of Nixon is also widely agreed to have contributed to his election defeat in 1976. Despite significant coverage, no consensus exists on the motive for the break-in nor who specifically ordered it. Theories range from an incompetent break-in by rogue campaign officials to a sexpionage operation or CIA plot. The scandal generated over 30 memoirs and left such an impression that it is common for scandals, even outside politics or the United States, to be named with the suffix \"-gate\".\nPrelude.\nLeaks and early wiretrapping.\nRichard Nixon, the 37th president of the United States, was elected to the White House in 1968 as a champion of \"law and order\". He had served as vice president under President Dwight D. Eisenhower and narrowly lost the 1960 presidential election to John F. Kennedy. As president, Nixon inherited American involvement in the Vietnam War, which he promised to end honorably. Seeking to force a diplomatic resolution, Nixon escalated the war and secretly expanded bombing to Cambodia. \nWhen \"The New York Times\" revealed the bombing operation in May 1969, Nixon ordered the wiretapping of reporters and suspected leakers. After J. Edgar Hoover's Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) could not bug some targets, Nixon had domestic policy chief John Ehrlichman directly arrange the wiretapping \u2014 a precedent for his administration's espionage. Nixon's discontent with the FBI also led him to hire former New York Police Department detectives Jack Caulfield and Anthony Ulasewicz as his own private investigators.\nIn June 1971, \"The New York Times\" started publishing the \"Pentagon Papers\": a leaked 7,000-page study of U.S. involvement in Vietnam, commissioned in 1967. Leaked by former RAND analyst Daniel Ellsberg, the papers exposed government deception about the war's progress. Nixon was initially unworried, as the \"Pentagon Papers\" predated his presidency, but National Security Advisor Henry Kissinger\u2014furious as Ellsberg was his mentee\u2014pushed Nixon into what White House chief of staff H. R. Haldeman called a \"frenzy\". Nixon had Attorney General John Mitchell threaten the \"Times\", which halted the papers' publication as it litigated a restraining order. However, the \"Washington Post\" began to publish the papers instead, and the \"Times\" case traveled to the Supreme Court, which ruled against Nixon. The episode was, according to journalist Garrett Graff, a \"self-inflicted... disaster\".\nThe White House Plumbers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"We've got a damn counter-government here and we've got to fight it. I don't give a damn how it is done, do whatever has to be done to stop these leaks. I don't want to be told why it can't be done. This government cannot survive, it cannot function if anyone can run out and leak.\"\n \u2014 Nixon to aide Chuck Colson after \"New York Times Co. v. United States\" (1971)\nAfter the Supreme Court's ruling, Nixon told aide Chuck Colson to stop leaks by any means. Nixon fixated on files at the Brookings Institution on the Chennault Affair, in which he had sabotaged 1968 Vietnam peace talks, and urged aides to \"get in and get those files\u2014blow the safe and get it\". Nixon advisors had previously drafted the Huston Plan, which proposed expanded domestic surveillance and tactics like \"surreptitious entry\" \u2014 burglary. Although approved by Nixon, a worried Hoover had the plan officially withdrawn.\nFor the Brookings burglary, Colson recruited retired Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) agent E. Howard Hunt, who had helped arrange the 1954 Guatemalan coup d'\u00e9tat and the failed 1961 Bay of Pigs Invasion of Cuba. After scouting by Ulasewicz, the plot escalated into a firebombing with burglars posing as firefighters: concerned White House Counsel John Dean halted the operation. Their focus shifted to leaker Ellsberg: Hunt was teamed with aides Egil Krogh and David Young in the new \"Special Investigations Unit\". Former FBI agent G. Gordon Liddy also joined the group, which he dubbed \"ODESSA\" after a rumored Nazi \"Schutzstaffel\" group. Young's grandmother offered another name for the leak-hunters: the \"Plumbers\".\nThe Plumbers targeted Ellsberg's psychiatrist, Lewis Fielding, believing he held compromising files. After Hunt and Liddy scouted his Los Angeles office, Krogh approved a burglary: \"Hunt/Liddy Project #1\". Hunt enlisted Cuban collaborators from the Bay of Pigs: CIA veteran Bernard Barker\u2014who had served under Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista\u2014and anti-Castro exiles Eugenio Mart\u00ednez and Felipe De Diego. The September 3 burglary reportedly failed, with the Cubans finding no Ellsberg files and having to stage an addict's rampage after damaging the safe. However, De Diego said that they found and photographed Ellsberg's records, and Fielding reported that Ellsberg's health files were in his office and appeared to have been \"fingered\". Liddy later suspected that Hunt had deceived him, photographing the files and sending them instead to the CIA. Hunt and Liddy then planned to burglarize Fielding's home but were stopped by Ehrlichman.\nThe Plumbers next plotted to discredit Ellsberg by drugging him with LSD at a Washington gala, but White House approval came too late. They revived the Brookings firebombing scheme, proposing to buy a fire engine for firefighter\u2011disguised Cubans, which the White House ultimately deemed too costly. Other projects included investigating Ted Kennedy's Chappaquiddick accident, assessing whether Hoover should be made to leave the FBI, and forging a cable to link John F. Kennedy to the 1963 assassination of South Vietnamese president Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Di\u1ec7m. The Plumbers also helped discover that the Pentagon was surveilling the White House via a leaker on the National Security Council, outraging an increasingly paranoid Nixon. Collectively, the Plumbers' schemes are often called the \"White House horrors\", a phrase coined by Attorney General Mitchell.\nCommittee for the Re-Election of the President.\nAs Nixon prepared for his 1972 reelection campaign, Caulfield proposed Operation Sandwedge: a private-sector intelligence operation against the Democrats, staffed by himself and Ulasewicz. White House officials deemed the plan too moderate and doubted Caulfield's competence: Liddy was selected to head the project before it was scrapped. In December 1971, Liddy instead became general counsel for the Committee for the Re-Election of the President (CRP)\u2014the fundraising arm of Nixon's reelection campaign\u2014introduced by deputy campaign manager Jeb Stuart Magruder as \"our man in charge of dirty tricks\". The CRP also recruited retired CIA officer James McCord, recommended by Caulfield, as its security chief.\nWith Hunt, Liddy devised Operation Gemstone, a set of covert campaign schemes pitched to Attorney General Mitchell on January 27. These included Operation Diamond: kidnapping, drugging, and detaining in Mexico likely protestors during the 1972 Republican National Convention. The plan, nicknamed \"Nacht und Nebel\" after an Adolf Hitler directive, would be enacted by an \"Einsatzgruppe\" of mobsters that Hunt said had committed 22 murders. Other plots included Operation Emerald, a spy airliner to trail the Democratic nominee; Operation Turquoise, Cuban commandos sabotaging air-conditioning at the Democrats' 1972 Miami convention; and Operation Sapphire, a boat with sex workers to entrap Democrats at the convention. Mitchell rejected the plots as unrealistic and expensive, requesting a simpler Gemstone. \nIn February, Mitchell resigned to become director of the CRP. Although disputed by Graff and biographer James Rosen, Mitchell is generally believed to have approved Liddy's next version of Gemstone, which proposed burglarizing and bugging the office of Larry O'Brien at the Democratic National Committee's (DNC) headquarters within D.C.'s Watergate Complex, the Fontainebleau Hotel suites of top Democrats during their Miami convention, and the campaign headquarters of the eventual nominee. As another break-in target, Mitchell or Magruder suggested \"Las Vegas Sun\" publisher Hank Greenspun's office. The desired material may have involved possible Democratic nominee Edmund Muskie or Howard Hughes' financial dealings with Nixon or his brother Donald. Although\u2014according to Hunt and Liddy\u2014the burglary was abandoned after Hughes would not provide a getaway plane, Greenspun's office showed evidence of forced entry, and Ehrlichman told Nixon in 1973 that Hunt and Liddy \"flew out [to Las Vegas], broke his safe, got something out\" [\"sic\"].\nOval Office taping system.\nAfter his election, Nixon made the Army Signal Corps remove a taping system used by predecessor Lyndon B. Johnson in the Oval Office. By 1971, Nixon worried that his presidency would not be sufficiently preserved for posterity and had the Secret Service install microphones in his desk and throughout the room. The system was deliberately kept secret from the White House Communications Agency, Kissinger, and even Nixon's secretary, Rose Mary Woods. From February 16, 1971 to July 12, 1973, the system recorded 3,432 hours of conversation. According to Graff, the tapes were ultimately \"the root cause of [Nixon's] downfall\". No president since Nixon is known to have taped White House conversations, although President Donald Trump suggested that he did.\nWatergate break-ins.\nAssembling the crew.\nFollowing the May 2 death of FBI director Hoover, Colson asked the CRP to send counterprotestors as he lay in state at the Capitol rotunda. Hunt and Liddy again recruited Bay of Pigs collaborators: Barker flew to D.C. with nine men from Miami. After the counterprotest\u2014at which they tried to attack the protesting Ellsberg\u2014Barker's team may have committed two unsolved burglaries in Washington, those of the Chilean Embassy and of a major Democratic law firm within the Watergate Complex on May 16. The counterprotest may also have been a ruse to bring the Cubans to D.C. to burglarize Hoover's home in search of alleged \"kompromat\" used to blackmail politicians.\nAfter meeting with Hunt in Miami, Barker selected the men for the DNC break-in planned for Memorial Day weekend: Mart\u00ednez, as photographer; Virgilio Gonzalez, as picklock; and De Diego, Reinaldo Pico, and Frank Sturgis as guards. Sturgis was the only non-Cuban member, but he had fought alongside Castro in the Sierra Maestra during the Cuban Revolution. Pico and De Diego were dropped because McCord forgot two walkie-talkies. After a planning session with McCord and Hunt at the Hamilton Hotel near the White House, Barker's team checked into the Watergate Hotel on May 26. McCord recruited former FBI agent Alfred Baldwin III to perform the wiretapping and monitor the telephone conversations afterward; he was booked at the Howard Johnson's motel opposite the Watergate.\nInitial attempts and May 28 break-in.\nThe Plumbers attempted a break-in on the night of May 26, with Hunt and seven others posing as executives in a banquet room that, although technically part of the hotel, was located beneath the Watergate office building and connected to the office's stairwell. This effort failed when Hunt and Mart\u00ednez, after hiding in a closet to evade a night guard, were unable to pick the lock and were stuck in the banquet room overnight. A parallel plot led by Liddy with the Cubans\u2014the bugging of George McGovern's D.C. campaign headquarters\u2014failed on two nights when a lone volunteer was seen working late. On May 27, a second DNC break-in failed after Gonzalez lacked proper tools for the DNC office's door; he flew back to Miami to retrieve them.\nOn May 28, Gonzalez and Sturgis entered the office on their third attempt, approaching via the garage. They were joined by Barker, who sought files on Cuban contributions and had Mart\u00ednez photograph convention security files, and McCord, who bugged the phones of both staffer R. Spencer Oliver and O'Brien's secretary. After the team left the office, McCord was unable to pick up the secretary wiretap transmitter with his remote receiver. In the following weeks, Baldwin recorded hundreds of calls on Oliver's wiretap, including many sexual conversations from secretaries using his phone. Liddy delivered the phone transcripts and developed photos to Magruder and a disappointed Mitchell, who dismissed them as \"shitty\".\nOn June 12, Magruder asked Liddy to photograph all documents in the office. Later that day, Baldwin, directed by Liddy, visited the Watergate DNC office under the guise of a nephew of former DNC chairman John Bailey and was given a tour of the floor. Two days later, Liddy told Hunt that the DNC break-in would be reattempted. On June 16, Barker's team returned to D.C. and checked into the Watergate.\nJune 17 break-in.\nFor the May 28 break-in, Sturgis and Gonzalez had used tape to cover latches and prevent doors locking. On the night of June 17, McCord volunteered to tape the doors but did so horizontally such that excess tape was visible on the sides. He then returned to Baldwin's listening post at the Howard Johnson's, where Hunt called him to ask if the DNC office was empty. McCord reported a lone staffer: Bruce Givner, an intern calling friends. At around 12:45, Givner left the office, and security guard Frank Wills began his shift. At 1 a.m., Wills removed the garage door tape, assuming a worker left it. Stumbling into Givner, Wills left to eat with him at the Howard Johnson's. \nAccounts differ on which burglar decided to proceed with the operation after the tape removal was found. Regardless, McCord rejoined the burglars, and Gonzalez repicked and retaped the door. Reaching the DNC office, the burglars abandoned picking the lock and removed the door from the hinges instead. At around 1:50 a.m., Wills returned and discovered the new tape and called the police. An unmarked Metropolitan Police cruiser arrived within three minutes. Baldwin, acting as spotter, saw the car but ignored it. He contacted Hunt, however, when the officers turned on the eighth floor lights. Hunt dismissed it as the night guard, and the team continued to install a new bug disguised as a smoke detector. \nThe three Metropolitan officers\u2014dressed undercover as hippies\u2014swept the ninth floor and, after finding a taped door on the sixth floor, began searching the DNC offices. Baldwin radioed Hunt that three armed men were approaching. McCord and the four others, hiding behind a partition, surrendered to the officers under false names. Hunt and Liddy escaped their hotel room in a Jeep, leaving behind traceable items in the team's two hotel suites, and told Baldwin to flee. Hunt drove to the White House, where he dumped electronic equipment in a safe and took $10,000: the three men then slept at their respective homes. The arrested burglars' listening devices led the Metropolitan police to involve the FBI under the presumption of a federal intercepted communications violation; by June 23, a federal grand jury of 23 D.C. residents began hearing testimony.\nMotives.\nThe purpose of the Watergate break-in and who ultimately ordered the operation has never been established and has spawned conspiracist literature akin to that on the Kennedy assassination. No one was ever charged for ordering the burglary, and the Plumbers' accounts conflict. According to Graff, the burglars may have had \"two or even three distinct and separate motives\" and deceived even each other. \nThe simplest theory is that Watergate was an incompetent break-in to bug O'Brien, emerging from White House paranoia, and that Hunt, Liddy, and McCord were overzealous and acted without proper oversight. Alternative theories often focus on the bugging of the relatively minor staffer Oliver, which investigators could not explain. Although Dean said that Oliver was accidentally bugged, the FBI found that Martinez carried a key matching the locked desk of Oliver's secretary.\nKompromat.\nA common theory argues that the burglars sought \"dirt\" on the Democrats, specifically involving illegal Democratic finances or sexual scandals. Both Dean and Magruder said that the break-in sought to expose the Democrats for \"cutting deals\" with donors to fund their convention. Hunt testified that he told the Cubans to photograph files on finances and contributions: the Cubans believed they were looking for files linking the Democrats to funding from Castro.\nIn 1980, Liddy conversely wrote that the break-in's purpose \"was to find out what O'Brien had of a derogatory nature about us\", often suggested to be files on illegal contributions to Nixon, possibly CIA-linked, from the Greek junta or Howard Hughes. A sexual blackmail theory, as advanced in \"Secret Agenda\" (1984) and \"Silent Coup\" (1992), alleges a link either between Oliver and a high-end escort service, or that Dean feared Democrat-held files linking his partner to a D.C. escort ring run by Phillip Mackin Bailley, or both. Liddy and Ehrlichman endorsed this theory, and Colson called it \"one of the most plausible explanations\". Dean rejected it as \"baloney\", and Oliver's secretary sued Liddy regarding the claims.\nCIA involvement and other theories.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Even if we should learn the Administration was victimized by a CIA plot\u2014even if we should learn the motive for the burglary\u2014that would change nothing regarding our understanding of John Mitchell's 'White House horrors.' Nor would it mitigate the resulting inter-institutional conflicts and encounters, which raised profound constitutional and political questions, or the constitutional crisis generated by the Administration's behavior in the wake of the burglary. That behavior resulted in the special crimes of cover-up and obstruction by high Administration officials\u2014up to and including the President of the United States.\"\n \u2014 Historian Stanley Kutler, 1992\nOthers, including Colson and Haldeman, allege that the CIA sabotaged the break-in (or simply the cover-up) to smear Nixon\u2014with whom it had a tense relationship\u2014or to conceal ties to the Bailley escort ring or ally Howard Hughes. In January 1974, according to Colson, Nixon nearly removed CIA director William Colby over such suspicions; that June, Senator Howard Baker released an inconclusive report on CIA complicity. In addition to all burglars' past roles in CIA plots, both McCord and Hunt had been CIA agents, Hunt continued to work for a firm that was a CIA cover, and Mart\u00ednez was actively on the CIA's payroll. The CIA also had unexplained insight into the plot, helped Hunt develop the Fielding photographs, and did not cooperate with investigators.\nA \"sixth man\" theory addresses McCord's periodic absences and the possible presence of Lou Russell, a CRP security guard allegedly linked to the escort ring and CIA. Another theory noted by Stanley Kutler suggests that Colson and Hunt were rogue operatives and proceeded with a version of Gemstone that, beyond the Watergate break-ins, targeted election rival George Wallace and, after his assassination attempt, sought to plant leftist literature at the shooter's home \u2014 a story broken by Seymour Hersh.\nThe final major theory, according to Graff, is that the Democrats or Metropolitan Police had foreknowledge of the burglary and \"sprung a trap\" or were somehow alerted by McCord or Hunt. Proponents note that the Metropolitan squad that arrived were coincidentally vice officers with experience busting D.C. sex work.\nCover-up and investigations.\nReactions and destruction of evidence.\nIn the morning, Liddy visited the CRP, destroyed Gemstone files, and reported the arrests to Magruder. When informed around 11 a.m., Nixon smashed an ash tray and, according to his memoir, wondered \"Why? Why then? Why in such a blundering way? And why, of all places, the Democratic National Convention?\" By lunch, Liddy asked Attorney General Richard Kleindienst to free the burglars, claiming that Mitchell demanded it, but was rebuffed.\nThat day, federal prosecutors Earl Silbert and Chuck Work searched the burglars' hotel rooms: they found spying gear, $100 bills, papers mentioning Hunt, Barker's address books (listing \"WH\"), and Mart\u00ednez's telephone directory (listing \"W. House\"). Investigators learned that the burglars had given pseudonyms and that McCord worked for the CRP; the FBI team led by Special Agent Angelo Lano found that the White House had conducted a background check on Hunt. The burglars did not cooperate with the FBI or in court: when asked their occupations, Barker said \"anti-communists\". When FBI agents visited Hunt's home, he admitted that a check found at Watergate was his but refused further comment.\nOn June 19, Liddy offered to be sacrificed in an assassination to protect Nixon, which Dean rejected. That same day, CIA agent Lee Pennington Jr. destroyed incriminating material at McCord's home. The CRP similarly conducted a \"massive housecleaning\"; Magruder burned Gemstone files at his home; and Colson destroyed pages in the White House phone directory listing Hunt. Nixon made his first public statement on Watergate on June 22, denying White House involvement.\nFollowing Ehrlichman's orders, Dean had Hunt's White House safe drilled open; Ehrlichman told Dean to \"deep six\" incriminating files in the Potomac River. As a Secret Service agent and two aides had seen the files' removal, Dean feared perjuring himself in future testimony. On June 27, he instead gave nonsensitive files to the FBI and sensitive files\u2014on the Fielding burglary and other Plumber activities\u2014directly to acting FBI director L. Patrick Gray. Dean personally destroyed two Hunt notebooks and an address book, and Gray burned the surrendered files around Christmas 1972.\nEarly press investigations.\nShortly after the break-in, DNC counsel Joseph Califano Jr. notified the \"Washington Post\": editor Barry Sussman assigned veteran journalist Alfred Lewis and novice Bob Woodward to the story. The team, joined by the young Carl Bernstein, found that four of the burglars were Cuban exiles; Woodward attended the burglar's preliminary hearing, where McCord admitted to being former CIA. While the \"Washington Post\"'s next issue contained three stories on Watergate, the scandal received negligible coverage from papers like \"The New York Times\".\nBased on the address book and letters found in the burglar's suite, Woodward and Bernstein contacted the White House switchboard and asked for Hunt. They were connected to \"Mr. Colson's office\", where a secretary referred them to Hunt's office at the Mullen Company PR Firm. Upon reaching Hunt, he exclaimed \"Good God! In view that the matter is under adjudication, I have no comment.\" and hung up. \nContacting acquaintances, they learned that Hunt was \"with the CIA\" and that McCord had worked with the Office of Emergency Preparedness to develop a list of \"domestic radicals\" and a censorship plan in case of a national emergency. Based on Sussman's research on Colson, the trio published a headline linking the plot to the White House: \"White House Consultant Linked to Bugging Suspects\". Press attention on the \"Watergate caper\" grew from other outlets. The \"New York Times\"' Latin-American specialist Tad Szulc connected the Cuban burglars to past CIA plots and Hunt to the Bay of Pigs.\nKidnapping of Martha Mitchell.\nMartha Mitchell, the wife of CRP head John Mitchell, was a vocal supporter of Nixon and, per Graff, \"perhaps the first national conservative celebrity pundit\". After the arrests, John Mitchell distanced the CRP from McCord\u2014who had previously been assigned to guard Martha\u2014claiming he was just an outside security contractor. Through aides, he unsuccessfully tried to prevent Martha from seeing any news about McCord. Furious at her husband's deception, Martha had a nervous episode. If her husband would not leave politics, she threatened to never return to D.C. and to contact UPI reporter Helen Thomas. In a locked bedroom of a Newport Beach villa, Martha's call to Thomas was interrupted when bodyguard Steve King broke down the door, pulled the phone from the wall, and restrained her.\nA thwarted morning escape attempt from King resulted in Martha slicing her hand on a broken glass door. A doctor visited the house and, restrained and pants removed by FBI and Secret Service agents, she was forcibly sedated. Other escape attempts also failed. Her concerned husband had her flown to the Westchester Country Club in New York, where she called Thomas, stating that \"I'm black and blue. I'm a political prisoner\". She was then interviewed by the \"New York Daily News\". John and his team denied Martha's account and blocked the FBI from interviewing her. On June 30, less than two weeks after the break-in, John Mitchell resigned to tend to his wife and because he had become a liability for Nixon.\n\"Smoking Gun\" conversation.\nThe FBI traced $4,500 from the burglars' hotel room to Barker's account and then to $89,000 in four Mexican checks and a $25,000 check from Kenneth Dahlberg \u2014 closing in on the \"money trail\" source: CRP contributions. The FBI's progress\u2014including a hypothesis by the Washington field office head that Watergate was \"in furtherance of the White House efforts to locate and identify 'leaks'\"\u2014alarmed the White House. As Gray was considering CIA involvement, Dean, Haldeman, and Mitchell plotted to have the CIA pressure the FBI to drop its probe under the pretense of national security. On June 23, Nixon approved the plan and instructed Haldeman in a recorded conversation known as the \"Smoking Gun\" tape:\n\"... When you get in (inaudible) people, say 'Look, the problem is that this will open the whole, the whole Bay of Pigs thing, and the President just feels that ah, without going into the details \u2014 don't, don't lie to them to the extent to say no involvement, but just say this is a comedy of errors, without getting into it, the President believes that it is going to open the whole Bay of Pigs thing up again. And, ah, because these people are plugging for (inaudible) and that they should call the FBI in and (inaudible) don't go any further into this case period!'\" \nHaldeman and Ehrlichman relayed this message to CIA director Richard Helms and deputy director Vernon Walters in a White House meeting: Helms agreed to pressure the FBI to end their investigation by claiming that it might reveal CIA money laundering. Although he threatened to resign, Walters reluctantly repeated this message to Gray; he refused to halt the investigation unless the CIA put the request in writing, which it rebuffed.\nThe meaning of \"the whole Bay of Pigs thing\"\u2014which Nixon also called a \"scab\" and \"a lot of hanky-panky\"\u2014has drawn much attention. Helms deemed it \"incoherent\"; investigators for the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence suspected it referred to the then-secret CIA assassination attempts on Cuban leader Castro but did not raise the subject with Nixon during 1975 testimony. Haldeman's memoir said it was Nixon's \"way of reminding Helms, not so gently, of the cover-up of the CIA assassination attempts on the hero of the Bay of Pigs, Fidel Castro, a CIA operation that may have triggered the Kennedy tragedy and which Helms desperately wanted to hide.\" Journalist Jefferson Morley cites another tape in which Nixon mentions \"the 'Who shot John?' angle\" to support Haldeman's interpretation.\nDeep Throat.\nIn 1971, Hoover made Mark Felt deputy associate director and his apparent successor. Disliked in the FBI and nicknamed the \"white rat\" due to his white hair and tendency to leak for personal gain, Felt was spurned after Hoover's 1972 death when Nixon selected L. Patrick Gray as acting director \u2014 avoiding a pre-election Senate confirmation. Gray named Felt as acting associate director. Hoping to become director, Felt sought to undermine Gray through leaks. \nWoodward\u2014then a Navy lieutenant\u2014met Felt in 1970, and he became a key anonymous source. No one else at the \"Post\" knew his identity; editor Howard Simons dubbed him \"Deep Throat\", referencing both his deep background status and the 1972 pornographic film \"Deep Throat\". Second only to Deep Throat, Woodward and Bernstein also relied on the anonymous \"Z\": a female grand juror.\nFelt gave Woodward many early Watergate leads but soon avoided the telephone. According to Woodward, Felt created a covert rendezvous protocol. If Woodward wished to contact Felt, he placed a potted plant with a flag on his sixth floor apartment's balcony: the two would then meet at 2 a.m. in an underground garage in Rosslyn, Virginia. If Felt wished to speak, he intercepted Woodward's daily \"New York Times\", circled page 20, and drew a clock showing the time to meet in the garage. Felt also leaked to \"The Washington Daily News\" and \"Time\"'s Sandy Smith; other FBI agents, like the Washington field office head, were also likely leakers.\nSome, including their managing editor Ben Bradlee, have criticized aspects of Woodward and Bernstein's Deep Throat account\u2014particularly the rendezvous system\u2014as implausible and overly cinematic. Biographer Adrian Havill identified many inaccuracies, such as Bernstein's ironic story of avoiding a subpoenae by watching \"Deep Throat\" at an adult theater \u2014 despite the film having already left cinemas. Woodward and Bernstein's role in Watergate is often exaggerated: Edward Jay Epstein wrote that their reporting was derivative or the mere presentation of leaks. Woodward has said that \"the mythologizing of our role in Watergate has gone to the point of absurdity, where journalists write\u2026 that I, single-handedly, brought down Richard Nixon. Totally absurd.\"\nObstruction and bribery.\nBy July, Baldwin was granted immunity by the FBI and became their first major insight into Watergate. The administration grew concerned over $250,000 in CRP funds (of which $199,000 was used) authorized for Liddy's operations. That month, Magruder pressed CRP treasurer Hugh Sloan\u2014the \"single greatest menace to the cover-up\" per journalist J. Anthony Lukas\u2014to fabricate a narrative of CRP payments to Liddy, suggesting perjury. Sloan, conflicted, confided to two lawyers, fled to California, and then returned to D.C. a week later to resign from the CRP. He confessed to the U.S. attorney's office and gave truthful grand jury testimony. \nAlarmed, Mitchell convened with Magruder, Dean, and Nixon advisor Fred LaRue to concoct a cover. They decided to inflate funding for Liddy's less illicit activities, such as campus surveillance of radicals, and convinced aide Herbert Porter to perjure himself. Their motto became \"The buck stops with Liddy\", who was fired from the CRP to create distance. Other efforts including delaying FBI interviews on \"national security\" grounds, coaching witnesses, and having Dean and assistant Fred Fielding sit in on FBI interviews of White House staff. They also disrupted the grand jury by making staffers testify privately at the DOJ, rather than before jurors that could assess their credibility. Throughout the grand jury investigation, prosecutors Silbert and especially Henry Petersen were overly deferent to Nixon.\nBefore the burglary, an unknown official had assured Liddy that the Plumbers would be \"taken care of\" financially if caught. Liddy reminded Mitchell of this, leading Dean to unsuccessfully ask CIA deputy director Walters to front hush money. Dean then convinced Nixon's former deputy campaign finance manager Herbert Kalmbach to provide the bribes. Ulasewicz delivered $180,000 in cash to the Plumbers, dispersed by Hunt's wife and, after her death on United Air Lines Flight 553, by Bay of Pigs invasion leader Manuel Artime.\nPatman probe and indictment of the Plumbers.\nIn August 1972, the Government Accountability Office released an audit of Nixon's reelection campaign, referring $350,000 in questionable transactions to the DOJ for prosecution. The DOJ did not pursue these, and Nixon declined to appoint a special prosecutor. Wright Patman, the Democrat House Banking Committee chair, initiated his own probe. Like the FBI, his committee was stonewalled by the White House.\nIn September, O'Brien's legal team\u2014all of whom also worked for the \"Post\"\u2014interviewed Baldwin, yielding a front page story for Woodward and Bernstein. Felt used the story to shift leaking suspicion to other FBI staffers, and Silbert made the FBI search his office and the grand jury room for bugs: none were found. However, another wiretap of unclear origin was found in Oliver's DNC office. On September 13, the Patman probe released a confidential report on the Mexican transactions: the findings were leaked to the \"Post\". Fearing more revelations, Nixon used House Republican leader Gerald Ford to stop the probe from gaining subpoena power.\nOn September 15, Hunt, Liddy, and the five burglars were indicted on eight counts, none relating to the misuse of campaign funds. The limited indictment, sparing Nixon officials, was a White House victory, and Eisenhower-appointee John Sirica assigned himself as judge. Baldwin then gave his complete account of Watergate to the \"Los Angeles Times\"' Jack Nelson and Ronald Ostrow. Although Hunt's lawyers and Silbert convinced Sirica to issue a gag order and advise the \"Times\" against publication, the paper printed the story\u2014the first directly linking the break-in to the White House\u2014on October 5. However, the cover-up proved effective, and Democrats could not make Watergate a campaign issue. Although most Americans knew of the break-in, few associated it with Nixon, and in November he won re-election in the largest landslide in American history, winning 49 of 50 states.\nTrial.\nOn January 6, 1973, Dean promised Liddy $30,000 annually, legal fees, and a 1975 pardon if he stayed silent; as early as January 8, Nixon discussed \"God damn hush money\" with Colson. Two days later, the trial began, with the Silbert-led prosecution arguing that McCord and Liddy were rogue agents and that Hunt and the other burglars acted on Liddy's payments. Hunt and the Cubans unexpectedly pled guilty. Using Sturgis as a source, \"The New York Times\"' Seymour Hersh\u2014who had exposed the My Lai massacre\u2014revealed that the burglars were receiving hush money and were pressured to plead guilty. Questioned by Sirica, the Cubans refused to say who sent the payments.\nThe White House learned that McCord, who had expressed concerns that he or the CIA might be scapegoated, was considering cooperating with prosecutors. Through Ulasewicz, Dean promised McCord an eventual government job and his family's financial security. To calm McCord, Caulfield thrice met with him alongside the George Washington Parkway. McCord proposed that the trial could be dismissed if prosecutors introduced telephone conversations regarding Watergate that he had made to the Israeli and Chilean embassies \u2014 both of which were illegally wiretapped. Dean rejected this approach.\nIn the trial's only interruption, Oliver's lawyer Charles Morgan convinced Sirica and Silbert to suspend the trial to stop Baldwin from describing the conversations from Oliver's wiretap: an appeals court sealed the transcripts. As of 2022, these remain secret and are, according to Graff, \"the last and potentially only chance to [know] whether... the burglary and wiretapping plot included a sexual motive.\" In resumed testimony, administration officials denied involvement in the break-in. Dissatisfied with Silbert's examination, Sirica made the unusual move to interrogate the officials privately. On January 30, the jury found the last two defendants\u2014Liddy and McCord\u2014guilty on all counts, and Sirica scheduled sentencing for March 23. After setting bail at $100,000 each on February 2, he declared that he was \"still not satisfied that all pertinent facts that might be available... have been produced before an American jury\".\nErvin Committee and the \"Dean Report\".\nIn addition to the trial's perceived failure, a multi-month, secret inquiry by Senator Ted Kennedy raised Congress' suspicions about Watergate. On February 7, 1973, the Senate voted 77\u20130 to establish a select committee to investigate Watergate, with Senator Sam Ervin of North Carolina named chairman. Ervin in turn selected Samuel Dash as chief counsel. They inherited files created by both Ted Kennedy and the Patman probe.\nDue to his loyalty, Nixon nominated Gray as FBI director. During his confirmation proceedings, Gray admitted that he had given the bureau's investigative Watergate reports to John Dean, alarming both his own agents and the senators. In a bid to save his nomination, Gray offered the reports to Congress, which was vetoed by an infuriated Nixon. In late February, Nixon devised two ways to stop the committee: executive privilege\u2014a then-vague doctrine that the Constitution's separation of powers prevented presidential disclosure to Congress\u2014and the release of an exonerative \"Dean Report\". The report was, per Graff, \"mythic\" as Dean had never conducted a real investigation of Watergate and was himself involved. \nOn March 21, Dean told Nixon that \"I have the impression that you don't know everything I know\" and gave a full account of Watergate\u2014which he called \"a cancer within\"\u2014particularly blaming Liddy and Magruder. Although Nixon seemed largely ignorant and asked over 150 questions, Dean was sometimes surprised by Nixon's knowledge of the plot, including the hush money and Fielding break-in. The following day, Gray testified that Dean had lied about his ignorance of the opening of Hunt's safe, damaging Dean's credibility and leading Gray to withdraw his nomination.\nMcCord, Dean, and Magruder cooperate.\nAt the March 23 sentencing, Judge Sirica read a confession from McCord that the Plumbers were told to plead guilty; perjury occurred; others were involved; and the Cubans were misled to think that Watergate was a CIA operation. Sirica tabled McCord's sentencing and gave maximum sentences to Liddy, Hunt, and the Cubans. McCord identified false testimony to the Ervin Committee, implicating Magruder and Dean, and leaked his account\u2014mostly hearsay through Liddy\u2014to the \"Los Angeles Times\". Press attention on Watergate exploded, and the Ervin Committee uncovered Gemstone, the destruction of evidence, and the Liddy payments. \nIn April, Dean began cooperating with prosecutors, exposing the Fielding break-in and the cover-up complicity of Magruder, Mitchell, Haldeman, and Ehrlichman \u2014 but not Nixon. After brief negotiations, Magruder also agreed to cooperate. Liddy refused to testify before the grand jury and was held in contempt; in jail he created an unused plan to kill Hunt if ordered by the White House. By the end of April, Nixon\u2014to save face\u2014made Ehrlichman, Haldeman, Magruder, and Attorney General Richard Kleindienst resign; Dean was fired on April 30.\nWatergate scrutiny spawned probes into other abuses, including a \"dirty tricks\" campaign by Donald Segretti; Kissinger-ordered wiretaps that led to Felt's resignation; B-52 bombings in Cambodia; illegal CRP donations from firms like American Airlines; and an off-record $200,000 from investor Robert Vesco that led to the May 10 indictment of Mitchell and CRP finance chairman Maurice Stans. Later that month, Congressman William Mills committed suicide after it emerged that he had taken an unreported $25,000 from a CRP slush fund. In July, Nixon was hospitalized with pneumonia, possibly caused by the stress of Watergate; acting White House Counsel Leonard Garment wrote that \"The organizing objective of these investigations was to bleed Nixon to death\".\nErvin hearings and Special Prosecutor Cox.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"If the many allegations to this date are true, then the burglars who broke into the headquarters of the Democratic National Committee at the Watergate were, in effect, breaking into the home of every citizen of the United States. And if these allegations prove true, what they were seeking to steal were not the jewels, money, or other property of American citizens, but something more valuable\u2014their most precious heritage: the right to vote in a free election.\"\n \u2014 Senator Sam Ervin on the first day of hearings\nThe Ervin Committee's public hearings began on May 17. Testimony from McCord, Caulfield, Ulasewicz, and others suggested White House involvement in the break-in and cover-up, which Nixon vehemently denied. Following Magruder's June 14 testimony, Dean read a 245-page statement stretching from the Huston Plan and Gemstone to the cover-up. In two days of testimony, John Mitchell evaded questions and did not implicate Nixon. The hearings drew immense publicity: three in four American households watched live testimony, an average of 30 hours per home.\nIn concurrent Senate proceedings, Attorney General nominee Elliot Richardson agreed to appoint a special prosecutor on Watergate. After rejecting Nixon's suggestions, Richardson chose Archibald Cox \u2014 President Kennedy's solicitor general. They negotiated that Cox could only be fired by Richardson and only due to \"extraordinary improprieties\". Cox built a legal team he called the Watergate Special Prosecution Force. As early as July 4, Nixon expressed a desire to fire Cox after the Force considered investigating the financial impropriety of his California estate, La Casa Pacifica. In August, the Force empaneled a second grand jury to pursue crimes beyond the break-in, such as the Fielding burglary and campaign finance irregularities.\nStruggle for the tapes.\nOn July 13, Haldeman assistant Alexander Butterfield revealed the existence of the Oval Office tapes to the Ervin Committee. In urgent meetings, White House counsel J. Fred Buzhardt suggested the tapes be destroyed; Vice President Spiro Agnew recommended a bonfire on the White House lawn. Nixon did not destroy the tapes for unclear reasons, possibly to preserve his legacy, protect himself against perjury or Kissinger's aggrandizement, or because he did not believe he would ever have to surrender them.\nFollowing Butterfield's revelation, Cox and the Ervin Committee formally subpoenaed tapes corresponding to meetings suspected to involve Watergate. Nixon rejected both subpoenas, leading to objections in court. Due to stronger standing under the separation of powers, Sirica prioritized the executive branch Cox over the legislative Ervin committee. \nNixon's legal team\u2014led by Charles Alan Wright\u2014invoked executive privilege and argued that releasing the tapes would create a precedent allowing judicial access to all sensitive presidential material. Cox asserted that executive privilege did not apply when criminality was suspected, and also cited \"United States v. Burr\", in which Chief Justice John Marshall ruled that President Thomas Jefferson could be subpoenaed. In a decision that upset both parties, Sirica ordered the tapes be submitted to him to determine if any were protected by executive privilege. This was appealed, and on October 12 the appeals court ruled 5\u20132 to force Nixon to surrender the tapes to Sirica, or to make a deal with Cox.\nSaturday Night Massacre.\nDuring October, Cox and the Force made progress on Watergate-related investigations, including securing a grand jury indictment of Krogh for false declarations on the Fielding break-in, and guilty pleas from American Airlines, Goodyear, and the 3M Company for illegal contributions to the CRP. Cox also began investigating Nixon's closest friend Bebe Rebozo for mediating an illicit $100,000 campaign contribution from Howard Hughes.\nAfter weighing the appellate decision, Nixon proposed giving Sirica the tapes and then firing Cox to negate the appeals court case; Attorney General Richardson rejected the scheme. Negotiations with Cox to drop the subpoena and have Senator John Stennis review the tapes also collapsed. On October 19\u2014citing the need for stability in the Middle East amid the Yom Kippur War\u2014Nixon unexpectedly announced that Stennis (whom he called \"Judge\" Stennis) would review the tapes: a deal not approved by Stennis, the Ervin Committee, Cox, or Richardson.\nOn October 20, in what became known as the Saturday Night Massacre, Nixon ordered Richardson to fire Cox. He refused and resigned in protest. Nixon then ordered Deputy Attorney General William Ruckelshaus to fire Cox, but Ruckelshaus declined and was fired after offering his resignation. The next acting attorney general, Solicitor General Robert Bork, agreed to fire Cox. FBI agents sealed the Force's office and blocked the entry of Cox's staff, an action that prosecutor Leon Jaworski said evoked the Gestapo. Though Bork believed Nixon's order was legal and justified, he considered resigning to avoid being \"perceived as a man who did the President's bidding to save my job\".\nImpeachment process and resignation.\nMassacre aftermath.\nThe Saturday Night Massacre sparked a constitutional crisis and drew wide condemnation and calls for Nixon's resignation or impeachment. Congress received an unprecedented near-500,000 mailgrams and telegrams, and protests were held outside the White House. Nixon's approval rating fell to 24 percent; bills calling for another special prosecutor were introduced by 98 representatives and 57 senators. Nixon, under great stress, withdrew from engagements and drank: in his absence, Kissinger briefly declared DEFCON 3 during a nightime crisis when Soviet deployment in the Yom Kippur War seemed imminent.\nAt an October 26 press conference, Nixon denounced the \"hysterical reporting\" and promised to appoint a new special prosecutor, although with limited access to presidential material. Representatives introduced over 20 impeachment and impeachment-inquiry resolutions; the House Judiciary Committee launched an impeachment inquiry on October 30 and granted Chairman Peter Rodino subpoena power.\nMissing tapes and building pressure.\nOn October 30, Buzhardt informed Sirica that two of the nine subpoeaned tapes\u2014corresponding to a June 20, 1972 Nixon-Mitchell call and an April 15, 1973 Nixon\u2013Dean meeting\u2014were \"missing\". In testimony, Secret Service agents and aides said that the tapes had been signed out and not returned; aides like Buzhardt inconsistently said they never existed due to a recorder malfunction or insufficient tape. Investigators discovered a tape labeled \"April 15 Part I\", implying that a \"Part II\" had existed. \nOn November 1, Nixon and Haig selected as special prosecutor Leon Jaworski, a former Nuremberg prosecutor presumed to be sympathetic to the president. Calls for impeachment continued, including from the editors of \"The New York Times\" and \"Time\" and\u2014for the first time\u2014from a Republican Senator, Edward Brooke. Buzhardt and Garment flew to Miami, where Nixon sought escape in boating, to urge him to resign; Nixon refused to see them. \nTipped off by Dean, Senator Lowell Weicker and investigators uncovered likely tax fraud by Nixon, who counted an illegally-backdated document donation to the National Archives towards tax deductions \u2014 a practice outlawed in 1969 after President Johnson had used the same loophole. The investigation expanded to Nixon's other finances, including publicly-funded renovations to Nixon's private homes in California and Florida. On November 17, at a meeting of Associated Press editors at Walt Disney World's Contemporary Resort, Nixon refuted the allegations and, in a defense considered the most iconic line from Watergate, declared, \"I am not a crook.\"\nThe eighteen-minute gap.\nOn November 21, Buzhardt told Jaworski that an 18-minute, 15-second segment was missing from a June 20, 1972 tape: a Nixon-Haldeman conversation thought to be Nixon's first on Watergate after the break-in. Buzhardt believed the erasure was intentional and blamed Nixon's secretary, Rose Mary Woods, who could not explain the gap; Sirica demanded that all tapes be surrendered within five days. Nixon complied, and they were placed in a National Security Agency-installed safe\u2014guarded by U.S. Marshals\u2014in Sirica's chambers; the seven extant tapes were given to the Force on December 12.\nIn December hearings, Force lawyer Jill Volner interrogated Woods, who gave a new explanation: while transcribing the tape on October 1, she accidentally hit the \"record\" button instead of \"off\" while reaching for the telephone and, throughout the call, also kept her foot on the \"forward\" pedal. In a recreation staged by Volner, Woods could not keep her foot on the pedal. Photos of the recreation generated the mocking label of the \"Rose Mary Stretch\".\nWoods' five-minute call also did not match the duration of the 18-minute gap. Questioned on the discrepancy, Haig suggested the \"devil theory\", that \"some sinister force had come in and applied the other energy source and taken care of the information.\" Volner theorized that Woods and Nixon had listened to the tape (the first subpoenaed) and that Nixon had panicked and made Woods erase it before realizing that the other subpoenaed tapes were equally incriminating. Sirica concluded that the erasure was \"more symbolic than substantive\", and Jaworski and the FBI declined to prosecute. In January 1974, an expert panel appointed by Sirica concluded that the tape had been erased in five to nine separate segments, and that audio signatures indicated that the hand keys\u2014not the pedal\u2014had been used. Other tapes had apparent seconds-long deletions\u2014obscuring key words\u2014but Sirica decided that further analysis was tangential.\nInvestigations advance.\nPushed by Speaker Tip O'Neill to accelerate the impeachment inquiry, Rodino's Judiciary Committee selected John Doar as special counsel. In December, Nixon withdrew from engagements\u2014sometimes for multiple days\u2014amid drinking bouts. On New Year's Eve, he resolved to \"fight it all out\", selecting trial lawyer James St. Clair to resist and delay all investigations. \nIn January, the scientific panel created by Sirica began deciphering the tapes' contents, which were muffled and compressed due to the 15/16th inch per second recording speed used to save tape. Transcibing each tape was difficult, with 100 hours of labor needed to decipher just one hour of tape. The tapes' content was damning, with Sirica finally concluding that the White House had obstructed justice. Concurrently, the Judiciary Committee\u2014with a team of lawyers that included Hillary Clinton\u2014weighed charging Nixon with specific criminal charges or more ambiguous Constitutional crimes.\nProsecutors focused on the cover-up\u2014an explicit White House conspiracy\u2014rather than the break-in, a more nebulous campaign conspiracy. Although Jaworski identified at least 15 instances where Nixon acknowledged or advanced the hush money scheme, he was hesitant to indict the president due to lack of precedent. The Force instead chose to designate Nixon an unindicted co-conspirator, allowing jurors to hear him on the tape and empowering Jaworksi to send incriminating evidence to the impeachment inquiry. On March 1, the Force indicted the \"Watergate Seven\": Mitchell, Haldeman, Ehrlichman, Colson, Gordon Strachan, Robert Mardian, and Kenneth Parkinson on 24 counts of conspiracy, lying, and obstructing justice. On March 26, Sirica transferred a 55-page report on presidential criminality, compiled by Jaworski and the grand jury, to the House Judiciary Committee.\nNixon releases tape transcripts.\nIn mid-April, Jaworski subpoenaed 64 additional taped conversations, with a deadline of May 2. Nixon then spent most of his days personally listening to the tapes, taking notes and brooding in what Graff calls \"one of the oddest weeks in all of modern presidential history\". Instead of releasing the tapes, Nixon's staff typed edited transcripts, with Nixon himself sometimes excising \"unpresidential\" speech, namely replacing profanity and vulgarity with hundreds of \"expletive deleted\". On April 29, Nixon released 1,300 pages of transcripts spanning 46 tapes.\nUpon receipt, House investigators realized that only 20 of the 64 Jaworski-subpoenaed conversations had been transcribed. Comparison between the transcripts matching tapes already acquired by investigators showed pervasive misrepresentations and intelligible sections marked \"unintelligible\". However, the edited transcripts still showed Nixon's apparent acceptance of the cover-up. \nIn a letter, the House Judiciary Committee informed Nixon that the transcript release did not fulfill the tape subpoena. St. Clair moved to block Jaworski's tape subpoena, calling them \"inadmissible hearsay\" as Nixon was not a conspirator. Jaworski revealed that Nixon was officially an unindicted co-conspirator and offered, as a compromise, to keep this secret and drop the subpoena if the White House released just 38 of the 64 tapes. St. Clair rejected this as blackmail.\nOn May 9, the pro-Nixon \"Chicago Tribune\" abandoned the president in an editorial: \"He is humorless to the point of being inhumane. He is devious. He is vacillating. He is profane.\" Senate Republican leader Hugh Scott called the transcripts \"deplorable, disgusting, shabby, and immoral\". Nixon's transcript miscalculation resulted in the first poll showing that a majority of Americans supported Nixon's impeachment.\nImpeachment hearings and \"Nixon v. United States\".\nThe same day of the \"Tribune\" editorial, impeachment hearings began. Over ten weeks, Doar and colleagues presented representatives a complete account of Watergate from the break-in through to the cover-up, highlighting two particular constitutional crimes: the false invocation of national security and a total indifference to legality of their actions.\nOn May 10, Jaworski released a 39-page brief revealing that Nixon was an unindicted co-conspirator; Sirica concluded that \"the president was doomed\". Seeking to avoid a lengthy appeals process, Jaworski requested the Supreme Court directly review the subpoena's legality. On May 31, the court agreed to hear the case.\nOn June 15, Woodward and Bernstein published \"All the President's Men\", which became a national bestseller. A \"Wall Street Journal\" reviewer noted that it was a \"great guide for people like me who still have trouble figuring out where Ehrlichman begins and Haldeman ends.\" Later that month, the Ervin Committee released its 1,094-page final report, outlining White House misconduct but not explicitly fingering Nixon. After the Fourth of July recess, the inquiry presented \"seminars\" synthesizing the information to the House and began releasing \"Statements of Information\" encompassing the evidence: the first installment was 4,133 pages. In an attempt to remain neutral, Rodino did not present analysis of the evidence, fustrating readers. \nConservative Southern Democrats began to abandon Nixon, and on July 23 Lawrence Hogan became the first Republican Representative to support impeachment. The following day, the Supreme Court ruled unanimously (8\u20130) that the subpoenaed tapes were admissible but also formally recognized executive privilege. Nixon complied with the order and released the first batch of 20 subpoenaed tapes on July 30.\n'Smoking gun' tape released.\nOn July 27, 1974, the House Judiciary Committee voted 27-to-11 to recommend the first article of impeachment against the president: obstruction of justice. The committee recommended the second article, abuse of power, on July 29, 1974. The following day, they approved a third\u2014obstruction of Congress\u2014and voted against two charges related to the Cambodian bombings and tax fraud. Ninety percent of Americans listened to committee proceeding on radio or television. Support for Nixon dwindled in the House and Senate, and, with the impending release of the June 23 \"smoking gun\" tape, Nixon weighed resigning, a move that would preserve his federal benefits and those of his staff and mitigate post-office liability. If impeached by the House, Nixon needed 34 votes in the Senate for acquittal.\nOn August 5, 1974, the White House released the \"smoking gun\" tape. The Haldeman-Nixon conversation showed that the president had lied and that he had been involved in the cover-up at its inception. The tape's release resulted in the loss of most support for Nixon in the Capitol, particularly among Republicans who felt betrayed. In addition to Republican House minority leader John Rhodes, ten Republican House Judiciary Committee members who had voted against the articles pledged to vote for impeachment. The following day, California governor Ronald Reagan and RNC chairman George H. W. Bush both called for Nixon to resign. Senator Barry Goldwater informed Haig that Nixon only had 12 votes in the Senate and said \"He has lied to me for the last time\". Fearing a \"berserk\" Nixon might unilaterally trigger nuclear armageddon, Secretary of Defense James R. Schlesinger alerted top military leaders that any launch orders from the president must be confirmed by himself or Kissinger.\nResignation.\nOn August 7, House minority leader Rhodes, Senate minority leader Hugh Scott, and Senator Goldwater\u2014a respected Republican statesman\u2014visited Nixon in the Oval Office and, although not explicitly urging his resignation, informed him that he did not have enough support to be acquitted. Faced with the inevitability of his impeachment and removal, Nixon resolved to resign.\nIn an August 8 Oval Office address, Nixon announced his resignation, the first of any U.S. president and effective at noon the following day, and his succession by Ford. Although he declared that he was not a \"quitter\", Nixon explained that he lacked support in Congress and had to \"put the interest of America first\". Jaworski noted that the farewell speech expressed no remorse.\nIn the morning, Nixon and his family bid farewell to the White House staff in the East Room. They left on the presidential helicopter, Army One, for Maryland's Andrews Air Force Base, where they boarded Air Force One for California. Ford delivered an 8-minute inauguration speech, also in the East Room, declaring that \"our long national nightmare is over\". \"Time\"'s resignation special sold 527,000 copies \u2014 the most of any newsweekly ever.\nAftermath.\nFord's pardon of Nixon.\nWith Nixon's resignation, Congress dropped its impeachment proceedings. Criminal prosecution was still a possibility at the federal level. In its final report, the House Judiciary Committee identified 36 instances of obstruction of justice by Nixon. Jaworski weighed indicting Nixon, with an internal Force memo by Assistant Special Prosecutor George Frampton urging his prosecution. However, on September 8, President Ford issued Nixon a full pardon for any acts committed while president. Ford may have feared the damage brought by a long, divisive trial, or, if Nixon was acquitted on a technicality, the delegitimization of his own presidency.\nFord was criticized for the sudden, unilateral nature of the pardon, granted without consultation with Congressional leaders. Senator Ervin criticized the pardon as \"incompatible with good government\", and Ford's press secretary Jerald terHorst resigned in protest. The president's approval rating fell by 22 percentage points. Although some spectators argued that the special prosecutor's powers permitted prosecution of Nixon even if pardoned, Jaworski resigned in October. According to Hersh, Jaworski was in financial distress at the time and could not be absent from his Texan law practice any longer.\nMany, including O'Neill, raised the possibility of a secret deal between Ford and Nixon. No tape recording or documentation suggests an explicit pardon deal, but biographer Jay Farrell concluded that implicit suggestions may have \"greased his departure\". When approached by Haig to discuss Nixon's possible choices, then-Vice President Ford reportedly refused to offer advice as he was an \"interested party.\" Beginning on September 4, President Ford\u2014through aides\u2014had tried to secure a formal apology by Nixon in exchange for a pardon. The former president refused to make any admission of guilt, and Ford abandoned the effort. According to Kutler, Nixon and his advisors correctly assumed that Ford would pardon him regardless. Hersh argues that a recorded September 7 telephone call shows Nixon threatening to expose Ford's prior promises of a pardon if he was not pardoned.\nFinal legal actions.\nIn total, 69 people were charged with crimes in conjunction with Watergate, including two of Nixon's Cabinet secretaries. Most were convicted or pled guilty. A Watergate-related probe on the ITT corporation resulted in the conviction of Ed Reinecke, Lieutenant Governor of California under Ronald Reagan. Of the Watergate Seven, Mitchell, Haldemann, Ehrlichman were convicted. Parkinson was acquitted, and Mardian's conviction was overturned. Mitchell remains the highest-ranking US government official to be imprisoned. Upon his sentencing, he quipped: \"It could have been worse. They could have sentenced me to spend the rest of my life with Martha Mitchell.\"\nIn 1978, FBI heads Gray and Felt and FBI Domestic Intelligence Division head Edward Miller were indicted for their approval of \"surreptitious entries\". Nixon voluntarily testified in their defense in 1980, his only appearance in any Watergate-related trial. Felt and Miller were found guilty. Conversely, revelations regarding the Fielding break-in ultimately resulted in the dismissal of all charges against Ellsberg for leaking the \"Pentagon Papers\".\nOn June 24 and 25, 1975, Nixon gave secret testimony to a grand jury. He evaded questions on the 18-minute gap and tax fraud. Often cynical, Nixon praised \"hardball\" tactics used by Kennedy against him during his 1962 gubernatorial campaign: \"Rather than using a group of amateur Watergate bugglers, burglars \u2014 well they were bunglers \u2014 [the Kennedy administration] used the F.B.I., used the I.R.S. and used it directly by their own orders against, in one instance, a man who had been vice president of the United States, running for governor\".\nLegacy.\nPolitical and professional.\nWatergate led to legislation limiting the powers of the \"imperial presidency\", including the designation of all presidential records as publicly-owned (the Presidential Records Act) and a mechanism for counsel investigations of executive scandals (the Ethics in Government Act). Other legislation included the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1974. These reforms were partly achieved by \"Watergate Babies\", new Democratic legislators who helped sweep the post-Watergate November 1974 Senate and House elections. Ford's pardon of Nixon effectively caused his loss to Jimmy Carter in the 1976 election, with seven percent of voters voting against Ford explicitly due to the pardon.\nSeeking to restore public trust after Watergate and the release of the CIA's \"Family Jewels\", Congress organized the Church Committee to investigate illegal activities by the CIA and other agencies, as did President Ford with the Rockefeller Commission. Concerns emerging from the burglaries and wiretappings resulted in the Privacy Act of 1974 and the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, which limited the ability of federal agencies to collect, maintain, and share information on Americans. Congress also strengthened the Freedom of Information Act, and created intelligence oversight committees with access to classified material.\nAs nearly all of those involved in Watergate crimes were lawyers, the American Bar Association mandated ethics courses at law schools. Watergate also helped revive investigative reporting, popularizing the use of anonymous sources and displacing \"New Journalism\" approaches.\nHistorical.\nWatergate is regarded as the greatest scandal in American presidential history and a successful demonstration of the separation of powers. It is frequently invoked during presidential scandals and impeachments, particularly those of President Trump. Haig and Kissinger respectively blamed Watergate for the Yom Kippur War (1973) and the Fall of Saigon (1975).\nIn 1977, Nixon\u2014hoping to improve his legacy and effectively broke\u2014accepted $600,000 to do a series of interviews with British journalist David Frost. Nixon expected Frost to be amenable and was surprised by his combative questions, leading Nixon to declare \"When the President does it, that means that it is not illegal.\" Although Nixon formally apologized for Watergate after the interview, his legacy remained tarnished. The Watergate Hotel has conversely embraced the scandal, incorporating it into its theming and converting the room where Hunt and Liddy communicated by radio into the \"scandal suite\". The Rosslyn garage where Woodward met with Deep Throat was demolished in 2017; its site is marked with a state historical marker.\nCultural impact and depictions.\nWatergate is often regarded as the climactic moment in the loss of American trust in government following the Vietnam War. Bill Schneider writes that although American political cynicism did not \"start with Watergate... Watergate turned an erosion of public confidence into a collapse\". It left such an impression that post-Watergate scandals are often named with the suffix \"-gate\". These range from genuine political scandals like Koreagate to the sports scandal Deflategate and the discredited Pizzagate conspiracy theory. The paranoia of the \"Watergate era\" is often associated with a subgenre of 1970s conspiracy thriller cinema, such as Francis Ford Coppola's \"The Conversation\" (1974) or \"Three Days of the Condor\" (1975), although production for some began before the scandal's zenith and are partly a reflection of the period's zeitgeist.\nOver thirty Watergate participants have written memoirs. Woodward and Bernstein's 1974 book \"All the President's Men\" was adapted into a 1976 film of the same name by Alan J. Pakula\u2014in which Watergate guard Frank Wills played himself. Although not used in the book, the phrase \"follow the money\" became part of the American lexicon after its use in the movie: Graff calls it the second most famous Watergate quote after \"I am not a crook\". The book also popularized the term \"ratfucking\" to describe covert political espionage. Other depictions include Oliver Stone's \"Nixon\" (1996) and \"Frost/Nixon\" (2008), adapted from a Tony-winning play of the same name.\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJournal articles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNews articles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWeb sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52385", "revid": "49354961", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52385", "title": "Axiom of pairing", "text": "Concept in axiomatic set theory\nIn axiomatic set theory and the branches of logic, mathematics, and computer science that use it, the axiom of pairing is one of the axioms of Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory. It was introduced by as a special case of his axiom of elementary sets.\nFormal statement.\nIn the formal language of the Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel axioms, the axiom reads:\nformula_1\nIn words:\nGiven any object \"A\" and any object \"B\", there is a set \"C\" such that, given any object \"D\", \"D\" is a member of \"C\" if and only if \"D\" is equal to \"A\" or \"D\" is equal to \"B\".\nConsequences.\nAs noted, what the axiom is saying is that, given two objects \"A\" and \"B\", we can find a set \"C\" whose members are exactly \"A\" and \"B\".\nWe can use the axiom of extensionality to show that this set \"C\" is unique. We call the set \"C\" the \"pair\" of \"A\" and \"B\", and denote it {\"A\",\"B\"}. Thus the essence of the axiom is:\nAny two objects have a pair.\nThe set {\"A\",\"A\"} is abbreviated {\"A\"}, called the \"singleton\" containing \"A\". Note that a singleton is a special case of a pair. Being able to construct a singleton is necessary, for example, to show the non-existence of the infinitely descending chains formula_2 from the Axiom of regularity.\nThe axiom of pairing also allows for the definition of ordered pairs. For any objects formula_3 and formula_4, the ordered pair is defined by the following:\nformula_5\nNote that this definition satisfies the condition\nformula_6\nOrdered \"n\"-tuples can be defined recursively as follows:\nformula_7\nAlternatives.\nNon-independence.\nThe axiom of pairing is generally considered uncontroversial, and it or an equivalent appears in just about any axiomatization of set theory. Nevertheless, in the standard formulation of the Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory, the axiom of pairing follows from the axiom schema of replacement applied to any given set with two or more elements, and thus it is sometimes omitted. The existence of such a set with two elements, such as { {}, { {} } }, can be deduced either from the axiom of empty set and the axiom of power set or from the axiom of infinity.\nIn the absence of some of the stronger ZFC axioms, the axiom of pairing can still, without loss, be introduced in weaker forms.\nWeaker.\nIn the presence of standard forms of the axiom schema of separation we can replace the axiom of pairing by its weaker version:\nformula_8.\nThis weak axiom of pairing implies that any given objects formula_9 and formula_10 are members of some set formula_11. Using the axiom schema of separation we can construct the set whose members are exactly formula_9 and formula_10.\nAnother axiom which implies the axiom of pairing in the presence of the axiom of empty set is the axiom of adjunction\nformula_14.\nIt differs from the standard one by use of formula_15 instead of formula_16. Using {} for \"A\" and \"x\" for B, we get {\"x\"} for C. Then use {\"x\"} for \"A\" and \"y\" for \"B\", getting {\"x,y\"} for C. One may continue in this fashion to build up any finite set. And this could be used to generate all hereditarily finite sets without using the axiom of union.\nStronger.\nTogether with the axiom of empty set and the axiom of union, the axiom of \npairing can be generalised to the following schema:\nformula_17\nthat is:\nGiven any finite number of objects \"A\"1 through \"A\"\"n\", there is a set \"C\" whose members are precisely \"A\"1 through \"A\"\"n\".\nThis set \"C\" is again unique by the axiom of extensionality, and is denoted {\"A\"1...,\"A\"\"n\"}.\nOf course, we can't refer to a \"finite\" number of objects rigorously without already having in our hands a (finite) set to which the objects in question belong. Thus, this is not a single statement but instead a schema, with a separate statement for each natural number \"n\".\nFor example, to prove the case \"n\" = 3, use the axiom of pairing three times, to produce the pair {\"A\"1,\"A\"2}, the singleton {\"A\"3}, and then the pair .\nThe axiom of union then produces the desired result, {\"A\"1,\"A\"2,\"A\"3}. We can extend this schema to include \"n\"=0 if we interpret that case as the axiom of empty set.\nThus, one may use this as an axiom schema in the place of the axioms of empty set and pairing. Normally, however, one uses the axioms of empty set and pairing separately, and then proves this as a theorem schema. Note that adopting this as an axiom schema will not replace the axiom of union, which is still needed for other situations."}
{"id": "52386", "revid": "3138265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52386", "title": "Axiom schema of specification", "text": "Concept in axiomatic set theory\nIn many popular versions of axiomatic set theory, the axiom schema of specification, also known as the axiom schema of separation (\"Aussonderungsaxiom\"), subset axiom, axiom of class construction, or axiom schema of restricted comprehension is an axiom schema. Essentially, it says that any definable subclass of a set is a set.\nSome mathematicians call it the axiom schema of comprehension, although others use that term for \"unrestricted\" comprehension, discussed below.\nBecause restricting comprehension avoided Russell's paradox, several mathematicians including Zermelo, Fraenkel, and G\u00f6del considered it the most important axiom of set theory.\nStatement.\nOne instance of the schema is included for each formula formula_1 in the language of set theory with free variables among formula_2 . So formula_3 does not occur free in formula_1. In the formal language of set theory, the axiom schema is:\nformula_5\nor in words:\n Given any set \"A\", there is a set \"B\" (a subset of \"A\") such that, given any set \"x\", \"x\" is a member of \"B\" if and only if \"x\" is a member of \"A\" and formula_1 holds for \"x\". \nNote that there is one axiom for every such predicate formula_1; thus, this is an axiom schema.\nTo understand this axiom schema, note that the set \"B\" must be a subset of \"A\". Thus, what the axiom schema is really saying is that, given a set \"A\" and a predicate formula_1, we can find a subset \"B\" of \"A\" whose members are precisely the members of \"A\" that satisfy formula_1. By the axiom of extensionality this set is unique. We usually denote this set using set-builder notation as formula_10. Thus the essence of the axiom is:\n Every subclass of a set that is defined by a predicate is itself a set.\nThe preceding form of separation was introduced in 1930 by Thoralf Skolem as a refinement of a previous, non-first-order form by Zermelo. The axiom schema of specification is characteristic of systems of axiomatic set theory related to the usual set theory ZFC, but does not usually appear in radically different systems of alternative set theory. For example, New Foundations and positive set theory use different restrictions of the axiom of comprehension of naive set theory. The Alternative Set Theory of Vopenka makes a specific point of allowing proper subclasses of sets, called semisets. Even in systems related to ZFC, this scheme is sometimes restricted to formulas with bounded quantifiers, as in Kripke\u2013Platek set theory with urelements.\nRelation to the axiom schema of replacement.\nThe axiom schema of specification is implied by the axiom schema of replacement together with the axiom of empty set.\nThe \"axiom schema of replacement\" says that, if a function formula_11 is definable by a formula formula_12, then for any set formula_13, there exists a set formula_14:\nformula_15.\nTo derive the axiom schema of specification, let formula_16 be a formula and formula_17 a set, and define the function formula_11 such that formula_19 if formula_16 is true and formula_21 if formula_16 is false, where formula_23 such that formula_24 is true. Then the set formula_25 guaranteed by the axiom schema of replacement is precisely the set formula_25 required in the axiom schema of specification. If formula_27 does not exist, then formula_28 in the axiom schema of specification is the empty set, whose existence (i.e., the axiom of empty set) is then needed.\nFor this reason, the axiom schema of specification is left out of some axiomatizations of ZF (Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory), although some authors, despite the redundancy, include both. Regardless, the axiom schema of specification is notable because it was in Zermelo's original 1908 list of axioms, before Fraenkel invented the axiom of replacement in 1922. Additionally, if one takes ZFC set theory (i.e., ZF with the axiom of choice), removes the axiom of replacement and the axiom of collection, but keeps the axiom schema of specification, one gets the weaker system of axioms called ZC (i.e., Zermelo's axioms, plus the axiom of choice).\nUnrestricted comprehension.\nThe axiom schema of unrestricted comprehension reads:\nformula_29\nthat is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn an unsorted material set theory, the axiom or rule of full or unrestricted comprehension says that for any property {{mvar|P}}, there exists a set formula_30 of all objects satisfying {{mvar|P}}.\nThis axiom schema was tacitly used in the early days of naive set theory, before a strict axiomatization was adopted. However, it was later discovered to lead directly to Russell's paradox, by taking {{math|{{var|\u03c6}}({{var|x}})}} to be {{math|\u00ac({{var|x}}\u00a0\u2208\u00a0{{var|x}})}} (i.e., the property that set {{mvar|x}} is not a member of itself). Therefore, no useful axiomatization of set theory can use unrestricted comprehension. Passing from classical logic to intuitionistic logic does not help, as the proof of Russell's paradox is intuitionistically valid.\nAccepting only the axiom schema of specification was the beginning of axiomatic set theory. Most of the other Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel axioms (but not the axiom of extensionality, the axiom of regularity, or the axiom of choice) then became necessary to make up for some of what was lost by changing the axiom schema of comprehension to the axiom schema of specification\u2014each of these axioms states that a certain set exists, and defines that set by giving a predicate for its members to satisfy, i.e. it is a special case of the axiom schema of comprehension.\nIt is also possible to prevent the schema from being inconsistent by restricting which formulae it can be applied to, such as only stratified formulae in New Foundations (see below) or only positive formulae (formulae with only conjunction, disjunction, quantification and atomic formulae) in positive set theory. Positive formulae, however, typically are unable to express certain things that most theories can; for instance, there is no complement or relative complement in positive set theory.\nIn NBG set theory.\nIn von Neumann\u2013Bernays\u2013G\u00f6del set theory, a distinction is made between sets and classes. A class {{mvar|C}} is a set if and only if it belongs to some class {{mvar|E}}. In this theory, there is a theorem schema that reads\nformula_31\nthat is,\nprovided that the quantifiers in the predicate {{mvar|P}} are restricted to sets.\nThis theorem schema is itself a restricted form of comprehension, which avoids Russell's paradox because of the requirement that {{mvar|C}} be a set. Then specification for sets themselves can be written as a single axiom\nformula_32\nthat is,\nor even more simply\nIn this axiom, the predicate {{mvar|P}} is replaced by the class {{mvar|D}}, which can be quantified over. Another simpler axiom which achieves the same effect is\nformula_33\nthat is,\nIn higher-order settings.\nIn a typed language where we can quantify over predicates, the axiom schema of specification becomes a simple axiom. This is much the same trick as was used in the NBG axioms of the previous section, where the predicate was replaced by a class that was then quantified over.\nIn second-order logic and higher-order logic with higher-order semantics, the axiom of specification is a logical validity and does not need to be explicitly included in a theory.\nIn Quine's New Foundations.\nIn the New Foundations approach to set theory pioneered by W. V. O. Quine, the axiom of comprehension for a given predicate takes the unrestricted form, but the predicates that may be used in the schema are themselves restricted. The predicate ({{mvar|C}} is not in {{mvar|C}}) is forbidden, because the same symbol {{mvar|C}} appears on both sides of the membership symbol (and so at different \"relative types\"); thus, Russell's paradox is avoided. However, by taking {{math|{{var|P}}({{var|C}})}} to be {{math|1=({{var|C}} = {{var|C}})}}, which is allowed, we can form a set of all sets. For details, see stratification."}
{"id": "52387", "revid": "24465790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52387", "title": "Axiom schema of replacement", "text": "Concept in set theory\nIn set theory, the axiom schema of replacement is a schema of axioms in Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory (ZF) that asserts that the image of any set under any definable mapping is also a set. It is necessary for the construction of certain infinite sets in ZF.\nThe axiom schema is motivated by the idea that whether a class is a set depends only on the cardinality of the class, not on the rank of its elements. Thus, if one class is \"small enough\" to be a set, and there is a surjection from that class to a second class, the axiom states that the second class is also a set. However, because ZFC only speaks of sets, not proper classes, the schema is stated only for definable surjections, which are identified with their defining formulas.\nStatement.\nSuppose formula_1 is a definable binary relation (which may be a proper class) such that for every set formula_2 there is a unique set formula_3 such that formula_4 holds. There is a corresponding definable function formula_5, where formula_6 if and only if formula_4. Consider the (possibly proper) class formula_8 defined such that for every set formula_3, formula_10 if and only if there is an formula_11 with formula_6. formula_8 is called the image of formula_14 under formula_5, and denoted formula_16 or (using set-builder notation) formula_17.\nThe axiom schema of replacement states that if formula_18 is a definable class function, as above, and formula_14 is any set, then the image formula_20 is also a set. This can be seen as a principle of smallness: the axiom states that if formula_14 is small enough to be a set, then formula_20 is also small enough to be a set. It is implied by the stronger axiom of limitation of size.\nBecause it is impossible to quantify over definable functions in first-order logic, one instance of the schema is included for each formula formula_23 in the language of set theory with free variables among formula_24; but formula_8 is not free in formula_23. In the formal language of set theory, the axiom schema is:\nformula_27\nFor the meaning of formula_28, see uniqueness quantification.\nFor clarity, in the case of no variables formula_29, this simplifies to:\nformula_30\nSo whenever formula_23 specifies a unique formula_2-to-formula_3 correspondence, akin to a function formula_18 on formula_14, then all formula_3 reached this way can be collected into a set formula_8, akin to formula_20.\nApplications.\nThe axiom schema of replacement is not necessary for the proofs of most theorems of ordinary mathematics. Indeed, Zermelo set theory (Z) already can interpret second-order arithmetic and much of type theory in finite types, which in turn are sufficient to formalize the bulk of mathematics. Although the axiom schema of replacement is a standard axiom in set theory today, it is often omitted from systems of type theory and foundation systems in topos theory.\nAt any rate, the axiom schema drastically increases the strength of ZF, both in terms of the theorems it can prove\u2014for example the sets shown to exist\u2014and also in terms of its proof-theoretic consistency strength, compared to Z. Some important examples follow:\nRelation to other axiom schemas.\nSimplifications.\nSome simplifications may be made to the axiom schema of replacement to obtain different equivalent versions. Azriel L\u00e9vy showed that a version of replacement with parameters removed, i.e. the following schema, is equivalent to the original form. In particular the equivalence holds in the presence of the axioms of extensionality, pairing, union and powerset.\n formula_61\nCollection.\nThe axiom schema of collection is closely related to and frequently confused with the axiom schema of replacement. \nOver the remainder of the ZF axioms, it is equivalent to the axiom schema of replacement. The axiom of collection is stronger than replacement in the absence of the power set axiom or its constructive counterpart of ZF and is used in the framework of IZF, which lacks the law of excluded middle, instead of Replacement which is weaker.\nWhile replacement can be read to say that the image of a function is a set, collection speaks about images of relations and then merely says that some superclass of the relation's image is a set. \nIn other words, the resulting set formula_8 has no minimality requirement, i.e. this variant also lacks the uniqueness requirement on formula_23. \nThat is, the relation defined by formula_23 is not required to be a function\u2014some formula_11 may correspond to many formula_3's in formula_8. In this case, the image set formula_8 whose existence is asserted must contain at least one such formula_3 for each formula_2 in the original set, with no guarantee that it will contain only one.\nSuppose that the free variables of formula_23 are among formula_72; but neither formula_14 nor formula_8 is free in formula_23. Then the axiom schema is:\nformula_76\nThe axiom schema is sometimes stated without prior restrictions (apart from formula_8 not occurring free in formula_23) on the predicate, formula_23:\nformula_80\nIn this case, there may be elements formula_2 in formula_14 that are not associated to any other sets by formula_23. However, the axiom schema as stated requires that, if an element formula_2 of formula_14 is associated with at least one set formula_3, then the image set formula_8 will contain at least one such formula_3. The resulting axiom schema is also called the axiom schema of boundedness.\nSeparation.\nThe axiom schema of separation, the other axiom schema in ZFC, is implied by the axiom schema of replacement and the axiom of empty set. Recall that the axiom schema of separation includes\nformula_89\nfor each formula formula_90 in the language of set theory in which formula_8 is not free, i.e. formula_90 that does not mention formula_8. \nThe proof is as follows: Either formula_14 contains some element formula_95 validating formula_96, or it does not. In the latter case, taking the empty set for formula_8 fulfills the relevant instance of the axiom schema of separation and one is done. Otherwise, choose such a fixed formula_95 in formula_14 that validates formula_96. Now define formula_101 for use with replacement. Using function notation for this predicate formula_23, it acts as the identity formula_103 wherever formula_104 is true and as the constant function formula_105 wherever formula_104 is false. By case analysis, the possible values formula_3 are unique for any formula_2, meaning formula_109 indeed constitutes a class function. In turn, the image formula_110 of formula_14 under formula_109, i.e. the class formula_113, is granted to be a set by the axiom of replacement. This formula_8 precisely validates the axiom of separation.\nThis result shows that it is possible to axiomatize ZFC with a single infinite axiom schema. Because at least one such infinite schema is required (ZFC is not finitely axiomatizable), this shows that the axiom schema of replacement can stand as the only infinite axiom schema in ZFC if desired. Because the axiom schema of separation is not independent, it is sometimes omitted from contemporary statements of the Zermelo-Fraenkel axioms.\nSeparation is still important, however, for use in fragments of ZFC, because of historical considerations, and for comparison with alternative axiomatizations of set theory. A formulation of set theory that does not include the axiom of replacement will likely include some form of the axiom of separation, to ensure that its models contain a sufficiently rich collection of sets. In the study of models of set theory, it is sometimes useful to consider models of ZFC without replacement, such as the models formula_115 in von Neumann's hierarchy.\nThe proof given above assumes the law of excluded middle for the proposition that formula_14 is inhabited by a set validating formula_90, and for any formula_104 when stipulating that the relation formula_23 is functional. The axiom of separation is explicitly included in constructive set theory, or a bounded variant thereof.\nReflection.\nL\u00e9vy's reflection principle for ZFC is equivalent to the axiom of replacement, assuming the axiom of infinity. L\u00e9vy's principle is as follows:\n For any formula_120 and any first-order formula formula_121, there exists an formula_122 such that formula_123.\nThis is a schema that consists of countably many statements, one for each formula formula_23. Here, formula_125 means formula_23 with all quantifiers bounded to formula_127, i.e. formula_23 but with every instance of formula_129 and formula_130 replaced with formula_131 and formula_132 respectively.\nHistory.\nThe axiom schema of replacement was not part of Ernst Zermelo's 1908 axiomatisation of set theory (Z). Some informal approximation to it existed in Cantor's unpublished works, and it appeared again informally in Mirimanoff (1917).\nIts publication by Abraham Fraenkel in 1922 is what makes modern set theory Zermelo-\"Fraenkel\" set theory (ZFC). The axiom was independently discovered and announced by Thoralf Skolem later in the same year (and published in 1923). Zermelo himself incorporated Fraenkel's axiom in his revised system he published in 1930, which also included as a new axiom von Neumann's axiom of foundation. Although it is Skolem's first order version of the axiom list that we use today, he usually gets no credit since each individual axiom was developed earlier by either Zermelo or Fraenkel. The phrase \u201cZermelo-Fraenkel set theory\u201d was first used in print by von Neumann in 1928.\nZermelo and Fraenkel had corresponded heavily in 1921; the axiom of replacement was a major topic of this exchange. Fraenkel initiated correspondence with Zermelo sometime in March 1921. However, his letters before the one dated 6 May 1921 are lost. Zermelo first admitted to a gap in his system in a reply to Fraenkel dated 9 May 1921. On 10 July 1921, Fraenkel completed and submitted for publication a paper (published in 1922) that described his axiom as allowing arbitrary replacements: \"If \"M\" is a set and each element of \"M\" is replaced by [a set or an urelement] then \"M\" turns into a set again\" (parenthetical completion and translation by Ebbinghaus). Fraenkel's 1922 publication thanked Zermelo for helpful arguments. Prior to this publication, Fraenkel publicly announced his new axiom at a meeting of the German Mathematical Society held in Jena on 22 September 1921. Zermelo was present at this meeting; in the discussion following Fraenkel's talk he accepted the axiom of replacement in general terms, but expressed reservations regarding its extent.\nThoralf Skolem made public his discovery of the gap in Zermelo's system (the same gap that Fraenkel had found) in a talk he gave on 6 July 1922 at the 5th Congress of Scandinavian Mathematicians, which was held in Helsinki; the proceedings of this congress were published in 1923. Skolem presented a resolution in terms of first-order definable replacements: \"Let \"U\" be a definite proposition that holds for certain pairs (\"a\", \"b\") in the domain \"B\"; assume further, that for every \"a\" there exists at most one \"b\" such that \"U\" is true. Then, as \"a\" ranges over the elements of a set \"Ma\", \"b\" ranges over all elements of a set \"Mb\".\" In the same year, Fraenkel wrote a review of Skolem's paper, in which Fraenkel simply stated that Skolem's considerations correspond to his own.\nZermelo himself never accepted Skolem's formulation of the axiom schema of replacement. At one point he called Skolem's approach \u201cset theory of the impoverished\u201d. Zermelo envisaged a system that would allow for large cardinals. He also objected strongly to the philosophical implications of countable models of set theory, which followed from Skolem's first-order axiomatization. According to the biography of Zermelo by Heinz-Dieter Ebbinghaus, Zermelo's disapproval of Skolem's approach marked the end of Zermelo's influence on the developments of set theory and logic.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52389", "revid": "50899871", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52389", "title": "Independence Day (1996 film)", "text": "1996 film by Roland Emmerich\nIndependence Day (also promoted as ID4) is a 1996 American science fiction action film directed by Roland Emmerich, written by Emmerich and the film's producer Dean Devlin, and stars an ensemble cast that consists of Will Smith, Bill Pullman, Jeff Goldblum, Mary McDonnell, Judd Hirsch, Margaret Colin, Randy Quaid, Robert Loggia, Vivica A. Fox, James Rebhorn, and Harvey Fierstein. The film focuses on disparate groups of people who converge in the Nevada desert in the aftermath of a worldwide attack by a powerful extraterrestrial race. With the other people of the world, they launch a counterattack on July 4\u2014Independence Day in the United States.\nWhile promoting \"Stargate\" in Europe, Emmerich conceived the film while answering a question about his belief in the existence of alien life. Devlin and Emmerich decided to incorporate a large-scale attack having noticed that aliens in most invasion films travel long distances in outer space only to remain hidden when reaching Earth. Shooting began on July 28, 1995, in New York City, and the film was completed on October 8, 1995.\nConsidered a significant turning point in the history of the Hollywood blockbuster, \"Independence Day\" was at the forefront of the large-scale disaster film and sci-fi resurgence of the mid-late 1990s. It was released worldwide on July 3, 1996, but began showing on July 2 (the same day the film's story begins) in original release as a result of a high level of anticipation among moviegoers. The film received mixed to positive reviews, with praise for the performances, musical score and visual effects, but criticism for its characters. It grossed over $817.4\u00a0million worldwide, becoming the highest-grossing film of 1996 and the second-highest-grossing film ever at the time, behind \"Jurassic Park\" (1993). The film won the Academy Award for Best Visual Effects and was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Sound.\nThe sequel, \"\", was released 20 years later on June 24, 2016, as part of a planned series of films.\nPlot.\nOn July 2, 1996, an extraterrestrial mother ship enters Earth's orbit outside the Moon and deploys its flying saucers, each in diameter, over major cities worldwide. U.S. Marine Captain Steven Hiller and his unit, the Black Knights fighter squadron stationed out of MCAS El Toro, are called back from Independence Day leave; his girlfriend, Jasmine Dubrow, decides to flee Los Angeles with her son, Dylan. Retired combat pilot Russell Casse, now an alcoholic single father and crop duster, sees this as vindication of the alien abduction he has been claiming for 10 years.\nIn New York City, technician David Levinson decodes a signal embedded within global satellite transmissions, realizing that it is the aliens' countdown for a coordinated attack. Aided by his ex-wife, White House Communications Director Constance Spano, David and his father Julius reach the Oval Office in Washington, D.C. and alert President Thomas Whitmore.\nWhitmore orders evacuations of Los Angeles, New York City, and the District of Columbia, but it is too late. Each saucer fires a beam, incinerating every targeted city, killing millions. Whitmore, the Levinsons, and a few others barely escape aboard Air Force One while Jasmine, Dylan, and their dog Boomer take shelter in a tunnel's inspection alcove and escape the destruction of Los Angeles.\nOn July 3, Earth's military retaliations against the invaders are thwarted by the alien warships' force fields. Each saucer launches shielded fighters, devastating the human fighter squadrons and military bases, including Captain Hiller's. Hiller lures an enemy fighter into the Grand Canyon before ejecting from his plane, blinding the fighter using his parachute and causing the alien to crash in the Mojave Desert. He subdues the downed alien and flags down a convoy of refugees, transporting the alien to Area 51, where Whitmore's plane has landed.\nU.S. Defense Secretary Albert Nimziki reveals that a government faction has been involved in a UFO conspiracy since 1947, when one of the invaders' fighters crashed near Roswell, New Mexico. Area 51 houses the refurbished ship and three alien corpses from the crash. Dr. Brackish Okun, the chief scientist, examines the alien captured by Steven, which awakens, telepathically invades Okun's mind, and psychically attacks Whitmore then is killed by Secret Service agents and military personnel. Whitmore learns the invaders' plan from the psychic attack; they intend to annihilate Earth's inhabitants and harvest its natural resources, as they have done to other civilizations.\nWhitmore reluctantly authorizes a trial nuclear attack against a saucer above Houston, but the saucer's force field protects it from damage, while Houston is destroyed by the blast. All subsequent nuclear attacks are aborted. Jasmine and Dylan commandeer a highway maintenance truck and rescue several survivors, including the badly injured First Lady, Marilyn Whitmore. Hiller rescues them and takes them to Area 51, where Marilyn succumbs to her injuries after reuniting with her family.\nOn July 4, inspired by Julius, David plans to write a computer virus on his laptop and upload it into the mothership's operating system to disable the aliens' shield. Hiller volunteers to pilot the alien ship armed with a tactical nuclear weapon to destroy the mothership. The U.S. military contacts the remaining forces and airborne squadrons through Morse code to organize a united counterattack. Lacking pilots, Whitmore and General William Grey enlist volunteers with flight experience, including Russell Casse from the refugee camp at Area 51, to fly the remaining jets. Hiller marries Jasmine, with David and Constance present, during which the divorced pair reconciles before leaving on the mission.\nEntering the alien mother ship, they upload the virus and launch the nuclear missile, destroying it and the alien invasion force before narrowly escaping. With the shields down, Whitmore's squadron engages a saucer targeting the Area 51 base. They exhaust their ammunition, and as the saucer readies to fire, Russell sacrifices himself by crashing into its primary weapon, destroying the saucer. Grey orders notifications to resistance groups worldwide about the saucers' critical weakness, leading to their destruction.\nAs humanity celebrates its victory against the aliens, Hiller and David are rescued after surviving the crash, and are reunited with their families.\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nThe idea for the film came when Roland Emmerich and Dean Devlin were in Europe promoting their film \"Stargate\" in 1994. A reporter asked Emmerich why he made a film with content like \"Stargate\" if he did not believe in aliens. Emmerich stated he was still fascinated by the idea of an alien arrival, and further explained his response by asking the reporter to imagine what it would be like to wake up one morning and to discover 15-mile-wide spaceships were hovering over the world's largest cities. Emmerich then turned to Devlin and said, \"I think I have an idea for our next film.\"\nEmmerich and Devlin decided to expand on the idea by incorporating a large-scale attack, with Devlin saying he was bothered by the fact that \"for the most part, in alien invasion movies, they come down to Earth and they're hidden in some back field \u2026[o]r they arrive in little spores and inject themselves into the back of someone's head.\" Emmerich agreed by asking Devlin if arriving from across the galaxy, \"would you hide on a farm or would you make a big entrance?\" The two wrote the script during a month-long vacation in Mexico, and just one day after they sent it out for consideration, 20th Century Fox chairman Peter Chernin greenlit the screenplay. Pre-production began just three days later in February 1995. The U.S. military originally intended to provide personnel, vehicles, and costumes for the film; however, they backed out when the producers refused to remove the script's Area 51 references.\nA then-record 3,000-plus special effects shots would ultimately be required for the film. The shoot used on-set and in-camera special effects more often than computer-generated effects in an effort to save money and get more authentic pyrotechnic results. Many of these shots were accomplished at Hughes Aircraft in Culver City, California, where the film's art department, motion control photography teams, pyrotechnics team, and model shop were headquartered. The production's model-making department built more than twice as many miniatures for the production than had ever been built for any film before by creating miniatures for buildings, city streets, aircraft, landmarks, and monuments. The crew also built miniatures for several of the spaceships featured in the film, including a destroyer model and a version of the mother ship spanning . City streets were recreated, then tilted upright beneath a high-speed camera mounted on a scaffolding filming downwards. An explosion would be ignited below the model, and flames would rise towards the camera, engulfing the tilted model and creating the rolling \"wall of destruction\" look seen in the film. A model of the White House was also created, covering by , and was used in forced-perspective shots before being destroyed in a similar fashion for its destruction scene. The detonation took a week to plan and required 40 explosive charges.\nThe film's aliens were designed by production designer Patrick Tatopoulos. The actual aliens in the film are diminutive and based on a design Tatopoulos drew when tasked by Emmerich to create an alien that was \"both familiar and completely original\". These creatures wear \"bio-mechanical\" suits that are based on another design Tatopoulos pitched to Emmerich. These suits were tall, equipped with 25 tentacles, and purposely designed to show it could not sustain a person inside, so it would not appear to be a \"man in a suit\".\nChristopher Weaver, founder of video game publisher Bethesda Softworks consulted with the movie's production team, Centropolis Films, and provided scientific collaboration. Dean Devlin used Weaver as the basis for the film character David Levinson.\nFilming.\nPrincipal photography began on July 28, 1995, in New York City. A second unit gathered plate shots and establishing shots of Manhattan, Washington, D.C., an RV community in Flagstaff, Arizona, and the Very Large Array on the Plains of San Agustin, New Mexico. The main crew also filmed in nearby Cliffside Park, New Jersey before moving to the former Kaiser Steel mill in Fontana, California to film the post-attack Los Angeles sequences. The production then moved to Wendover, Utah, and West Wendover, Nevada, where the deserts doubled for Imperial Valley, and the Wendover Airport doubled for the El Toro and Area 51 exteriors. It was here where Pullman filmed his pre-battle speech. Immediately before filming the scene, Devlin and Pullman decided to add \"Today, we celebrate our Independence Day!\" to the end of the speech. At the time, the production was nicknamed \"ID4\" because Warner Bros. owned the rights to the title because of a film from 1983 which is also called \"Independence Day\". Devlin had hoped that if Fox executives noticed the addition in dailies, the impact of the new dialogue would help them to win the rights to the title. Pullman had stated in a 2020 interview that Fox had otherwise been aiming to use \"Doomsday\" for the film's release to match with other disaster films of the time, and Devlin and Emmerich had hoped the impact of this speech scene would help win Fox over to the \"Independence Day\" name. The right to use the title was eventually won two weeks later.\nThe production team moved to the Bonneville Salt Flats to film three scenes, then returned to California to film in various places around Los Angeles, including Hughes Aircraft where sets for the cable company and Area 51 interiors were constructed at a former aircraft plant. Sets for the latter included corridors containing windows that were covered with blue material. The filmmakers originally intended to use the chroma key technique to make it appear as if an activity was happening on the other side of the glass, but the composited images were not added to the final print because production designers decided the blue panels gave the sets a \"clinical look\". The attacker hangar set contained an attacker mockup wide that took four months to build. The White House interior sets used had already been built for \"The American President\" and had previously been used for \"Nixon\". Principal photography completed on October 8, 1995, after 72 days of filming.. In addition to reusing the White House interior sets, the production also reused sets from previous movies with the B-3 stealth bomber cockpit from \"Broken Arrow\" and the US nuclear submarine sets from \"Down Periscope\" and \"Crimson Tide\" being prime examples.\nThe film initially depicted Russell Casse being rejected as a volunteer for the July 4 aerial counteroffensive because of his alcoholism. He then uses a stolen missile tied to his red biplane to carry out his suicide mission. According to Dean Devlin, test audiences responded well to the scene's irony and comedic value. However, the scene was re-shot to include Russell's acceptance as a volunteer, his crash course on flying modern fighter aircraft, and him flying an F/A-18 instead of the biplane. Devlin preferred the alteration because the viewer now witnesses Russell ultimately making the decision to sacrifice his life.\nMusic.\nThe Grammy Award-winning score for the film was composed by David Arnold and recorded with an orchestra of 90, a choir of 46, \"and every last ounce of stereotypical Americana he could muster for the occasion\". The film's producer Dean Devlin commented that \"you can leave it up to a Brit to write some of the most rousing and patriotic music in the history of American cinema.\" The soundtrack has received two official CD releases. RCA released a 50-minute album at the time of the film's release, then in 2010, La-La Land Records and Fox Music released a limited-edition, two-disc CD set that comprised the complete score plus 12 alternate cues. The premiere of \"Independence Day\" live took place at the Royal Albert Hall in September 2016, with the film's score performed live for a screening of the film. This celebrated the twentieth anniversary of the film's release, and the event also featured a pre-film talk by David Arnold.\nRelease.\nTheatrical.\nWhile \"Independence Day\" was still in post-production, Fox began an expensive marketing campaign to help promote the film, beginning with the airing of a dramatic commercial during Super Bowl XXX, for which it paid $1.3\u00a0million. The film's subsequent success at the box office resulted in a trend of using Super Bowl air time to begin the advertising campaigns for potential blockbusters.\nFox's Licensing and Merchandising division also entered into co-promotional deals with Apple Inc. The co-marketing project was dubbed \"The Power to Save the World\" campaign, in which the company used footage of David using his PowerBook 5300 laptop in their print and television advertisements. Trendmasters entered a merchandising deal with the film's producers to create a line of tie-in toys. In exchange for product placement, Fox also entered into co-promotional deals with Molson Coors Brewing Company and Coca-Cola.\nThe film was marketed with several taglines, including: \"We've always believed we weren't alone. On July 4, we'll wish we were\", \"Earth. Take a good look. It could be your last\", and \"Don't make plans for August\". The weekend before the film's release, the Fox Network aired a half-hour special on the film, the first third of which was a spoof news report on the events that happen in the film. Roger Ebert attributed most of the film's early success to its teaser trailers and marketing campaigns, acknowledging them as \"truly brilliant\".\nThe film had its official premiere held at Los Angeles' now-defunct Mann Plaza Theater on June 25, 1996. It was then screened privately at the White House for President Bill Clinton and his family before receiving a nationwide release in the United States on July 2, 1996, a day earlier than its previously scheduled opening.\nA 3D re-release was cancelled in 2013.\nCensorship.\nIn Lebanon, certain Jewish- and Israel-related content in the film was censored. One cut scene involved Judd Hirsch's character donning a kippah, and leading soldiers and White House officials in a Jewish prayer. Other removed footage showed Israeli and Arab troops working together in preparation for countering the alien invasion. The Lebanese Shi'a Islamist militant group Hezbollah called for Muslims to boycott the film, describing it as \"propaganda for the so-called genius of the Jews and their concern for humanity.\" In response, Jewish actor Jeff Goldblum said: \"I think Hezbollah has missed the point. The film is not about American Jews saving the world; it's about teamwork among people of different religions and nationalities to defeat a common enemy.\"\nHome media.\nAfter a six-week, $30\u00a0million marketing campaign, \"Independence Day\" was released on a THX certified VHS on November 22, 1996. A LaserDisc release came out at roughly the same time, which included audio commentary, theatrical trailers, deleted scenes, and a bundled soundtrack CD. The film sold 22 million copies in North America, becoming the best selling live-action video.\nThe film became available on DVD on June 27, 2000, and has since been re-released in several different versions of this format with varying supplemental material, including one instance where it was packaged with a lenticular cover. A special edition of the film was included on the DVD as well, which features nine minutes of additional footage not seen in the original theatrical release. A single-disc DVD version of the film was released alongside \"Cast Away\" on May 21, 2002. \"Independence Day\" became available on Blu-ray in the United Kingdom on December 24, 2007, and in North America on March 11, 2008 and in Australia on March 5, 2008. The initial single-disc releases only feature the theatrical cut and a few extras, as per the single-disc DVDs. For its 2016 twentieth anniversary, the film was re-released on two-disc Blu-ray and DVD, 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray, and Digital HD. The 20th-anniversary editions feature both the theatrical and extended versions, all the extras of the previous 2-disc DVDs and more.\nTelevision broadcast.\n\"Independence Day\" was originally scheduled to air on Fox on September 16, 2001, but was cancelled following the September 11 attacks. Fox replaced \"Independence Day\" with a repeat airing of \"There's Something About Mary\".\nRe-release.\nThe film had both its twentieth anniversary and premiere at a special live-orchestral screening performance at the Royal Albert Hall on September 22, 2016. The Royal Philharmonic Orchestra, conducted by the original orchestrator Nicholas Dodd, performed the score live during the film, and the film's composer, David Arnold, was a presenter at the event.\nReception.\nBox office.\n\"Independence Day\" was the highest-grossing film of 1996, surpassing both \"Twister\" and '. The film had its preview screenings on July 2, 1996, grossing $11.1 million from 2,433 theaters. At that point, it had the biggest pre-opening of any film, breaking the six-year record held by \"Die Hard 2\". The next day on July 3, the film officially opened to the public with $17.4 million. During its second day of release, it earned $17.3 million, which made it the highest Thursday gross, holding this record for six years until it was taken by ' in 2002. This was also the highest non-sequel Thursday gross, which would last until the opening of \"Transformers\" in 2007. \"Independence Day\" earned $104.3\u00a0million in its opening week, including $96.1\u00a0million during its five-day holiday opening, and $50.2\u00a0million during its opening weekend. The film stayed in the number-one spot for three consecutive weeks before being displaced by \"A Time to Kill\". Moreover, it beat ''s record for largest five-day Wednesday gross of any film, as well as the biggest July opening weekend. The combined total for the five-day Wednesday opening with ticket sales increased to $190 million, dethroning the $158.6 million record formerly held by \"Toy Story\". In addition, the film had the second-highest opening weekend of any movie, behind \"Batman Forever\". All three figures broke records set by \"Jurassic Park\" three years earlier, whose successor, ', claimed all three records when it was released in 1997. That same year, \"Men in Black\" surpassed \"Independence Day\" for highest July opening weekend and largest three-day Fourth of July opening weekend. Despite this, the film would continue to hold the record for having the highest five-day Fourth of July Wednesday opening until \"Men in Black II\" in 2002.\n\"Independence Day\" earned over $150 million in 12 days, becoming the quickest film to do so. In 21 days, it became the fastest film to approach the $200 million mark. The film would hold this record for three years until it was surpassed by \"\" in 1999. By the end of July 1996, \"Independence Day\" had lost 38% of its audience, but it was able to top \"Ghostbusters\", \"Aladdin\", \"Mrs. Doubtfire\" and \"Ghost\", becoming the fourteenth-highest domestic grossing film of all time. It reached $230 million within the first month of release, and on August 9, crossed the $250 million mark. Halfway through the month, it became the eighth-highest domestic grosser, beating \"Jaws\".\n\"Independence Day\" grossed $306,169,268 in the United States and Canada and $511,231,623 in other territories during its theatrical run. The combined worldwide total of $817,400,891 surpassed \"The Lion King\", second only to the worldwide earnings of \"Jurassic Park\" as the highest of all time. For over 20 years, the film would hold the record for being the highest-grossing film starring Will Smith until 2019 when it was surpassed by the live-action version of \"Aladdin\". The domestic record was beaten by \"Suicide Squad\" three years earlier in 2016. In the UK, the film grossed \u00a37,005,905 in its opening weekend (including \u00a3939,022 from previews), surpassing \"Jurassic Park\"'s record of \u00a34.9 million. The film grossed a record $10.5\u00a0million in its opening weekend in Germany and also beat the opening record in France. Box Office Mojo estimates that the film sold over 69.26\u00a0million tickets in the US and Canada. Hoping to capitalize on the film's success, several studios released large-scale disaster films, and the already rising interest in science fiction-related media was further increased by the film's popularity.\nA month after the film's release, jewelry designers and marketing consultants reported an increased interest in dolphin-themed jewelry, as the character Jasmine (Vivica A. Fox) wears dolphin earrings, and is presented with a wedding ring featuring a gold dolphin.\nCritical response.\nReview aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that 69% of 80 surveyed critics gave \"Independence Day\" a positive review; the average rating is 6.6/10. The site's critical consensus reads, \"The plot is thin and so is character development, but as a thrilling, spectacle-filled summer movie, \"Independence Day\" delivers.\" On Metacritic, the film has a score of 59 out of 100 based on 19 critics, indicating \"mixed or average\" reviews. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of \"A\" on an A+ to F scale.\nCritics wrote that the film has \"cardboard\" and \"stereotypical\" characters, and weak dialogue. However, the shot of the White House's destruction was declared a milestone in visual effects and one of the most memorable scenes of the 1990s. In a 2010 poll, readers of \"Entertainment Weekly\" rated it the second-greatest summer film of the previous 20 years, ranking only behind \"Jurassic Park\".\nMick LaSalle of the \"San Francisco Chronicle\" gave the film his highest rating, declaring it the \"apotheosis\" of comic book space adventure movies. Lisa Schwarzbaum of \"Entertainment Weekly\" gave it a B+ for living up to its massive hype, adding \"charm is the foremost of this epic's contemporary characteristics. The script is witty, knowing, cool.\" Eight years later, \"Entertainment Weekly\" rated the film as one of the best disaster films of all time. Kenneth Turan of the \"Los Angeles Times\" felt that the film did an \"excellent job conveying the boggling immensity of [the] extraterrestrial vehicles [\u2026] and panic in the streets\" and the scenes of the alien attack were \"disturbing, unsettling and completely convincing\".\nThe film's nationalistic overtones were widely criticized by reviewers outside the U.S. \"Movie Review UK\" described the film as \"a mish-mash of elements from a wide variety of alien invasion movies and gung-ho American jingoism.\" The speech during which Whitmore states that victory in the coming war would see the entire world henceforth describe July 4 as its Independence Day, was described in a BBC review as \"the most jaw-droppingly pompous soliloquy ever delivered in a mainstream Hollywood movie.\" In 2003, readers of \"Empire\" voted that scene as the \"Cheesiest Movie Moment of All-Time\". \"Empire\" critic Kim Newman had given the film a five-star rating in the magazine's original review.\nSeveral critics were disappointed by the special effects. \"Newsweek\"'s David Ansen claimed they were no better than those seen nineteen years earlier in \"Star Wars\". Todd McCarthy of \"Variety\" felt the production's budget-conscious approach resulted in \"cheesy\" shots, lacking the quality of effects in films by James Cameron and Steven Spielberg. Roger Ebert noted a lack of imagination in the spaceship and creature designs. Gene Siskel expressed the same sentiments in his \"At the Movies\" review.\"\"\nAmerican Film Institute lists\nLegacy.\nDisaster elements portrayed in \"Twister\" and \"Independence Day\" (both in 1996) represented a significant turning point for Hollywood blockbuster films. With advancements in CGI special effects, events depicting mass destruction became commonplace in films that soon followed, such as \"Dante's Peak\" and \"Volcano\" (both in 1997), as well as \"Deep Impact\" and \"Armageddon\" (both in 1998). The trend resumed from the mid-2000s to 2010s, evident in three of Emmerich's films titled \"The Day After Tomorrow\" (2004), \"2012\" (2009), and \"White House Down\" (2013), as well as other blockbusters like \"Transformers\" (2007) and \"The Avengers\" (2012).\nIn other media.\nBooks.\nAuthor Stephen Molstad wrote a tie-in novel to help promote the film shortly before its release. The novel goes into further detail on the characters, situations, and overall concepts not explored in the film. The novel presents the film's finale as originally scripted, with the character played by Randy Quaid stealing a missile and roping it to his cropduster biplane.\nFollowing the film's success, a prequel novel entitled \"Independence Day: Silent Zone\" was written by Molstad in February 1998. The novel is set in the late 1960s and early 1970s, and details the early career of Dr. Brackish Okun.\nMolstad wrote a third novel, \"Independence Day: War in the Desert\" in July 1999. Set in Saudi Arabia on July 3, it centers around the two Royal Air Force officers seen receiving the Morse code message in the film. A Marvel comic book was also written based on the first two novelizations.\nRadio.\nOn August 4, 1996, BBC Radio 1 broadcast the one-hour play \"Independence Day UK\", written, produced, and directed by Dirk Maggs, a spin-off depicting the alien invasion from a British perspective. None of the original cast was present. Dean Devlin gave Maggs permission to produce an original version, on the condition that he did not reveal certain details of the movie's plot, and that the British were not depicted as saving the day. \"Independence Day UK\" was set up to be similar to the 1938 radio broadcast of \"The War of the Worlds\u2014\"the first 20 minutes were live.\nMultimedia.\nIn 1996 a \"behind-the-scenes\" multimedia CD-ROM titled \"Inside Independence Day\" was released for Microsoft Windows and Macintosh; it includes storyboards for the film, sketches, movie clips, and a preview of the \"Independence Day\" video game.\nVideo games.\nAn \"Independence Day\" video game was released in February 1997 for the PlayStation, Sega Saturn, and PC, each version receiving mostly tepid reviews. The multi-view shooter game contains various missions to perform, with the ultimate goal of destroying the aliens' primary weapon. A pinball machine themed to the film was released by Sega in June 1996. Plus, a wireless mobile version was released in 2005.\nA video game titled \"ID4 Online\" (or Independence Day Online) was released by Mythic Entertainment.\nToys.\nTrendmasters released a toy line for the film in 1996. Each action figure, vehicle or playset came with a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3+1\u20442 inch floppy disk that contained an interactive computer game.\nFranchise.\nIn June 2011, Devlin confirmed that he and Emmerich had written a treatment for two sequels to form a trilogy; both expressed the desire for Will Smith to return. In October 2011, however, discussions over Smith returning were halted, due to Fox's refusal to provide the $50\u00a0million salary demanded by Smith for the two sequels. Emmerich, however, made assurances that the films would be shot back-to-back, regardless of Smith's involvement.\nIn March 2013, Emmerich stated that the titles of the new films would be \"ID: Forever \u2013 Part I\" and \"ID: Forever \u2013 Part II\". In November 2014, the sequel was given the green light by 20th Century Fox, with a release date of June 24, 2016. This would be a stand-alone sequel, that would not split into two parts as originally planned, with filming beginning in May 2015 and casting being done after the studio locked down Emmerich as the director of the film. In December 2014, Devlin confirmed that Emmerich would indeed be directing the sequel. On June 22, 2015, Emmerich announced the official title, \"\".\nWith respect to Smith's decision not to return to film a sequel, Emmerich told Screen Crush that: \"In the very beginning, I wanted to work with him and he was excited to be in it but then after a while he was tired of sequels, and he did another science fiction film, which was his father-son story \"After Earth\", so he opted out.\"\n\"\" was released on June 24, 2016. The sequel, unlike the original, was both a critical and commercial failure, making further sequels unlikely. Furthermore, in March 2018, LRM Online reported that, after having met producer Dean Devlin at WonderCon and asking about the status of \"Independence Day 3\", Devlin told them \"I don't know. I don't know. Currently, I personally have no plans of doing another one.\" One year later, Emmerich stated that once The Walt Disney Company purchased Fox he thought the chances of a third movie were over, but still had hopes that the project could happen given Disney's preference for franchise films.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52390", "revid": "49482675", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52390", "title": "Armageddon (1998 film)", "text": "1998 film by Michael Bay\nArmageddon is a 1998 American science fiction disaster film directed by Michael Bay and co-produced by Jerry Bruckheimer. The film follows a group of blue-collar deep-core drillers sent by NASA to destroy a gigantic asteroid, which is the size of Texas, on a collision course with Earth. It stars an ensemble cast including Bruce Willis with Billy Bob Thornton, Liv Tyler, Ben Affleck, Will Patton, Peter Stormare, Keith David, Owen Wilson, William Fichtner and Steve Buscemi.\nThe film released on July 1, 1998 by Buena Vista Pictures through its Touchstone Pictures label. Despite receiving mixed reviews from critics, \"Armageddon\" was a commercial success, grossing $553.7\u00a0million worldwide against a $140 million budget, becoming the highest-grossing film of 1998, and the highest-grossing film to be released by Touchstone Pictures.\nPlot.\nA massive meteor shower destroys the orbiting Space Shuttle \"Atlantis\" before entering the atmosphere and bombarding Boston, Philadelphia, Moncton, Halifax, Newfoundland and New York City, the latter being extensively damaged. The meteors were pushed out of the asteroid belt by a collision from a rogue comet the size of Texas and NASA learns it will impact Earth in 18 days, wiping out all life on Earth. \nNASA devises a plan to drill a deep hole into the asteroid, into which they will insert and detonate a nuclear bomb to destroy it. They recruit Harry Stamper, a third-generation oil driller and owner of an oil drilling company, who agrees to help but on the condition that he bring in his own team to do the drilling. He picks his best employees for the job: Chick Chapple, his best friend and right-hand man; geologists Rockhound and Oscar Choice; and drillers Bear Curlene, Freddie Noonan, Max Lennert, and A. J. Frost (who has been dating Harry's daughter Grace despite Harry's objections). Over twelve days, they are trained to become astronauts with astronaut Willie Sharp, who will pilot \"Freedom\"\u2014one of the two super shuttles to fly to the asteroid, the other being the \"Independence\". Before leaving, Chick apologizes to his ex-wife for wronging her and sees his son\u2014who is unaware of his parentage\u2014and Grace accepts A.J.'s marriage proposal, much to Harry's reluctant dismay; she later has her father promise to return home safe and with her fianc\u00e9.\nFollowing the destruction of Shanghai by another meteor strike, word of the asteroid becomes public to the world. Both shuttles take off without incident and dock with the Russian space station Mir to take on fuel, but faulty materials start a fire in the fuel pod. A.J. and Roscosmos cosmonaut Lev Andropov narrowly manage to board \"Independence\" before the space station is destroyed.\nApproaching the asteroid, \"Independence\" is damaged by debris and crashes, killing all on board except Lev, Bear, and A.J. They embark in the shuttle's mobile driller \u201cArmadillo\u201d to find the \"Freedom\" crew, which landed 26 miles from its intended landing/drilling site. When the drilling goes slower than predicted, Sharp reports to Mission Control that it is unlikely they will reach the depth necessary to destroy the asteroid before \"Zero Barrier\", the point after which detonating the rock will not save Earth. The president of the United States decides to remotely detonate the bomb from Earth immediately, not understanding this will cause total mission failure. Sharp and Harry have a vicious argument, but agree to defuse the bomb and work together after Harry promises Sharp that he will accomplish the mission. They make up on lost drilling time, but a missed gas pocket causes their Armadillo and Max to be blown into space. Just as Harry, NASA, and the world believe the mission to be a failure, while another meteor destroys Paris, A.J. and the others arrive in the second Armadillo.\nA.J. successfully finishes the drilling, but a rock storm kills Gruber and damages the bomb\u2019s remote detonator, forcing someone to stay behind and manually detonate it. They draw straws; A.J. is given the responsibility. Harry takes him down to the asteroid's surface, only to disconnect A.J.'s air hose and force him into the shuttle's air lock, before telling A.J. that he is the son Harry never had, and he would be proud to have him marry Grace. Using the Armadillo, Harry tearfully gives Grace his blessing to marry A.J., and Grace says she is proud to be his daughter.\nAfter various difficulties, \"Freedom\" takes off, and just before Zero Barrier, Harry manages to detonate the bomb and saves the planet, sacrificing his life in the process. The astronauts land on Earth safely. A.J. and Grace are reunited, and Chick reconciles with his ex-wife and estranged son. During the credits, A.J. and Grace are married, with the portraits of Harry and the others lost on the mission present \"in memoriam\".\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Bruce Willis as Harry S. Stamper\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nAccording to Bruce Joel Rubin, writer of \"Deep Impact\", a production president at Disney took notes on everything the writer said during lunch about his script and initiated \"Armageddon\" as a counter film at Disney. Nine writers worked on the script, five of whom are credited. In addition to Robert Roy Pool, Jonathan Hensleigh, Tony Gilroy, Shane Salerno and J. J. Abrams, the writers involved included Paul Attanasio, Ann Biderman, Scott Rosenberg and Robert Towne. Originally, it was Hensleigh's script, based on Pool's original, that had been given the green-light by Touchstone Pictures. Jerry Bruckheimer hired the succession of writers for rewrites and polishes.\nBruce Willis was cast in the film as part of a three-picture deal he cut with the studio to compensate them for the dissolution of 1997's \"Broadway Brawler\". He received a significant pay cut for the picture as part of the deal. Sean Connery was originally considered for the role of Stamper, but Michael Bay decided to cast a younger actor in the role after meeting oil drillers. Bradley Cooper auditioned for the role of A.J. Frost, which eventually went to Ben Affleck.\nFilming.\nPrincipal photography for \"Armageddon\" began on August 27, 1997 and ended on January 29, 1998. Filming occurred at Culver Studios in Culver City, California. In May 1998, Walt Disney Studios chairman Joe Roth expanded the film's budget by $3\u00a0million to include additional special effects scenes by Dream Quest Images showing an asteroid impacting Paris. This additional footage, incorporated two months prior to the film's release, was specifically added for the television advertising campaign to visually differentiate the film from \"Deep Impact\" which was released a few months before. At a budget of $140 million, it was Buena Vista's most expensive film at the time.\nAfter filming was complete, according to Home Improvement actor Richard Karn, he stumbled upon the main asteroid set and suggested to Tim Allen that they needed to film on it. According to Karn, Allen asked then ABC executive Bob Iger who then asked Michael Bay for permission. Bay required waiting 6 months after the film was released. The asteroid set was used as a credit roll gag scene to imitate a cave in Wilson's basement.\nRelease.\nMarketing.\nPrior to \"Armageddon\"'s release, the film was advertised in Super Bowl XXXII at a cost of $2.6\u00a0million. Several billboards sparked a city-wide panic with its all-too-real ad campaign. The studio also partnered with McDonald's for the tie-in promotion.\nHome media.\nDespite a mixed critical reception, The Criterion Collection\u2014a specialist film distributor of primarily arthouse films that markets what it considers to be \"important classic and contemporary films\" and \"cinema at its finest\"\u2014released the 'directors cut' of the film to DVD and LaserDisc. In an essay supporting the selection of \"Armageddon\", film scholar Jeanine Basinger, who taught Michael Bay at Wesleyan University, states that the film is \"a work of art by a cutting-edge artist who is a master of movement, light, color, and shape\u2014and also of chaos, razzle-dazzle, and explosion\". She sees it as a celebration of working men: \"This film makes these ordinary men noble, lifting their efforts up into an epic event.\" Further, she states that in the first few moments of the film all the main characters are well established, saying, \"If that isn't screenwriting, I don't know what is\".\nThe film was also released on VHS and DVD by Buena Vista Home Entertainment on November 13, 1998, and would surpass \"Pretty Woman\" to become Buena Vista Home Entertainment's best-selling live-action title. \"Armageddon\" then premiered on both VHS and DVD formats on February 1, 1999, in the UK. It was the country's best-selling DVD release, selling over 100,000 copies. However, this record would be surpassed by \"The Matrix\" later that year. The film was released on a standard edition Blu-ray in 2010 with only a few special features. In late November 2024, it was announced that the film would be released on 4K Blu-ray.\nTelevision airing.\nBy April 2002, ABC airings of \"Armageddon\" had already received modifications due to the September 11 attacks that occurred seven months prior. The scene where the World Trade Center was hit by meteors and caught on fire was censored because of its similarity to the attacks.\nFollowing the 2003 \"Columbia\" disaster, some screen captures from the opening scene where \"Atlantis\" is destroyed were passed off as satellite images of the disaster in a hoax. Additionally, the American cable network FX, which had intended to broadcast \"Armageddon\" that evening, removed the film from its schedule and aired \"Aliens\" in its place.\nReception.\nBox office.\n\"Armageddon\" was released on July 1, 1998 in 3,127 theaters in the United States and Canada. It ranked first at the box office ahead of \"Dr. Dolittle\" with an opening weekend gross of $36 million, combined with $54.2 million from its first five days. Upon opening, the film had the third-highest Fourth of July opening weekend at the time, behind \"Men in Black\" and \"Independence Day\". It went on to beat \"Ransom\" to achieve the highest opening weekend for a live-action Disney film. That record would only last for four months before being surpassed by \"The Waterboy\" that November. The film was surpassed by \"Lethal Weapon 4\" in its second weekend, although it collected a total of $23.5 million. In late July 1998, it surpassed its rival \"Deep Impact\" to become the highest-grossing domestic release of the year. The film grossed $201.6 million in the United States and Canada and $352.1 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $553.7 million. It was the highest-grossing film of 1998 worldwide and the second-highest-grossing film of that year in the United States, finishing just behind \"Saving Private Ryan\".\nIn South Korea, \"Armageddon\" surpassed \"Godzilla\" to have the country's highest opening, making $2.7 million. It recorded the second-highest opening in Taiwan with $1 million, behind \"\". The film would spend a total of thirteen weeks in Japan's number one spot until it was surpassed by \"A Bug's Life\".\nCritical response.\n\"Armageddon\" received mixed reviews from film critics, many of whom took issue with \"the furious pace of its editing\". On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film has a 43% approval rating based on 176 reviews, with an average rating of 5.3/10. The critical consensus states, \"Lovely to look at but about as intelligent as the asteroid that serves as the movie's antagonist, \"Armageddon\" slickly sums up the cinematic legacies of producer Jerry Bruckheimer and director Michael Bay.\" Metacritic\u00a0gave the film a\u00a0weighted average\u00a0score of 42 out of 100, based on 23 critics, indicating \"mixed or average\" reviews. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of \"A\u2212\" on an A+ to F scale.\nA rough assemblage of footage from the film was shown in the marketplace at the 1998 Cannes Film Festival in May. The footage reportedly generated unintentional laughs from journalists who viewed it.\nThe film is on the list of Roger Ebert's most hated films. In his original review, Ebert gave the film 1 star and stated, \"The movie is an assault on the eyes, the ears, the brain, common sense and the human desire to be entertained\". On \"At the Movies\", Ebert gave it a Thumbs Down. However, his co-host Gene Siskel gave it a Thumbs Up, commenting on the noise and intensity of the film, but also stating that he found the film to be amusing. Ebert went on to name \"Armageddon\" as the worst film of 1998 (though he was originally considering \"Spice World\"). Janet Maslin of \"The New York Times\" said, \"A real movie about courage in space is \"Apollo 13\", in which fear and sacrifice have meaning. This jingoistic, overblown spectacle is about whistling in the dark.\" Todd McCarthy of \"Variety\" also gave the film a negative review, noting Michael Bay's rapid cutting style: \"Much of the confusion, as well as the lack of dramatic rhythm or character development, results directly from Bay's cutting style, which resembles a machine gun stuck in the firing position for 2&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 hours.\"\nIn April 2013, in a \"Miami Herald\" interview to promote \"Pain &amp; Gain\", Bay was quoted as having said:\u2026We had to do the whole movie in 16 weeks. It was a massive undertaking. That was not fair to the movie. I would redo the entire third act if I could. But the studio literally took the movie away from us. It was terrible. My visual effects supervisor had a nervous breakdown, so I had to be in charge of that. I called James Cameron and asked \"What do you do when you're doing all the effects yourself?\" But the movie did fine.Some time after the article was published, Bay changed his stance, claiming that his apology only related to the editing of the film, not the whole film, and accused the writer of the article for taking his words out of context. The author of the article, \"Miami Herald\" writer Rene Rodriguez, claimed: \"NBC asked me for a response, and I played them the tape. I didn't misquote anyone. All the sites that picked up the story did.\"\nScientific accuracy.\nIn an interview with \"Entertainment Weekly\", Bay admitted that the film's central premise \"that NASA could actually do something in a situation like this\" was unrealistic. Additionally, the largest known potentially hazardous asteroid (PHA) is (53319) 1999 JM8, which is only in diameter, while the asteroid in the movie is described as being \"the size of Texas\". Near the end of the credits, there is a disclaimer stating, \"The National Aeronautics and Space Administration's cooperation and assistance does not reflect an endorsement of the contents of the film or the treatment of the characters depicted therein.\" Astronomers would subsequently note that \"Deep Impact\" was more scientifically accurate.\nThe infeasibility of the H-bomb approach was published by four physics postdocs in 2011 and then reported by \"The Daily Telegraph\" in 2012:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A mathematical analysis of the situation found that for Willis's approach to be effective, he would need to be in possession of an H-bomb a billion times stronger than the Soviet Union's \"Big Ivan\", the biggest ever detonated on Earth. Using estimates of the asteroid's size, density, speed and distance from Earth based on information in the film, the postgraduate students from Leicester University found that to split the asteroid in two, with both pieces clearing Earth, would require 800\u00a0trillion terajoules of energy. In contrast, the total energy output of \"Big Ivan\", which was tested by the Soviet Union in 1961, was only 418,000 terajoules.\nIn the commentary track, Ben Affleck says he \"asked Michael why it was easier to train oil drillers to become astronauts than it was to train astronauts to become oil drillers, and he told me to shut the fuck up, so that was the end of that talk.\"\nNeil deGrasse Tyson said on the October 2, 2023 episode of \"The Late Show with Stephen Colbert\" that, until the release of the 2022 film \"Moonfall\", \"Armageddon\" was the movie which violated more laws of physics per minute than any other movie ever.\nOther media.\nMerchandising.\nRevell and Monogram released two model kits inspired by the film's spacecraft and the Armadillos, in 1998. The first one, \"Space Shuttle with Armadillo drilling unit\", included an X-71, a small, rough Armadillo and a pedestal. The second one, \"Russian Space Center\", included the \"Mir\", with the docking adapter seen in the film, and another pedestal.\nIn 2011, Fantastic Plastic released another X-71 kit, the \"X-71 Super Shuttle\", the goal of which was to be more accurate than the Revell/Monogram kit.\nTheme park attraction.\nArmageddon \u2013 Les Effets Speciaux was an attraction based on \"Armageddon\" at Walt Disney Studios Park located at Disneyland Paris. It opened in time for the park's premiere on March 16, 2002, being a debut attraction. The attraction simulated the scene in the movie in which the Russian Space Station is destroyed. Michael Clarke Duncan (\"Bear\" in the film) was featured in the pre-show.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52392", "revid": "6455386", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52392", "title": "Prince Maximilian of Baden", "text": "Chancellor of Germany in 1918\nMaximilian, Margrave of Baden (\"Maximilian Alexander Friedrich Wilhelm\"; 10 July 1867 \u2013 6 November 1929), also known as Max von Baden, was a German prince, general, and politician. He was heir presumptive to the throne of the Grand Duchy of Baden, and in October and November 1918 briefly served as the last chancellor of the German Empire and minister-president of Prussia. He sued for peace on Germany's behalf at the end of World War I based on U.S. President Woodrow Wilson's Fourteen Points and took steps towards transforming the government into a parliamentary system. As the German Revolution of 1918\u20131919 spread, he handed over the office of chancellor to SPD Chairman Friedrich Ebert and unilaterally proclaimed the abdication of Emperor Wilhelm II. Both events took place on 9 November 1918, marking the beginning of the Weimar Republic.\nEarly life.\nBorn in Baden-Baden on 10 July 1867, Maximilian was a member of the House of Baden, the son of Prince Wilhelm Max (1829\u20131897), third son of Grand Duke Leopold (1790\u20131852) and Princess Maria Maximilianovna of Leuchtenberg (1841\u20131914), a granddaughter of Eug\u00e8ne de Beauharnais. He was named after his maternal grandfather, Maximilian de Beauharnais, and bore a resemblance to his cousin, Emperor Napoleon III.\nMax received a humanistic education at a \"Gymnasium\" secondary school and studied law and cameralism at the Leipzig University. Upon the order of Queen Victoria, Prince Max was brought to Darmstadt in the Grand Duchy of Hesse and by Rhine as a suitor for Victoria's granddaughter, Alix of Hesse-Darmstadt. Alix was the daughter of Victoria's late daughter, Princess Alice, and Louis IV, Grand Duke of Hesse. Alix quickly rejected Prince Max, as she was in love with Nicholas II, the future Tsar of Russia. Max von Baden was homosexual and even listed on an according list of the Berlin criminal police as a young officer, however in 1900 he decided for dynastic reasons to marry Princess Marie Louise of Hanover and Cumberland. So did the future King Gustaf V of Sweden who married Max's cousin Victoria of Baden.\nEarly military and political career.\nAfter finishing his studies, he trained as an officer of the Prussian Army. Following the death of his uncle Grand Duke Frederick I of Baden in 1907, he became heir to the grand-ducal throne of his cousin Frederick II, whose marriage remained childless. He also became president of the \"Erste Badische Kammer\" (the upper house of the parliament of Baden). In 1911, Max applied for a military discharge with the rank of a \"Generalmajor\" (Major general).\nWorld War I.\nUpon the outbreak of World War I in 1914, he served as a general staff officer at the XIV Corps of the German Army as the representative of the Grand Duke (XIV Corps included the troops from Baden). Shortly afterwards, however, he retired from his position (\"General der Kavallerie \u00e0 la suite\") as he was dissatisfied with his role in the military and was suffering from ill health.\nIn October 1914, he became honorary president of the Baden section of the German Red Cross, thus beginning his work for prisoners-of-war inside and outside Germany in which he made use of his family connections to the Russian and Swedish courts as well as his connections to Switzerland. In 1916, he became honorary president of the German-American support union for prisoners of war within the YMCA world alliance.\nDue to his liberal stance he came into conflict with the policies of the \"Oberste Heeresleitung\" (OHL \u2013 Supreme Army Command) supreme command under Paul von Hindenburg and Erich Ludendorff. He openly spoke against the resumption of the unrestricted submarine warfare in 1917, which provoked the declaration of war by the United States Congress on 6 April.\nHis activity in the interests of prisoners of war, as well as his tolerant, easy-going character gave him a reputation as an urbane personality who kept his distance from the extremes of nationalism and official war enthusiasm in evidence elsewhere at the time. Since he was almost unknown to the public, it was mainly due to Kurt Hahn, who served from spring 1917 in the military office of the Foreign Ministry, that he was later considered for the position of chancellor. Hahn maintained close links with Secretary of State Wilhelm Solf and several Reichstag deputies like Eduard David (SPD) and Conrad Hau\u00dfmann (FVP). David pushed for Max to be appointed Chancellor in July 1917, after the fall of Chancellor Bethmann Hollweg. Max then put himself forward for the position in early September 1918, pointing out his links to the social democrats, but Emperor Wilhelm II turned him down.\nChancellor.\nAppointment.\nAfter the \"Oberste Heeresleitung\" (OHL) told the government in late September 1918 that the German front was about to collapse and asked for immediate negotiation of an armistice, the cabinet of Chancellor Georg von Hertling resigned on 30 September 1918. Hertling, after consulting Vice-Chancellor Friedrich von Payer (FVP), suggested Prince Max of Baden as his successor to the emperor. However, it took the additional support of Hau\u00dfmann, \"Oberst\" Johannes \"Hans\" von Haeften and Ludendorff himself to have Wilhelm II appoint Max as Imperial Chancellor of Germany and Minister President of Prussia.\nMax was to head a new government, based on the majority parties of the Reichstag (SPD, Centre Party and FVP). When Max arrived in Berlin on 1 October, he had no idea that he would be asked to approach the Allies about an armistice. Horrified, Max fought against the plan. Moreover, he also admitted openly that he was no politician, and that he did not think additional steps towards \"parliamentarisation\" and democratisation feasible, as long as the war continued. Consequently, he did not favour a liberal reform of the constitution. However, Emperor Wilhelm II convinced him to take the post, and appointed him on 3 October 1918. The message asking for an armistice went out only on 4 October, not as originally planned on 1 October, hopefully to be accepted by US President Woodrow Wilson.\nIn office.\nAlthough Max had serious reservations about the conditions under which the OHL was willing to conduct negotiations and tried to interpret Wilson's Fourteen Points in a way most favourable to the German position, he accepted the charge. He appointed a government that for the first time included representatives of the largest party in the Reichstag, the Social Democratic Party of Germany, as state secretaries (equivalent to ministers in other monarchies): Philipp Scheidemann and Gustav Bauer. This was following up on an idea of Ludendorff's and former Foreign Secretary Paul von Hintze's (as the representative of the Hertling cabinet) who had agreed on 29 September that the request for an armistice must not come from the old regime, but from one based on the majority parties. The official reason for appointing a government based on a parliamentary majority was to make it harder for the American president to refuse a peace offer. The need to convince Wilson was also the driving factor behind the move towards \"parliamentarisation\" that was to make the Chancellor and his government answerable to the Reichstag, as they had not been under the Empire so far. Ludendorff, however, was more interested in shifting the blame for the lost war to the politicians and to the Reichstag parties.\nThe Allies were cautious, distrusting Max as a member of a ruling family of Germany. These doubts were intensified by the publication of a personal letter Max had written to Prince Alexander zu Hohenlohe-Schillingsf\u00fcrst in early 1918, in which he had expressed criticism of \"parliamentarisation\" and his opposition to the \"Friedensresolution\" of the Reichstag of July 1917, when a majority had demanded a negotiated peace rather than a peace by victory. President Wilson reacted with reserve to the German initiative and took his time to agree to the request for an armistice, sending three diplomatic notes between 8 October and 23 October 1918. When Ludendorff changed his mind about the armistice and suddenly advocated continued fighting, Max opposed him in a cabinet meeting on 17 October 1918. On 24 October, Ludendorff issued an army order that called Wilson's third note \"unacceptable\" and called on the troops to fight on. On 25 October, Hindenburg and Ludendorff then ignored explicit instructions by the Chancellor and travelled to Berlin. Max asked for Ludendorff to be dismissed; Wilhelm II agreed. On 26 October, the emperor told Ludendorff that he had lost his trust. Ludendorff offered his resignation and Wilhelm II accepted.\nWhile trying to move towards an armistice, Max, advised closely by Hahn (who also wrote his speeches), Hau\u00dfmann and Walter Simons, worked with the representatives of the majority parties in his cabinet (Scheidemann and Bauer for the SPD, Matthias Erzberger, Karl Trimborn and Adolf Gr\u00f6ber for the Centre Party, Payer and, after 14 October, Hau\u00dfmann for the FVP). Although some of the initiatives were a result of the notes sent by Wilson, they were also in line with the parties' manifestos: making the Chancellor, his government and the Prussian Minister of War answerable to parliament (\"Reichstag\" and \"Preu\u00dfischer Landtag\"), introducing a more democratic voting system in the place of the \"Dreiklassenwahlrecht\" (Three-class franchise) in Prussia, the replacement of the Governor of Alsace-Lorraine with the Mayor of Stra\u00dfburg, appointing a local deputy from the Centre Party as Secretary of State for Alsace-Lorraine and some other adjustments in government personnel.\nPushed by the social democrats, the government passed a widespread amnesty, under which political prisoners like Karl Liebknecht were released. Under Max von Baden, the bureaucracy, military and political leadership of the old Empire began a cooperation with the leaders of the majority parties and with the individual states of the empire. This cooperation was to have a significant impact on later events during the revolution.\nIn late October, the Imperial constitution was amended to transform the empire into a parliamentary monarchy. The chancellor was now responsible to the Reichstag rather than the emperor. However, Wilson's third note seemed to imply that negotiations for an armistice would be dependent on the abdication of Wilhelm II. Max and his government now feared that a military collapse and a socialist revolution at home were becoming likelier with every day that went by. In fact, the government's efforts to secure an armistice were interrupted by the Kiel mutiny, which began with events at Wilhelmshaven on 30 October and the outbreak of revolution in Germany in early November. On 1 November, Max wrote to all the ruling Princes of Germany, asking them whether they would approve of an abdication by the Emperor. On 6 November, the Chancellor sent Erzberger to conduct the negotiations with the Allies. Max, seriously ill with Spanish influenza, urged Wilhelm II to abdicate. The Emperor, who had fled from revolutionary Berlin to the Spa headquarters of the OHL in Belgium, despite similar advice by Hindenburg and Ludendorff's successor Wilhelm Groener of the OHL, was willing to consider abdication only as German Emperor, not as King of Prussia. This was not possible under the imperial constitution as it stood. Article 11 defined the empire as a confederation of states under the permanent presidency of the king of Prussia. Thus, the imperial crown was tied to the Prussian crown, and Wilhelm could not renounce one crown without renouncing the other.\nRevolution and resignation.\nOn 7 November, Max met with Friedrich Ebert, leader of the SPD, and discussed his plan to go to Spa and convince Wilhelm II to abdicate. He considered installing Prince Eitel Friedrich, Wilhelm's second son, as regent; however, the outbreak of the revolution in Berlin prevented Max from implementing his plan. Ebert decided that to keep control of the socialist uprising the Emperor must abdicate quickly and a new government was required. As the masses gathered in Berlin, at noon on 9 November 1918, Maximilian went ahead and unilaterally announced Wilhelm's abdication of both the imperial and Prussian crowns, as well as the renunciation of Crown Prince Wilhelm.\nShortly thereafter, Ebert appeared in the Reichskanzlei and demanded that the government be handed over to him and the SPD, as that was the only way to keep up law and order. In an unconstitutional move, Max resigned and appointed Ebert as his successor. On the same day, Philipp Scheidemann spontaneously proclaimed Germany a republic in order to placate the masses and prevent a socialist revolution. When Maximilian later visited Ebert to say goodbye before leaving Berlin, Ebert \u2013 who urgently wanted to keep up the old order, improving it through parliamentary rule, and head a legitimate, not a revolutionary government \u2013 asked him to stay on as regent (\"Reichsverweser\"). Maximilian refused and, turning his back on politics for good, departed for Baden.\nAlthough events had overtaken him during his tenure at the Reichskanzlei and he was not considered a strong Chancellor, Max is seen today as having played a vital role in enabling the transition from the old regime to a democratic government based on the majority parties and the Reichstag. This made the government of Ebert that emerged from the November revolution acceptable to some conservative forces in the bureaucracy and military, which was one of Ebert's strongest aims. They were thus willing to ally themselves with him against the more radical demands by the revolutionaries on the far-left.\nLater life.\nMaximilian spent the rest of his life in retirement. He rejected a mandate to the 1919 Weimar National Assembly, offered to him by the German Democratic politician Max Weber. In 1920, together with Kurt Hahn, he established the Schule Schloss Salem boarding school, which was intended to help educate a new German intellectual elite.\nMax also published a number of books, assisted by Hahn: \"V\u00f6lkerbund und Rechtsfriede\" (1919), \"Die moralische Offensive\" (1921) and \"Erinnerungen und Dokumente\" (1927).\nIn 1928, following the death of Grand Duke Frederick II, who had been deposed in November 1918 when the German monarchies were abolished, Maximilian became head of the House of Z\u00e4hringen, assuming the dynasty's historical title of \"Margrave of Baden\". He died at Salem on 6 November the following year.\nChildren.\nMaximilian was married to Princess Marie Louise of Hanover and Cumberland, eldest daughter of Ernest Augustus, Crown Prince of Hanover, and Princess Thyra of Denmark, on 10 July 1900 in Gmunden, Austria-Hungary. The couple had two children:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52395", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52395", "title": "Martha Argerich", "text": "Argentine pianist (born 1941)\nMartha Argerich (Argentinian ; ; born 5 June 1941) is an Argentine classical concert pianist. Argerich is known for her interpretations of the works by composers such as Chopin, Ravel, Liszt, Prokofiev, and Schumann.\nBorn and raised in Buenos Aires, Argerich gave her debut concert at the age of eight before receiving further piano training in Europe. At sixteen, she won both the Geneva International Music Competition and the Ferruccio Busoni International Competition. After a period of artistic uncertainty, she returned to performing with encouragement from Anny Askenase and went on to win the International Chopin Piano Competition in 1965, launching her international career. Since the 1980s, she has prioritized collaborative performance, appearing frequently with artists including Stephen Kovacevich, Mischa Maisky, and Gidon Kremer.\nShe has held leadership roles in institutions such as the International Piano Academy Lake Como and the Argerich Music Festival in Beppu, Japan. Argerich gained early recognition for her technical skills and expressive interpretations, and while she initially performed solo recitals, she later focused on concerto and chamber music due to discomfort with solo performance. A prominent advocate for human rights, she has supported political causes and fellow musicians publicly. Known for her aversion to publicity, she holds citizenship in Argentina and Switzerland and has lived in various countries throughout her career.\nEarly life and education.\nArgerich was born in Buenos Aires. Her paternal ancestors were from Catalonia, based in Buenos Aires since the 18th century. Her maternal grandparents were Jewish immigrants from the Russian Empire, who settled in Colonia Villa Clara in Argentina's Entre R\u00edos Province, one of the colonies established by Baron de Hirsch and the Jewish Colonization Association. The provenance of the name \"Argerich\" is Catalonia.\nA precocious child, Argerich began kindergarten at the age of two years and eight months, where she was the youngest child. A five-year-old boy, who was a friend, teased her that she would not be able to play the piano, and Argerich responded by playing perfectly, by ear, a piece their teacher played them. The teacher immediately called the mother and they \"started making a fuss.\" Argerich started learning the piano at the age of three. At the age of five, she moved to teacher Vincenzo Scaramuzza, who stressed to her the importance of lyricism and feeling. Argerich gave her debut concert in 1949 at the age of eight. The family moved to Europe in 1955, where Argerich studied with Friedrich Gulda in Austria, whom Argerich describes as one of her major influences. She later studied with Stefan Askenase and Maria Curcio. Argerich also seized opportunities for brief periods of coaching with Madeleine Lipatti (widow of Dinu Lipatti), Abbey Simon, and Nikita Magaloff. In 1957, at sixteen, she won both the Geneva International Music Competition and the Ferruccio Busoni International Competition within three weeks of each other.\nFollowing this success, Argerich had a personal and artistic crisis. After an abortive attempt to study with the Italian pianist Arturo Benedetti Michelangeli, who gave her only four lessons in the space of 18 months, she went to New York City, hoping but failing to meet and study with her idol, Vladimir Horowitz. She did not play the piano for three years and considered giving it up to train as a secretary or doctor. She credited Anny Askenase, the wife of Stefan Askenase, with encouraging her to return to the piano.\nProfessional career.\nArgerich performed her debut concert at the age of eight, playing Mozart's Piano Concerto No. 20 in D minor and Beethoven's Piano Concerto No. 1 in C major. She gained international prominence when she won the VII International Chopin Piano Competition in Warsaw in 1965, at age 24. In that same year, she debuted in the United States in Lincoln Center's Great Performers Series. In 1960, she had made her first commercial recording, which included works by Chopin, Brahms, Ravel, Prokofiev, and Liszt; it received critical acclaim upon its release in 1961. She has since recorded works by composers including Ginastera, Rachmaninoff and Schumann, to whom she describes feeling a particular connection.\nArgerich has often remarked in interviews of feeling \"lonely\" on stage during solo performances. Since the 1980s, she has staged few solo performances, concentrating instead on concertos and, in particular, chamber music, and collaborating with instrumentalists in sonatas.\nArgerich has also promoted younger pianists, both through her annual festival and through her appearances as a member of the jury at international competitions. The pianist Ivo Pogoreli\u0107 was thrust into the musical spotlight partly as a result of Argerich's actions: after he was eliminated in the third round of the 1980 International Chopin Piano Competition in Warsaw, Argerich proclaimed him a genius and left the jury in protest. According to \u0110\u1eb7ng Th\u00e1i S\u01a1n, the eventual winner, Argerich made the \"beautiful gesture\" of sending a public telegram to the judging committee to congratulate him, after learning the final results. She has supported several artists, including Gabriela Montero, Mauricio Vallina, Sergio Tiempo, Roberto Carnevale, Gabriele Baldocci, and Christopher Falzone.\nArgerich is the president of the International Piano Academy Lake Como and performs annually at the Lugano Festival. She has also created and been a General Director of the Argerich Music Festival and Encounter in Beppu, Japan, since 1996.\nHer aversion to the press and publicity has resulted in her remaining out of the limelight for most of her career. Nevertheless, she has been described as one of the greatest contemporary pianists. Her performance of Liszt's First Piano Concerto conducted by Daniel Barenboim at The Proms 2016 prompted this review in \"The Guardian\": \"It was an unforgettable performance. Argerich celebrated her 75th birthday in June this year, but that news doesn't seem to have reached her fingers. Her playing is still as dazzling, as frighteningly precise, as it has always been; her ability to spin gossamer threads of melody as matchless as ever. This was unmistakably and unashamedly Liszt in the grand manner, a bit old-fashioned and sometimes even a bit vulgar at times, but in this of all concertos, with Barenboim and the orchestra following each twist and turn, every little quickening and moment of expressive reflection, it seemed entirely appropriate\". Argerich returned to the Proms at the age of 78 in 2019 to perform Tchaikovsky's First Piano Concerto under the baton of Barenboim, a performance described as \"mesmerizing\".\nPersonal life.\nArgerich's first marriage was to composer-conductor Robert Chen (), with whom she had her first child (violinist Lyda Chen-Argerich). The marriage was dissolved after several months, in 1964. From 1969 to 1973, Argerich was married to Swiss conductor Charles Dutoit, with whom she had her second daughter, Annie Dutoit. Although they separated in 1973, Argerich and Dutoit continued to collaborate. In the 1970s, Argerich had a relationship with American pianist Stephen Kovacevich, with whom she had her third daughter, St\u00e9phanie. Although they made few recordings together during their relationship, Argerich and Kovacevich still frequently perform together. St\u00e9phanie Argerich explains in her film \"Argerich \u2013 Bloody Daughter\" that as her parents were not married, they tossed a coin to name their daughter, for which Argerich won the toss. Argerich brought her children up in a manner described by Annie Dutoit as \"bohemian\"; Argerich preferred her children to stay at home rather than go to school and regularly hosted young musicians in her home and practiced through the night.\nArgerich is a polyglot and can speak Spanish, French, Italian, German, English, and Portuguese. Although her mother tongue is Spanish, she brought her children up speaking French. She has lived in Argentina, Belgium, Switzerland, and France, and holds citizenship for Switzerland and Argentina.\nArgerich has never been connected to any political party. However, she stated in a 2019 interview that she is strongly against capital punishment and admires the French politician Robert Badinter, who enacted the abolition of the death penalty in France. Her friend, the pianist Daniel Barenboim, stated that when he contacted the Argentine president Mauricio Macri in 2016, asking him to accept Syrian refugees into the country, it was also on behalf of Argerich. Argerich advocated for a Russian pianist who was imprisoned after criticizing Vladimir Putin, and paid \"tribute to an Israeli pianist being held hostage in Gaza\".\nIn 1990, Argerich was diagnosed with malignant melanoma. After treatment, the cancer went into remission, but it recurred in 1995 and metastasized to her lungs, pancreas, liver, brain, and lymph nodes. Following an experimental treatment at the John Wayne Cancer Institute in Santa Monica pioneered by oncologist Donald Morton, Argerich's cancer went into remission again. In gratitude, Argerich performed a recital at Carnegie Hall benefiting the institute. As of 2023[ [update]], Argerich remains cancer-free. In August 2023 she was forced to cancel several concerts in Germany and Switzerland due to an undisclosed illness.\nMedia.\nIn 2002, director Georges Gachot released \"Martha Argerich: Conversation nocturne\" \"(Martha Argerich: Evening Talks)\", a documentary film about Argerich. St\u00e9phanie Argerich Blagojevic, using film she had shot since childhood, directed a 2012 documentary film about her mother, titled \"Bloody Daughter\".\nIn September 2025, an interview with Argerich appeared on the YouTube podcast \"fortissimo\", hosted by young Swiss pianists Lucas Chiche and David Chen Argerich - the latter being Argerich's grandson.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52396", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52396", "title": "Public holiday", "text": "General holiday established by law\nA public holiday, national holiday, federal holiday, statutory holiday, bank holiday or legal holiday is a holiday generally established by law and is usually a non-working day during the year.\nTypes.\nCivic holiday.\nA \"civic holiday\", also known as a \"civil holiday\" or \"work holiday\", is a day that is legally recognized and celebrated as a holiday in a particular sovereign state or jurisdictional subdivision of such, e.g., a state or a province. It is usually a day that the legislature, parliament, congress or sovereign has declared by statute, edict or decree as a non-working day when the official arms of government such as the court system are closed. In federal states there may also be different holidays for the constituent states or provinces, as in the United States, where holidays that were established by the federal government are called \"federal holidays\". Such days may or may not be counted in calculating the statute of limitations in legal actions and are usually days when non-custodial parents are given alternating visitation or access to their children from a prior marriage or relationship according to a parenting schedule.\nThe term may also be used to distinguish between days that may be celebrated as secular holidays rather than \"religious holidays\" such as the celebration of New Year's Day on January 1 (Gregorian calendar) and January 14 (Julian Calendar) in certain eastern Orthodox Christian countries such as Russia.\nBank holiday.\nIn the United Kingdom, \"bank holidays\" are days established as public holidays in statute law. In England and Wales, Good Friday and Christmas Day are known as common law holidays, as they have been celebrated by custom since time immemorial. Bank holidays were introduced in the late 19th century to extend the labour rights citizens have on common law holidays to four additional days.\nIn Ireland, public holidays are sometimes colloquially referred to as \"bank holidays\".\nImpacts.\nThe major social function of public holidays is the co-ordination of leisure time. This co-ordination has costs, such as congestion and overcrowding (in leisure facilities, on transport systems) and benefits (easier for people to arrange social occasions).\nPublic holidays constitute an important part of nation building and become important symbols of the nation. They can build and legitimise the nation and are intended to foster national unity, social cohesion and popular identification. They provide national governments with annual opportunities to reinforce the status of the nation. Sabine Marschall argues that public holidays can be regarded as sites of memory, which preserve particular representations of historical events and particular national or public heroes.\nBy country.\nIn some countries, there are national laws that make some or all public holidays paid holidays, and in other countries, there are no such laws, though many firms provide days off as paid or unpaid holidays.\nThey vary by country and may vary by year. With 36 days a year, Nepal is the country with the highest number of public holidays but it observes six working days a week. India ranks second with 21 national holidays, followed by Colombia and the Philippines at 18 each. Likewise, Japan, China and Hong Kong enjoy 17 public breaks a year. Some countries (e.g. Cambodia) with a longer, six-day workweek, have more holidays (28) to compensate.\nItaly.\nPublic holidays in Italy are established by the Italian parliament and, with the exception of city or community patronal days, apply nationwide. These include a mix of national, religious and local observances. As for Whit Monday, there is an exception for South Tyrol. In Italy there are also State commemoration days, which are not public holidays.\nNew Zealand.\nIn New Zealand, a national law sets 12 paid public holidays. If a worker works on a public holiday, they are to be paid 1.5 times their regular rate of pay and be given another alternate day off.\nSouth Africa.\nSabie Marschall argues that the revised set of public holidays in post-Apartheid South Africa attempts to produce and celebrate a particular national identity in line with the political goal of the rainbow nation.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, there is no national law requiring that employers pay employees who do not work on public holidays (although the U.S. states of Rhode Island and Massachusetts have paid holiday laws).\nControversial holidays.\nColumbus Day.\nSome public holidays are controversial. For example, in the United States a federal holiday commemorates explorer Christopher Columbus, who is said to have discovered the Americas by Europeans. This has led to protests at Columbus Day parades and calls for the public holiday to be changed. Some states have adopted the day as Indigenous People's Day rather than Columbus Day.\nAustralia Day.\nSimilarly, Australia Day commemorates the day when the First Fleet first arrived in the country on 26 January 1788 at Sydney Cove. This has also led to protests, with some Australians seeing the date as a symbol of the beginning of European oppression towards the indigenous population. The holiday has since garnered the nickname 'Invasion Day'. Although the national date has not been changed, many Australia Day staples, such as citizenship ceremonies and Triple J's Hottest 100, have nonetheless been moved to alternative dates.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52397", "revid": "336266", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52397", "title": "Umtata", "text": ""}
{"id": "52400", "revid": "779224", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52400", "title": "Day of Atonement (disambiguation)", "text": "Day of Atonement may refer to:\nCultural.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "52401", "revid": "43520964", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52401", "title": "Hairstyle", "text": "Style of hair, usually on the human scalp\nA hairstyle, hairdo, haircut, or coiffure refers to the styling of hair, usually on the human head but sometimes on the face or body. The fashioning of hair can be considered an aspect of personal grooming, fashion, and cosmetics, although practical, cultural, and popular considerations also influence some hairstyles.\nThe oldest known depiction of hair styling is hair braiding, which dates back about 30,000 years. Women's hair was often elaborately and carefully dressed in special ways, though it was also frequently kept covered outside the home, especially for married women.\nPrehistory and history.\nPeople's hairstyles are largely determined by the fashions of the culture they live in. Hairstyles are markers and signifiers of social class, age, marital status, racial identification, political beliefs, and attitudes about gender.\nSome people may cover their hair totally or partially for cultural or religious reasons. Notable examples of head covering include women in Islam who wear the hijab, married women in Haredi Judaism who wear the sheitel or tichel, married Himba men who cover their hair except when in mourning, Tuareg men who wear a veil, and men and women in Sikhism who wear the dastar, whether baptized or not, as a symbol of their faith and cultural identity.\nPaleolithic.\nThe oldest known reproduction of hair braiding lies back about 30,000 years: the Venus of Willendorf, now known in academia as the Woman of Willendorf, of a female figurine from the Paleolithic, estimated to have been made between about 28,000 and 25,000 BC. The Venus of Brassempouy counts about 25,000 years old and indisputably shows hairstyling.\nBronze Age.\nIn the Bronze Age, razors were known and in use by some men, but not on a daily basis since the procedure was rather unpleasant and required resharpening of the tool which reduced its endurance.\nAncient history.\nIn ancient civilizations, women's hair was often elaborately and carefully dressed in special ways. Women coloured their hair, curled it, and pinned it up (ponytail) in a variety of ways. For waves and curls, they used wet clay, which they dried in the sun before combing out, or they used a jelly made from quince seeds soaked in water. Additionally, various kinds of curling tongs and curling irons were popular tools for hair styling.\nHairstyles in ancient Korea and Japan were influenced by Chinese hairstyles. For instance, the \"chu'kye\" style worn in Koguryo was similar in style and head placement as the \"chu'kye\" style in China. The hairstyles were characterized by the large topknots on women's heads. Also, hairstyles were used as an expression of beauty, social status, and marital status. For instance, Japanese girls wore a \"mae-gami\" to symbolize the start of their coming-of-age ceremony. Single women in Baekjae put their hair in a long pigtail and married women would braid their hair on both sides of the head. The hairstyles displayed their marital status to those around them.\nRoman Empire and Middle Ages.\nBetween 27 BC and 102 AD, in Imperial Rome, women wore their hair in complicated styles: a mass of curls on top, or in rows of waves, drawn back into ringlets or braids. Eventually noble women's hairstyles grew so complex that they required daily attention from several enslaved people and a stylist in order to be maintained. The hair was often lightened using wood ash, unslaked lime and sodium bicarbonate, or darkened with copper filings, oak-apples or leeches marinated in wine and vinegar. It was augmented by wigs, hairpieces and pads, and held in place by nets, pins, combs and pomade. Under the Byzantine Empire, noblewomen covered most of their hair with silk caps and pearl nets.\nFrom the time of the Roman Empire until the Middle Ages, most women grew their hair as long as it would naturally grow. It was normally styled through cutting, as women's hair was tied up on the head and covered on most occasions when outside the home by using a snood, kerchief or veil; for an adult woman to wear uncovered and loose hair in the street was often restricted to prostitutes. Braiding and tying the hair was common. In the 16th century, women began to wear their hair in extremely ornate styles, often decorated with pearls, precious stones, ribbons, and veils. Women used a technique called \"lacing\" or \"taping,\" in which cords or ribbons were used to bind the hair around their heads. During this period, most of the hair was braided and hidden under wimples, veils or couvrechefs. In the later half of the 15th century and on into the 16th century, a very high hairline on the forehead was considered attractive, and wealthy women frequently plucked out hair at their temples and the napes of their necks, or used depilatory cream to remove it, if it would otherwise be visible at the edges of their hair coverings. Working-class women in this period wore their hair in simple styles.\nEarly modern history.\nMale styles.\nDuring the 15th and 16th centuries, European men wore their hair cropped no longer than shoulder-length, with very fashionable men wearing bangs or fringes. In Italy, it was common for men to dye their hair. In the early 17th century male hairstyles grew longer, with waves or curls being considered desirable in upper-class European men.\nThe male wig was supposedly pioneered by King Louis XIII of France (1601\u20131643) in 1624 when he had prematurely begun to bald. This fashion was largely promoted by his son and successor Louis XIV of France (1638\u20131715) that contributed to its spread in European and European-influenced countries. The beard had been in a long decline and now disappeared among the upper classes.\nPerukes or periwigs for men were introduced into the English-speaking world with other French styles when Charles II was restored to the throne in 1660, following a lengthy exile in France. These wigs were shoulder-length or longer, imitating the long hair that had become fashionable among men since the 1620s. Their use soon became popular in the English court. The London diarist Samuel Pepys recorded the day in 1665 that a barber had shaved his head and that he tried on his new periwig for the first time, but in a year of plague he was uneasy about wearing it:3rd September 1665: Up, and put on my coloured silk suit, very fine, and my new periwig, bought a good while since, but darst not wear it because the plague was in Westminster when I bought it. And it is a wonder what will be the fashion after the plague is done as to periwigs, for nobody will dare to buy any hair for fear of the infection? That it had been cut off the heads of people dead of the plague.\nLate 17th-century wigs were very long and wavy (see George I below), but became shorter in the mid-18th century, by which time they were normally white (George II). A very common style had a single stiff curl running round the head at the end of the hair. By the late 18th century the natural hair was often powdered to achieve the impression of a short wig, tied into a small tail or \"queue\" behind (George III).\nShort hair for fashionable men was a product of the Neoclassical movement. Classically inspired male hair styles included the Bedford Crop, arguably the precursor of most plain modern male styles, which was invented by the radical politician Francis Russell, 5th Duke of Bedford as a protest against a tax on hair powder; he encouraged his friends to adopt it by betting them they would not. Another influential style (or group of styles) was named by the French \"coiffure \u00e0 la Titus\" after Titus Junius Brutus (not in fact the Roman Emperor Titus as often assumed), with hair short and layered but somewhat piled up on the crown, often with restrained quiffs or locks hanging down; variants are familiar from the hair of both Napoleon and George IV. The style was supposed to have been introduced by the actor Fran\u00e7ois-Joseph Talma, who upstaged his wigged co-actors when appearing in productions of works such as Voltaire's \"Brutus\" (about Lucius Junius Brutus, who orders the execution of his son Titus). In 1799, a Parisian fashion magazine reported that even bald men were adopting Titus wigs, and the style was also worn by women, the \"Journal de Paris\" reporting in 1802 that \"more than half of elegant women were wearing their hair or wig \"\u00e0 la Titus\"\".\nIn the early 19th century the male beard, and also moustaches and sideburns, made a strong reappearance, associated with the Romantic movement, and all remained very common until the 1890s, after which younger men ceased to wear them, with World War I, when the majority of men in many countries saw military service, finally despatching the full beard except for older men retaining the styles of their youth, and those affecting a Bohemian look. The short military-style moustache remained popular.\nFemale styles.\nFrom the 16th to the 19th century, European women's hair became more visible while their hair coverings grew smaller, with both becoming more elaborate, and with hairstyles beginning to include ornamentation such as flowers, ostrich plumes, ropes of pearls, jewels, ribbons and small crafted objects such as replicas of ships and windmills. Bound hair was felt to be symbolic of propriety: loosening one's hair was considered immodest and sexual, and sometimes was felt to have supernatural connotations. Red hair was popular, particularly in England during the reign of the red-haired Elizabeth I, and women and aristocratic men used borax, saltpeter, saffron and sulfur powder to dye their hair red, making themselves nauseated and giving themselves headaches and nosebleeds. During this period in Spain and Latin cultures, women wore lace mantillas, often worn over a high comb, and in Buenos Aires, there developed a fashion for extremely large tortoise-shell hair combs called peinet\u00f3n, which could measure up to three feet in height and width, and which are said by historians to have reflected the growing influence of France, rather than Spain, upon Argentinians.\nIn the middle of the 18th century the pouf style developed, with women creating volume in the hair at the front of the head, usually with a pad underneath to lift it higher, and ornamented the back with seashells, pearls or gemstones. In 1750, women began dressing their hair with perfumed pomade and powdering it white. Just before World War I, some women began wearing silk turbans over their hair.\nJapan.\nIn the early 1870s, in a shift that historians attribute to the influence of the West, Japanese men began cutting their hair into styles known as or (which roughly means \"random cropping\"). During this period, Japanese women were still wearing traditional hairstyles held up with combs, pins, and sticks crafted from tortoise, metal, wood and other materials, but in the middle 1880s, upper-class Japanese women began pushing back their hair in the Western style (known as ), or adopting Westernized versions of traditional Japanese hairstyles (these were called , or literally, \"soir\u00e9e chignon\").\nInter-war years.\nDuring the First World War, women around the world started to shift to shorter hairstyles that were easier to manage. After WWI women started for to bob, shingle and crop their hair, often covering it with small head-hugging cloche hats. In Korea, the bob was called . In Europe and the US the bob was seen as a step towards women's liberation. Women began marcelling their hair, creating deep waves in it using heated scissor irons. Durable permanent waving became popular also in this period: it was an expensive, uncomfortable and time-consuming process, in which the hair was put in curlers and inserted into a steam or dry heat machine. During the 1930s women began to wear their hair slightly longer, in pageboys, bobs or waves and curls.\nDuring the 1920s and 1930s, Japanese women began wearing their hair in a style called (literally, \"ear hiding\"), in which hair was pulled back to cover the ears and tied into a bun at the nape of the neck. Waved or curled hair became increasingly popular for Japanese women throughout this period, and permanent waves, though controversial, were extremely popular. Bobbed hair also became more popular for Japanese women, mainly among actresses and , or \"cut-hair girls,\" young Japanese women who followed Westernized fashions and lifestyles in the 1920s.\nDuring this period, Western men began to wear their hair in ways popularized by movie stars such as Douglas Fairbanks Jr. and Rudolph Valentino. Men wore their hair short, and either parted on the side or in the middle, or combed straight back, and used pomade, creams and tonics to keep their hair in place. At the beginning of the Second World War and for some time afterwards, men's haircuts grew shorter, mimicking the military crewcut.\nPost-war years.\nAfter the war, women started to wear their hair in softer, more natural styles. In the early 1950s women's hair was generally curled and worn in a variety of styles and lengths. In the later 1950s, high bouffant and beehive styles, sometimes nicknamed B-52s for their similarity to the bulbous noses of the B-52 Stratofortress bomber, became popular. During this period many women washed and set their hair only once a week, and kept it in place by wearing curlers every night and reteasing and respraying it every morning. In the 1960s, many women began to wear their hair in short modern cuts such as the pixie cut, while in the 1970s, hair tended to be longer and looser. In both the 1960s and 1970s many men and women wore their hair very long and straight. Long, natural hair was also worn due to the emergence of counterculture movements such as that of the hippies who used such styles to symbolize their opposition to the norm. From the 1950s onward, various groups have pushed the norms for hairstyles as symbols of their unique ideology or identity. The Skinheads, who opposed the hippies, shaved off much of their hair. The punks of the later 1970s, meanwhile, wanted to cause outrage, styling their hair in unique ways (such as the mohawk) and dyeing it in unnatural shades. Women straightened their hair through chemical straightening processes, by ironing their hair at home with a clothes iron, or by rolling it up with large empty soda cans while wet.\nSince the 1960s and 1970s, women have worn their hair in a wide variety of styles. Part of this came from the \"Black is Beautiful\" movement which promoted the natural beauty of the Black population as opposed to what some considered a Eurocentric model. Some critics argue that straightening or relaxing African hair is trying to conform to a white standard of beauty. However, there are those that disagree with this belief. Nevertheless, Malcolm X advised against Black people straightening their hair for such reasons. Black hair then became not only an act of beauty but an act of revolution. The Afro, specifically, was both fashionable and political in the 1960s onward. However, the Afro, or \"the natural\", as it was first called, was not originally a political choice, but a style favored by both artistic and intellectual Black communities in the 1940s and 1950s.\nContemporary hairstyles.\nThe challenges to social norms for hair in the 1960s onward alongside the more accessible hair dyes allowed for a variation in hairstyles to emerge. In the contemporary world, women and men can choose from a broad range of hairstyles. But they are still expected to wear their hair in ways that conform to gender norms: in much of the world, men with long hair and women whose hair does not appear carefully groomed may face various forms of discrimination, including harassment, social shaming or workplace discrimination. This is somewhat less true of African-American men, who wear their hair in a variety of styles that overlap with those of African-American women, including box braids and cornrows fastened with rubber bands and dreadlocks.\nIn the 1980s, women pulled back their hair with scrunchies, stretchy ponytail holders made from cloth over fabric bands. Women also often wear glittery ornaments today, as well as claw-style barrettes used to secure ponytails and other upswept or partially upswept hairstyles.\nThe 1980s in America also were a time of noted turmoil between hair choices. Tensions arose particularly between hair choices from women of color, and the workplace as noted by court cases such as \"Rogers v. American Airlines\" which upheld employers rights to ban certain hairstyles in the workplace, notably braided hairstyles. Additional instances of USPS, hotel chains, police departments and another industries banning hairstyles common within the Black American community such as braids, colored hair, and dreadlocks from the workplace during this period.\nDefining factors.\nA hairstyle's aesthetic considerations may be determined by many factors, such as the subject's physical attributes and desired self-image and/or the stylist's artistic instincts.\nPhysical factors include natural hair type and growth patterns, face and head shape from various angles, and overall body proportions; medical considerations may also apply. Self-image may be directed toward conforming to mainstream values (military-style crew cuts or current \"fad\" hairstyles such as the Dido flip), identifying with distinctively groomed subgroups (e.g., punk hair), or obeying religious dictates (e.g., Orthodox Jewish have payot, Rastafari have Dreadlocks, Sadhus jatas in India and Nepal, or the Sikh practice of Kesh), though this is highly contextual such that \"mainstream\" look in one setting may be limited to a \"subgroup\" in another.\nA hairstyle is achieved by arranging hair in a certain way, occasionally using combs, a blow-dryer, gel, or other products. The practice of styling hair is often called \"hairdressing\", especially when done as an occupation.\nHairstyling may also include adding accessories (such as headbands or barrettes) to the hair to hold it in place, enhance its ornamental appearance, or partially or fully conceal it with coverings such as a \"kippah\", hijab, tam or turban.\nHairstyling techniques.\nHair dressing may include cuts, weaves, coloring, extensions, perms, permanent relaxers, curling, and any other form of styling or texturing.\nSome of these techniques are described in detail below;\nWashing.\nStylists often wash a subject's hair first, so that the hair is cut while still slightly damp. Compared to dry hair, wet hair can be easier to manage in a cut/style situation because the added weight and surface tension of the water cause the strands to stretch downward and cling together along the hair's length, holding a line and making it easier for the stylist to create a form. It is important to note that this method of cutting hair while wet, may be most suitable (or common) for straight hair types. Curly, kinky and other types of hair textures with considerable volume may benefit from cutting while dry, as the hair is in a more natural state and the hair can be cut evenly.\nCutting.\nHair cutting or hair trimming is intended to create or maintain a specific shape and form. There are ways to trim one's own hair but usually another person is enlisted to perform the process, as it is difficult to maintain symmetry while cutting hair at the back of one's head.\nCutting hair is often done with hair clipper, scissors, and razors. Combs and hair grips are often employed to isolate a section of hair which is then trimmed.\nBlending.\nBlending is a technique used to create a seamless transition between different lengths or textures of hair. This process ensures that there are no harsh lines or visible distinctions where one section of hair ends, and another begins. Stylists typically use thinning shears, razors, or specific scissor techniques to soften the edges of a haircut. Blending is especially important in layered cuts or when merging short and long sections, as it gives the hairstyle a cohesive and natural look.\nBrushing and combing.\nBrushes and combs are used to organize and untangle the hair, encouraging all of the strands to lie in the same direction and removing debris such as lint, dandruff, or hairs that have already shed from their follicles but continue to cling to the other hairs.\nThere are all manner of detangling tools available in a wide variety of price ranges. Combs come in all shapes and sizes and all manner of materials, including plastics, wood, and horn. Similarly, brushes also come in all sizes and shapes, including various paddle shapes. Most benefit from using some form of a wide tooth comb for detangling. Most physicians advise against sharing hair care instruments like combs and clips, to prevent spreading hair conditions like dandruff and head lice.\nThe historical dictum to brush hair with 100 strokes every day is somewhat archaic, dating from a time when hair was washed less frequently; the brushstrokes would spread the scalp's natural oils down through the hair, creating a protective effect. Now, however, this does not apply when the natural oils have been washed off by frequent shampoos. Also, hairbrushes are now usually made with rigid plastic bristles instead of the natural boar's bristles that were once standard; the plastic bristles increase the likelihood of actually injuring the scalp and hair with excessively vigorous brushing. However, traditional brushes with boar's bristles are still commonly used among African Americans and those with coarse or kinky textures to soften and lay down curls and waves.\nDrying.\nHair dryers speed the drying process of hair by blowing air, which is usually heated, over the wet hair shaft to accelerate the rate of water evaporation.\nExcessive heat may increase the rate of shaft-splitting or other damage to the hair. Hair dryer diffusers can be used to widen the stream of air flow so it is weaker but covers a larger area of the hair.\nHair dryers can also be used as a tool to sculpt the hair to a very slight degree. Proper technique involves aiming the dryer such that the air does not blow onto the face or scalp, which can cause burns.\nOther common hair drying techniques include towel drying and air drying.\nBraiding and updos.\nTight or frequent braiding may pull at the hair roots and cause traction alopecia. Rubber bands with metal clasps or tight clips, which bend the hair shaft at extreme angles, can have the same effect.\nAn updo is a hair style that involves arranging the hair so that it is carried high on the head. It can be as simple as a ponytail, but is more commonly associated with more elaborate styles intended for special occasions such as a prom or weddings.\nIf hair is pinned too tightly, or the whole updo slips causing pulling on the hair in the follicle at the hair root, it can cause aggravation to the hair follicle and result in headaches. Although some people of African heritage may use braiding extensions (long term braiding hairstyle) as a form of convenience and/or as a reflection of personal style, it is important not to keep the braids up longer than needed to avoid hair breakage or hair loss. Proper braiding technique and maintenance can result in no hair damage even with repeated braid styles.\nCurling and straightening.\nCurling and straightening hair typically involve using a curling rod or a flat iron to achieve the desired look. These tools use heat to shape the hair into various waves and curls, or to temporarily straighten it by reversing natural curls. However, frequent use of heat styling tools can damage hair, especially when combined with chemicals used to maintain the style. Some irons are designed to style damp hair, but they require higher temperatures, ranging from . To minimize heat damage, it's advisable to use heat protection sprays and hair-repairing shampoos and conditioners.\nIndustry.\nHair styling is a major world industry, from the salon itself to products, advertising, and even magazines on the subject. In the United States, most hairstylists are licensed after obtaining training at a cosmetology or beauty school.\nIn recent years, competitive events for professional stylists have grown in popularity. Stylists compete on deadline to create the most elaborate hairstyle using props, lights and other accessories.\nTools.\nStyling tools may include hair irons (including flat, curling, and crimping irons), hair dryers, hair brushes and hair rollers. Hair dressing might also include the use of hair product to add texture, shine, curl, volume or hold to a particular style. Hairpins are also used when creating particular hairstyles. Their uses and designs vary over different cultural backgrounds.\nProducts.\nStyling products aside from shampoo and conditioner are many and varied. Leave-in conditioner, conditioning treatments, mousse, gels, lotions, waxes, creams, clays, serums, oils, and sprays are used to change the texture or shape of the hair, or to hold it in place in a certain style. Applied properly, most styling products will not damage the hair apart from drying it out; most styling products contain alcohols, which can dissolve oils. Many hair products contain chemicals which can cause build-up, resulting in dull hair or a change in perceived texture.\nWigs.\nCare of human or other natural hair wigs is similar to care of a normal head of hair in that the wig can be brushed, styled, and kept clean using haircare products. Wigs can serve as a form of protective styling that allows freedom of control of the hairstyling.\nSynthetic wigs are usually made from a fine fiber that mimics human hair. This fiber can be made in almost any color and hairstyle, and is often glossier than human hair. However, this fiber is sensitive to heat and cannot be styled with flat irons or curling irons. There is a newer synthetic fiber that can take heat up to a certain temperature.\nHuman hair wigs can be styled with heat, and they must be brushed only when dry. Synthetic and human hair wigs should be brushed dry before shampooing to remove tangles. To clean the wig, the wig should be dipped into a container with water and mild shampoo, then dipped in clear water and moved up and down to remove excess water. The wig must then be air dried naturally into its own hairstyle. Proper maintenance can make a human hair wig last for many years.\nFunctional and decorative ornaments.\nThere are many options to embellish and arrange the hair. Hairpins, clasps, barrettes, headbands, ribbons, rubber bands, scrunchies, and combs can be used to achieve a variety of styles. There are also many decorative ornaments that, while they may have clasps to affix them to the hair, are used solely for appearance and do not aid in keeping the hair in place. In India for example, the Gajra (flower garland) is common there are heaps on hair.\nSocial and cultural implications.\nGender.\nAt most times in most cultures, men have worn their hair in styles that are different from women's. American sociologist Rose Weitz wrote that the most widespread cultural rule about hair is that women's hair must differ from men's hair. In western societies \u2013 particularly the US, UK, and Canada \u2013 hair on the head is more strongly tied to feminine gender expression. Long hair is seen as not only feminine but also more sexually appealing for women. Women are also more likely to style their hair in a variety of ways, including using accessories. Meanwhile, men's styles tend to be uniform amongst one another. Masculine gender expressions tend to gear towards facial hair rather than head hair, likely due to how many men experience baldness. An exception is the men and women living in the Orinoco-Amazon Basin, where traditionally both genders have worn their hair cut into a bowl shape. In Western countries in the 1960s, both young men and young women wore their hair long and natural, and since then it has become more common for men to grow their hair.\nDuring most periods in human history when men and women wore similar hairstyles, as in the 1920s and 1960s, it has generated significant social concern and approbation. In the west, groups such as hippies and punks caused outrage for their overlaps in masculine and feminine presentation. Around the 1950s onward, feminists in the US opposed traditionally feminine beauty standards of long hair and little or no body hair. They argued that those standards take much effort to maintain and were symbols of oppression, though the specifics of what sort of hairstyles or other beauty norms are \"oppressive\" was highly debated. Typically, many have aimed towards styles which take less maintenance. Meanwhile, there are also non-political examples of challenging gender presentation with performers presenting as cross-dressing or with androgynous appearances.\nReligion.\nHair in religion also plays an important role since women and men, when deciding to dedicate their life to faith, often change their haircut. Baldness is likely chosen as a common spiritual symbol of dedication because it is perceived as a sign of aging and thus, undesirable. Cutting or shaving one's hair is a rejection of worldly pride and vanity. There may be another layer of giving up sexuality as well, as hair is seen as a sex symbol, so the inverse of little or no hair could be a symbol of celibacy \u2013 a common oath for holy people. Catholic nuns often cut their hair very short, and men who joined Catholic monastic orders in the eighth century adopted what was known as the tonsure, which involved shaving the tops of their heads and leaving a ring of hair around the bald crown. Many Buddhists, Hajj pilgrims and Vaisnavas, especially members of the Hare Krishna movement who are \"brahmacharis\" or \"sannyasis\", shave their heads. Some Hindu and most Buddhist monks and nuns shave their heads upon entering their order, and Korean Buddhist monks and nuns have their heads shaved every 15 days.\nConversely, there are also practices of keeping the hair long and/or uncut. One such example are adherents of Sikhism are required to wear their hair unshorn. Women usually wear it in a braid or a bun and men cover it with a turban also known as a dast\u0101r. Other religions also have various kinds of head coverings. The three Abrahamic religions, for instance all have some sort of religious writing on head coverings, particularly for women. In Islam women wear the hijab for modesty and covers the hair as well as chest. In Judaism (mostly orthodox), married women wear coverings such as the tichel, and in some branches men wear the kippah mostly in prayers. Meanwhile, due to the varied branches of Christianity, not all Christian women wear coverings and there are various kinds of head covering.\nMarital status.\nIn the 1800s, American women started wearing their hair up when they became ready to get married. Among the Fulani people of west Africa, unmarried women wear their hair ornamented with small amber beads and coins, while married women wear large amber ornaments. Marriage is signified among the Toposa women of South Sudan by wearing the hair in many small pigtails. Unmarried Hopi women have traditionally worn a \"butterfly\" hairstyle characterized by a twist or whorl of hair at each side of the face. Hindu widows in India used to shave their heads as part of their mourning although that practice has mostly disappeared.\nLife transitions.\nIn many cultures, including Hindu culture and among the Wayana people of the Guiana highlands, young people have historically shaved off their hair to denote coming-of-age. Women in India historically have signified adulthood by switching from wearing two braids to one. Among the Rendille of north-eastern Kenya and the Tchikrin people of the Brazilian rainforest, both men and women shave their heads after the death of a close family member. When a man died in ancient Greece, his wife cut off her hair and buried it with him, and in Hindu families, the chief mourner is expected to shave his or her head 3 days after the death.\nSocial class.\nUpper-class people have always used their hairstyles to signal wealth and status. Wealthy Roman women wore complex hairstyles that needed the labours of several people to maintain them, and rich people have also often chosen hairstyles that restricted or burdened their movement, making it obvious that they did not need to work. Wealthy people's hairstyles used to be at the cutting edge of fashion, setting the styles for the less wealthy. But today, the wealthy are generally observed to wear their hair in conservative styles that date back decades prior.\nMiddle-class hairstyles tend to be understated and professional. Middle-class people aspire to have their hair look healthy and natural, implying that they have the resources to live a healthy lifestyle and take good care of themselves.\nEuropean-influenced working-class people's haircuts have tended to be somewhat simple. Working-class men have often shaved their heads or worn their hair close-cropped. While working-class women typically with long hair often have their hair cinched back away from their faces and secured on their scalp.\nHealth.\nHair, when it is natural and meets certain criteria, is one of the indicators of a person's good or poor health. This is one of the explanations for the significant role that hairstyles play in both sexual and emotional attraction.\nIn the past, certain products used for hair graying (such as lead oxide or lead combs) have been a source of lead poisoning. Hair is sensitive to air pollution, particularly to various metallic pollutants in the environment (such as lead, mercury, or arsenic). These metals can also be absorbed through food and beverages, as hair bioconcentrates and stores them from the bloodstream to the skin. Additionally, certain medications can lead to hair loss, and this may be worsened by specific hairstyles.\nAccording to a study published in 2016 by the American Academy of Dermatology and notably reported by The Root and Science magazine, certain tightly braided hairstyles that exert significant and constant tension on the scalp can contribute to a specific form of alopecia known as traction alopecia (TA). This article categorized hairstyling practices into high, moderate, and low-risk categories of induced alopecia, enabling dermatologists and physicians to provide more precise advice to affected patients.\nThis is the case with common hairstyles among African-American women, including extensions, braids, and dreadlocks. This may explain why approximately one-third of black women suffer from hair loss. Hair damage can be further exacerbated by the use of chemical products used for chemical straightening. The study's findings support recommendations to wear looser hairstyles and avoid keeping braids and extensions for more than a few months.\nCertain products (hair dyes, hairsprays, bleaches, etc.) may contain allergenic ingredients. Several studies suggest that certain hairstyles or the use of bleaching or dyeing products may increase the risk of certain cancers (melanomas, as well as carcinomas); thus, long and dark hair that shades the skin and protects it from excessive ultraviolet exposure could be a protective factor against certain skin cancers (such as ear cancers).\nHaircuts in space.\nHaircuts also occur in the International Space Station. During the various expeditions astronauts use hair clippers attached to vacuum devices for grooming their colleagues so that the cut hair will not drift inside the weightless environment of the space station and become a nuisance to the astronauts or a hazard to the sensitive equipment installations inside the station.\nHaircutting in space was also used for charitable purposes in the case of astronaut Sunita Williams who obtained such a haircut by fellow astronaut Joan Higginbotham inside the International Space Station. Sunita's ponytail was brought back to earth with the STS-116 crew and was donated to Locks of Love.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52404", "revid": "49745431", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52404", "title": "24th century BC", "text": "One hundred years, from 2400 BC to 2301 BC\nThe 24th century BC was a century that lasted from the year 2400 BC to 2301 BC.\nKorean Chronology.\nIn modern Korean national mythology, the character Dangun, whose mother was originally a bear, founded the state Gojoseon in 2333 BC and ruled it for about 2000 years. Some Koreans think of it as the earliest Korean state and of Dangun as the ancestor of Koreans. From 1948 until December 1961, the Republic of Korea officially reckoned years by adding 2333 to the Common Era year. The year 2333 BC and the related myth are sometimes presented matter-of-factly as \"history\" rather than \"mythology\" in Korea.\nBiblical Chronology.\nGenesis flood narrative. In Jewish and Christian history, sometime near the middle of the 24th century BC, the (known) world was flooded, covering the tops of mountains, and destroying the human and land animal populations. Only the family of a man named Noah, and one breeding pair of each animal type survived the flood by floating in/on a large wooden boat for several months.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52405", "revid": "43768634", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52405", "title": "2210s BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "52406", "revid": "43768634", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52406", "title": "2220s BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "52407", "revid": "43768634", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52407", "title": "2230s BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "52409", "revid": "43768634", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52409", "title": "2100s BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "52410", "revid": "43768634", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52410", "title": "2090s BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "52411", "revid": "43768634", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52411", "title": "2080s BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "52412", "revid": "19951496", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52412", "title": "2022", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Events by month/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\n \n \n \n \n \n \nCalendar year\n2022 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nThe year began with another wave in the COVID-19 pandemic, with Omicron spreading rapidly and becoming the dominant variant of the SARS-CoV-2 virus worldwide. Tracking a decrease in cases and deaths, 2022 saw the removal of most COVID-19 restrictions and the reopening of international borders in the vast majority of countries, while the global rollout of COVID-19 vaccines continued. The global economic recovery from the pandemic continued, though many countries experienced an ongoing inflation surge; in response, many central banks raised their interest rates to landmark levels. The world population reached eight billion people in 2022. The year also witnessed numerous natural disasters, including two devastating Atlantic hurricanes (Fiona and Ian), and the most powerful volcano eruption of the century so far. The later part of the year also saw the first public release of ChatGPT by OpenAI starting an arms race in artificial intelligence which increased in intensity into 2023, as well as the collapse of the cryptocurrency exchange FTX.\n2022 was also dominated by wars and armed conflicts. While escalations into the internal conflict in Myanmar and the Tigray War dominated the heightening of tensions within their regions and each caused over 10,000 deaths, 2022 was most notable for the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the largest armed conflict in Europe since World War II. The invasion caused the displacement of 15.7\u00a0million Ukrainians (8\u00a0million internally displaced persons and 7.7\u00a0million refugees), and led to international condemnations and sanctions and nuclear threats, the withdrawal of hundreds of companies from Russia, and the exclusion of Russia from major sporting events.\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Nonumtoc/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Horizontal TOC/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nConflicts.\nThe ongoing Russian invasion of Ukraine escalated after Russian president Vladimir Putin announced a \"special military operation\", stating that it was to support the Russian-backed breakaway republics of Donetsk and Luhansk, whose paramilitary forces had been fighting Ukraine in the Donbas conflict since 2014.\nDemographics.\nThe world population was estimated to have reached 8 billion after 11 years on 15 November 2022. China was the most populous country throughout the year, followed by India. Africa was the fastest growing continent.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "52413", "revid": "19951496", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52413", "title": "2023", "text": "Calendar year\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Events by month/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\n \n \n \n \n \n \nCalendar year\n2023 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nCatastrophic natural disasters in 2023 included the 5th-deadliest earthquake of the 21st century striking Turkey and Syria, leaving up to 62,000 people dead; Cyclone Freddy, the longest-lasting recorded tropical cyclone in history in the Indian Ocean, which led to over 1,400 deaths in Malawi and Mozambique; Storm Daniel, which became the deadliest tropical cyclone worldwide since Typhoon Haiyan after killing at least 5,300 people in Libya; a major 6.8 magnitude earthquake striking western Morocco, killing 2,960 people; and a 6.3 magnitude quadruple earthquake striking western Afghanistan, killing over 1,400 people. The year also saw a decline in the severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, with the WHO (World Health Organization) ending its global health emergency status in May.\nThe Russian invasion of Ukraine and Myanmar civil war continued in 2023, and a series of coups, several armed conflicts, and political crises broke out in numerous African nations, most notably a Sudanese civil war. In Armenia and Azerbaijan, the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict ended after over 100,000 Armenians fled the region after an Azeri military invasion. In India, the year marked the beginning of the ethnic violence in the state of Manipur between the Kuki and the Meitei people. A major escalation of the Israeli\u2013Palestinian conflict occurred in October when Hamas, the governing body of the Gaza Strip, led a major attack on Israel, leading the latter to both declare war on Hamas and invade the Gaza Strip; the Israeli aerial bombardment campaign killed 20,000 Palestinians within two months and caused a humanitarian crisis, leading to allegations of genocide that formed the basis of an ICJ case brought by South Africa that December.\nA banking crisis resulted in the collapse of numerous American regional banks as well as the buyout of Credit Suisse by UBS in Switzerland. The two largest American banks to collapse were Silicon Valley Bank and First Republic Bank, two of the three largest banking collapses in US history. The most notable of numerous acquisitions in various industries included October's energy acquisitions with ExxonMobil and Chevron buying Pioneer Natural Resources and Hess respectively, the luxury fashion holding company Tapestry (Coach New York and Kate Spade New York) announcing its purchase of Capri Holdings (Michael Kors and Versace), and the closure of Microsoft's acquisition of Activision Blizzard. In the realm of technology, 2023 saw the continued rise of generative AI models, with increasing applications across various industries. These models, leveraging advancements in machine learning and natural language processing, had become capable of creating realistic and coherent text, music, and images.\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Nonumtoc/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Horizontal TOC/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\nThe world population on January 1, 2023 was estimated at 7.943 billion people, and was expected to increase to 8.119 billion on January 1, 2024. An estimated 134.3 million births and 60.8 million deaths were expected to take place in 2023. The average global life expectancy was 73.16 years, an increase of 0.18 years from 2022. The rate of child mortality was 36.7 per 1000 live births, a decrease from 38.2 in 2022. Less than 23% of people were living in extreme poverty (on or below the international poverty line), a decrease from 2022. In April, India surpassed China as the most populated country in the world.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52414", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52414", "title": "42 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 42 BC was either a common year starting on Monday, Tuesday or Wednesday or a leap year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar (the sources differ, see leap year error for further information) and a common year starting on Tuesday of the Proleptic Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Lepidus and Plancus (or, less frequently, year 712 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 42 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nRoman Republic.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52415", "revid": "10951369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52415", "title": "50 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 50 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Paullus and Marcellus (or, less frequently, year 704 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 50 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nRoman Republic.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52416", "revid": "19951496", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52416", "title": "2024", "text": "Calendar year\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Events by month/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\n \n \n \n \n \n \nCalendar year\n2024 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nThe year saw the continuation of major armed conflicts, including the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the Myanmar civil war, the Sudanese civil war, and the Islamist insurgency in the Sahel. Israel's war on Gaza led to widespread protests and spillover conflicts into numerous other countries, most notably Lebanon, which was invaded by Israel in October. This followed an intensification of the ongoing conflict between Israel and Hezbollah. In September, Israel escalated an offensive against the group, which resulted in the killing of the Secretary-General, Hassan Nasrallah. Ismail Haniyeh, the political leader of Hamas, had also been assassinated in the Iranian capital Tehran in July, and his successor Yahya Sinwar was killed by the Israel Defense Forces in October. In November, heavy fighting resumed in the Syrian civil war, leading to the toppling of Ba'athist Syria, with Bashar al-Assad fleeing Syria in December. The year also saw a rise in activity by the Houthi movement which contributed to a crisis in the Red Sea that impacted global shipping.\nApproximately 80 countries, representing around 4 billion people, conducted national elections throughout the course of the year, including eight out of the ten most populous countries (Bangladesh, Brazil, Pakistan, Russia, India, Mexico, Indonesia, and the United States) as well as France, the United Kingdom, and Japan. The European Parliament also held elections. Among democracies, over 80% saw the incumbent party lose support compared to the last election, including many significant losses. In countries like Japan, Botswana, and South Africa, incumbent parties that had dominated domestic politics for decades lost their majorities and either relinquished power or are holding on through coalitions with minor parties. Bassirou Diomaye Faye won the 2024 Senegalese presidential election, becoming the first opposition candidate to win in the first round since the country's independence. In Sri Lanka, voters delivered a landslide victory to the National People's Power, previously a minor party. On November 5, 2024, Republican Donald Trump won the 2024 United States presidential election, becoming the first U.S. president to be elected to a nonconsecutive second term since 1892. The French and German governments lost votes of no confidence. In December, South Korean president Yoon Suk Yeol's attempt to declare and impose martial law was thwarted by members of parliament, sparking a political crisis that led to his impeachment and the impeachment of acting president Han Duck-soo.\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Nonumtoc/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Horizontal TOC/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52417", "revid": "5526749", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52417", "title": "2025", "text": "Current calendar year\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Events by month/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\n \n \n \n \n \n \nCalendar year\n2025 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \nSo far, the year has seen an escalation of major armed conflicts, including the Russian invasion of Ukraine, which began peace negotiations involving Vladimir Putin and Donald Trump. The Gaza war, including a famine and humanitarian crisis, as well as the Sudanese civil war, also continued throughout the year. Internal crises in Armenia, Bangladesh, Ecuador, France, Georgia, Germany, Haiti, Peru, Somalia, and South Korea continued into this year, with the latter leading to President Yoon Suk Yeol's arrest and removal from office. The year has also seen a wave of protests predominantly led by Generation Z, with some, like those in Nepal and Madagascar, resulting in the overthrow of governments. Several brief conflicts out of longstanding tensions emerged mid-year\u2014India\u2013Pakistan in May, Iran\u2013Israel in June, and Cambodia\u2013Thailand in July, in which a leaked phone call involving Thai prime minister Paetongtarn Shinawatra and Cambodian senate president Hun Sen resulted in the removal of the former.\nIn economics and business, the return of Donald Trump to the U.S. presidency ushered in a series of tariffs levied by America on most of the world, significantly disrupting global trade, in addition to reinvigorating the China\u2013United States trade war. The technology sector was additionally hit with the release of DeepSeek's chatbot, a Chinese large language model which competes with ChatGPT. Aviation and aerospace also saw accidents this year, including when Air India Flight 171 crashed in Ahmedabad, India. Several advances in space exploration were made as well, including the first crewed polar orbit spaceflight, and the first fully successful landing of a spacecraft on the Moon by a private company.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52418", "revid": "29539620", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52418", "title": "2070s", "text": ""}
{"id": "52419", "revid": "30861941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52419", "title": "52 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \n \nYear 52 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Pompeius and Scipio (or, less frequently, year 702 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 52 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nRoman Republic.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52420", "revid": "48191322", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52420", "title": "280s BC", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThis article concerns the period 289 BC \u2013 280 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52421", "revid": "6127189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52421", "title": "270s BC", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThis article concerns the period 279 BC \u2013 270 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52422", "revid": "6127189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52422", "title": "260s BC", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThis article concerns the period 269 BC \u2013 260 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52423", "revid": "48191322", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52423", "title": "250s BC", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThis article concerns the period 259 BC \u2013 250 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52424", "revid": "27199084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52424", "title": "240s BC", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThis article concerns the period 249 BC \u2013 240 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52425", "revid": "6127189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52425", "title": "230s BC", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThis article concerns the period 239 BC \u2013 230 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52426", "revid": "48191322", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52426", "title": "210s BC", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThis article concerns the period 219 BC \u2013 210 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52428", "revid": "37812451", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52428", "title": "160s BC", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThis article concerns the period 169 BC \u2013 160 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52429", "revid": "44928949", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52429", "title": "170s BC", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThis article concerns the period 179 BC \u2013 170 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52430", "revid": "20585603", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52430", "title": "180s BC", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThis article concerns the period 189 BC \u2013 180 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52431", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52431", "title": "190s BC", "text": "Decade\nThis article concerns the period 199 BC \u2013 190 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52432", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52432", "title": "Xanthine", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nXanthine ( or , from Ancient Greek 'yellow' for its yellowish-white appearance; archaically xanthic acid; systematic name 3,7-dihydropurine-2,6-dione) is a purine base found in most human body tissues and fluids, as well as in other organisms. Several stimulants are derived from xanthine, including caffeine, theophylline, and theobromine.\nXanthine is a product on the pathway of purine degradation.\nXanthine is subsequently converted to uric acid by the action of the xanthine oxidase enzyme.\nUse and production.\nXanthine is used as a drug precursor for human and animal medications, and is produced as a pesticide ingredient.\nClinical significance.\nDerivatives of xanthine (known collectively as xanthines) are a group of alkaloids commonly used for their effects as mild stimulants and as bronchodilators, notably in the treatment of asthma or influenza symptoms. In contrast to other, more potent stimulants like sympathomimetic amines, xanthines mainly act to oppose the actions of adenosine, and increase alertness in the central nervous system.\nToxicity.\nMethylxanthines (methylated xanthines), which include caffeine, aminophylline, IBMX, paraxanthine, pentoxifylline, theobromine, theophylline, and 7-methylxanthine (heteroxanthine), among others, affect the airways, increase heart rate and force of contraction, and at high concentrations can cause cardiac arrhythmias. In high doses, they can lead to convulsions that are resistant to anticonvulsants. Methylxanthines induce gastric acid and pepsin secretions in the gastrointestinal tract. Methylxanthines are metabolized by cytochrome P450 in the liver.\nIf swallowed, inhaled, or exposed to the eyes in high amounts, xanthines can be harmful, and they may cause an allergic reaction if applied topically.\nPharmacology.\nIn in vitro pharmacological studies, xanthines act as both competitive nonselective phosphodiesterase inhibitors and nonselective adenosine receptor antagonists. Phosphodiesterase inhibitors raise intracellular cAMP, activate PKA, inhibit TNF-\u03b1 synthesis, and leukotriene and reduce inflammation and innate immunity. Adenosine receptor antagonists inhibit sleepiness-inducing adenosine.\nHowever, different analogues show varying potency at the numerous subtypes, and a wide range of synthetic xanthines (some nonmethylated) have been developed searching for compounds with greater selectivity for phosphodiesterase enzyme or adenosine receptor subtypes.\nPathology.\nPeople with rare genetic disorders, specifically xanthinuria and Lesch\u2013Nyhan syndrome, lack sufficient xanthine oxidase and cannot convert xanthine to uric acid.\nPossible formation in absence of life.\nStudies reported in 2008, based on 12C/13C isotopic ratios of organic compounds found in the Murchison meteorite, suggested that xanthine and related chemicals, including the RNA component uracil, have been formed extraterrestrially. In August 2011, a report, based on NASA studies with meteorites found on Earth, was published suggesting xanthine and related organic molecules, including the DNA and RNA components adenine and guanine, were found in outer space.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52433", "revid": "41849648", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52433", "title": "2026", "text": "Next calendar year\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Events by month/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\n \n \n \n \n \n \nCalendar year\n2026 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Nonumtoc/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Horizontal TOC/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52434", "revid": "28089545", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52434", "title": "2027", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Events by month/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\n \n \n \n \n \n \nCalendar year\n2027 is the upcoming year, which will be , the year of the Common Era (CE) and (AD) designations, the year of the , and the year of the decade. \n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Nonumtoc/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Horizontal TOC/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52435", "revid": "49918473", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52435", "title": "Tait's conjecture", "text": "Disproven graph theory\nIn mathematics, Tait's conjecture states that \"Every 3-connected planar cubic graph has a Hamiltonian cycle (along the edges) through all its vertices\". It was proposed by P. G. Tait\u00a0(1884) and disproved by W. T. Tutte\u00a0(1946), who constructed a counterexample with 25 faces, 69 edges and 46 vertices. Several smaller counterexamples, with 21 faces, 57 edges and 38 vertices, were later proved minimal by .\nThe condition that the graph be 3-regular is necessary due to polyhedra such as the rhombic dodecahedron, which forms a bipartite graph with six degree-four vertices on one side and eight degree-three vertices on the other side; because any Hamiltonian cycle would have to alternate between the two sides of the bipartition, but they have unequal numbers of vertices, the rhombic dodecahedron is not Hamiltonian.\nThe conjecture was significant, because if true, it would have implied the four color theorem: as Tait described, the four-color problem is equivalent to the problem of finding 3-edge-colorings of bridgeless cubic planar graphs. In a Hamiltonian cubic planar graph, such an edge coloring is easy to find: use two colors alternately on the cycle, and a third color for all remaining edges. Alternatively, a 4-coloring of the faces of a Hamiltonian cubic planar graph may be constructed directly, using two colors for the faces inside the cycle and two more colors for the faces outside.\nTutte's counterexample.\nTutte's fragment.\nThe key to this counter-example is what is now known as Tutte's fragment, shown on the right.\nIf this fragment is part of a larger graph, then any Hamiltonian cycle through the graph must go in or out of the top vertex (and either one of the lower ones). It cannot go in one lower vertex and out the other.\nThe counterexample.\nThe fragment can then be used to construct the non-Hamiltonian Tutte graph, by putting\ntogether three such fragments as shown in the picture. The \"compulsory\" edges of the fragments, that must be part of any Hamiltonian path through the fragment, are connected at the central vertex; because any cycle can use only two of these three edges, there can be no Hamiltonian cycle.\nThe resulting Tutte graph is 3-connected and planar, so by Steinitz' theorem it is the graph of a polyhedron. In total it has 25 faces, 69 edges and 46 vertices.\nIt can be realized geometrically from a tetrahedron (the faces of which correspond to the four large faces in the drawing, three of which are between pairs of fragments and the fourth of which forms the exterior) by multiply truncating three of its vertices.\nSmaller counterexamples.\nAs show, there are exactly six 38-vertex non-Hamiltonian polyhedra that have nontrivial three-edge cuts. They are formed by replacing two of the vertices of a pentagonal prism by the same fragment used in Tutte's example.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nPartly based on http://, used by permission."}
{"id": "52436", "revid": "6941696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52436", "title": "51 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 51 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Marcellus and Sulpicius (or, less frequently, year 703 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 51 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAsia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52437", "revid": "1275753490", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52437", "title": "99 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 99 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Antonius and Albinus (or, less frequently, year 655 \"Ab urbe condita\") and the Second Year of Tianhan. The denomination 99 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\n* The Han general Li Guangli marches west from Jiuquan with 30,000 cavalrymen to attack the Tuqi King of the Right in the Tian Shan Mountains. After an initial victory, the Han are surrounded, and they lose more than 20,000 men while breaking out of the encirclement.\n* The Han generals Lu Bode and Gongsun Ao march into the Zhuoxie Mountains, but they encounter no Xiongnu forces and turn back.\n* Autumn \u2013 The Han general Li Ling leads 5000 crack infantry and a cavalry force from Juyan Lake into the eastern Altay Mountains but is pursued by Qiedihou Chanyu. After a desperate fighting retreat across more than 500km of Xiongnu territory, the Han expedition runs out of arrows. Li Ling surrenders and his force disintegrates in the Tihan Mountains, about 50km from the Great Wall of China.\n* Emperor Wu of Han has the 'Grand Historian' Sima Qian castrated after the latter argues in defense of Li Ling's surrender.\nBy place.\nAsia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52438", "revid": "30861941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52438", "title": "53 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 53 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Messalla and Calvinus (or, less frequently, year 701 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 53 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nArmenia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52439", "revid": "48535550", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52439", "title": "433", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 433 (CDXXXIII) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Theodosius and Maximus (or, less frequently, year 1186 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 433 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52440", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52440", "title": "435", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 435 (CDXXXV) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known in Rome as the Year of the Consulship of Theodosius and Valentinianus (or, less frequently, year 1188 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 435 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nDeaths.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52442", "revid": "20318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52442", "title": "447", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 447 (CDXLVII) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known in the Roman Empire as the Year of the Consulship of Calepius and Ardabur (or, less frequently, year 1200 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 447 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52443", "revid": "1319754788", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52443", "title": "449", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 449 (CDXLIX) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Astyrius and Romanus (or, less frequently, year 1202 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 449 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52444", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52444", "title": "460", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 460 (CDLX) was a leap year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Magnus and Apollonius (or, less frequently, year 1213 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 460 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52445", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52445", "title": "469", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 469 (CDLXIX) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Marcianus and Zeno (or, less frequently, year 1222 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 469 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52446", "revid": "30552921", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52446", "title": "882", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 882 (DCCCLXXXII) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52447", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52447", "title": "European colonization of the Americas", "text": "15th\u201319th century colonization\nDuring the Age of Discovery, a large scale colonization of the Americas, involving European countries, took place primarily between the late 15th century and early 19th century. The Norse settled areas of the North Atlantic, colonizing Greenland and creating a short-term settlement near the northern tip of Newfoundland circa 1000\u00a0AD. However, due to its long duration and importance, the later colonization by Europeans, after Christopher Columbus\u2019s voyages, is more well-known. During this time, the European colonial empires of Spain, Portugal, Great Britain, France, Russia, the Netherlands, Denmark, and Sweden began to explore and claim the Americas, its natural resources, and human capital, leading to the displacement, disestablishment, enslavement, and genocide of the Indigenous peoples in the Americas, and the establishment of several settler colonial states.\nThe rapid rate at which some European nations grew in wealth and power was unforeseeable in the early 15th century because it had been preoccupied with internal wars and it was slowly recovering from the loss of population caused by the Black Death. The Ottoman Empire's domination of trade routes to Asia prompted Western European monarchs to search for alternatives, resulting in the voyages of Christopher Columbus and his accidental arrival at the New World. With the signing of the Treaty of Tordesillas in 1494, Portugal and Spain agreed to divide the Earth in two, with Portugal having dominion over non-Christian lands in the world's eastern half, and Spain over those in the western half. Spanish claims essentially included all of the Americas; however, the Treaty of Tordesillas granted the eastern tip of South America to Portugal, where it established Brazil in the early 1500s, and the East Indies to Spain, where It established the Philippines. The city of Santo Domingo, in the current-day Dominican Republic, founded in 1496 by Columbus, is credited as the oldest continuously inhabited European-established settlement in the Americas.\nBy the 1530s, other Western European powers realized they too could benefit from voyages to the Americas, leading to British and French colonization in the northeast tip of the Americas, including in the present-day United States. Within a century, the Swedish established New Sweden; the Dutch established New Netherland; and Denmark\u2013Norway along with the Swedish and Dutch established colonization of parts of the Caribbean. By the 1700s, Denmark\u2013Norway revived its former colonies in Greenland, and Russia began to explore and claim the Pacific Coast from Alaska to California. Russia began colonizing the Pacific Northwest in the mid-18th century, seeking pelts for the fur trade. Many of the social structures\u2014including religions, political boundaries, and linguae francae\u2014which predominate in the Western Hemisphere in the 21st century are the descendants of those that were established during this period.\nViolent conflicts arose during the beginning of this period as indigenous peoples fought to preserve their territorial integrity from increasing European settlers and from hostile indigenous neighbors who were equipped with European technology. Conflict between the various European colonial empires and the American Indian tribes was a leading dynamic in the Americas into the 1800s, although some parts of the continent gained their independence from Europe by then, countries such as the United States continued to fight against Indian tribes and practiced settler colonialism. The United States for example practiced a settler colonial policy of Manifest destiny and Indian removal. Other regions, including California, Patagonia, the North Western Territory, and the northern Great Plains, experienced little to no colonization at all until the 1800s. European contact and colonization had disastrous effects on the indigenous peoples of the Americas and their societies.\nWestern European powers.\nNorsemen.\nNorse Viking explorers were the first known Europeans to set foot in North America. Norse journeys to Greenland and Canada are supported by historical and archaeological evidence. The Norsemen established a colony in Greenland in the late tenth century, which lasted until the mid 15th-century, with court and parliament assemblies (\"\u00feing\") taking place at Brattahl\u00ed\u00f0 and a bishop located at Gar\u00f0ar. The remains of a settlement at L'Anse aux Meadows in Newfoundland, Canada, were discovered in 1960 and were dated to around the year 1000 (carbon dating estimate 990\u20131050). L'Anse aux Meadows is the only site widely accepted as evidence of pre-Columbian trans-oceanic contact. It was named a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1978. It is also notable for its possible connection with the attempted colony of Vinland, established by Leif Erikson around the same period or, more broadly, with the Norse colonization of the Americas. Leif Erikson's brother is said to have had the first contact with the native population of North America which would come to be known as the skr\u00e6lings. After capturing and killing eight of the natives, they were attacked at their beached ships, which they defended.\nSpain.\nSystematic European colonization began in 1492. A Spanish expedition sailed west to find a new trade route to the Orient, the source of spices, silks, porcelains, and other rich trade goods. Ottoman control of the Silk Road, the traditional route for trade between Europe and Asia, forced European traders to look for alternative routes. The Genoese mariner Christopher Columbus led an expedition to find a route to East Asia, but instead landed in The Bahamas. Columbus encountered the Lucayan people on the island Guanahani (possibly Cat Island), which they had inhabited since the ninth century. In his reports, Columbus exaggerated the quantity of gold in the East Indies, which he called the \"New World\". These claims, along with the slaves he brought back, convinced the monarchy to fund a second voyage. Word of Columbus's exploits spread quickly, sparking the Western European exploration, conquest, and colonization of the Americas.\nSpanish explorers, conquerors, and settlers sought material wealth, prestige, and the spread of Christianity, often summed up in the phrase \"gold, glory, and God\". The Spanish justified their claims to the New World based on the ideals of the Christian Reconquista of the Iberian Peninsula from the Muslims, completed in 1492. In the New World, military conquest to incorporate indigenous peoples into Christendom was considered the \"spiritual conquest\". In 1493, Pope Alexander VI, the first Spaniard to become Pope, issued a series of Papal Bulls that confirmed Spanish claims to the newly discovered lands.\nAfter the final Reconquista of Iberia, the Treaty of Tordesillas was ratified by the Pope, the two kingdoms of Castile (in a personal union with other kingdoms of Spain) and Portugal in 1494. The treaty divided the entire non-European world into two spheres of exploration and colonization. The longitudinal boundary cut through the Atlantic Ocean and the eastern part of present-day Brazil. The countries declared their rights to the land despite the fact that Indigenous populations had settled from pole to pole in the hemisphere and it was their homeland.\nAfter European contact, the native population of the Americas plummeted by an estimated 80% (from around 50 million in 1492 to eight million in 1650), due in part to Old World diseases carried to the New World. Smallpox was especially devastating, for it could be passed through touch, allowing native tribes to be wiped out, and the conditions that colonization imposed on Indigenous populations, such as forced labor and removal from homelands and traditional medicines. Some scholars have argued that this demographic collapse was the result of the first large-scale act of genocide in the modern era.\nFor example, the labor and tribute of inhabitants of Hispaniola were granted in encomienda to Spaniards, a practice established in Spain for conquered Muslims. Although not technically slavery, it was coerced labor for the benefit of the Spanish grantees, called \"encomenderos\". Spain had a legal tradition and devised a proclamation known as The Requerimento to be read to indigenous populations in Spanish, often far from the field of battle, stating that the indigenous were now subjects of the Spanish Crown and would be punished if they resisted. When the news of this situation and the abuse of the institution reached Spain, the New Laws were passed to regulate and gradually abolish the system in the Americas, as well as to reiterate the prohibition of enslaving Native Americans. By the time the new laws were passed, in 1542, the Spanish crown had acknowledged their inability to control and properly ensure compliance with traditional laws overseas, so they granted to Native Americans specific protections not even Spaniards had, such as the prohibition of enslaving them even in the case of crime or war. These extra protections were an attempt to avoid the proliferation of irregular claims to slavery. However, as historian Andr\u00e9s Res\u00e9ndez has noted, \"this categorical prohibition did not stop generations of determined conquistadors and colonists from taking Native slaves on a planetary scale, ... The fact that this other slavery had to be carried out clandestinely made it even more insidious. It is a tale of good intentions gone badly astray.\"\nA major event in early Spanish colonization, which had so far yielded paltry returns, was the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire (1519\u20131521). It was led by Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s and made possible by securing indigenous alliances with the Aztecs' enemies, mobilizing thousands of warriors against the Aztecs for their own political reasons. The Aztec capital, Tenochtitlan, became Mexico City, the chief city of the \"New Spain\". More than an estimated 240,000 Aztecs died during the siege of Tenochtitlan, 100,000 in combat, while 500\u20131,000 of the Spaniards engaged in the conquest died. The other great conquest was of the Inca Empire (1531\u201335), led by Francisco Pizarro.\nDuring the early period of exploration, conquest, and settlement, c. 1492\u20131550, the overseas possessions claimed by Spain were only loosely controlled by the crown. With the conquests of the Aztecs and the Incas, the New World now commanded the crown's attention. Both Mexico and Peru had dense, hierarchically organized indigenous populations that could be incorporated and ruled. Even more importantly, both Mexico and Peru had large deposits of silver, which became the economic motor of the Spanish empire and transformed the world economy. In Peru, the singular, hugely rich silver mine of Potos\u00ed was worked by traditional forced indigenous labor drafts, known as the mit'a. In Mexico, silver was found outside the zone of dense indigenous settlement, so laborers migrated to the mines in Guanajuato and Zacatecas. The crown established the Council of the Indies in 1524, based in Seville, and issued laws of the Indies to assert its power against the early conquerors. The crown created the viceroyalty of New Spain and the viceroyalty of Peru to tighten crown control over these rich prizes of conquest.\nPortugal.\nOver this same time frame as Spain, Portugal claimed lands in North America (Canada) and colonized much of eastern South America naming it Santa Cruz and Brazil. On behalf of both the Portuguese and Spanish crowns, cartographer Amerigo Vespucci explored the South American east coast and published his new book \"Mundus Novus\" (\"New World\") in 1502\u20131503 which disproved the belief that the Americas were the easternmost part of Asia and confirmed that Columbus had reached a set of continents previously unheard of to any Europeans. Cartographers still use a Latinized version of his first name, \"America\", for the two continents. In April 1500, Portuguese noble Pedro \u00c1lvares Cabral claimed the region of Brazil to Portugal; the effective colonization of Brazil began three decades later with the founding of S\u00e3o Vicente in 1532 and the establishment of the system of captaincies in 1534, which was later replaced by other systems. Others tried to colonize the eastern coasts of present-day Canada and the River Plate in South America. These explorers include Jo\u00e3o Vaz Corte-Real in Newfoundland; Jo\u00e3o Fernandes Lavrador, Gaspar and Miguel Corte-Real and Jo\u00e3o \u00c1lvares Fagundes, in Newfoundland, Greenland, Labrador, and Nova Scotia (from 1498 to 1502, and in 1520).\nDuring this time, the Portuguese gradually switched from an initial plan of establishing trading posts to extensive colonization of what is now Brazil. They imported millions of slaves to run their plantations. The Portuguese and Spanish royal governments expected to rule these settlements and collect at least 20% of all treasure found (the \"quinto real\" collected by the \"Casa de Contrataci\u00f3n\"), in addition to collecting all the taxes they could. By the late 16th century silver from the Americas accounted for one-fifth of the combined total budget of Portugal and Spain. In the 16th century perhaps 240,000 Europeans entered ports in the Americas.\nFrance.\nFrance founded colonies in the Americas: in eastern North America (which had not been colonized by Spain north of Florida), a number of Caribbean islands (which had often already been conquered by the Spanish or depopulated by disease), and small coastal parts of South America. Explorers included Giovanni da Verrazzano in 1524; Jacques Cartier (1491\u20131557), and Samuel de Champlain (1567\u20131635), who explored the region of Canada he reestablished as New France.\nThe first French colonial empire stretched to over at its peak in 1710, which was the second largest colonial empire in the world, after the Spanish Empire.\nIn the French colonial regions, the focus of the economy was on sugar plantations in the French West Indies. In Canada the fur trade with the natives was important. About 16,000 French men and women became colonizers. The great majority became subsistence farmers along the St. Lawrence River. With a favorable disease environment and plenty of land and food, their numbers grew exponentially to 65,000 by 1760. Their colony was taken over by Britain in 1760, but social, religious, legal, cultural, and economic changes were few in a society that clung tightly to its recently formed traditions.\nBritish.\nBritish colonization began in North America almost a century after Spain. The relatively late arrival meant that the British could use the other European colonization powers as models for their endeavors. Inspired by the Spanish riches from colonies founded upon the conquest of the Aztecs, Incas, and other large Native American populations in the 16th century, their first attempt at colonization occurred in Roanoke and Newfoundland, although unsuccessful. In 1606, King James I granted a charter with the purpose of discovering the riches at their first permanent settlement in Jamestown, Virginia in 1607. They were sponsored by common stock companies such as the chartered Virginia Company financed by wealthy Englishmen who exaggerated the economic potential of the land. \nThe Reformation of the 16th century broke the unity of Western Christendom and led to the formation of numerous new religious sects, which often faced persecution by governmental authorities. In England, many people came to question the organization of the Church of England by the end of the 16th century. One of the primary manifestations of this was the Puritan movement, which sought to purify the existing Church of England of its residual Catholic rites. The first of these people, known as the Pilgrims, landed on Plymouth Rock in November 1620. Continuous waves of repression led to the migration of about 20,000 Puritans to New England between 1629 and 1642, where they founded multiple colonies. Later in the century, the new Province of Pennsylvania was given to William Penn in settlement of a debt the king owed his father. Its government was established by William Penn in about 1682 to become primarily a refuge for persecuted English Quakers, but others were welcomed. Baptists, German and Swiss Protestants, and Anabaptists also flocked to Pennsylvania. The lure of cheap land, religious freedom and the right to improve themselves with their own hand was very attractive.\nMainly due to discrimination, there was often a separation between English colonial communities and indigenous communities. The Europeans viewed the natives as savages who were not worthy of participating in what they considered civilized society. The native people of North America did not die out nearly as rapidly nor as greatly as those in Central and South America due in part to their exclusion from British society. The indigenous people continued to be stripped of their native lands and were pushed further out west. The English eventually went on to control much of Eastern North America, the Caribbean, and parts of South America. They also gained Florida and Quebec in the French and Indian War.\nJohn Smith convinced the colonists of Jamestown that searching for gold was not taking care of their immediate needs for food and shelter. The lack of food security leading to an extremely high mortality rate was quite distressing and cause for despair among the colonists. To support the colony, numerous supply missions were organized. Tobacco later became a cash crop, with the work of John Rolfe and others, for export and the sustaining economic driver of Virginia and the neighboring colony of Maryland. Plantation agriculture was a primary aspect of the economies of the Southern Colonies and in the British West Indies. They heavily relied on African slave labor to sustain their economic pursuits.\nFrom the beginning of Virginia's settlements in 1587 until the 1680s, the main source of labor and a large portion of the immigrants were indentured servants looking for a new life in the overseas colonies. During the 17th century, indentured servants constituted three-quarters of all European immigrants to the Chesapeake Colonies. Most of the indentured servants were teenagers from England with poor economic prospects at home. Their fathers signed the papers that gave them free passage to America and an unpaid job until they came of age. They were given food, clothing, and housing and taught farming or household skills. American landowners were in need of laborers and were willing to pay for a laborer's passage to America if they served them for several years. By selling passage for five to seven years worth of work, they could then start on their own in America. Many of the migrants from England died in the first few years.\nEconomic advantage also prompted the Darien scheme, an ill-fated venture by the Kingdom of Scotland to settle the Isthmus of Panama in the late 1690s. The Darien Scheme aimed to control trade through that part of the world and thereby promote Scotland into a world trading power. However, it was doomed by poor planning, short provisions, weak leadership, lack of demand for trade goods, and devastating disease. The failure of the Darien scheme was one of the factors that led the Kingdom of Scotland into the Act of Union 1707 with the Kingdom of England, creating the united Kingdom of Great Britain and giving Scotland commercial access to English, now British, colonies.\nDutch.\nThe Netherlands had been part of the Spanish Empire, due to the inheritance of Charles V of Spain. Many Dutch people converted to Protestantism and sought their political independence from Spain. They were a seafaring nation and built a global empire in regions where the Portuguese had originally explored. In the Dutch Golden Age, it sought colonies. In the Americas, the Dutch conquered the northeast of Brazil in 1630, where the Portuguese had built sugar cane plantations worked by black slave labor from Africa. Prince Johan Maurits van Nassau-Siegen became the administrator of the colony (1637\u201343), building a capital city and royal palace, fully expecting the Dutch to retain control of this rich area. As the Dutch had in Europe, it tolerated the presence of Jews and other religious groups in the colony. After Maurits departed in 1643, the Dutch West India Company took over the colony until it was lost to the Portuguese in 1654. The Dutch retained some territory in Dutch Guiana, now Suriname. The Dutch also seized islands in the Caribbean that Spain had originally claimed but had largely abandoned, including Sint Maarten in 1618, Bonaire in 1634, Cura\u00e7ao in 1634, Sint Eustatius in 1636, Aruba in 1637, some of which remain in Dutch hands and retain Dutch cultural traditions.\nOn the east coast of North America, the Dutch planted the colony of New Netherland on the lower end of the island of Manhattan, at New Amsterdam starting in 1624. The Dutch sought to protect their investments and purchased Manhattan from a band of Canarse from Brooklyn who occupied the bottom quarter of Manhattan, known then as the Manhattoes, for 60 guilders' worth of trade goods. Minuit conducted the transaction with the Canarse chief Seyseys, who accepted valuable merchandise in exchange for an island that was actually mostly controlled by another indigenous group, the Weckquaesgeeks. Dutch fur traders set up a network upstream on the Hudson River. There were Jewish settlers from 1654 onward, and they remained following the English capture of New Amsterdam in 1664. The naval capture was despite both nations being at peace with the other.\nRussia.\nRussia came to colonization late compared to Spain or Portugal, or even England. Siberia was added to the Russian Empire and Cossack explorers along rivers sought valuable furs of ermine, sable, and fox. Cossacks enlisted the aid of indigenous Siberians, who sought protection from nomadic peoples, and those peoples paid tribute in fur to the czar. Thus, prior to the eighteenth-century Russian expansion that pushed beyond the Bering Strait dividing Eurasia from North America, Russia had experience with northern indigenous peoples and accumulated wealth from the hunting of fur-bearing animals. Siberia had already attracted a core group of scientists, who sought to map and catalogue the flora, fauna, and other aspects of the natural world.\nA major Russian expedition for exploration was mounted in 1742, contemporaneous with other eighteenth-century European state-sponsored ventures. It was not clear at the time whether Eurasia and North America were completely separate continents. The first voyages were made by Vitus Bering and Aleksei Chirikov, with settlement beginning after 1743. By the 1790s the first permanent settlements were established. Explorations continued down the Pacific coast of North America, and Russia established a settlement in the early nineteenth century at what is now called Fort Ross, California. Russian fur traders forced indigenous Aleut men into seasonal labor. Never very profitable, Russia sold its North American holdings to the United States in 1867, called at the time \"Seward's Folly\".\nTuscany.\nDuke Ferdinand I de Medici made the only Italian attempt to create colonies in America. For this purpose, the Grand Duke organized in 1608 an expedition to the north of Brazil, under the command of the English captain Robert Thornton.\nThornton, on his return from the preparatory trip in 1609 (he had been to the Amazon), found Ferdinand I dead and all projects were cancelled by his successor Cosimo II.\nReligion and colonization.\nRoman Catholics were the first major religious group to immigrate to the New World, as settlers in the Spanish and Portuguese colonies of Portugal and Spain, and later, France in New France. No other religion was tolerated and there was a concerted effort to convert indigenous peoples and black slaves to Catholicism. The Catholic Church established three offices of the Spanish Inquisition, in Mexico City; Lima, Peru; and Cartagena de Indias in Colombia to maintain religious orthodoxy and practice. The Portuguese did not establish a permanent office of the Portuguese Inquisition in Brazil, but did send visitations of inquisitors in the seventeenth century.\nEnglish and Dutch colonies, on the other hand, tended to be more religiously diverse. Settlers to these colonies included Anglicans, Dutch Calvinists, English Puritans and other nonconformists, English Catholics, Scottish Presbyterians, French Protestant Huguenots, German and Swedish Lutherans, as well as Jews, Quakers, Mennonites, Amish, and Moravians. Jews fled to the Dutch colony of New Amsterdam when the Spanish and Portuguese inquisitions cracked down on their presence.\nChristianization.\nBeginning with the first wave of European colonization, the religious discrimination, persecution, and violence toward the Indigenous peoples' native religions was systematically perpetrated by the European Christian colonists and settlers from the 15th\u201316th centuries onwards.\nDuring the Age of Discovery and the following centuries, the Spanish and Portuguese colonial empires were the most active in attempting to convert the Indigenous peoples of the Americas to the Christian religion. Pope Alexander VI issued the \"Inter caetera\" bull in May 1493 that confirmed the lands claimed by the Kingdom of Spain, and mandated in exchange that the Indigenous peoples be converted to Catholic Christianity. During Columbus's second voyage, Benedictine friars accompanied him, along with twelve other priests. With the Spanish conquest of the Aztec empire, evangelization of the dense Indigenous populations was undertaken in what was called the \"spiritual conquest\". Several mendicant orders were involved in the early campaign to convert the Indigenous peoples. Franciscans and Dominicans learned Indigenous languages of the Americas, such as Nahuatl, Mixtec, and Zapotec. One of the first schools for Indigenous peoples in Mexico was founded by Pedro de Gante in 1523. The friars aimed at converting Indigenous leaders, with the hope and expectation that their communities would follow suit. In densely populated regions, friars mobilized Indigenous communities to build churches, making the religious change visible; these churches and chapels were often in the same places as old temples, often using the same stones. \"Native peoples exhibited a range of responses, from outright hostility to active embrace of the new religion.\" In central and southern Mexico where there was an existing Indigenous tradition of creating written texts, the friars taught Indigenous scribes to write their own languages in Latin letters. There is a significant body of texts in Indigenous languages created by and for Indigenous peoples in their own communities for their own purposes. In frontier areas where there were no settled Indigenous populations, friars and Jesuits often created missions, bringing together dispersed Indigenous populations in communities supervised by the friars in order to more easily preach the gospel and ensure their adherence to the faith. These missions were established throughout Spanish America which extended from the southwestern portions of current-day United States through Mexico and to Argentina and Chile.\nAs slavery was prohibited between Christians and could only be imposed upon non-Christian prisoners of war and/or men already sold as slaves, the debate on Christianization was particularly acute during the early 16th century, when Spanish conquerors and settlers sought to mobilize Indigenous labor. Later, two Dominican friars, Bartolom\u00e9 de Las Casas and the philosopher Juan Gin\u00e9s de Sep\u00falveda, held the Valladolid debate, with the former arguing that Native Americans were endowed with souls like all other human beings, while the latter argued to the contrary to justify their enslavement. In 1537, the papal bull \"Sublimis Deus\" definitively recognized that Native Americans possessed souls, thus prohibiting their enslavement, without putting an end to the debate. Some claimed that a native who had rebelled and then been captured could be enslaved nonetheless.\nWhen the first Franciscans arrived in Mexico in 1524, they burned the sacred places dedicated to the Indigenous peoples' native religions. However, in Pre-Columbian Mexico, burning the temple of a conquered group was standard practice, shown in Indigenous manuscripts, such as Codex Mendoza. Conquered Indigenous groups expected to take on the gods of their new overlords, adding them to the existing pantheon. They likely were unaware that their conversion to Christianity entailed the complete and irrevocable renunciation of their ancestral religious beliefs and practices. In 1539, Mexican bishop Juan de Zum\u00e1rraga oversaw the trial and execution of the Indigenous nobleman Carlos of Texcoco for apostasy from Christianity. Following that, the Catholic Church removed Indigenous converts from the jurisdiction of the Inquisition, since it had a chilling effect on evangelization. In creating a protected group of Christians, Indigenous men no longer could aspire to be ordained Christian priests.\nThroughout the Americas, the Jesuits were active in attempting to convert the Indigenous peoples to Christianity. They had considerable success on the frontiers in New France and Portuguese Brazil, most famously with Antonio de Vieira, S.J; and in Paraguay, almost an autonomous state within a state. The \"Mamusse Wunneetupanatamwe Up-Biblum God\", a translation by John Eliot of the gospel into Algonquian, was published in 1663.\nDisease, genocides, and indigenous population loss.\nThe European lifestyle included a long history of sharing close quarters with domesticated animals such as cows, pigs, sheep, goats, horses, dogs and various domesticated fowl, from which many diseases originally stemmed. In contrast to the indigenous people, the Europeans had developed a richer endowment of antibodies. The large-scale contact with Europeans after 1492 introduced Eurasian germs to the indigenous people of the Americas.\nEpidemics of smallpox (1518, 1521, 1525, 1558, 1589), typhus (1546), influenza (1558), diphtheria (1614) and measles (1618) swept the Americas subsequent to European contact, killing between 10 million and 100 million people, up to 95% of the indigenous population of the Americas. The cultural and political instability attending these losses appears to have been of substantial aid in the efforts of various colonists in New England and Massachusetts to acquire control over the great wealth in land and resources of which indigenous societies had customarily made use.\nSuch diseases yielded human mortality of unquestionably enormous gravity and scale \u2013 and this has profoundly confused efforts to determine its full extent with any true precision. Estimates of the pre-Columbian population of the Americas vary tremendously. Others have argued that significant variations in population size over pre-Columbian history are reason to view higher-end estimates with caution. Such estimates may reflect historical population maxima, while indigenous populations may have been at a level somewhat below these maxima or in a moment of decline in the period just prior to contact with Europeans. Indigenous populations hit their ultimate lows in most areas of the Americas in the early 20th century; in a number of cases, growth has returned.\nAccording to scientists from University College London, the colonization of the Americas by Europeans killed so much of the indigenous population that it resulted in climate change and global cooling. Some contemporary scholars also attribute significant indigenous population losses in the Caribbean to the widespread practice of slavery and deadly forced labor in gold and silver mines. Historian Andr\u00e9s Res\u00e9ndez, supports this claim and argues that indigenous populations were smaller previous estimations and \"a nexus of slavery, overwork and famine killed more Indians in the Caribbean than smallpox, influenza and malaria.\"\nAccording to the Cambridge World History, the Oxford Handbook of Genocide Studies, and the Cambridge World History of Genocide, colonial policies in some cases included the deliberate genocide of indigenous peoples in North America. According to the Cambridge World History of Genocide, Spanish colonization of the Americas also included genocidal massacres.\nAccording to Adam Jones, genocidal methods included the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;* Genocidal massacres\nSlavery.\nIndigenous population loss following European contact directly led to Spanish explorations beyond the Caribbean islands they initially claimed and settled in the 1490s, since they required a labor force to both produce food and to mine gold. Slavery was not unknown in Indigenous societies. With the arrival of European colonists, enslavement of Indigenous peoples \"became commodified, expanded in unexpected ways, and came to resemble the kinds of human trafficking that are recognizable to us today\".\nWhile the disease was the main killer of indigenous peoples, the practice of slavery and forced labor was also a significant contributor to the indigenous death toll. With the arrival of Europeans other than the Spanish, enslavement of native populations increased since there were no prohibitions against slavery until decades later. It is estimated that from Columbus's arrival to the end of the 19th century between 2.5 and 5 million Native Americans were forced into slavery. Indigenous men, women, and children were often forced into labor in sparsely populated frontier settings, in the household, or in the toxic gold and silver mines. This practice was known as the \"encomienda\" system and granted free native labor to the Spaniards. Based upon the practice of exacting tribute from Muslims and Jews during the Reconquista, the Spanish Crown granted a number of native laborers to an \"encomendero\", who was usually a conquistador or other prominent Spanish male. Under the grant, they were theoretically bound to both protect the natives and convert them to Christianity. In exchange for their forced conversion to Christianity, the natives paid tributes in the form of gold, agricultural products, and labor. The Spanish Crown tried to terminate the system through the Laws of Burgos (1512\u201313) and the New Laws of the Indies (1542). However, the encomenderos refused to comply with the new measures and the indigenous people continued to be exploited. Eventually, the encomienda system was replaced by the \"repartimiento\" system which was not abolished until the late 18th century.\nIn the Caribbean, deposits of gold were quickly exhausted and the precipitous drop in the indigenous population meant a severe labor shortage. Spaniards sought a high-value, low-bulk export product to make their fortunes. Cane sugar was the answer. It had been cultivated on the Iberian Atlantic islands. It was a highly desirable, expensive foodstuff. The problem of a labor force was solved by the importation of African slaves, initiating the creation of sugar plantations worked by chattel slaves. Plantations required a significant workforce to be purchased, housed, and fed; capital investment in building sugar mills on-site, since once cane was cut, the sugar content rapidly declined. Plantation owners were linked to creditors and a network of merchants to sell processed sugar in Europe. The whole system was predicated on a huge, enslaved population. The Portuguese controlled the African slave trade, since the division of spheres with Spain in the Treaty of Tordesillas, they controlled the African coasts. Black slavery dominated the labor force in tropical zones, particularly where sugar was cultivated, in Portuguese Brazil, the English, French, and Dutch Caribbean islands. On the mainland of North America, the English southern colonies imported black slaves, starting in Virginia in 1619, to cultivate other tropical or semi-tropical crops such as tobacco, rice, and cotton.\nAlthough black slavery is most associated with agricultural production, in Spanish America enslaved and free blacks and mulattoes were found in numbers in cities, working as artisans. Most newly transported African slaves were not Christians, but their conversion was a priority. For the Catholic Church, black slavery was not incompatible with Christianity. The Jesuits created hugely profitable agricultural enterprises and held a significant black slave labor force. European whites often justified the practice through the belts of latitude theory, supported by Aristotle and Ptolemy. In this perspective, belts of latitude wrapped around the Earth and corresponded with specific human traits. The peoples from the \"cold zone\" in Northern Europe were \"of lesser prudence\", while those of the \"hot zone\" in sub-Sahara Africa were intelligent but \"weaker and less spirited\". According to the theory, those of the \"temperate zone\" across the Mediterranean reflected an ideal balance of strength and prudence. Such ideas about latitude and character justified a natural human hierarchy.\nAfrican slaves were a highly valuable commodity, enriching those involved in the trade. Africans were transported to slave ships to the Americas and were primarily obtained from their African homelands by coastal tribes who captured and sold them. Europeans traded for slaves with the local native African tribes who captured them elsewhere in exchange for rum, guns, gunpowder, and other manufactures. The total slave trade to islands in the Caribbean, Brazil, the Portuguese, Spanish, French, Dutch, and British Empires is estimated to have involved 12 million Africans. The vast majority of these slaves went to sugar colonies in the Caribbean and to Brazil, where life expectancy was short and the numbers had to be continually replenished. At most about 600,000 African slaves were imported into the United States, or 5% of the 12 million slaves brought across from Africa.\nColonization and race.\nThroughout the South American hemisphere, there were three large regional sources of populations: Native Americans, arriving Europeans, and forcibly transported Africans. The mixture of these cultures impacted the ethnic makeup that predominates in the hemisphere's largely independent states today. The term to describe someone of mixed European and indigenous ancestry is mestizo while the term to describe someone of mixed European and African ancestry is mulatto. The mestizo and mulatto population are specific to Iberian-influenced current-day Latin America because the conquistadors had (often forced) sexual relations with the indigenous and African women. The social interaction of these three groups of people inspired the creation of a caste system based on skin tone. The hierarchy centered around those with the lightest skin tone and ordered from highest to lowest was the Peninsulares, Criollos, mestizos, indigenous, mulatto, then African.\nUnlike the Iberians, the British men came with families with whom they planned to permanently live in what is now North America.\nThey kept the natives on the margins of colonial society.\nBecause the British colonizers' wives were present, the British men rarely had sexual relations with the native women. While the mestizo and mulatto population make up the majority of people in Latin America today, there is only a small mestizo population in present-day North America (excluding Central America).\nColonization and gender.\nBy the early to mid-16th century, even the Iberian men began to carry their wives and families to the Americas. Some women even carried out the voyage alone. Later, more studies of the role of women and female migration from Europe to the Americas have been made. By the 19th century, the arrival of missionaries in Indigenous territories, along with the imposition of Western educational systems, had introduced colonial concepts of gender to the Americas.\nImpact of colonial land ownership on long-term development.\nEventually, most of the Western Hemisphere came under the control of Western European governments, leading to changes to its landscape, population, and plant and animal life. In the 19th century, over 50 million people left Western Europe for the Americas. The post-1492 era is known as the period of the Columbian exchange, a dramatically widespread exchange of animals, plants, culture, human populations (including slaves), ideas, and communicable disease between the American and Afro-Eurasian hemispheres following Columbus's voyages to the Americas.\nMost scholars writing at the end of the 19th century estimated that the pre-Columbian population was as low as 10 million; by the end of the 20th century most scholars gravitated to a middle estimate of around 50 million, with some historians arguing for an estimate of 100 million or more. A recent estimate is that there were about 60.5 million people living in the Americas immediately before depopulation, of which 90 per cent, mostly in Central and South America, perished from wave after wave of disease, along with war and slavery playing their part.\nGeographic differences between the colonies played a large determinant in the types of political and economic systems that later developed. In their paper on institutions and long-run growth, economists Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson argue that certain natural endowments gave rise to distinct colonial policies promoting either smallholder or coerced labor production. Densely settled populations, for example, were more easily exploitable and profitable as slave labor. In these regions, landowning elites were economically incentivized to develop forced labor arrangements such as the Peru mit'a system or Argentinian latifundias without regard for democratic norms. French and British colonial leaders, conversely, were incentivized to develop capitalist markets, property rights, and democratic institutions in response to natural environments that supported smallholder production over forced labor.\nJames Mahoney proposes that colonial policy choices made at critical junctures regarding land ownership in coffee-rich Central America fostered enduring path dependent institutions. Coffee economies in Guatemala and El Salvador, for example, were centralized around large plantations that operated under coercive labor systems. By the 19th century, their political structures were largely authoritarian and militarized. In Colombia and Costa Rica, conversely, liberal reforms were enacted at critical junctures to expand commercial agriculture, and they ultimately raised the bargaining power of the middle class. Both nations eventually developed more democratic and egalitarian institutions than their highly concentrated landowning counterparts.\nList of European colonies in the Americas.\nThere were at least a dozen European countries involved in the colonization of the Americas. The following list indicates those countries and the Western Hemisphere territories they worked to control.\nExhibitions and collections.\nIn 2007, the Smithsonian Institution National Museum of American History and the Virginia Historical Society (VHS) co-organized a traveling exhibition to recount the strategic alliances and violent conflict between European empires (English, Spanish, French) and the Native people living in North America. The exhibition was presented in three languages and with multiple perspectives. Artefacts on display included rare surviving Native and European artefacts, maps, documents, and ceremonial objects from museums and royal collections on both sides of the Atlantic. The exhibition opened in Richmond, Virginia on March 17, 2007, and closed at the Smithsonian International Gallery on October 31, 2009.\nThe related online exhibition explores the international origins of the societies of Canada and the United States and commemorates the 400th anniversary of three lasting settlements in Jamestown (1607), Quebec City (1608), and Santa Fe (1609). The site is accessible in three languages.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt; "}
{"id": "52448", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52448", "title": "883", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 883 (DCCCLXXXIII) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nArabian Empire.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52449", "revid": "1275157153", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52449", "title": "933", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 933 (CMXXXIII) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAfrica.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52450", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52450", "title": "936", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 936 (CMXXXVI) was a leap year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52451", "revid": "9719271", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52451", "title": "Russian colonization of North America", "text": "From 1732 to 1867, the Russian Empire laid claim to northern Pacific Coast territories in the Americas. Russian colonial possessions in the Americas were collectively known as Russian America from 1799 to 1867. It consisted mostly of present-day Alaska in the United States, but also included the outpost of Fort Ross in California. Russian Creole settlements were concentrated in Alaska, including the capital, New Archangel (), which is now Sitka.\nRussian expansion eastward began in 1552, and Russian explorers reached the Pacific Ocean in 1639. In 1725, Emperor Peter the Great ordered navigator Vitus Bering to explore the North Pacific for potential colonization. The Russians were primarily interested in the abundance of fur-bearing mammals on Alaska's coast, as stocks had been depleted by overhunting in Siberia. Bering's first voyage was foiled by thick fog and ice, but in 1741 a second voyage by Bering and Aleksei Chirikov discovered part of the North American mainland. Bering claimed the Alaskan country for the Russian Empire. Russia later confirmed its rule over the territory with the of 1799 which established the southern border of Russian America along the 55th parallel north. The decree also provided monopolistic privileges to the state-sponsored Russian-American Company (RAC) and established the Russian Orthodox Church in Alaska.\nRussian (trappers and hunters) quickly developed the maritime fur trade, which instigated several conflicts between the Aleuts and Russians in the 1760s. The fur trade proved to be a lucrative enterprise, capturing the attention of other European nations. In response to potential competitors, the Russians extended their claims eastward from the Commander Islands to the shores of Alaska. In 1784, with encouragement from Empress Catherine the Great, explorer Grigory Shelekhov founded Russia's first permanent settlement in Alaska at Three Saints Bay. Ten years later, the first group of Orthodox Christian missionaries arrived, evangelizing thousands of Native Americans, many of whose descendants continue to maintain the religion. By the late 1780s, trade relations had opened with the Tlingits, and in 1799 the RAC was formed to monopolize the fur trade, also serving as an imperialist vehicle for the Russification of Alaska Natives.\nAngered by encroachment on their land and other grievances, the indigenous peoples' relations with the Russians deteriorated. In 1802, Tlingit warriors destroyed several Russian settlements, most notably Redoubt Saint Michael (Old Sitka), leaving New Russia as the only remaining outpost on mainland Alaska. This failed to expel the Russians, who re-established their presence two years later following the Battle of Sitka. Peace negotiations between the Russians and Native Americans would later establish a , a situation that, with few interruptions, lasted for the duration of Russian presence in Alaska. In 1808, Redoubt Saint Michael was rebuilt as New Archangel and became the capital of Russian America after the previous colonial headquarters were moved from Kodiak. A year later, the RAC began expanding its operations to more abundant sea otter grounds in Northern California, where Fort Ross was built in 1812.\nBy the middle of the 19th century, profits from Russia's North American colonies were in steep decline. Competition with the British Hudson's Bay Company had brought the sea otter to near extinction, while the population of bears, wolves, and foxes on land was also nearing depletion. Faced with the reality of periodic Native American revolts, the political ramifications of the Crimean War, and the inability to fully colonize the Americas to their satisfaction, the Russians concluded that their North American colonies were too expensive to retain. Eager to release themselves of the burden, the Russians sold Fort Ross in 1841, and in 1867, after less than a month of negotiations, the United States accepted Emperor Alexander II's offer to sell Alaska. The Alaska Purchase for $7.2 million (equivalent to $ million in 2024) ended Imperial Russia's colonial presence in the Americas.\nExploration.\nThe earliest written accounts indicate that the Eurasian Russians were the first Europeans to reach Alaska. There is an unofficial assumption that Eurasian Slavic navigators reached the coast of Alaska long before the 18th century.\nIn 1648, Semyon Dezhnev sailed from the mouth of the Kolyma River through the Arctic Ocean and around the eastern tip of Asia to the Anadyr River. One legend holds that some of his boats were carried off course and reached Alaska. However, no evidence of settlement survives. Dezhnev's discovery was never forwarded to the central government, leaving open the question of whether or not Siberia was connected to North America.\nThe first sighting of the Alaskan coastline was in 1732; this sighting was made by the Russian maritime explorer and navigator Ivan Fedorov from the sea near present-day Cape Prince of Wales on the eastern boundary of the Bering Strait opposite Russian Cape Dezhnev. He did not land.\nThe first landfall happened in southern Alaska in 1741 during the Russian exploration by Vitus Bering and Aleksei Chirikov. In the early 1720s, Tsar Peter the Great called for another expedition. As a part of the 1733\u20131743 Second Kamchatka expedition, the \"Sv. Petr\" under the Danish-born Russian Vitus Bering and the \"Sv. Pavel\" under the Russian Alexei Chirikov set sail from the Kamchatkan port of Petropavlovsk in June 1741. They were soon separated, but each continued sailing east. On July 15, Chirikov sighted land, probably the west side of Prince of Wales Island in southeast Alaska. He sent a group of men ashore in a longboat, making them the first Europeans to land on the northwestern coast of North America. On roughly July 16, Bering and the crew of \"Sv. Petr\" sighted Mount Saint Elias on the Alaskan mainland; they turned westward toward Russia soon afterward. Meanwhile, Chirikov and the \"Sv. Pavel\" headed back to Russia in October with news of the land they had found. In November, Bering's ship was wrecked on Bering Island. There Bering fell ill and died, and high winds dashed the \"Sv. Petr\" to pieces. After the stranded crew wintered on the island, the survivors built a boat from the wreckage and set sail for Russia in August 1742. Bering's crew reached the shore of Kamchatka in 1742, carrying word of the expedition. The high quality of the sea otter pelts they brought sparked Russian settlement in Alaska.\nDue to the distance from central authority in St. Petersburg, and combined with the difficult geography and lack of adequate resources, the next state-sponsored expedition would wait more than two decades until 1766, when captains Pyotr Krenitsyn and Mikhail Levashov embarked for the Aleutian Islands, eventually reaching their destination after initially been wrecked on Bering Island. Between 1774 and 1800 Spain also led several expeditions to Alaska to assert its claim over the Pacific Northwest. These claims were later abandoned at the turn of the 19th century following the aftermath of the Nootka Crisis. Count Nikolay Rumyantsev funded Russia's first naval circumnavigation under the joint command of Adam Johann von Krusenstern and Nikolai Rezanov in 1803\u20131806, and was instrumental in the outfitting of the voyage of the \"Riurik\"'s circumnavigation of 1814\u20131816, which provided substantial scientific information on Alaska's and California's flora and fauna, and important ethnographic information on Alaskan and Californian (among other) natives.\nTrading company.\nImperial Russia was unique among European empires for having no state sponsorship of foreign expeditions or territorial (conquest) settlement. The first state-protected trading company for sponsoring such activities in the Americas was the Shelikhov-Golikov Company of Grigory Shelikhov and Ivan Larionovich Golikov. A number of other companies were operating in Russian America during the 1780s. Shelikhov petitioned the government for exclusive control, but in 1788 Catherine II decided to grant his company a monopoly only over the area it had already occupied. Other traders were free to compete elsewhere. Catherine's decision was issued as the imperial (proclamation) of September 28, 1788.\nThe Shelikhov-Golikov Company formed the basis for the Russian-American Company (RAC). Its charter was laid out in 1799 by the new Tsar Paul I, which granted the company monopolistic control over trade in the Aleutian Islands and the North American mainland, south to 55\u00b0 north latitude. The RAC was Russia's first joint stock company, and came under the direct authority of the Ministry of Commerce of Imperial Russia. Siberian merchants based in Irkutsk were initially the major stockholders, but were soon replaced by Russia's nobility and aristocracy based in Saint Petersburg. The company constructed settlements in what is today Alaska, Hawaii, and California.\nRussian colonization.\n1740s to 1800.\nBeginning in 1743, small associations of fur-traders began to sail from the shores of the Russian Pacific coast to the Aleutian islands.\nRather than hunting the marine life themselves, the Sibero-Russian forced the Aleuts to do the work for them, often by taking hostage family members in exchange for hunted seal furs. This pattern of colonial exploitation resembled some of the practices in their expansion into Siberia and the Russian Far East.\nAs word spread of the potential riches in furs, competition among Russian companies increased and a large number of Aleuts were enserfed.\nAs the animal populations declined, the Aleuts, already too dependent on the new barter economy fostered by the Russian fur trade, were increasingly coerced into taking greater and greater risks in the highly dangerous waters of the North Pacific to hunt for more otter. As the Shelekhov-Golikov Company of 1783\u20131799 developed a monopoly, its use of skirmishes and violent incidents turned into systematic violence as a tool of colonial exploitation of the indigenous people. When the Aleutian serfs revolted and won some victories, the retaliated, killing many and destroying their boats and hunting gear, leaving them no means of survival. The most devastating effects came from disease: during the first two generations (1741\u20131759 &amp; 1781\u20131799) of Sibero-Russian contact, 80 percent of the Aleut population died from Eurasian infectious diseases; these were by then endemic among Eurasians, but the Aleuts had no immunity against the diseases.\nThough the Alaskan colony was never very profitable because of the costs of transportation, most Russian traders were determined to keep the land for themselves. In 1784, Grigory Ivanovich Shelekhov, who later set up the Russian-American Company\nthat developed into the Alaskan colonial administration, arrived in Three Saints Bay on Kodiak Island with two ships, the \"Three Saints\" () and the \"St. Simon\". The Koniag Alaska Natives harassed the Russian party and Shelekhov responded by killing hundreds and taking hostages to enforce the obedience of the rest. Having established his authority on Kodiak Island, Shelekhov founded the second permanent Russian settlement in Alaska (after Unalaska, permanently settled in 1774) on the island's Three Saints Bay.\nIn 1790, Shelekhov, back in Russia, hired Alexander Andreyevich Baranov to manage his Alaskan fur enterprise. Baranov moved the colony to the northeast end of Kodiak Island, where timber was available. The site later developed into what is now the city of Kodiak. Russian colonists took Koniag's wives and started families whose surnames continue today, such as Panamaroff, Petrikoff, and Kvasnikoff. In 1795 Baranov, concerned by the sight of non-Russian Europeans trading with the natives in southeast Alaska, established Mikhailovsk north of present-day Sitka. He bought the land from the Tlingit, but in 1802, while Baranov was away, Tlingit from a neighboring settlement attacked and destroyed Mikhailovsk. Baranov returned with a Russian warship and razed the Tlingit village. He built the settlement of New Archangel () on the ruins of Mikhailovsk. It became the capital of Russian America \u2013 and later the city of Sitka.\nAs Baranov secured the Russians' settlements in Alaska, the Shelekhov family continued to lobby Empress Catherine the Great for a monopoly on Alaska's fur trade. In 1799 Shelekhov's son-in-law, Nikolay Petrovich Rezanov, succeeded when he acquired a monopoly on the American fur trade from Emperor Paul I. Rezanov formed the Russian-American Company. As part of the deal, the Emperor expected the company to establish new settlements in Alaska. Thus, while the company was focused on its commercial enterprise, it also effectively became an outpost for the Russian Empire in North America.\n1800 to 1867.\nBy 1804, Baranov, now manager of the Russian\u2013American Company, had consolidated the company's hold on fur trade activities in the Americas following his suppression of the Tlingit clan at the Battle of Sitka. The Russians never fully colonized Alaska. For the most part, they clung to the coast and shunned the interior.\nFrom 1812 to 1841, the Russians operated Fort Ross, California. From 1814 to 1817, Russian Fort Elizabeth was operating in the Kingdom of Hawaii. By the 1830s, the Russian monopoly on trade was weakening. The British Hudson's Bay Company was leased the southern edge of Russian America in 1839 under the RAC-HBC Agreement, establishing Fort Stikine which began siphoning off trade.\nA company ship visited the Russian American outposts only every two or three years to give provisions. Because of the limited stock of supplies, trading was incidental compared to trapping operations under the Aleutian laborers. This left the Russian outposts dependent upon British and American merchants for sorely needed food and materials; in such a situation Baranov knew that the RAC establishments \"could not exist without trading with foreigners.\" Ties with Americans were particularly advantageous since they could sell furs at Guangzhou, close to the Russians at the time. The downside was that American hunters and trappers encroached on territory Russians considered theirs.\nStarting with the destruction of the \"Phoenix\" in 1799, several RAC ships sank or were damaged in storms, leaving the RAC outposts with scant resources. On June 24, 1800, an American vessel sailed to Kodiak Island. Baranov negotiated the sale of over 12,000 rubles worth of goods carried on the ship, averting \"imminent starvation.\" During his tenure, Baranov traded over 2 million rubles worth of furs for American supplies, to the consternation of the board of directors. From 1806 to 1818 Baranov shipped 15 million rubles worth of furs to Russia, only receiving under 3 million rubles in provisions, barely half of the expenses spent solely on the Saint Petersburg company office.\nThe Russo-American Treaty of 1824 recognized exclusive Russian rights to the fur trade north of latitude 54\u00b040'N, with the American rights and claims restricted to below that line. This division was repeated in the Treaty of Saint Petersburg, a parallel agreement with the British in 1825 (which also settled most of the border with British North America). However, the agreements soon went by the wayside, and with the retirement of Alexandr Baranov in 1818, the Russian hold on Alaska was further weakened.\nWhen the Russian-American Company's charter was renewed in 1821, it stipulated that the chief managers from then on be naval officers. Most naval officers did not have any experience in the fur trade, so the company suffered. The second charter also tried to cut off all contact with foreigners, especially the competitive Americans. This strategy backfired since the Russian colony had become used to relying on American supply ships, and the United States had become a valued customer for furs. Eventually the Russian\u2013American Company agreed with the Hudson's Bay Company, which gave the British rights to sail through Russian territory.\nColonies.\nThe first Russian colony in Alaska was founded in 1784 by Grigory Shelikhov. Subsequently, Russian explorers and settlers continued to establish trading posts in mainland Alaska, on the Aleutian Islands, Hawaii, and Northern California.\nAlaska.\nThe Russian-American Company was formed in 1799 with the influence of Nikolay Rezanov to hunt sea otters for their fur. The peak population of the Russian colonies was about 4,000 although almost all of these were Aleuts, Tlingits and other Native Alaskans. The number of Russians rarely exceeded 500 at any one time.\nCalifornia.\nThe Russians established an outpost called Fortress Ross (Russian: , ) in 1812 near Bodega Bay in Northern California, north of San Francisco Bay.\nThe Fort Ross colony included a sealing station on the Farallon Islands off San Francisco.\nBy 1818 Fort Ross had a population of 128, consisting of 26 Russians and 102 Native Americans. The Russians maintained it until 1841 when they left the region. As of 2015[ [update]], Fort Ross is a Federal National Historical Landmark on the National Register of Historic Places. It is preserved\u2014restored in California's Fort Ross State Historic Park, about northwest of San Francisco.\nSpanish concern about Russian colonial intrusion prompted the authorities in New Spain to initiate the upper Province settlement, with (forts), (villages), and the California missions. After declaring their independence in 1821, the Mexicans also asserted themselves in opposition to the Russians: the (Sonoma Mission, 1823) specifically responded to the presence of the Russians at Fort Ross; and Mexico established the or Sonoma Barracks in 1836, with General as the Commandant of the Northern Frontier of the Province.\nMissionary activity.\nAt Three Saints Bay, Shelekov built a school to teach the natives to read and write Russian and introduced the first resident missionaries and clergymen who spread the Russian Orthodox faith. This faith (with its liturgies and texts, translated into Aleut at a very early stage) had been informally introduced, in the 1740s\u20131780s. Some fur traders founded local families or symbolically adopted Aleut trade partners as godchildren to gain their loyalty through this special personal bond. The missionaries soon opposed the exploitation of the indigenous populations, and their reports provide evidence of the violence exercised to establish colonial rule in this period.\nThe RAC's monopoly was continued by Emperor Alexander I in 1821, on the condition that the company would financially support missionary efforts. The company board ordered chief manager Arvid Adolf Ethol\u00e9n to build a residency in New Archangel for bishop Veniaminov When a Lutheran church was planned for the Finnish population of New Archangel, Veniamiov prohibited any Lutheran pastors from proselytizing to neighboring Tlingits. Veniamiov faced difficulties in exercising influence over the Tlingit people outside New Archangel, due to their political independence from the RAC leaving them less receptive to Russian cultural influences than Aleuts. A smallpox epidemic spread throughout Alaska in 1835\u20131837 and the medical aid given by Veniamiov created converts to Orthodoxy.\nInspired by the same pastoral theology as Bartolom\u00e9 de las Casas or St. Francis Xavier, the origins of which were in early Christianity's need to adapt to the cultures of Classical antiquity, missionaries in Russian America applied a strategy that placed value on local cultures and encouraged indigenous leadership in parish life and missionary activity. When compared to later Protestant missionaries, the Orthodox policies \"in retrospect proved to be relatively sensitive to indigenous Alaskan cultures.\" This cultural policy was originally intended to gain the loyalty of the indigenous populations by establishing the authority of Church and State as protectors of over 10,000 inhabitants of Russian America. (The number of ethnic Russian settlers had always been less than the record 812, almost all concentrated in Sitka and Kodiak).\nDifficulties arose in training Russian priests to attain fluency in any of the various Indigenous Alaskan languages. To redress this, Veniaminov opened a seminary for mixed-race and native candidates for the Church in 1845. Promising students were sent to additional schools in either Saint Petersburg or Irkutsk, the later city becoming the original seminary's new location in 1858. The Holy Synod instructed for the opening of four missionary schools in 1841, to be located in Amlia, Chiniak, Kenai, and Nushagak. Veniamiov established the curriculum, which included Russian history, literacy, mathematics, and religious studies.\nA side effect of the missionary strategy was the development of a new and autonomous form of indigenous identity. Many native traditions survived within local \"Russian\" Orthodox tradition and in the religious life of the villages. Part of this modern indigenous identity is an alphabet and the basis for written literature in nearly all of the ethnic-linguistic groups in the Southern half of Alaska. Father Ivan Veniaminov (later St. Innocent of Alaska), famous throughout Russian America, developed an Aleut dictionary for hundreds of language and dialect words based on the Russian alphabet.\nThe most visible trace of the Russian colonial period in contemporary Alaska is the nearly 90 Russian Orthodox parishes with a membership of over 20,000 men, women, and children, almost exclusively indigenous people. These include several Athabascan groups of the interior, very large Yup'ik communities, and quite nearly all of the Aleut and Alutiiq populations. Among the few Tlingit Orthodox parishes, the large group in Juneau adopted Orthodox Christianity only after the Russian colonial period, in an area where there had been no Russian settlers nor missionaries. The widespread and continuing local Russian Orthodox practices are likely the result of the syncretism of local beliefs with Christianity.\nObservers noted that while their religious ties were tenuous, before the sale of Alaska there were 400 native converts to Orthodoxy in New Archangel. Tlingit practitioners declined in number after the lapse of Russian rule, until there were only 117 practitioners in 1882 residing in the place, by then renamed as Sitka.\nPurchase of Alaska.\nBy the 1860s, the Russian government was ready to abandon its Russian America colony. Over-hunting had severely reduced the fur-bearing animal population, and competition from the British and Americans exacerbated the situation. This, combined with the difficulties of supplying and protecting such a distant colony, reduced interest in the territory. In addition, Russia was in a difficult financial position and feared losing Russian Alaska without compensation in some future conflict, especially with the British. The Russians believed that in a dispute with Britain, their hard-to-defend region might become a prime target for British aggression from British Columbia, and would be easily captured. So following the Union victory in the American Civil War, Tsar Alexander II instructed the Russian minister to the United States, Eduard de Stoeckl, to enter into negotiations with the United States Secretary of State William H. Seward in the beginning of March 1867. At the instigation of Seward the United States Senate approved the purchase, known as the Alaska Purchase, from the Russian Empire. The cost was set at 2 cents an acre, which came to a total of $7,200,000 on April 9, 1867. The canceled check is in the present day United States National Archives.\nAfter Russian America was sold to the U.S. in 1867, for $7.2 million (2 cents per acre, ), all the holdings of the Russian\u2013American Company were liquidated.\nFollowing the transfer, many elders of the local Tlingit tribe maintained that \"Castle Hill\" comprised the only land that Russia was entitled to sell. Other indigenous groups also argued that they had never given up their land; the Americans had encroached on it and taken it over. Native land claims were not fully addressed until the latter half of the 20th century, with the signing by Congress and leaders of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act.\nAt the height of Russian America, the Russian population had reached 700, compared to 40,000 Aleuts. They and the Creoles, who had been guaranteed the privileges of citizens in the United States, were given the opportunity to become citizens within three years, but few decided to exercise that option. General Jefferson C. Davis ordered the Russians out of their homes in Sitka, maintaining that the dwellings were needed for the Americans. The Russians complained of rowdiness and assaults by the American troops. Many Russians returned to Russia, while others migrated to the Pacific Northwest and California.\nLegacy.\nThe Soviet Union (USSR) released a series of commemorative coins in 1990 and 1991 to mark the 250th anniversary of the first sighting of and claiming domain over Alaska\u2013Russian America. The commemoration consisted of a silver coin, a platinum coin, and two palladium coins in both years.\nThe Alaska Native population was first recorded in the 1880 United States census, and it was estimated that the population had declined from 80,000 in 1741 to 33,000 due to disease. The population continued to decline until 1910 and it was not until 1947 that this number surpassed the 1880 figure. The Alaskan Native peoples claimed that they still had title to the territory in that the U.S. bought the right to negotiate with the indigenous populations, rather than buying the territory outright; however, following the enactment of the Alaska Statehood Act, the U.S. government ceded 44 million acres to Alaska\u2019s native populations.\nIn the early 21st century, Russian officials and pro-Kremlin bloggers have fuelled discussion in Russia, generally facetious, of an ambition to regain control of Alaska. Some Russian ultra-nationalists viewed the purchase as an enormous mistake.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNative Americans\nRussians\nHistory\nOther topics\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52452", "revid": "50900664", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52452", "title": "John Gorton", "text": "Prime Minister of Australia from 1968 to 1971\nSir John Grey Gorton (9 September 1911 \u2013 19 May 2002) was an Australian politician, farmer and airman who served as the 19th prime minister of Australia from 1968 to 1971. He held office as the leader of the Liberal Party of Australia, having previously served as a senator for Victoria. He was the first and only member of the upper house of the Parliament to assume the office of prime minister.\nGorton was born out of wedlock and had a turbulent childhood. He studied at Brasenose College, Oxford, after finishing his secondary education at Geelong Grammar School, and then returned to Australia to take over his father's property in northern Victoria. Gorton enlisted in the Royal Australian Air Force in 1940, and was a fighter pilot in Malaya and New Guinea during the Second World War. He suffered severe facial injuries in a crash landing on Bintan Island in 1942, and whilst being evacuated, his ship was torpedoed and sunk by a Japanese submarine.\nGorton returned to farming after being discharged in 1944, and was elected to the Kerang Shire Council in 1946; he later served a term as shire president. After a previous unsuccessful candidacy at state level, Gorton was elected to the Senate at the 1949 federal election.\nGorton took a keen interest in foreign policy, and gained a reputation as a strident anti-Communist. Gorton was promoted to the ministry in 1958, and over the following decade held a variety of different portfolios in the governments of Sir Robert Menzies and Harold Holt. He was responsible at various times for the Royal Australian Navy, public works, education, and science. He was elevated to the Cabinet in 1966, and the following year, he was promoted to Leader of the Government in the Senate.\nGorton defeated three other candidates for the Liberal leadership after Harold Holt's disappearance on 17 December 1967. He became the first and only senator to assume the office of Prime Minister, but soon transferred to the House of Representatives in line with constitutional convention.\nHis government continued Australian involvement in the Vietnam War, but began withdrawing troops amid growing public discontent. His government notably encouraged and fostered the re-establishment of the Australian film industry. Gorton retained office at the 1969 federal election in the Coalition's 20th year in office, albeit with a severely reduced majority. After alienating his party's right wing and following the resignation of Malcolm Fraser from his ministry, Gorton resigned as Liberal leader in March 1971 after a confidence motion in his leadership was tied, and was replaced by Billy McMahon. After losing the prime ministership, Gorton was elected deputy leader under McMahon and appointed Minister for Defence; he was sacked for disloyalty after a few months.\nAfter the Coalition's defeat at the 1972 federal election, Gorton unsuccessfully stood as McMahon's replacement. He briefly was an opposition frontbencher under Billy Snedden, but stood down in 1974 and spent the rest of his career as a backbencher. Notably, during this period Gorton moved the motion which decriminalised homosexuality federally and in the territories. Gorton resigned from the Liberal Party when Fraser was elected leader and he denounced the dismissal of the Whitlam government; at the 1975 election he mounted an unsuccessful campaign for the Senate as an Independent in the ACT and advocated for a Labor win. He later spent several years as a political commentator, retiring from public life in 1981.\nGorton's domestic policies, which emphasised centralisation and economic nationalism, were often controversial in his own party, and his individualistic style alienated many of his Cabinet members. His political views widely varied and were incongruous, although he is generally regarded as having shifted further to the left over time after starting his parliamentary career on his party's hard right. Conservatively, he opposed Indigenous land rights, was opposed to an Australian Republic, was and at times fervently supported Australia developing nuclear weapons, but progressively, he staunchly supported drug decriminalisation, LGBT equality and reproductive rights. Evaluations of his prime ministership have been mixed; although he is generally ranked higher than either Holt or McMahon, Gorton is usually considered to have been a transitional prime minister who ultimately fell short of his potential for greatness.\nEarly life.\nBirth and family background.\nJohn Grey Gorton was the second child of Alice Sinn and John Rose Gorton; his older sister Ruth was born in 1909. He had no birth certificate, but official forms recorded his date of birth as 9 September 1911 and his place of birth as Wellington, New Zealand. His birth was registered in the state of Victoria as occurring on that date, but in the inner Melbourne suburb of Prahran. However, that document contained a number of inaccuracies \u2013 his name was given as \"John Alga Gordon\", his parents were recorded as husband and wife, his father's name was incorrect, and his sister was recorded as deceased. At some point before 1932, Gorton's father told him that he had actually been born in Wellington. There are no records of his birth in New Zealand, but his parents are known to have travelled there on several occasions. John Gorton apparently believed he was born in Wellington, listing the city as his place of birth on his RAAF enlistment papers, and claiming so to a biographer in 1968. If he were so, it would make him the only Australian Prime Minister born in New Zealand (and the second to have been originally a New Zealander, after Chris Watson).\nIf John Gorton was indeed born in New Zealand, this would have made him a New Zealand citizen from 1 January 1949 under changes to New Zealand nationality law. Holding dual-citizenship would have rendered Gorton ineligible to sit in Australia's federal parliament under Section 44 of the Australian Constitution. Gorton's eligibility to have sat in parliament throughout his career is therefore unclear.\nGorton's father was born to a middle-class family in Manchester, England, UK. As a young man he moved to Johannesburg, South Africa, where he went into business as a merchant \u2013 during the Boer War, he developed a reputation as a war profiteer. He reputedly escaped the Siege of Ladysmith by sneaking through Boer lines, and then made his way to Australia. He was involved in various business schemes in multiple states, and was to said to have \"lived on the brink of a fortune which never quite materialised\". One of his business partners was the inventor George Julius. At some point, Gorton's father separated from his first wife, Kathleen O'Brien, and began living with Alice Sinn \u2013 born in Melbourne to a German father and an Irish mother. However, Kathleen refused to grant him a divorce. Some official documents record Gorton's parents as having married in New Zealand at some point, but there are no records of this occurring; any such marriage would have been bigamous. Gorton never denied his illegitimacy as an adult, but it did not become generally known until a biography was published during his prime ministership.\nChildhood and adolescence.\nGorton spent his early years living with his maternal grandparents in Port Melbourne, as his parents were frequently away on business trips. When he was about four years old, his parents took him to live with them in Sydney, where they had an apartment at Edgecliff. Gorton began his education at Edgecliff Preparatory School. When he was eight years old, his mother contracted tuberculosis and was sent to a sanatorium to avoid passing on the disease. She died in September 1920, aged 32. Gorton's grieving father sent his son to live with his estranged wife Kathleen. There, he met his sister Ruth for the first time; he had previously been told that she was dead. Although she was his full sibling, she had been raised by Kathleen since birth, and rarely saw her biological parents. Gorton initially lived with Kathleen and Ruth at their home in Cronulla. They later moved into a larger house in Killara, in the north of Sydney.\nWhile living in Killara, Gorton began attending Headfort College, a short-lived private school run by a former Anglican minister. In 1924, he began boarding at Sydney Church of England Grammar School (Shore), initially on a weekly basis but later on a full-time one. He did not excel academically, failing the Intermediate Certificate on his first attempt, but was a well-liked boy and good at sports. Gorton began spending his holidays with his father, who had purchased a property in Mystic Park, Victoria, and planted a citrus orchard. He left Shore at the end of 1926, and the following year began boarding at Geelong Grammar School, which he would attend for four years from 1927 to 1930. He represented the school in athletics, football, and rowing, and in his final year was a school prefect and house captain.\nUniversity.\nAfter leaving Geelong Grammar, Gorton spent a year working on his father's property in Mystic Park. His father then took out a second mortgage to allow him to travel to England and attend Oxford University. Gorton arrived in England in early 1932, and after a period at a \"cramming school\" passed the exam to enter Brasenose College. He also took flying lessons around the same time, and was awarded a pilot's licence in June 1932. Gorton began his degree in October 1932 and finished in June 1935 with an \"upper second\" in history, politics and economics. He was initially something of an outsider, with relatively little money and no social connections. However, his prowess in rowing \u2013 he won the O.U.B.C. Fours in his first year, and was Captain of the Brasenose College Boat Club \u2013 saw him elected to Vincent's Club and Leander Club. In 1934, while on holiday in Spain, he met his future wife Bettina Brown, the younger sister of one of his College friends. They married in early 1935.\nReturn to Australia.\nAfter his graduation, Gorton and his wife returned to Australia via the United States, spending some time with her family in Maine. He had expected to take up a position at The Herald and Weekly Times, Keith Murdoch's newspaper group. However, he arrived in Melbourne to find his father in failing health. His father subsequently required hospitalisation and died in August 1936. Gorton had taken over the management of the orchard as soon as his father entered hospital. He inherited an overdraft of \u00a35,000, which took several years to pay off. However, the property \u2013 located on the western side of Kangaroo Lake \u2013 was in good condition, requiring only minor improvements. He employed up to ten seasonal workers during picking season. Mystic Park remained his primary residence until he was appointed to the ministry, at which point he and his family moved to Canberra.\nMilitary service.\n1940\u20131942.\nOn 31 May 1940, following the outbreak of World War II, Gorton enlisted in the Royal Australian Air Force Reserve. At the age of 29, Gorton was considered too old for pilot training, but he re-applied in September after this rule was relaxed. Gorton was accepted and commissioned into the RAAF on 8 November 1940. He trained as a fighter pilot at Somers, Victoria and Wagga Wagga, New South Wales, before being sent to the UK. Gorton completed his training at RAF Heston and RAF Honiley, with No. 61 Operational Training Unit RAF, flying Supermarine Spitfires. He was disappointed when his first operational posting was No. 135 Squadron RAF, a Hawker Hurricane unit, as he considered the type greatly inferior to Spitfires.\nDuring late 1941, Gorton and other members of his squadron became part of the cadre of a Hurricane wing being formed for service in the Middle East. They were sent by sea, with 50 Hurricanes in crates, travelling around Africa to reduce the risk of attack. In December, when the ship was at Durban, South Africa, it was diverted to Singapore, after Japan entered the war. As it approached its destination in mid-January, Japanese forces were advancing down the Malayan Peninsula. The ship was attacked on at least one occasion by Japanese aircraft, but arrived and unloaded safely after tropical storms made enemy air raids impossible. As the Hurricanes were assembled, the pilots were formed into a composite operational squadron, No. 232 Squadron RAF.\nIn late January 1942, the squadron became operational and joined the remnants of several others that had been in Malaya, operating out of RAF Seletar and RAF Kallang. During one of his first sorties, Gorton was involved in a brief dogfight over the South China Sea, after which he suffered engine failure and was forced to land on Bintan island, 40\u00a0km (25\u00a0mi) south east of Singapore. As he landed, one of the Hurricane's wheels hit an embankment and flipped over. Gorton was not properly strapped in and his face hit the gun sight and windscreen, mutilating his nose and breaking both cheekbones. He also suffered severe lacerations to both arms. He made his way out of the wreck and was rescued by members of the Royal Dutch East Indies Army, who provided some medical treatment. Gorton later claimed that his face was so badly cut and bruised, that a member of the RAF sent to collect him assumed he was near death, collected his personal effects and returned to Singapore without him. By chance, one week later, Sgt Matt O'Mara of No. 453 Squadron RAAF also crash landed on Bintan, and arranged for them to be collected.\nThey arrived back in Singapore, on 11 February, three days after the island had been invaded. As the Allied air force units on Singapore had been destroyed or evacuated by this stage, Gorton was put on the \"Derrymore\", an ammunition ship bound for Batavia (Jakarta). On 13 February, as it neared its destination, the ship was torpedoed by Japanese submarine I-55 Kaidai class submarine and the \"Derrymore\" was abandoned. Gorton then spent almost a day on a crowded liferaft, in shark-infested waters, with little drinking water, until the raft was spotted by HMAS \"Ballarat\", which picked up the passengers and took them to Batavia.\nTwo schoolfriends, who had also been evacuated from Singapore to Batavia, heard that Gorton was in hospital, arranged for them to be put on a ship for Fremantle, which left on 23 February and treated Gorton's wounds. When the ship arrived in Fremantle, on 3 March, one of Gorton's arm wounds had become septic and needed extensive treatment. However, he was more concerned about the effect that the sight of his mutilated face would have on his wife. It is reported that Betty Gorton, who had been running the farm in his absence, was relieved to see Gorton alive.\n1942\u20131944.\nAfter arriving in Australia he was posted to Darwin on 12 August 1942 with No. 77 Squadron RAAF (Kittyhawks). During this time he was involved in his second air accident. While flying P-40E A29-60 on 7 September 1942, he was forced to land due to an incorrectly set fuel cock. Both Gorton and his aircraft were recovered several days later after spending time in the bush. On 21 February 1943 the squadron was relocated to Milne Bay, New Guinea.\nGorton's final air incident came on 18 March 1943. His A29-192 Kittyhawk's engine failed on takeoff, causing the aircraft to flip at the end of the strip. Gorton was unhurt. In March 1944, Gorton was sent back to Australia with the rank of Flight Lieutenant. His final posting was as a Flying Instructor with No. 2 Operational Training Unit at Mildura, Victoria. He was then discharged from the RAAF on 5 December 1944.\nDuring late 1944 Gorton went to Heidelberg Hospital for surgery which could not fully repair his facial injuries; he was left permanently disfigured.\nEarly political involvement.\nAfter resuming his life in Mystic Park, Gorton was elected unopposed to the Kerang Shire Council in September 1946. He remained on the council until 1952, overlapping with his first term in the Senate, and from 1949 to 1950 was shire president. Although he had little previous experience, Gorton began to develop a reputation as a powerful public speaker. His first major speech, in April 1946, was an address to a welcome-home gathering for returned soldiers at the Mystic Park Hall. In what John Brogden has described as \"Australia's best unknown political speech\", he exhorted his audience to honour those who had died in the war and saying \"we must do our most to alleviate the immediate suffering, and we must take our place in the world, not as a self-sufficient, sealed-off unit, but as a member of a family, the members of which are dependent the one upon the other\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I want you to forget it is I who am standing here. And I want you to see instead Bob Davey. And behind him I want you to see an army; regiment on regiment of young men, dead. They say to you, burning in tanks and aeroplanes, drowning in submarines, shattered and broken by high explosive shells, we gave the last full measure of devotion. We bought your freedom with our lives. So take this freedom. Guard it as we have guarded it, use it as we can no longer use it, and with it as a foundation, build. Build a world in which meanness and poverty, tyranny and hate, have no existence. If you see and hear these men behind me \u2013 do not fail them.\u2014\u200a\nGorton's next major speech was made in September 1947, at a rally against the Chifley government's attempt to nationalise private banks. He told the crowd in Kerang that they should oppose the establishment of banks run by politicians, and objected in particular to the government's decision not to take the issue to a referendum. According to his biographer Ian Hancock, \"the bank nationalisation issue marked his advance beyond purely local politics and stamped him firmly and publicly as an anti-socialist\".\nGorton had been a supporter of the Country Party before the war, along with most of his neighbours. Over time, he became frustrated with the party's frequent squabbles with the Liberal Party and its willingness to cooperate with the Labor Party. After the Victorian Country Party withdrew from its coalition with the Liberals in December 1948, Gorton became involved in efforts to form a new anti-socialist movement that would absorb both parties. At some point he was introduced to Magnus Cormack, the state president of the Liberals, who became something of a mentor. In March 1949, Gorton was elected to the state executive of the new organisation, which named itself the Liberal and Country Party (LCP). On a number of occasions he addressed Country Party gatherings, urging its members to join the new party and stressing that it would not neglect rural interests, as many feared. However, the LCP did not achieve its goal of uniting the anti-Labor forces, as most Country Party members viewed it as simply a takeover attempt; the new party affiliated with the federal Liberal Party of Australia.\nIn June 1949, Gorton stood for the Victorian Legislative Council as the LCP candidate in Northern Province. It was a safe Country Party seat, and at the preceding three elections no other parties had bothered to field a candidate. Making right-wing unity the focal point of his campaign, Gorton polled 48.8 percent of the vote to finish less than 400 votes behind the sitting member, George Tuckett. The result impressed the LCP's leadership, and the following month he was preselected in third place on its joint Senate ticket with the Country Party. He was relatively unknown within the party, and his rural background was a major factor in his selection. The Coalition won a large majority at the 1949 federal election, including four out of Victoria's seven senate vacancies. The LCP candidates joined the parliamentary Liberal Party.\nSenate (1950\u20131968).\nBackbencher.\nGorton's term in the Senate began on 22 February 1950. He was re-elected to additional terms at the 1951, 1953, 1958, and 1964 elections, and from 1953 occupied first place on the Coalition's ticket in Victoria. Gorton's early speeches on domestic policy foreshadowed the stances and policy initiatives he would later adopt as prime minister, such as economic nationalism, support for a strong central government, and support for nuclear energy. One of his first notable actions in the Senate came in November 1951, when he successfully moved a motion opposing \"any substantial measure of ownership or control over any Australian broadcasting station\" being granted to non-Australians. In his early speeches on foreign policy, Gorton drew analogies between the actions of the Soviet Union and Communist China and those of Nazi Germany. He developed a reputation as a \"hardline anti-communist\", speaking in favour of the Communist Party Dissolution Bill and campaigning for the \"Yes\" vote during the 1951 referendum to ban the Communist Party. At a campaign rally in September 1951, he had to be restrained by police after attempting to drag a heckler from his seat and shouting at him to \"come outside, you yellow rat\".\nFrom 1952 to 1958, Gorton served on the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Foreign Affairs, including as chairman for a period. He developed a keen interest in Asia, which was rooted in his anti-communism, and joined parliamentary delegations to Malaya, South Vietnam, Thailand, and the Philippines. He strongly supported Australia joining the Southeast Asia Treaty Organisation (SEATO), a collective defence initiative designed to prevent the spread of communism in the region. He also supported Taiwanese independence and opposed Australian recognition of the People's Republic of China (PRC). On a number of occasions, Gorton spoke of the need for Australia to develop a foreign policy independent of Britain and the United States. In May 1957, he told the Senate that Australia should acquire its own nuclear deterrent, including intercontinental missiles.\nGovernment minister.\nNavy portfolio.\nGorton was elevated to the ministry after the 1958 election, as Minister for the Navy. This was a junior position subordinate to the Minister for Defence, Athol Townley. Although his promotion was unexpected, he would serve as Minister for the Navy for more than five years, the longest-serving navy minister in Australia's history. Gorton regularly attended meetings of the Naval Board, unlike previous ministers, and championed its recommendations at cabinet meetings. He was able to secure most elements of the board's desired modernisation program, despite Townley showing more interest in the air force. During Gorton's tenure, the navy acquired four Australian-built frigates and six British-built minesweepers, as well as placing orders for three \"Charles F. Adams\"-class destroyers and four \"Oberon\"-class submarines. He postponed the phasing out of the Fleet Air Arm, due to occur in 1963, and secured the purchase of 27 Westland Wessex helicopters.\nGorton was a supporter and admirer of Robert Menzies, who was sympathetic to his ambitions for higher office and assigned him additional responsibilities. In 1959, he was tasked with securing the passage of the Matrimonial Causes Bill, which introduced uniform divorce laws; he described it as \"a systematic attempt to make a new approach to the problem of divorce\". The bill was opposed by religious conservatives (mostly Catholics) on both sides of politics, but it eventually passed the Senate with only a single amendment. Gorton was appointed assistant minister to the Minister for External Affairs in February 1960, working under Menzies and later under Garfield Barwick and Paul Hasluck. In February 1962, he was also made minister-in-charge of the CSIRO. During question time in the Senate, he represented ministers from the House of Representatives, allowing him to gain experience in portfolios beyond his own.\nEducation and science portfolio.\nAfter the 1963 election, Gorton relinquished the navy portfolio and was placed in charge of the government's activities in education and scientific research. He was also made Minister for Works and Minister for the Interior, relatively low-profile positions dealing mostly with administrative matters; the latter post was taken over by Doug Anthony after a few months. Menzies had a personal interest in education, having previously handled the portfolio himself, and told Gorton that it should be his primary focus. He was given oversight of the Australian Universities Commission, the Australian National University, the Commonwealth Archives Office, the Commonwealth Literary Fund, and the National Library of Australia. In January 1966, Menzies retired and Harold Holt became prime minister. Gorton was elevated to cabinet, and at the end of the year was given the title Minister for Education and Science. He was placed in charge of the new Department of Education and Science, the first time those portfolios had been given a separate department at federal level.\nGorton presided over a \"major intrusion\" of the federal government into the education sector. His tenure saw significant increases in the number of university scholarships available, the number of new university entrants, and overall funding of education. One of the first major issues Gorton confronted was that of state aid to non-government schools. He believed that private schools should have equal access to federal government funding, and in 1964 announced that the government would fund science laboratories for private schools. This stance, supported by the Catholic education sector but opposed by secularists and most Protestant schools, eventually achieved widespread acceptance. In September 1965, Gorton created the Commonwealth Advisory Committee on Advanced Education, tasked with advising the government on non-university technical and further education (TAFE). He announced that the federal government would fund technical colleges on a pro-rata basis with the states, and personally oversaw the establishment of the Canberra College of Advanced Education, the forerunner of the University of Canberra. As science minister, he lent his support to the Anglo-Australian Telescope project, securing cabinet approval for its construction in April 1967.\nRole in the VIP aircraft affair.\nGorton's reputation was significantly enhanced by his role in the VIP aircraft affair, a political controversy relating to the use of Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) VIP aircraft by the Holt government and its predecessor the Menzies government that came to a head in October 1967. Holt had provided vague and inaccurate answers to parliamentary questions about the VIP fleet, notably denying the existence of passenger manifests which might confirm instances of misuse. Air Minister Peter Howson became aware of the inaccuracies and sought to protect Holt, but their statements were soon subjected to further scrutiny, leading to accusations that they had conspired to mislead parliament. Gorton, who had just replaced Denham Henty as Leader of the Government in the Senate on 16 October, helped resolve the situation by tabling the \"missing\" passenger manifests in their entirety on 25 October. He did so on the grounds that the government could not maintain such a cover-up.\nGorton's act has been credited for helping thrust him into general public view; boosting his standing among his parliamentary colleagues; and for the first time Gorton began to be viewed as a serious future leadership contender, which proved to be critical to his election as Holt's successor three months later. However, although Gorton defended Howson in Parliament, the affair also sowed the seeds of long-term enmity between him and Howson, the latter turning into a staunch, vocal opponent of Gorton during his years as prime minister and beyond.\nPrime minister (1968\u20131971).\nFirst term (1968\u20131969).\nHolt's disappearance.\nHarold Holt disappeared while swimming on 17 December 1967 and was declared presumed drowned two days later. His presumed successor was Liberal deputy leader William McMahon. However, on 18 December, the Country Party leader and Deputy Prime Minister John McEwen announced that if McMahon were named the new Liberal leader, he and his party would not serve under him. His reasons were never stated publicly, but in a private meeting with McMahon, he said \"I will not serve under you because I do not trust you\". McEwen's shock declaration triggered a leadership crisis within the Liberal Party; even more significantly, it raised the threat of a possible breaking of the Coalition, which would spell electoral disaster for the Liberals. Up to that time, the Liberals had never won enough seats in any House of Representatives election to be able to govern without Country Party support.\nThe Governor-General Lord Casey swore McEwen in as prime minister, on an interim basis pending the Liberal Party electing its new leader. McEwen agreed to accept an interim appointment provided there was no formal statement of time limit. This appointment was in keeping with previous occasions when a conservative Coalition government had been deprived of its leader. Casey also concurred in the view put to him by McEwen that to commission a Liberal temporarily as prime minister would give that person an unfair advantage in the forthcoming party room ballot for the permanent leader.\nIn the subsequent leadership struggle, Gorton was championed by Army Minister Malcolm Fraser, Government whip in the Senate Malcolm Scott and Liberal Party Whip Dudley Erwin, and with their support he was able to defeat rivals Paul Hasluck, Les Bury and Billy Snedden to become Liberal leader even though he was a member of the Senate. He was elected party leader on 9 January 1968, and appointed prime minister on 10 January, replacing McEwen. He was the only senator in Australia's history to be prime minister and the only prime minister to have ever served in the Senate. He remained a senator until, in accordance with the Westminster tradition that the prime minister is a member of the lower house of parliament, he resigned on 1 February 1968 to contest the by-election for Holt's old House of Representatives seat of Higgins in south Melbourne. The by-election in this comfortably safe Liberal seat was held on 24 February; there were three other candidates, but Gorton achieved a massive 68% of the formal vote. He visited all the polling places during the day, but was unable to vote for himself as he was still enrolled in Mallee, in rural western Victoria. Between 2 and 23 February (both dates inclusive) he was a member of neither house of parliament.\nAlthough he was still a senator when he was sworn in as prime minister, Gorton never sat in the Senate as prime minister because neither House of Parliament was in session between his swearing in as prime minister and his resignation from the Senate.\nActivities in office.\nGorton was initially a very popular Prime Minister. He carved out a style quite distinct from those of his predecessors \u2013 the aloof Menzies and the affable, sporty Holt. Gorton liked to portray himself as a man of the people who enjoyed a beer and a gamble, with a bit of a \"larrikin\" streak about him \u2013 hence one of his nicknames, \"Gort the sport\". Unfortunately for him, this reputation later came back to haunt him.\nHe also began to follow new policies, pursuing independent defence and foreign policies and distancing Australia from its traditional ties to Britain. But he continued to support Australia's involvement in the Vietnam War, a position he had reluctantly inherited from Holt, which became increasingly unpopular after 1968. On domestic issues, he favoured centralist policies at the expense of the states, which alienated powerful Liberal state leaders like Sir Henry Bolte of Victoria and Bob Askin of New South Wales. He also fostered an independent Australian film industry and increased government funding for the arts.\nGorton proved to be a surprisingly poor media performer and public speaker, and was portrayed by the media as a foolish and incompetent administrator. He was unlucky to come up against a new and formidable Labor Opposition Leader in Gough Whitlam. Also, he was subjected to media speculation about his drinking habits and his involvements with women. He generated great resentment within his party, and his opponents became increasingly critical of his reliance on an inner circle of advisers \u2013 most notably his private secretary Ainsley Gotto.\nThe Coalition suffered a 7% swing against it at the 1969 election, and Labor outpolled it on the two-party-preferred vote. During the close election Gorton promised to waive all future government rent on residential leaseholders in Canberra. After surviving the election Gorton came through on his promise, giving away an estimated $100\u00a0million in equity to leaseholders and abandoning future government rent revenue. Still, Gorton saw the sizeable 45-seat majority he had inherited from Holt cut down to only seven. Indeed, the Coalition might have lost government had it not been for the Democratic Labor Party's longstanding practice of preferencing against the ALP. The Coalition was only assured of a ninth term in government when DLP preferences tipped four marginal seats in Melbourne\u2014the DLP's heartland\u2014to the Liberals. Had those preferences gone the other way, Whitlam would have become prime minister.\nSecond term (1969\u20131971).\nLeadership challenges and resignation.\nAfter the 1969 election, Gorton was unsuccessfully challenged for the Liberal leadership by McMahon and National Development Minister David Fairbairn; although on this occasion McEwen decided to lift his veto on McMahon. In the subsequent ministerial reshuffle, Gorton reinstated Don Chipp and promoted Andrew Peacock, Jim Killen and Tom Hughes to the ministry, among others. The Coalition suffered a significant primary vote swing in the 1970 Senate-only election, though seat losses were stemmed to just two and Labor was also judged to have performed poorly.\nOn 8 March 1971, a challenge was launched when Defence Minister Malcolm Fraser resigned from the ministry. Fraser had strongly supported Gorton for the leadership three years earlier, but now attacked Gorton on the floor of parliament in his resignation speech, accusing him of disloyalty in a dispute Fraser had with General Sir Thomas Daly and of \"interference in (his) ministerial responsibilities\". Fraser concluded the speech by condemning Gorton as \"not fit to hold the great office of Prime Minister\". Gorton's response on the floor of the House was infamously interrupted when journalist Alan Ramsey shouted \"You liar!\" to Gorton from the press gallery; realising his error, Ramsey quickly conveyed his gravest apology both to the House and, most particularly, to the Prime Minister. Gorton graciously accepted the apology, while inviting the Opposition to withdraw its motion that Ramsey be immediately arrested by the serjeant-at-arms of the House.\nGorton called a Liberal caucus meeting for 10 March 1971 to settle the matter. A motion of confidence in his leadership was tied. Under Liberal caucus rules of the time, a tied vote meant the motion was passed and hence Gorton could have remained as party leader and Prime Minister without further ado. However, he took it upon himself to resign, saying \"Well, that is not a vote of confidence, so the party will have to elect a new leader.\" A ballot was held and McMahon was elected leader and thus Prime Minister. Australian television marked the end of Gorton's stormy premiership with a newsreel montage accompanied by Frank Sinatra's anthem \"My Way\".\nIn a surprise move, Gorton contested and won the position of Deputy Leader, forcing McMahon to make him Defence Minister. This situation lasted until August, when Gorton published two articles detailing the problems he had with ministers leaking information from cabinet. McMahon forced Gorton's resignation on the grounds of disloyalty, and Gorton went to the backbench.\nFinal years in parliament.\nA number of polls during McMahon's prime ministership had Gorton as both the preferred Liberal leader and the preferred prime minister. In 1972, businessman David Hains commissioned a series of polls in marginal electorates that showed the Coalition would significantly increase its vote if Gorton mounted a successful comeback; for instance, polling in the Division of Henty found that his return would add eight points to the Liberal vote. However, Gorton generally downplayed the polling and did not mount an active campaign to oust McMahon. Labor went on to win a nine-seat majority at the 1972 election, ending 23 consecutive years of Coalition rule. A number of Gorton's contemporaries \u2013 including Country Party leader Doug Anthony and Labor ministers Clyde Cameron, Doug McClelland, and John Wheeldon \u2013 retrospectively expressed doubts as to whether Whitlam could have won if Gorton had returned to the prime ministership. Rupert Murdoch, whose newspapers endorsed the Labor Party, stated in 2000 that \"we would most certainly have supported the re-election of a Gorton government in 1972. And he would have won!\".\nThe seat of Henty, which became a particular point of Hains' polling as Hains made his case for Gorton to be restored as prime minister, was narrowly retained by the Liberals despite a huge swing towards Labor.\nMcMahon resigned as Liberal leader a few weeks after the 1972 election. Gorton was one of five candidates who stood the resulting leadership ballot, but polled only the fourth-highest total as Billy Snedden won a narrow victory over Nigel Bowen. Snedden subsequently appointed him to the opposition frontbench as spokesman for urban and regional development, the environment, and conservation. Soon after being sworn in as prime minister, Whitlam responded to a congratulatory letter from Gorton by promising to \"advance some of the causes which you were the first Australian Prime Minister to identify\". Over the following years, several failed initiatives from Gorton's prime ministership were passed into law by the Whitlam government. This included the establishment of the Australian Film, Television and Radio School and the assertion of sovereignty over the territorial seabed and continental shelf.\nSocial liberalism.\nEarly in 1973, Gorton stated his public support of \"abortion on request, under certain conditions\"; he was opposed to \"compulsory pregnancy\". He nonetheless voted against David McKenzie and Tony Lamb's private member's bill to legalise abortion in the Australian Capital Territory, as he believed it did not provide clear enough guidelines for medical practitioners. He preferred the conditions of the Menhennitt ruling. Gorton was also a supporter of no-fault divorce. During the debate over what became the \"Family Law Act 1975\", he crossed the floor to oppose a Coalition amendment which he thought complicated the requirements for divorce through separation.\nIn October 1973, Gorton introduced a motion in the House of Representatives calling for the decriminalisation of homosexuality, co-sponsored by Labor's Moss Cass. It was modelled on the recommendations of the UK's Wolfenden report. While noting his personal objections to homosexuality, Gorton stated that most gay people \"hurt no one, harm no one and yet have this hanging over them\". He dismissed arguments that decriminalisation would violate \"God's law\", noting that many religious leaders were in favour of a change, and stated that the existing law had led to \"bashing\", blackmail, and suicides. The motion passed by 24 votes, with all parties receiving a conscience vote. However, it was of no legal effect as homosexuality law was the province of state laws and territory ordinances.\nResignation from the Liberal Party.\nWhitlam was re-elected at the 1974 election. Gorton was dropped from shadow cabinet after the election, as was McMahon. In November 1974, following an unsuccessful attempt to install Malcolm Fraser as Liberal leader, he condemned those involved and stated they had caused \"irreparable damage\" to the party. On 3 March 1975, as leadership tensions continued to build, Gorton announced that he would not recontest his seat in parliament at the next election, citing his unwillingness to be a perpetual backbencher. He also stated: \"If Fraser got in, it would be a disaster. He is extreme right-wing. The Liberal Party can't be a right-leaning affair.\" When Fraser won a leadership spill on 21 March, Gorton reportedly stormed out of the meeting and slammed the door behind him.\nOn 23 May 1975, Gorton announced his resignation from the Liberal Party and his intention to be an independent candidate for one of the new Australian Capital Territory (ACT) Senate seats. He hoped to join Steele Hall on the crossbench and secure the balance of power. Opinion polling shortly after his announcement showed him winning 55 percent of the primary vote. His candidacy received endorsements from the small local branches of the Liberal Movement and the Australia Party. Gough Whitlam was dismissed as prime minister on 11 November, sparking an early election on 13 December. During the preceding constitutional crisis, Gorton had denounced Fraser's actions in blocking supply in the Senate. Gorton advocated a vote and \"a resounding victory\" for Labor in election ads aired nationally, in protest against the dismissal of the Whitlam government. In the election, he polled 11.9 percent of the ACT Senate vote running on a two-man ticket with Harold Hird. It was the second-highest percentage for an independent candidate nation-wide, after Brian Harradine's 12.8 percent in Tasmania, but nowhere near enough to win election. He had campaigned mainly on local issues, which obscured his candidacy somewhat in an election that was a virtual referendum on the Whitlam government.\nRetirement and death.\nGorton retired to Canberra, where he largely kept out of the political limelight. However, in March 1983, he congratulated Bob Hawke \"for rolling that bastard Fraser\" at that year's election.\nIn 1977, Gorton was recruited to record a series of three-minute radio broadcasts on current affairs, titled \"Sir John Gorton's viewpoints\". He wrote and recorded around 400 segments over the following four years, which were syndicated and broadcast by over 80 radio stations around the country. His broadcasts covered a wide range of issues \u2013 he supported the decriminalisation of marijuana and prostitution, called on Australians to welcome Vietnamese boat people, opposed the creation of SBS, denounced \"the cacophony known as modern music\", opposed Aboriginal land rights, supported uranium mining, and opposed republicanism. He frequently criticised the Fraser government, but grudgingly admired Fraser's ability to get his way as prime minister.\nIn 1989, Gorton was interviewed by Caroline Jones on her Radio National program, The Search for Meaning.\nIn the 1990s, Gorton quietly rejoined the Liberal Party; John Hewson credited himself with \"returning Gorton to the fold.\" In 1993, Gorton was invited to open the Liberal Party's campaign headquarters for the 1993 election. He endorsed Hewson's Fightback! package. In his old age he was rehabilitated by the Liberals; his 90th birthday party was attended by Prime Minister John Howard who said at the event: \"He (Gorton) was a person who above everything else was first, second and last an Australian.\" Although he was back within Liberal circles, he never forgave Fraser; as late as 2002 he told his biographer Ian Hancock that he still could not tolerate being in the same room as Fraser.\nGorton died at Sydney's St Vincent's Hospital at the age of 90 in May 2002. A state funeral and memorial service was held on 30 May at St Andrews' Cathedral where extremely critical remarks of Fraser, who was in attendance with wife Tamie, were delivered during the eulogy by Gorton's former Attorney-General Tom Hughes. Current and former Prime Ministers Howard, Gough Whitlam and Bob Hawke were also in attendance. Gorton was cremated after a private service and his ashes interred within the 'Prime Ministers Garden' at Melbourne General Cemetery.\nPersonal life.\nMarriages and family.\nDuring a holiday in Spain while an undergraduate, Gorton met Bettina Brown of Bangor, Maine, United States. She was a language student at the Sorbonne. This meeting came about through Gorton's friend from Oxford, Arthur Brown, who was Bettina's brother. In 1935, Gorton and Brown were married in Oxford. After his studies were finished, they settled in Australia, taking over his father's orchard, \"Mystic Park\", at Lake Kangaroo near Kerang, Victoria. They had three children: Joanna, Michael, and Robin. Bettina Gorton died of cancer in 1983. In 1993, he married again. His 2nd wife was Nancy Home (n\u00e9e Elliott), a long-time acquaintance.\nGorton's granddaughter is poet and novelist Lisa Gorton.\nReligious beliefs.\nGorton was a nominal Christian at least in the early part of his life, but was not a churchgoer. Some sources have identified him as agnostic or even atheist. He attended Anglican schools, and was influenced by the Christian socialist views of James Ralph Darling, his headmaster at Geelong Grammar. In a 1948 speech, Gorton said that \"the story of Christianity is the most tremendous in the history of the world\". However, in the lead-up to the 1999 referendum he publicly opposed mentioning God in the preamble. According to his biographer Ian Hancock: \"Gorton may not have been a believing, let alone a practising, Christian, and when he spoke of religion of 'the soul' he did not have a particular faith in mind. Rather, his religion was founded upon the injunction in the Book of Deuteronomy: 'Man doth not live by bread only'.\"\nHonours.\nGorton was appointed a Privy Counsellor in 1968, a Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour in 1971, a Knight Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George in 1977, and a Companion of the Order of Australia in 1988. He was awarded the Centenary Medal in 2001. Commonwealth Railways CL class locomotive CL1 was named \"John Gorton\" in February 1970.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52453", "revid": "219307", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52453", "title": "Tetum language", "text": "Austronesian language spoken on Timor\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nTetum ( ; ; ) is an Austronesian language spoken on the island of Timor. It is one of the official languages of Timor-Leste and it is also spoken in Belu Regency and Malaka Regency, which form the eastern part of Indonesian West Timor adjoining Timor-Leste.\nThere are two main forms of Tetum as a language:\n\"Ethnologue\" classifies \"Tetun Terik\" as a dialect of Tetun. However, without previous contact, \"Tetun Dili\" is not immediately mutually intelligible, mainly because of the large number of Portuguese origin words used in Tetun Dili. Besides some grammatical simplification, Tetun Dili has been greatly influenced by the vocabulary and to a small extent by the grammar of Portuguese, the other official language of East Timor.\nNomenclature.\nThe English form \"Tetum\" is derived from Portuguese, rather than from modern Tetum. Consequently, some people regard \"Tetun\" as more appropriate. Although this coincides with the favoured Indonesian form, and the variant with \"m\" has a longer history in English, \"Tetun\" has also been used by some Portuguese-educated Timorese, such as Jos\u00e9 Ramos-Horta and Carlos Filipe Ximenes Belo.\nHistory and dialects.\nAccording to linguist Geoffrey Hull, Tetum has four dialects:\n\"Tetun-Belu\" and \"Tetun-Terik\" are not spoken outside their home territories. \"Tetun-Prasa\" is the form of Tetum that is spoken throughout East Timor. Although Portuguese was the official language of Portuguese Timor until 1975, \"Tetun-Prasa\" has always been the predominant \"lingua franca\" in the eastern part of the island.\nIn the fifteenth century, before the arrival of the Portuguese, Tetum had spread through central and eastern Timor as a contact language under the aegis of the Belunese-speaking Kingdom of Wehali, at that time the most powerful kingdom in the island. The Portuguese (present in Timor from c. 1556) made most of their settlements in the west, where Dawan was spoken, and it was not until 1769, when the capital was moved from Lifau (Oecussi) to Dili that they began to promote Tetum as an inter-regional language in their colony. Timor was one of the few Portuguese colonies where a local language, and not a form of Portuguese, became the lingua franca: this is because Portuguese rule was indirect rather than direct, the Europeans governing through local kings who embraced Catholicism and became vassals of the King of Portugal.\nFollowing the Carnation Revolution in Portugal in 1974, Indonesia invaded East Timor, declaring it \"the Republic's 27th Province\". The use of Portuguese was banned, and Indonesian was declared the sole official language, but the Roman Catholic Church adopted Tetum as its liturgical language, making it a focus for cultural and national identity. After the United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) took over governance in 1999, Tetun (Dili) was proclaimed the country's official language, even though according to \"Encarta Winkler Prins\" it was only spoken by about 8% of the native population at the time, while the elite (consisting of 20 to 30 families) spoke Portuguese and most adolescents had been educated in Indonesian. When East Timor gained its independence in 2002, Tetum and Portuguese were declared as official languages. The 2010 census found that Tetum Prasa had 385,269 native speakers on a total population of 1,053,971, meaning that the share of native Tetum Prasa/Dili speakers had increased to 36.6% during the 2000s.\nIn addition to regional varieties of Tetum in East Timor, there are variations in vocabulary and pronunciation, partly due to Portuguese and Indonesian influence. The Tetum spoken by East Timorese migrants living in Portugal and Australia are more Portuguese-influenced, as many of those speakers were not educated in Indonesian.\nVocabulary.\nIndigenous.\nThe Tetum name for East Timor is , which means 'Timor of the rising sun', or, less poetically, 'East Timor'; comes from 'sun' and 'to rise, to go up'. The noun for 'word' is , from 'voice' and 'fruit'. Some more words in Tetum:\nFrom Portuguese.\nWords derived from Portuguese:\nFrom Malay.\nAs a result of Bazaar Malay being a regional lingua franca and of Indonesian being a working language, many words are derived from Malay, including:\nIn addition, as a legacy of Indonesian rule, other words of Malay origin have entered Tetum, through Indonesian.\nNumerals.\nHowever, Tetum speakers often use Malay/Indonesian or Portuguese numbers instead, such as or 'eight' instead of , especially for numbers over one thousand.\nCombinations.\nTetum has many hybrid words, which are combinations of indigenous and Portuguese words. These often include an indigenous Tetum verb, with a Portuguese suffix \"-d\u00f3r\" (similar to '-er'). For example:\nGrammar.\nMorphology.\nPersonal pronouns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA common occurrence is to use titles such as for a woman or names rather than pronouns when addressing people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe second person singular pronoun is used generally with children, friends or family, while with strangers or people of higher social status, or is used.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNouns and pronouns.\nPlural.\nThe plural is not normally marked on nouns, but the word 'they' can express it when necessary.\n 'woman/women' \u2192 'women'\nHowever, the plural ending \"-s\" of nouns of Portuguese origin is sometimes retained.\n \u2013 United States (from )\n \u2013 United Nations (from )\nDefiniteness.\nTetum has an optional indefinite article ('one'), used after nouns:\n \u2013 a child\nThere is no definite article, but the demonstratives ('this one') and ('that one') may be used to express definiteness:\n \u2013 this child, the child\n \u2013 that child, the child\nIn the plural, ('these') or ('those') are used:\n \u2013 these children, the children\n \u2013 those children, the children\nPossessive/genitive.\nThe particle forms the inalienable possessive, and can be used in a similar way to \"'s\" in English, e.g.:\n \u2013 'Jo\u00e3o's house'\n \u2013 'Cristina's book'\nWhen the possessor is postposed, representing alienable possession, becomes :\n \u2013 the people of East Timor\nInclusive and exclusive \"we\".\nLike other Austronesian languages, Tetum has two forms of \"we\", (equivalent to Malay ) which is exclusive, e.g. \"I and they\", and (equivalent to Malay ), which is inclusive, e.g. \"you, I, and they\".\n \u2013 'our [family's] car'\n \u2013 'our country'\nNominalization.\nNouns derived from verbs or adjectives are usually formed with affixes, for example the suffix \"-na'in\", similar to \"-er\" in English.\n 'write' \u2192 'writer'\nThe suffix \"-na'in\" can also be used with nouns, in the sense of 'owner'.\n 'house' \u2192 'householder'\nIn more traditional forms of Tetum, the circumfix \"ma(k)- -k\" is used instead of \"-na'in\". For example, the nouns 'sinner' or 'wrongdoer' can be derived from the word as either , or . Only the prefix \"ma(k)-\" is used when the root word ends with a consonant; for example, the noun 'cook' or 'chef' can be derived from the word as as well as .\nThe suffix \"-teen\" (from the word for 'dirt' or 'excrement') can be used with adjectives to form derogatory terms:\n 'false' \u2192 'liar'\nAdjectives.\nDerivation from nouns.\nTo turn a noun into a nominalised adjective, the word ('person, child, associated object') is added to it.\n 'foreigner' \u2192 'foreign'\nThus, 'Timorese person' is , as opposed to the country of Timor, .\nTo form adjectives and actor nouns from verbs, the suffix \"-d\u00f3r\" (derived from Portuguese) can be added:\n 'tell' \u2192 'talkative'\nGender.\nTetum does not have separate masculine and feminine gender, hence (similar to // in Malay) can mean either 'he', 'she' or 'it'.\nDifferent forms for the genders only occur in Portuguese-derived adjectives, hence ('thank you') is used by men, and by women. The masculine and feminine forms of other adjectives derived from Portuguese are sometimes used with Portuguese loanwords, particularly by Portuguese-educated speakers of Tetum.\n \u2013 'democratic government' (from , masculine)\n \u2013 'democratic nation' (from , feminine)\nIn some instances, the different gender forms have distinct translations into English:\n \u2013 'handsome'\n \u2013 'pretty'\nIn indigenous Tetum words, the suffixes ('male') and ('female') are sometimes used to differentiate between the genders:\n 'son' \u2192 'daughter'\nComparatives and superlatives.\nSuperlatives can be formed from adjectives by reduplication:\n 'much, many' \u2192 'very much, many'\n 'big, great' \u2192 'huge, enormous'\n 'good' \u2192 'very good'\n 'last' \u2192 'the very last, final'\n 'clean, clear' \u2192 'spotless, immaculate'\nWhen making comparisons, the word ('more') is used after the adjective, optionally followed by ('than' from Portuguese ):\n \u2014 Maria is older than Ana.\nTo describe something as the most or least, the word ('all') is added:\n \u2014 Maria is the oldest.\nAdverbs.\nAdverbs can be formed from adjectives or nouns by reduplication:\n 'good' \u2192 'well'\n 'new, recent' \u2192 'newly, recently'\n 'night' \u2192 'nightly'\n 'quick' \u2192 'quickly'\n 'day' \u2192 'daily'\nPrepositions and circumpositions.\nThe most commonly used prepositions in Tetum are the verbs ('have', 'possess', 'specific locative') and ('go', 'to', 'for'). Most prepositional concepts of English are expressed by nominal phrases formed by using , the object and the position (expressed by a noun),optionally with the possessive .\n \u2014 ' \"inside\" the house'\n \u2014 ' \"on top of\" the mountain'\n \u2014 ' \"on\" the table'\n \u2014 ' \"under\" the chair'\n \u2014 ' \"outside\" the country'\n \u2014 ' \"between\" the people'\nVerbs.\nCopula and negation.\nThere is no verb \"to be\" as such, but the word , which translates as 'not to be', is used for negation:\n \u2014 'The Timorese are not Indonesians.'\nThe word , which roughly translates as 'who is' or 'what is', can be used with fronted phrases for focusing/ emphasis:\n \u2014 'It's John who likes beer.'\nInterrogation.\nThe interrogative is formed by using the words ('or') or ('or not').\n \u2014 'Are you crazy?'\n \u2014 'Do you like me?'\nDerivation from nouns and adjectives.\nTransitive verbs are formed by adding the prefix \"ha-\" or \"hak-\" to a noun or adjective:\n 'liquid' \u2192 'to liquify, to melt'\n 'mad' \u2192 'to drive mad'\n 'union' \u2192 'to unite'\n 'shade' \u2192 'to shade, to cover'\n 'hot' \u2192 'to heat up'\nIntransitive verbs are formed by adding the prefix \"na-\" or \"nak-\" to a noun or adjective:\n \u2014 '(to be) liquified, melted'\n \u2014 '(to be) driven mad'\n \u2014 '(to be) united'\n \u2014 '(to be) shaded, covered'\n \u2014 '(to become) heated up'\nConjugations and inflections (in Tetun-Terik).\nIn , verbs inflect when they begin with a vowel or consonant h. In this case mutation of the first consonant occurs. For example, the verb ('see') in would be conjugated as follows:\n \u2014 'I see'\n \u2014 'you (sing.) see'\n \u2014 'he/she/it sees'\n \u2014 'we see'\n \u2014 'you (pl.) see'\n \u2014 'they see'\nTenses.\nPast.\nWhenever possible, the past tense is simply inferred from the context, for example:\n \u2013 'Yesterday I ate rice.'\nHowever, it can be expressed by placing the adverb ('already') at the end of a sentence.\n \u2013 'I've (already) eaten rice.'\nWhen is used with ('not') this means 'no more' or 'no longer', rather than 'have not':\n \u2013 'I don't eat rice anymore.'\nIn order to convey that an action has not occurred, the word ('not yet') is used:\n \u2013 'I haven't eaten rice (yet).'\nWhen relating an action that occurred in the past, the word ('finally' or 'well and truly') is used with the verb.\n \u2013 'I ate rice.'\nFuture.\nThe future tense is formed by placing the word ('will') before a verb:\n \u2013 'I \"will\" give them food.'\nThe negative is formed by adding ('not') between and the verb:\n \u2013 'I \"will not\" give them food.'\nAspects.\nPerfect.\nThe perfect aspect can be formed by using .\n \u2013 'I have eaten rice / I ate rice.'\nWhen negated, indicates that an action ceased to occur:\n \u2013 'I didn't eat rice anymore.'\nIn order to convey that a past action had not or never occurred, the word ('not yet' or 'never') is used:\n \u2013 'I didn't eat rice / I hadn't eaten rice.'\nProgressive.\nThe progressive aspect can be obtained by placing the word ('stay') after a verb:\n \u2013 'They're (still) working.'\nImperative.\nThe imperative mood is formed using the word ('go') at the end of a sentence, hence:\n \u2013 'Read the letter!'\nThe word ('just' or 'a bit') may also be used when making a request rather than a command:\n \u2013 'Just read the letter.'\nWhen forbidding an action ('must not') or ('do not') are used:\n \u2013 'Don't smoke here!'\n \u2013 'Don't kill them!'\nOrthography and phonology.\nThe influence of Portuguese and to a lesser extent Malay/Indonesian on the phonology of Tetun has been extensive.\nIn the Tetum language, , and tend to have relatively fixed sounds. However and vary according to the environment they are placed in, for instance the sound is slightly higher if the proceeding syllable is or .\nAll consonants appearing in parentheses are used only in loanwords.\nStops: All stops in Tetum are un-aspirated, meaning an expulsion of breath is absent. In contrast, English stops, namely 'p' 't' and 'k' are generally aspirated. \nFricatives: \n is an unstable voiced labio-dental fricative and tends to alternate with or is replaced by ; e.g. \u2013 meaning 'grandparent.'\nAs Tetum did not have any official recognition or support under either Portuguese or Indonesian rule, it is only recently that a standardised orthography has been established by the National Institute of Linguistics (INL). The standard orthography devised by the institute was declared official by Government Decree 1/2004 of 14 April 2004. However, there are still widespread variations in spelling, one example being the word or 'when', which has also been written as , , , . The use of \u27e8w\u27e9 or \u27e8u\u27e9 is a reflection of the pronunciation in some rural dialects of \"Tetun-Terik\".\nThe current orthography originates from the spelling reforms undertaken by Fretilin in 1974, when it launched literacy campaigns across East Timor, and also from the system used by the Catholic Church when it adopted Tetum as its liturgical language during the Indonesian occupation. These involved the transcription of many Portuguese words that were formerly written in their original spelling, for example, \u2192 'education', and \u2192 'colonialism'.\nReforms suggested by the International Committee for the Development of East Timorese Languages (IACDETL) in 1996 included the replacement of the digraphs \u27e8nh\u27e9 and \u27e8lh\u27e9 (borrowed from Portuguese, where they stand for the phonemes and ) with \u27e8n\u0304\u27e9 and \u27e8l\u0304\u27e9 , respectively (as in certain Basque orthographies), to avoid confusion with the consonant clusters and , which also occur in Tetum. Thus, 'sir' became , and 'worker' became . Later, as adopted by IACDETL and approved by the INL in 2002, \u27e8n\u0304\u27e9 and \u27e8l\u0304\u27e9 were replaced by \u27e8\u00f1\u27e9 and \u27e8ll\u27e9 (as in Spanish). Thus, 'sir' became , and 'worker' became . Some linguists favoured using \u27e8ny\u27e9 (as in Catalan and Filipino) and \u27e8ly\u27e9 for these sounds, but the latter spellings were rejected for being similar to the Indonesian system, and most speakers actually pronounce \"\u00f1\" and \"ll\" as and , respectively, with a semivowel which forms a diphthong with the preceding vowel (but reduced to , after ), not as the palatal consonants of Portuguese and Spanish. Thus, , are pronounced , , and , are pronounced , . As a result, some writers use \u27e8in\u27e9 and \u27e8il\u27e9 instead, for example and for June and July ( and in Portuguese).\nAs well as variations in the transliteration of Portuguese loanwords, there are also variations in the spelling of indigenous words. These include the use of double vowels and the apostrophe for the glottal stop, for example \u2192 'large' and \u2192 'small'.\nThe sound , which is not indigenous to Tetum but appears in many loanwords from Portuguese and Malay, often changed to in old Tetum and to (written \u27e8j\u27e9) in the speech of young speakers: for example, 'table' from Portuguese , and 'shirt' from Portuguese . In the sociolect of Tetum that is still used by the generation educated during the Indonesian occupation, and may occur in free variation. For instance, the Portuguese-derived word 'example' is pronounced by some speakers, and conversely 'January' is pronounced . The sound , also not native to the language, often shifted to , as in 'work' from Portuguese (also note that a modern INL convention promotes the use of for 'work' and for 'service').\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52454", "revid": "30552921", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52454", "title": "945", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 945 (CMXLV) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52455", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52455", "title": "448", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 448 (CDXLVIII) was a leap year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Praetextatus and Zeno (or, less frequently, year 1201 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 448 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years. \nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52456", "revid": "1739907", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52456", "title": "Dwarf (folklore)", "text": "Supernatural being in Germanic folklore\nA dwarf (pl.\u2009dwarfs or dwarves) is a type of supernatural short human-shaped being in Germanic folklore. Accounts of dwarfs vary significantly throughout history. They are commonly, but not exclusively, presented as living in mountains or stones and being skilled craftsmen. In early literary sources, only males are explicitly referred to as dwarfs. However, they are described as having sisters and daughters, while male and female dwarfs feature in later saga literature and folklore. Dwarfs are sometimes described as short; however, scholars have noted that this is neither explicit nor relevant to their roles in the earliest sources.\nDwarfs continue to feature in modern popular culture, such as in the works of J. R. R. Tolkien and Terry Pratchett, where they are often, but not exclusively, presented as distinct from elves.\nEtymology and meaning.\nEtymology.\nThe modern English noun \"dwarf\" descends from . It has a variety of cognates in other Germanic languages, including Old Norse \"dvergr\", Old Frisian \"dwerch\", Middle Dutch \"dwerch\", Middle Low German \"dwerch\", and Old High German \"twerg.\"\nThe common Proto-Germanic form is generally reconstructed as . A different etymology traces it to Proto-Germanic , with the \"r\" sound being the product of Verner's Law . Linguist Anatoly Liberman connects the Germanic word with Modern English \"dizzy\", suggesting a link between the etymology and their role in inflicting mental diseases on humans, similar to some other supernatural beings in Germanic folklore such as elves.\nBefore the Proto-Germanic stage, the origin of the word \"dwarf\" is highly debated. Scholars in historical linguistics and comparative mythology have suggested that dwarfs may have started out as nature spirits, beings linked to death, or a blend of different concepts. Some theories trace the word to the Proto-Indo-European root ('damage'), or to (whence modern English 'dream' and German 'deception'). Scholars have also compared it to the Sanskrit \"\", a type of 'demonic being'. Alternatively, linguist Guus Kroonen has suggested that it may derive from a verb *\"dwerganan\" ('to squeeze, press'), which might be attested in Middle High German \"zwergen\". \nEnglish meaning.\nIn Old English, the use of \"dweorg\" ('dwarf') to designate a mythological being is not conclusively attested, though it is assumed to have existed based on references to an illness attributed to a supernatural being. A related Old English plant name, \"dweorge-dwostle\" (pennyroyal), might also suggest a belief in a dwarf-related malady or a connection with warding off the being responsible. Additionally, early place names such as \"Dueridene\" (now Dwarriden), \"Dwerihouse\" (now Dwerryhouse), and \"Dwerffehole\" further hint at the presence of a supernatural concept of dwarfs, often associated with subterranean spaces.\nModern English has two plurals for the word \"dwarf\": \"dwarfs\" and \"dwarves\". \"Dwarfs\" remains the most commonly employed plural. The minority plural \"dwarves\" was recorded as early as 1818. However, it was later popularized by the fiction of philologist and legendarium author J. R. R. Tolkien, originating as a hypercorrective mistake. It was employed by Tolkien for some time before 1917. Regarding his use of this plural, Tolkien wrote in 1937, \"I am afraid it is just a piece of private bad grammar, rather shocking in a philologist; but I shall have to go with it.\"\nAttestations.\nEddic sources.\nTerminology.\nScholars have noted that the ('black elves') appear to be the same beings as dwarfs, given that both are described in the \"Prose Edda\" as the residents of Svart\u00e1lfaheimr. Another potential synonym is d\u00f6kk\u00e1lfar ('dark elves'); however, it is unclear whether and were considered the same at the time of the writing of the Prose Edda. The partial overlap of dwarfs in Eddic sources with elves is supported by the names of dwarfs recorded in the Dvergatal section of V\u00f6lusp\u00e1, which include \u00c1lfr ('Elf'), Gand\u00e1lfr ('Wand-elf'), Vind\u00e1lf ('Wind-elf'). Dvergatal further lists Yngvi \u2013 a name of the god Freyr who was given \u00c1lfheimr, the home of the elves, to rule according to Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l.\nGermanic heroic legend and sagas.\nContinuity with older beliefs.\nAfter the Christianisation of the Germanic peoples, dwarfs continued in the folklore of Germanic-speaking areas of Europe and the literary works produced there. Opinions on the degree of continuity in beliefs on dwarfs before and after Christianisation differ significantly. Some scholars, such as Rudolf Simek, propose that the folk beliefs remained essentially intact in the transitional period, making later sources exceedingly informative on pre-Christian Germanic religion. In contrast, others, such as Sch\u00e4fke, argue that there is no resemblance between Eddic and skaldic dwarfs and those in later sources.\nOld Norse.\nDwarfs feature throughout both fornaldars\u00f6gur and riddaras\u00f6gur. In V\u00f6lsunga saga, which details the events that unfold after Loki extorts treasure out of the dwarf Andvari, to pay the wergild for his killing of \u00d3tr, a being whose brother Regin is also described in some sources as either resembling or being a dwarf. In Hervarar saga ok Hei\u00f0reks, the sword Tyrfing is forged, and subsequently cursed, by a dwarf named Dvalinn, and another named Dulin in the Hauksb\u00f3k manuscript.\nMiddle High German.\nIn German literature, many dwarfs can make themselves invisible, typically via a \"Tarnkappe\" (cloak of invisibility), which has been suggested to be an ancient attribute of dwarfs. Depending on the story, they may be hostile or friendly to humans.\nThe dwarf Alberich plays a vital role in the \"Nibelungenlied\", where he guards the Nibelung's treasure and has the strength of twelve men. He is defeated by Siegfried and afterwards serves the hero. In \"Ortnit\", Alberich seduces the Lombardy queen, spawning the hero Ortnit. The dwarf then aids Ortnit in his adventures after revealing to the hero that he is his father. In \"Das Lied vom H\u00fcrnen Seyfrid\", Siegfried is aided by the dwarf Eugel, who is the son of the dwarf king Nibelung, originator of the Nibelung's treasure.\nThe hero Dietrich von Bern is portrayed in adventures involving dwarfs. In \"Laurin\", he fights against the dwarf King Laurin at the dwarf's magical rose garden. He later rescues a woman whom Laurin had kidnapped. A similar plot occurs in the fragmentary poem \"Goldemar\". In \"Virginal\", Dietrich rescues the dwarf queen Virginal from a force of invading heathens. The dwarfs Eggerich and Baldung play a role in aiding Dietrich in the poem \"Sigenot\": Baldung gives Dietrich a magical gem that prevents him from being bitten when thrown into a snake pit, whereas Eggerich helps Dietrich and Hildebrand escape. In the Heldenbuch-Prosa, a dwarf takes Dietrich out of this world after the death of all the other heroes, a role given to Laurin in some different versions of Dietrich's end.\nModern period.\nDwarfs feature in the modern folklore of Germanic-speaking regions of Europe, such as the Simonside Dwarfs in Northumberland, who are sometimes believed to use lights to lure people off paths, akin to a will-o'-the-wisp.\nSome dwarfs in modern folklore have been argued to belong to a broader group of smith-beings living within hollow mountains or in caves such as the Grinkenschmied. These craftsmen can be referred to explicitly as dwarfs or terms that describe their roles such as ('mountain smith'). Mounds in Denmark can also be referred to by names derived from their inhabitants, such as 'smedsberg' or 'smedshoie' ('smith's hill' or 'smith's mound'). Anglian folklore tells that one can hear a forge from within a mound and feel furnace fires under the earth, while in Switzerland, the heat can be attributed to the underground kitchens of dwarfs. In one example, the furnace's heat is believed to increase soil fertility.\nAttributes and themes.\nDiversity and vagueness.\nRather than existing a \"true\" single nature of a dwarf, they vary in their characteristics, not only across regions and time but also between one another in the same cultural context. Some are capable of changing their form entirely. The scholar \u00c1rmann Jakobsson notes that accounts of dwarfs in the Eddas and the section of Ynglinga saga regarding Sveig\u00f0ir lack prominence in their narratives and cohesive identity. Based on this, he puts forward the idea that dwarfs in these sources are set apart from other beings by their difficulty to be defined and generalised, ultimately stemming from their intrinsic nature to be hidden and as the \"Other\" that stands in contrast with humans.\nAppearance.\nForm and colour.\nBased on the etymology of dwarf, it has been proposed that the oldest conception of a dwarf was as exclusively a formless spirit, potentially as in the case of disease-causing dwarfs; however, this view is not seen in the oldest manuscript accounts. In the quotation of V\u00f6lusp\u00e1 in the Prose Edda, the dwarfs emerge as beings with human form (), while in the Codex Regius manuscript the first two dwarfs created either dwarfs or people with human forms. The prose of the Ynglinga saga describes a dwarf sitting, standing, and speaking, leading to the proposal that at the time of writing, dwarfs were believed to, at least sometimes, have a human-like form. It nonetheless appears to have been recognised as a dwarf; however, that may have been due to its behaviour instead of its physical appearance. In skaldic and Eddic sources, it has been noted that their roles are what define them rather than their physical appearance, which has no significant relevance.\nMany dwarf names in Eddic sources relate to light and brightness, such as ('the gleaming one') and ('glowing'). Stories do not explain these names, but it has been theorised that they refer to the fires in the forges the dwarfs work, or to ('grave mound fires') that are found in later Icelandic folklore. In contrast, Snorri describes d\u00f6kk\u00e1lfar (which are typically identified as dwarfs) as \"blacker than pitch\". Alv\u00edss is described by Thor in Alv\u00edssm\u00e1l as being as unsuitable for wedding his daughter \u00der\u00fa\u00f0r as he was \"pale about the nostrils\" and resembled a \u00feurs.\nIn Middle High German heroic poetry, most dwarfs have long beards, but some may appear childish.\nSize.\nIn the early Old Norse sources, dwarfs are typically described vaguely, with no reference to them being particularly small; in the legendary sagas and later folklore, however, they are often described as short.\nNor\u00f0ri, Su\u00f0ri, Austri and Vestri are four dwarfs, potentially depicted as four anthropomorphic figures on the hogback stone in Heysham in Lancashire, that according to the Prose Edda, each holds up a corner of the sky, that was fashioned from the skull of Ymir. It has been suggested that this would imply that dwarfs could be very tall; however, it has been noted that the sky could have been conceived of as being close to the earth at the horizon. Regin, a figure identified as either a dwarf or resembling a dwarf, is a similar size to the hero Sigurd on both the Ramsund carving and carvings from the Hylestad Stave Church. Dwarf names in Eddic sources include ('tall enough') and ('high'); however, the terms are ambiguous and do not necessarily mean the dwarfs were conceived of as tall relative to a human. Some names suggest a small size, such as Nori and Nabbi, which have been translated as \"tiny\" and \"little nub\", respectively; however, it has been argued that this was not necessarily the general rule.\nNot all late sagas involving dwarfs describe their size, but all that do describe them as short. In some German stories, the dwarf takes on the attributes of a knight but is most clearly separated from normal humans by his small size, in some cases only reaching up to the knees. Despite their small size, dwarfs in these contexts typically have superhuman strength, either by nature or through magical means. Anatoly Liberman suggests that dwarfs may have been initially thought of as lesser supernatural beings, which became literal smallness after Christianisation.\nShape changing.\nDiversity in appearance is not only seen between dwarfs throughout time and region but also with individual dwarfs, who can be capable of changing their shape and size, such as in Reginsm\u00e1l, in which the dwarf Andvari lived as a pike in the water due to curse from a Norn, however, could also take on a human-like shape. In later German folklore, the Zwergk\u00f6nig ('Dwarf King') is a tiny being but is capable of becoming enormously tall at will.\nGender and family groups.\nIn Eddic and skaldic sources, dwarfs are almost exclusively male; for example, in the Dvergatal, every dwarf named is male. Some scholars have proposed that female dwarfs were not believed to exist; however, they are likely attested in charms dating to the early medieval period and are explicitly described in later saga material. Dwarfs are also widely referenced in these sources as having family relations with others, such as brothers and sons. Pairs or groups of brothers are seen relatively abundantly in Eddic contexts, as with the sons of \u00cdvaldi, and Fjalarr and Galarr.\nThe inscription on the 8th century Ribe skull fragment has been interpreted by some scholars as explicitly referring to a ('female-dwarf') that may have been believed to have been causing harm to the user of the fragment. This interpretation is paralleled in Wi\u00f0 Dweorh XCIIIb (Against a Dwarf XCIIIb), in which a harmful dwarf's sister is called to prevent him from causing an afflicted person's illness.\nIn F\u00e1fnism\u00e1l, the worm F\u00e1fnir refers to some Norns as \"Dvalinn's daughters\" (), while in the Prose Edda, they are described as \"of the dwarfs' kin\" (). As Norns are also female, this could mean that dwarfs were conceived of by the author of the poem as able to be female, it is not clear whether either their mother (or mothers) are dwarfs, or if they themselves are considered dwarfs just because they are descended from dwarfs.\nIt has been noted that it may not be that female dwarfs did not exist in the folklore of this period, only that no explicit references to them survive in preserved narratives. It has been proposed this may be because narratives typically centre on the gods rather than dwarfs and that female dwarfs were not conceived of as of great relevance to the gods, given their primary interest in obtaining goods from dwarfs, which does not depend on their gender. Humans, being of lower power and status, cannot control dwarfs as easily and require alternative strategies to obtain treasures from them, potentially explaining why female dwarfs are more prominent in saga literature.\nFemale dwarfs feature in the late Gibbons saga, B\u00f3sa saga and \u00dejalar-J\u00f3ns saga, where they are referred to by the term \"\". In these cases, female dwarfs are only mentioned alongside males and are not independently important to the plot. Beyond Svama, the named in \u00dejalar-J\u00f3ns saga, the only other explicitly named dwarf woman in saga literature is the daughter of Sindri in \u00deorsteins saga V\u00edkingssonar, Herr\u00ed\u00f0r. In saga material, dwarf children are also seen. In \u00deorsteins saga V\u00edkingssonar and Egils saga einhenda ok \u00c1smundar berserkjabana, central characters help these children and are rewarded in return by the father with treasures. Conversely, in Sigur\u00f0ar saga \u00fe\u01ebgla, the human H\u00e1lfdan is cursed after he throws a rock at a dwarf child, breaking its jaw, and is subsequently visited by the child's father in a dream who curses him. H\u00e1lfdan's brother later gives the child a gold ring to atone for the harm and is rewarded by the father, once more in a dream. Together, this suggests that dwarfs could be conceived of as loving and protective of their children by the saga authors. In \u00deorsteins saga V\u00edkingssonar, this family love is extended to the human H\u00e1lfdan who develops a fostering relation with the dwarf Litr, likely with H\u00e1lfdan as the foster son.\nIn German heroic legend, male dwarfs are often portrayed as lusting after human women. In contrast, female dwarfs seek to possess the male hero in the legends.\nCraftsmanship and treasure.\nIn Eddic sources dwarfs are attributed with creating magical treasures for the gods such as Mj\u00f6lnir, Sif's hair, Draupnir, Gullinbursti, Sk\u00ed\u00f0bla\u00f0nir, Gleipnir and Gungnir, while in S\u00f6rla \u00fe\u00e1ttr they craft Br\u00edsingamen for Freyja. They further created the Mead of Poetry from the blood of Kvasir, which grants skill in poetry to those who drink from it. According to Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l, due to the role of dwarfs in crafting the drink, poetry can be referred to by kennings such as \"the Billow of the Dwarf-Crag\", \"Thought's Drink of the Rock-Folk\", \"the Drink of Dvalinn\", \"the Dwarves' ship\" and the \"Ale of the Dwarves\". John Lindow noted that stanza 10 of the \"Poetic Edda\" poem \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\" can be read as describing the creation of human forms from the earth and follows a catalogue of dwarf names; he suggests that the poem may present Ask and Embla as having been created by dwarfs, with the three gods then giving them life.\nIn Eddic and some saga sources, rather than being exchanged, items of value move from dwarfs to others, often through extortion. This has been suggested to be a critical differentiator between dwarfs and elves in pre-Christian Germanic religion, who maintain reciprocal and positive relationships with gods and humans; Kormaks saga describes how food was to be shared with elves to heal sickness and Austrfararv\u00edsur records an \u00e1lfabl\u00f3t being held around the early 11th century in Sweden. Dwarfs, on the other hand, according to these sources, are asocial, and there are no records of them receiving bl\u00f3ts or other gifts in this period.\nDwarfs maintain their roles as reluctant donors of their possessions in some later Old Norse legends such as Volsunga saga and Hervarar saga ok Hei\u00f0reks, where they are forced to give up Andvaranaut and Tyrfing respectively. Some legendary and romance sagas diverge from this, with dwarfs acting friendlily and helpfully; however, this is attributed to their lateness and likely do not represent perceptions that predate Christianisation. Typically, in these later sagas, fighting dwarfs is considered dishonourable, in contrast to other beings such as dragons. Receiving help from a dwarf, however, such as being healed or given a treasure, was not seen as problematic; it has been proposed that the worldview of the saga writers was that a hero is not defined by achieving deeds alone but by being able to both give and accept help.\nIn German legends, they also possess other magical objects and often appear as master smiths.\nAssociation with mountains and stones.\nThe Codex Regius version of V\u00f6lusp\u00e1 records that dwarfs were produced out of the earth, while in the Prose Edda, they form like maggots in the flesh of Ymir, which became the earth. Beyond this, in early Old Norse sources, there is ambiguity between whether dwarfs live within stones or whether they are themselves stones. In V\u00f6lusp\u00e1 they are referred to as 'masters of the rocks' () and skaldic kennings for 'stone' include ('house of the dwarf') and ('the hall of Durnir's kinsman'). In Ynglingatal stanza 2 and the accompanying prose in the Ynglinga saga, a dwarf lures King Sveig\u00f0ir into an open stone which closes behind them, whereupon he is never seen again. Ynglingasaga also describes this dwarf as being afraid of the sun (), akin to in Alv\u00edssm\u00e1l, where the poem's eponymous dwarf is turned to stone by sunlight.\nIn German legends, they typically live inside of hollow mountains; in some cases, they may live above the ground, while in saga literature, such as \u00deorsteins saga V\u00edkingssonar they commonly live in individual stones, which could also serve as workshops, such as in the forging of Br\u00edsingamen in S\u00f6rla \u00fe\u00e1ttr. The presentation of dwarfs living within stones continued into modern folklore surrounding specific landscape features such as the Dwarfie Stane, a chambered tomb located on the island of Hoy, and the in Sey\u00f0isfj\u00f6r\u00f0ur.\nIt has been proposed by Lotte Motz that the inhabitation of mountains, stones, and mounds by dwarfs may be derived from their earlier association with the dead who were frequently buried in mounds and around megaliths.\nCausing disease.\nThe term \" can be used in Old English texts to describe an illness; it is commonly used in medical texts derived from Greek or Latin sources, where it is used to gloss symptoms such as fever. The \"Dictionary of Old English\" divides the definition of into either \"a dwarf or pygmy\" or \"a fever\"; however, it has been argued that the distinction between the two meanings may not have been prevalent among Germanic peoples in the Early Middle Ages, due to the close association between the beings and sickness in medicinal charms.\nThe 8th century Ribe skull fragment, found in Jutland, bears an inscription that calls for help from three beings, including Odin, against either one or two harmful dwarfs. The item's function has been compared to the Sigtuna amulet I and Canterbury charm that seek to drive away a \"lord of \u00feursar\" that is causing an infection, the latter explicitly with the help of Thor. A similar inscription dating between the 8th and 11th century is found on a lead plaque discovered near Fakenham in Norfolk, which reads \"dead is dwarf\" (), and has been interpreted as another example of a written charm aiming to rid the ill person of the disease, identified as a dwarf. The Lacnunga contains the Anglo-Saxon charm XCIIIb (\"Against a Dwarf XCIIIb\") that refers to a sickness as a that is riding the afflicted person like a horse, similar to the harmful \"mare\" in the later folklore of the Germanic-speaking peoples. Despite the Christian elements in the charms, such as the saints called upon for help, their foundations likely lie in a shared North-Sea Germanic tradition that includes inscribed runic charms such as those found in Ribe and Norfolk.\nThe conception of diseases as being caused by projectiles from supernatural beings is widespread in Germanic folklore through time, such as in the phenomenon of elfshot, in Wi\u00f0 f\u00e6rstice, where they are thrown by elves, \u0112se and witches, and in the Canterbury charm in which an infection is caused by the 'wound-spear' () used by the \"lord of \u00feursar\". In the case of dwarfs, this association has continued in places into the modern period, such as in the Norwegian words or which refer to an 'animal disease' and translate literally as 'dwarfshot'.\nToponymy.\nPlacenames derived from dwarf or cognate:\nEngland\nInfluence on popular culture.\nDwarfs feature in modern tellings of folklore such as Walt Disney's film \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" (1937) based on the \"Snow White\" folktale retold by the Brothers Grimm.\nMost dwarfs in modern fantasy fiction closely follow those of J. R. R. Tolkien's \"The Hobbit\" and \"The Lord of the Rings\", where the dwarves (Tolkien's spelling) were distinguished from elves: most modern fantasy has continued this distinction. Dwarfs are also present in other fantasy literature such as C. S. Lewis's \"Narnia\" stories, Terry Pratchett's \"Discworld\" and the \"Artemis Fowl\" novels by Eoin Colfer.\nThe emergence of fantasy video games has led to differing depictions and interpretations of dwarfs. In the universe of \"The Elder Scrolls\", \"dwarves\" (or Dwemer) are presented as a race of subterranean elves whose culture was centred around science and engineering, which differs from Tolkien's conceptualisation in that they are not particularly short, and are extinct. Other games like \"Dragon Age\" and \"Warcraft\" present an image of dwarfs as stout, bearded mountain dwellers, separate from Elves.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52457", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52457", "title": "934", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 934 (CMXXXIV) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52458", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52458", "title": "937", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 937 (CMXXXVII) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAsia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52459", "revid": "140154", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52459", "title": "Counter-Earth", "text": "Hypothetical planet on the other side of the Sun from Earth\nThe Counter-Earth is a that orbits on the other side of the Solar System from Earth, e.g. at the L3 Lagrange point of the Sun\u2013Earth system. A Counter-Earth, or Antichthon (), was hypothesized by the pre-Socratic Greek philosopher Philolaus (c.\u2009470\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009385 BC) to support his non-geocentric cosmology, in which all objects in the universe revolve around a \"Central Fire\" (unseen from Earth and distinct from the Sun which also revolves around it).\nIn modern times a hypothetical planet always on the other side of the Sun from Earth has been called a \"Counter-Earth\", and has been a recurring theme in UFO claims, as well as in fiction (particularly science fiction).\nGreek Pythagorean universe.\nAn astronomical system positing that the Earth, Moon, Sun, planets and unseen \"counter-earth\" revolve around an unseen \"Central Fire\" was developed in the 5th century BC and attributed to the Pythagorean philosopher Philolaus. Philolaus' universe moved \"the earth from the center of the cosmos\", and provided the insight that \"the apparent motion of the heavenly bodies\" was (in large part) due to \"the real motion of the observer\"\u2014i.e. Earth.\nIn Philolaus' system, the Earth and Counter-Earth revolved around the unseen Central Fire every 24 hours, while the Moon's revolution was monthly, and the Sun's yearly. It was the Earth's speedy travel past the slower moving Sun that resulted in the appearance on Earth of the Sun rising and setting. Further from the Central Fire, the Planets' movement was slower still, and the outermost \"sky\" (i.e. stars) probably fixed.\nCounter-Earth.\nAlong with the Central Fire, the \"mysterious\" Counter-Earth (\"Antichthon\") was the other heavenly body not visible from Earth. Aristotle described it as \"another Earth\", from which Greek scholar George Burch infers that it must be similar in size, shape and constitution to Earth. Some (such as astronomer John Louis Emil Dreyer) have thought that Philolaus had it following an orbit such that it was always located between Earth and the Central Fire. However, Burch argues that Philolaus must have thought that it orbited on the other side of the Fire from Earth. Since \"counter\" means \"opposite\", and opposite could only be in respect to the Central Fire, it follows that the Counter-Earth must be orbiting 180 degrees from Earth.\nAccording to Aristotle\u2014a critic of the Pythagoreans\u2014the function of the Counter-Earth was to explain \"eclipses of the moon and their frequency\", which could not be explained by Earth alone blocking the light of the Sun if Earth did not revolve around the Sun. Aristotle suggested that it was also introduced \"to raise the number of heavenly bodies around the central fire from nine to ten, which the Pythagoreans regarded as the perfect number\".\nHowever, Burch believes that Aristotle was having a joke \"at the expense of Pythagorean number theory\", and that the true purpose of the Counter-Earth was to \"balance\" Philolaus' cosmos\u2014balance being needed because without a counter there would be only one dense, massive object in the system\u2014Earth. Although his system had both the Earth and the Planets orbiting a single point, the ancient Greeks did not consider Earth a \"planet\". In the time before Galileo could observe from his telescope that planets were spheres like Earth, they were thought to be different from stars only in brightness and in their motion, and like stars composed of a fiery or ethereal matter having little or no density. However, the Earth was obviously made of the dense elements of earth and water. According to Burch,\nIf there was a single Earth revolving at some distance from the center of space, then the universe's center of gravity, located in the Earth as its only dense body, would not coincide with its spatial center\u00a0... The universe, consequently, would be off center, so to speak\u2014lopsided and asymmetric\u2014a notion repugnant to any Greek, and doubly so to a Pythagorean.\nThis could be corrected by another body with the same mass as Earth, orbiting the same central point but 180 degrees from Earth\u2014the Counter-Earth.\nLater.\nIn the 1st century AD, after the idea of a spherical Earth had gained more general acceptance, Pomponius Mela, a Latin cosmographer, developed an updated version of the idea, wherein a spherical Earth must have a more or less balanced distribution of land and water, even though all known continents were in the northern hemisphere. Mela drew a map which postulated a continental landmass in the unknown, southern half of Earth\u2014the antipodes\u2014below the equator and the tropics, climes which he believed uninhabitable and impassably hot. Mela ascribed the name \"Antichthones\" to the inhabitants of this continent.\nModern era.\nPhilolaus's ideas were all eventually superseded by the modern realization that a spherical Earth rotating on its own axis was one of several spherical planets following the laws of gravity and revolving around a much larger Sun. The idea of a Counter-Earth waned after the heliocentric model of the solar system became widely accepted from the 16th century. In the contemporary world, \"Counter-Earth\" usually refers to a hypothetical planet with an orbit as Burch described, on the other side of the \"Central Fire\"\u2014i.e. the Sun. It cannot be seen from Earth, not because Earth faces away from the center, but because the Sun's great size blocks its view. It has been a recurring motif in fiction\u2014often serving as an allegory for the real Earth\u2014and UFO claims. The 1968 \"Scientific Study of Unidentified Flying Objects\" headed by Edward Condon at the University of Colorado even included a \"Numerical Experiment on the Possible Existence of an 'Anti-Earth'\" as an appendix.\nDetectability.\nA Counter-Earth could still be detected from the Earth for a number of reasons. Even if the Sun blocked its view from Earth, a Counter-Earth would have gravitational influence (perturbation) upon the other planets, comets and man-made probes of the Solar System. Researchers have detected no such influence, and indeed space probes sent to Venus, Mars and other places could not have successfully flown by or landed on their targets if a Counter-Earth existed, as the navigational calculations for their journeys did not take any putative Counter-Earth into account. Roughly speaking, anything larger than in diameter should have been detected.\nAny planetary-sized body 180 degrees from Earth should also have been visible to some space probes, such as NASA's STEREO coronagraph probes (two spacecraft launched into orbits around the Sun in 2006, one farther ahead of and one behind the Earth's orbit) which would have seen the Counter-Earth during the first half of 2007. The separation of the STEREO spacecraft from Earth would give them a view of the L3 point during the early phase of the mission.\nA Counter-Earth would also eventually be visible from Earth because the gravitational forces of the other planets on it would make its own orbit unstable. Venus has 82% of the mass of Earth and would come within 0.3\u00a0AU of the location of a Counter-Earth every 20 months, providing considerable gravitational pull that over the years would move its orbit into sight of observers on Earth.\nIn fiction.\nCounter-Earth has made appearances in fiction since the late 1800s. It is variously depicted as very similar to Earth or very different, and often employed as a vehicle for satire. Counter-Earth being inhabited by counterparts of the people of Earth is a recurring theme. Variations on the concept also occasionally appear, including extrasolar equivalents, the Mars equivalent \"Counter-Mars\", and a planet hidden on the other side of the Moon rather than the Sun.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nM.Admin. (2014, March 26). The Bizarre Greek Theory About The Solar System. KnowledgeNuts. https://knowledgenuts.com/2014/03/26/the-bizarre-greek-theory-about-the-solar-system/\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52460", "revid": "7147223", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52460", "title": "French colonization of the Americas", "text": "France began colonizing America in the 16th century and continued into the following centuries as it established a colonial empire in the Western Hemisphere. France established colonies in much of eastern North America, on several Caribbean islands, and in South America. Most colonies were developed to export products such as fish, rice, sugar, and furs.\nThe first French colonial empire stretched to over at its peak in 1710, which was the second largest colonial empire in the world, after the Spanish Empire.\nAs they colonized the New World, the French established forts and settlements that would become such cities as Quebec, Trois-Rivi\u00e8res and Montreal in Canada; Detroit, Green Bay, St. Louis, Cape Girardeau, Mobile, Biloxi, Baton Rouge and New Orleans in the United States; and Port-au-Prince, Cap-Ha\u00eftien (founded as \"Cap-Fran\u00e7ais\") in Haiti, Saint-Pierre and Fort Saint-Louis (formerly as \"Fort Royal\") in Martinique, Castries (founded as \"Car\u00e9nage\") in Saint Lucia, Cayenne in French Guiana and S\u00e3o Lu\u00eds (founded as \"Saint-Louis de Maragnan\") in Brazil.\nNorth America.\nBackground.\nThe French first came to the New World as travelers seeking a route to the Pacific Ocean and wealth. Major French exploration of North America began under the rule of Francis I, King of France. In 1524, Francis sent Italian-born Giovanni da Verrazzano to explore the region between Florida and Newfoundland for a route to the Pacific Ocean. He would find parts of New York Harbor. The French would take narrow land ports of the Boroughs Queens and Brooklyn from the upper and lower parts of the harbor until 1609 when the British and the Dutch came to take control of it from the French Verrazzano. He would later give the names \"Francesca\" and \"Nova Gall\" to that land between New Spain and English Newfoundland, thus promoting French interests.\nColonization.\nIn 1534, Francis I of France sent Jacques Cartier on the first of three voyages to explore the coast of Newfoundland and the St. Lawrence River. He founded New France by planting a cross on the shore of the Gasp\u00e9 Peninsula. The French subsequently tried to establish several colonies throughout North America that failed, due to weather, disease, or conflict with other European powers. Cartier attempted to create the first permanent European settlement in North America at Cap-Rouge (Quebec City) in 1541 with 400 settlers but the settlement was abandoned the next year after bad weather and attacks from Native Americans in the area. A small group of French troops were left on Parris Island, South Carolina in 1562 to build Charlesfort, but left after a year when they were not resupplied by France. Fort Caroline established in present-day Jacksonville, Florida, in 1564, lasted only a year before being destroyed by the Spanish from St. Augustine. An attempt to settle convicts on Sable Island off Nova Scotia in 1598 failed after a short time. In 1599, a sixteen-person trading post was established in Tadoussac (in present-day Quebec), of which only five men survived the first winter. In 1604 Pierre Du Gua de Monts and Samuel de Champlain founded a short-lived French colony, the first in Acadia, on Saint Croix Island, presently part of the state of Maine, which was much plagued by illness, perhaps scurvy. The following year the settlement was moved to Port Royal, located in present-day Nova Scotia.\nSamuel de Champlain founded Quebec (1608) and explored the Great Lakes. In 1634, Jean Nicolet founded \"La Baye des Puants\" (present-day Green Bay), which is one of the oldest permanent European settlements in the USA. In 1634, Sieur de Laviolette founded Trois-Rivi\u00e8res. In 1642, Paul de Chomedey, Sieur de Maisonneuve, founded Fort Ville-Marie which is now known as Montreal. Louis Jolliet and Jacques Marquette founded Sault Sainte Marie (1668) and Saint Ignace (1671) and explored the Mississippi River. At the end of the 17th century, Ren\u00e9-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle established a network of forts going from the Gulf of Mexico to the Great Lakes and the Saint Lawrence River. Fort Saint Louis was established in Texas in 1685, but was gone by 1688. Antoine de la Mothe Cadillac founded \"Fort Pontchartrain du D\u00e9troit\" (modern-day Detroit) in 1701 and Jean-Baptiste Le Moyne, Sieur de Bienville founded \"La Nouvelle Orl\u00e9ans\" (New Orleans) in 1718. Pierre Le Moyne d'Iberville founded Baton Rouge in 1719.\nThe European settlement of Mobile, Alabama began with French colonists, who in 1702 constructed \"Fort Louis de la Louisiane\", at Twenty-seven Mile Bluff on the Mobile River, as the first capital of the French colony of La Louisiane. It was founded by French Canadian brothers Pierre Le Moyne d'Iberville and Jean-Baptiste Le Moyne, Sieur de Bienville, to establish control over France's claims to \"La Louisiane\". Bienville was appointed as royal governor of French Louisiana in 1701. Mobile's Roman Catholic parish was established on July 20, 1703, by Jean-Baptiste de la Croix de Chevri\u00e8res de Saint-Vallier, Bishop of Quebec. The parish was the first French Catholic parish established on the Gulf Coast of the United States.\nIn 1704 the ship \"P\u00e9lican\" delivered 23 French women to the colony; passengers had contracted yellow fever at a stop in Havana. Though most of the \"\"P\u00e9lican\" girls\" recovered, numerous colonists and neighboring Native Americans contracted the disease in turn and many died. This early period was also the occasion of the importation of the first African slaves, transported aboard a French supply ship from the French colony of Saint-Domingue in the Caribbean, where they had first been held. The population of the colony fluctuated over the next few years, growing to 279 persons by 1708, yet shrinking to 178 persons two years later due to disease.\nThese additional outbreaks of disease and a series of floods resulted in Bienville ordering that the settlement be relocated in 1711 several miles downriver to its present location at the confluence of the Mobile River and Mobile Bay. A new earth-and-palisade Fort Louis was constructed at the new site during this time. By 1712, when Antoine Crozat was appointed to take over administration of the colony, its population had reached 400 persons.\nThe capital of La Louisiane was moved in 1720 to Biloxi, leaving Mobile to serve as a regional military and trading center. In 1723 the construction of a new brick fort with a stone foundation began and it was renamed Fort Cond\u00e9 in honor of Louis Henri, Duke of Bourbon.\nIn 1763, the Treaty of Paris was signed, ending the Seven Years' War, which Britain won, defeating France. By this treaty, France ceded its territories east of the Mississippi River to Britain. This area was made a part of the expanded British West Florida colony. The British changed the name of Fort Cond\u00e9 to Fort Charlotte, after Queen Charlotte.\nThe French were eager to explore North America but New France remained largely unpopulated. Due to the lack of women, intermarriages between French and Indians were frequent, giving rise to the M\u00e9tis people. Relations between the French and Indians were usually peaceful. As the 19th-century historian Francis Parkman stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Spanish civilization crushed the Indian; English civilization scorned and neglected him; French civilization embraced and cherished him.\"\u2014\u200a\nTo boost the French population, Cardinal Richelieu issued an act declaring that Indians converted to Catholicism were considered \"natural Frenchmen\" by the Ordonnance of 1627:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The descendants of the French who have accustomed to this country [New France], together with all the Indians who will be brought to the knowledge of the faith and will profess it, shall be deemed and renowned natural Frenchmen, and as such may come to live in France when they want, and acquire, donate, and succeed and accept donations and legacies, just as true French subjects, without being required to take no letters of declaration of naturalization.\"\nLouis XIV also tried to increase the population by sending approximately 800 young women nicknamed the \"King's Daughters\". However, the low density of the population in New France remained a very persistent problem. At the beginning of the French and Indian War (1754\u20131763), the British population in North America outnumbered the French 20 to 1. France fought a total of six colonial wars in North America (see the four French and Indian Wars as well as Father Rale's War and Father Le Loutre's War).\nFrench Florida.\nIn 1562, Charles IX, under the leadership of Admiral Gaspard de Coligny sent Jean Ribault and a group of Huguenot settlers in an attempt to colonize the Atlantic coast and found a colony on a territory which would take the name of the French Florida. They discovered the sound and Port Royal Island, which would be called Parris Island in South Carolina, on which he built a fort named Charlesfort. The group, led by Ren\u00e9 Goulaine de Laudonni\u00e8re, moved to the south where they founded the Fort Caroline on the Saint John's river in Florida on June 22, 1564.\nThis irritated the Spanish who claimed Florida and opposed the Protestant settlers for religious reasons. In 1565, Pedro Men\u00e9ndez de Avil\u00e9s led a group of Spaniards and founded Saint Augustine, 60 kilometers south of Fort Caroline. Fearing a Spanish attack, Ribault planned to move the colony but a storm suddenly destroyed his fleet. On 20 September 1565 the Spaniards, commanded by Men\u00e9ndez de Avil\u00e9s, attacked and massacred all the Fort Caroline occupants including Jean Ribault.\nCanada and Acadia.\nThe French interest in Canada focused first on fishing off the Grand Banks of Newfoundland. However, at the beginning of the 17th century, France was more interested in fur from North America. The fur trading post of Tadoussac was founded in 1600. Four years later, Champlain made his first trip to Canada on a trade mission for fur. Although he had no formal mandate on this trip, he sketched a map of the St. Lawrence River and in writing, on his return to France, a report entitled \"Savages\" (relation of his stay in a tribe of Montagnais near Tadoussac).\nChamplain needed to report his findings to Henry IV. He participated in another expedition to New France in the spring of 1604, conducted by Pierre Du Gua de Monts. It helped the foundation of a settlement on Saint Croix Island, the first French settlement in the New World, which would be given up the following winter. The expedition then founded the colony of Port-Royal.\nIn 1608, Champlain founded a fur post that would become the city of Quebec, which would become the capital of New France. In Quebec, Champlain forged alliances between France and the Huron and Ottawa against their traditional enemies, the Iroquois. Champlain and other French travelers then continued to explore North America, with canoes made from birch bark, to move quickly through the Great Lakes and their tributaries. In 1634, the Normand explorer Jean Nicolet pushed his exploration to the West up to Wisconsin.\nFollowing the capitulation of Quebec by the Kirke brothers, the British occupied the city of Quebec and Canada from 1629 to 1632. Samuel de Champlain was taken prisoner and there followed the bankruptcy of the Company of One Hundred Associates. Following the Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye, France took possession of the colony in 1632. The city of Trois-Rivi\u00e8res was founded in 1634. In 1642, the Angevin J\u00e9r\u00f4me le Royer de la Dauversi\u00e8re founded Ville-Marie (later Montreal) which was at that time, a fort as protection against Iroquois attacks (the first great Iroquois war lasted from 1642 to 1667).\nDespite this rapid expansion, the colony developed very slowly. The Iroquois wars and diseases were the leading causes of death in the French colony. In 1663 when Louis XIV provided the \"Royal Government\", the population of New France was only 2,500 European inhabitants. That year, to increase the population, Louis XIV sent between 800 and 900 'King's Daughters' to become the wives of French settlers. The population of New France reached subsequently 7,000 in 1674 and 15,000 in 1689.\nFrom 1689 to 1713, the French settlers were faced with almost incessant war during the French and Indian Wars. From 1689 to 1697, they fought the British in the Nine Years' War. The war against the Iroquois continued even after the Treaty of Rijswijk until 1701, when the two parties agreed on peace. Then, the war against the English took over in the War of the Spanish Succession. In 1690 and 1711, Quebec City had successfully resisted the attacks of the English navy and then British army. Nevertheless, the British took advantage of the second war. With the signing of the Treaty of Utrecht in 1713, France ceded to Britain Acadia (with a population of 1,700 people), Newfoundland and Hudson Bay. Under the Sovereign Council, the population of the colony grew faster. However, the population growth was far inferior to that of the British Thirteen Colonies to the south. In the middle of the 18th century, New France accounted for 60,000 people while the British colonies had more than one million people. This placed the colony at a great military disadvantage against the British. The war between the colonies resumed in 1744, lasting until 1748. A final and decisive war began in 1754. The Canadiens and the French were helped by numerous alliances with Native Americans, but they were usually outnumbered on the battlefield.\nLouisiana.\nOn May 17, 1673, explorers Louis Jolliet and Jacques Marquette began exploring the Mississippi River, known to the Sioux as \"does Tongo,\" or to the Miami-Illinois as \" missisipioui\" (\"the great river\"). They reached the mouth of the Arkansas and then up the river, after learning that it flowed into the Gulf of Mexico and not to the California Sea (Pacific Ocean).\nIn 1682, the Normand Cavelier de la Salle and the Italian Henri de Tonti came down the Mississippi to its Delta. They left from Fort Crevecoeur on the Illinois River, along with 23 French and 18 Native Americans. In April 1682, they arrived at the mouth of the Mississippi; they planted a cross and a column bearing the arms of the king of France. In 1686 de Tonti left 6 men near the Quapaw village of Osotouy, creating the settlement of Arkansas Post. De Tonti's Arkansas Post would be the first European settlement in the Lower Mississippi River valley. La Salle returned to France and won over the Secretary of State of the Navy to give him the command of Louisiana. He believed that it was close to New Spain by drawing a map on which the Mississippi seemed much further west than its actual rate. He set up a maritime expedition with four ships and 320 emigrants, but it ended in disaster when he failed to find the Mississippi Delta and was killed in 1687.\nIn 1698, Pierre LeMoyne d'Iberville left La Rochelle and explored the area around the mouth of the Mississippi. He stopped between Isle-aux-Chats (now Cat Island) and Isle Surgeres (renamed Isle-aux-Vascular or Ship Island) on February 13, 1699, and continued his explorations to the mainland, with his brother Jean-Baptiste Le Moyne de Bienville to Biloxi. He built a precarious fort, called 'Maurepas' (later 'Old Biloxi'), before returning to France. He returned twice in the Gulf of Mexico and established a fort at Mobile in 1702.\nFrom 1699 to 1702, Pierre Le Moyne d'Iberville was governor of Louisiana. His brother succeeded him in that post from 1702 to 1713. He was again governor from 1716 to 1724 and again 1733 to 1743. In 1718, Jean-Baptiste Le Moyne de Bienville commanded a French expedition in Louisiana. He founded the city of New Orleans, in homage to Regent Duke of Orleans. The architect Adrian de Pauger drew the orthogonal plane of the Old Square.\nLouisiana immigration.\nIn 1718, there were only 700 Europeans in Louisiana. The Mississippi Company arranged for ships to bring 800 more, who landed in Louisiana in 1718, doubling the European population. John Law encouraged Germans, particularly Germans of the Alsatian region who had recently fallen under French rule, and the Swiss to emigrate.\nPrisoners were set free in Paris in September 1719 onwards, under the condition that they marry prostitutes and go with them to Louisiana. The newly married couples were chained together and taken to the port of embarkation. In May 1720, after complaints from the Mississippi Company and the concessioners about this class of French immigrants, the French government prohibited such deportations. However, there was a third shipment of prisoners in 1721.\nThe Mississippi Company arranged for hundreds of German immigrants to move to Louisiana by ships in 1721. Charles Frederick d'Arensbourg was a leader of the settlement called the German Coast. By the end of 1720, the Mississippi Company failed. Later, more Germans immigrated to Louisiana during the 1750s and 1770s.\nDissolution.\nThe last French and Indian War resulted in the dissolution of New France in 1763, with Canada going to Great Britain and Louisiana going to Spain, although mainly absent. French colonists descendants or \"Canadiens\" that had settled in the Valley of Ohio, migrated into the Spanish territory West of the Mississippi and were instrumental in pushing further West toward the Pacific through their longer experience of the new continent and its native inhabitants. Only the islands of Saint-Pierre-et-Miquelon are still in French hands.\nIn 1802 Spain returned Louisiana to France, but Napoleon sold it to the United States in 1803. The French left many toponyms (Illinois, Vermont, Bayous) and ethnonyms (Sioux, Coeur d'Alene, Nez Perc\u00e9) across North America.\nWest Indies.\nA major French settlement lay on the island of Hispaniola, where France established the colony of Saint-Domingue on the western third of the island in 1664. Nicknamed the \"Pearl of the Antilles\", Saint-Domingue became the richest colony in the Caribbean due to slave plantation production of sugar cane. It had the highest slave mortality rate in the western hemisphere. A 1791 slave revolt, the only ever successful slave revolt, began the Haitian Revolution, led to freedom for the colony's slaves in 1794 and, a decade later, complete independence for the country, which renamed itself Haiti. France briefly also ruled the eastern portion of the island, which is now the Dominican Republic.\nDuring the 17th and 18th centuries, France ruled much of the Lesser Antilles at various times. Islands that came under French rule during part or all of this time include Dominica, Grenada, Guadeloupe, Marie-Galante, Martinique, St. Barth\u00e9lemy, St. Croix, St. Kitts, St. Lucia, St. Martin, St. Vincent and Tobago. Control of many of these islands was contested between the French, the British and the Dutch; in the case of St. Martin, the island was divided in two, a situation that persists to this day. Great Britain captured some of France's islands during the Seven Years' War and the Napoleonic Wars. Following the latter conflict, France retained control of Guadeloupe, Martinique, Marie-Galante, St. Barth\u00e9lemy, and its portion of St. Martin; all remain part of France today. Guadeloupe (including Marie-Galante and other nearby islands) and Martinique each is an overseas department of France, while St. Barth\u00e9lemy and St. Martin each became an overseas collectivity of France in 2007.\nSouth America.\n1. Brazil.\nFrance Antarctique (formerly also spelled France antartique) was a French colony south of the Equator, in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, which existed between 1555 and 1567, and had control over the coast from Rio de Janeiro to Cabo Frio. The colony quickly became a haven for the Huguenots, and was ultimately destroyed by the Portuguese in 1567.\n1555 First settlement.\nOn November 1, 1555, French vice-admiral Nicolas Durand de Villegaignon (1510\u20131575), a Catholic knight of the Order of Malta, who later would help the Huguenots to find a refuge against persecution, led a small fleet of two ships and 600 soldiers and colonists, and took possession of the small island of Serigipe in the Guanabara Bay, in front of present-day Rio de Janeiro, where they built a fort named Fort Coligny. The fort was named in honor of Gaspard de Coligny (then a Catholic statesman, who about a year later would become a Huguenot), an admiral who supported the expedition and would use the colony in order to protect his fellow believers.\nTo the still largely undeveloped mainland village, Villegaignon gave the name of Henriville, in honour of Henry II, the King of France, who also knew of and approved the expedition, and had provided the fleet for the trip. Villegaignon secured his position by making an alliance with the Tamoio and Tupinamb\u00e1 Indians of the region, who were fighting the Portuguese.\n1557 Calvinist arrival.\nUnchallenged by the Portuguese, who initially took little notice of his landing, Villegaignon endeavoured to expand the colony by calling for more colonists in 1556. He sent one of his ships, the \"Grande Roberge\", to Honfleur, entrusted with letters to King Henry II, Gaspard de Coligny and according to some accounts, the Protestant leader John Calvin.\nAfter one ship was sent to France to ask for additional support, three ships were financed and prepared by the king of France and put under the command of Sieur De Bois le Comte, a nephew of Villegagnon. They were joined by 14 Calvinists from Geneva, led by Philippe de Corguilleray, including theologians Pierre Richier and Guillaume Chartrier. The new colonists, numbering around 300, included 5 young women to be wed, 10 boys to be trained as translators, as well as 14 Calvinists sent by Calvin, and also Jean de L\u00e9ry, who would later write an account of the colony. They arrived in March 1557. The relief fleet was composed of:\nDoctrinal disputes arose between Villegagnon and the Calvinists, especially in relation to the Eucharist, and in October 1557 the Calvinists were banished from Coligny island as a result. They settled among the Tupinamba until January 1558, when some of them managed to return to France by ship together with Jean de L\u00e9ry, and five others chose to return to Coligny island where three of them were drowned by Villegagnon for refusing to recant.\nPortuguese intervention.\nIn 1560 Mem de S\u00e1, the new Governor-General of Brazil, received from the Portuguese government the command to expel the French. With a fleet of 26 warships and 2,000 soldiers, on 15 March 1560, he attacked and destroyed Fort Coligny within three days, but was unable to drive off their inhabitants and defenders, because they escaped to the mainland with the help of the Native Brazilians, where they continued to live and to work. Admiral Villegaignon had returned to France in 1558, disgusted with the religious tension that existed between French Protestants and Catholics, who had come also with the second group (see French Wars of Religion).&lt;br&gt;\nUrged by two influential Jesuit priests who had come to Brazil with Mem de S\u00e1, named Jos\u00e9 de Anchieta and Manuel da N\u00f3brega, and who had played a big role in pacifying the Tamoios, Mem de S\u00e1 ordered his nephew, Est\u00e1cio de S\u00e1 to assemble a new attack force. Est\u00e1cio de S\u00e1 founded the city of Rio de Janeiro on March 1, 1565, and fought the Frenchmen for two more years. Helped by a military reinforcement sent by his uncle, on January 20, 1567, he imposed final defeat on the French forces and decisively expelled them from Brazil, but died a month later from wounds inflicted in the battle. Coligny's and Villegaignon's dream had lasted a mere 12 years.\n2. Equinoctial France.\nEquinoctial France was the contemporary name given to the colonization efforts of France in the 17th century in South America, around the line of Equator, before \"tropical\" had fully gained its modern meaning: Equinoctial means in Latin \"of equal nights\", i.e., on the Equator, where the duration of days and nights is nearly the same year round.&lt;br&gt;\nThe French colonial empire in the New World also included New France (Nouvelle France) in North America, particularly in what is today the province of Quebec, Canada, and for a very short period (12 years) also Antarctic France (France Antarctique, in French), in present-day Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. All of these settlements were in violation of the papal bull of 1493, which divided the New World between Spain and Portugal. This division was later defined more exactly by the Treaty of Tordesillas.\nHistory of France \u00e9quinoxiale.\nFrance \u00e9quinoxiale started in 1612, when a French expedition departed from Cancale, Brittany, France, under the command of Daniel de la Touche, Seigneur de la Ravardi\u00e8re, and Fran\u00e7ois de Razilly, admiral. Carrying 500 colonists, it arrived in the Northern coast of what is today the Brazilian state of Maranh\u00e3o. De la Ravardi\u00e8re had discovered the region in 1604 but the death of the king postponed his plans to start its colonization.&lt;br&gt;\nThe colonists soon founded a village, which was named \"Saint-Louis\", in honor of the French king Louis IX. This later became S\u00e3o Lu\u00eds in Portuguese,[1] the only Brazilian state capital founded by France. On 8 September, Capuchin friars prayed the first mass, and the soldiers started building a fortress. An important difference in relation to France Antarctique is that this new colony was not motivated by escape from religious persecutions to Protestants (see French Wars of Religion).&lt;br&gt; \nThe colony did not last long. A Portuguese army assembled in the Captaincy of Pernambuco, under the command of Alexandre de Moura, was able to mount a military expedition, which defeated and expelled the French colonists in 1615, less than four years after their arrival in the land. Thus, it repeated the disaster spelt for the colonists of France Antarctique, in 1567. A few years later, in 1620, Portuguese and Brazilian colonists arrived in number and S\u00e3o Lu\u00eds started to develop, with an economy based mostly in sugar cane and slavery.\nFrench traders and colonists tried again to settle a France \u00c9quinoxiale further North, in what is today French Guiana, in 1626, 1635 (when the capital, Cayenne, was founded) and 1643. Twice a Compagnie de la France \u00e9quinoxiale was founded, in 1643 and 1645, but both foundered as a result of misfortune and mismanagement. It was only after 1674, when the colony came under the direct control of the French crown and a competent Governor took office, that France \u00c9quinoxiale became a reality. To this day, French Guiana is a department of France.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52461", "revid": "29237824", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52461", "title": "938", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 938 (CMXXXVIII) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAsia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52462", "revid": "5104548", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52462", "title": "Observational learning", "text": "Learning that occurs through observing the behaviour of others\nObservational learning is learning that occurs through observing the behavior of others. It is a form of social learning which takes various forms, based on various processes. In humans, this form of learning seems to not need reinforcement to occur, but instead, requires a social model such as a parent, sibling, friend, or teacher with surroundings. Particularly in childhood, a model is someone of authority or higher status in an environment. In animals, observational learning is often based on classical conditioning, in which an instinctive behavior is elicited by observing the behavior of another (e.g. mobbing in birds), but other processes may be involved as well.\nHuman.\nMany behaviors that a learner observes, remembers, and imitates are actions that models display and display modeling, even though the model may not intentionally try to instill a particular behavior. A child may learn to swear, smack, smoke, and deem other inappropriate behavior acceptable through poor modeling. Albert Bandura claims that children continually learn desirable and undesirable behavior through observational learning. Observational learning suggests that an individual's environment, cognition, and behavior all incorporate and ultimately determine how the individual functions and models.\nThrough observational learning, individual behaviors can spread across a culture through a process called \"diffusion chain\". This basically occurs when an individual first learns a behavior by observing another individual and that individual serves as a model through whom other individuals learn the behavior, and so on.\nCulture plays a role in whether observational learning is the dominant learning style in a person or community. Some cultures expect children to actively participate in their communities and are therefore exposed to different trades and roles on a daily basis. This exposure allows children to observe and learn the different skills and practices that are valued in their communities.\nAlbert Bandura, who is known for the classic Bobo doll experiment, identified this basic form of learning in 1961. The importance of observational learning lies in helping individuals, especially children, acquire new responses by observing others' behavior.\nAlbert Bandura states that people's behavior could be determined by their environment. Observational learning occurs through observing negative and positive behaviors. Bandura believes in reciprocal determinism in which the environment can influence people's behavior and vice versa. For instance, the Bobo doll experiment shows that the model, in a determined environment, affects children's behavior. In this experiment Bandura demonstrates that one group of children placed in an aggressive environment would act the same way, while the control group and the other group of children placed in a passive role model environment hardly shows any type of aggression.\nIn communities where children's primary mode of learning is through observation, the children are rarely separated from adult activities. This incorporation into the adult world at an early age allows children to use observational learning skills in multiple spheres of life. This learning through observation requires keen attentive abilities. Culturally, they learn that their participation and contributions are valued in their communities. This teaches children that it is their duty, as members of the community, to observe others' contributions so they gradually become involved and participate further in the community.\nInfluential stages and factors.\nThe stages of observational learning include exposure to the model, acquiring the model's behaviour and accepting it as one's own.\nBandura's social cognitive learning theory states that there are four factors that influence observational learning:\nBandura clearly distinguishes between learning and performance. Unless motivated, a person does not produce learned behavior. This motivation can come from external reinforcement, such as the experimenter's promise of reward in some of Bandura's studies, or the bribe of a parent. Or it can come from vicarious reinforcement, based on the observation that models are rewarded. High-status models can affect performance through motivation. For example, girls aged 11 to 14 performed better on a motor performance task when they thought it was demonstrated by a high-status cheerleader than by a low-status model.\nSome have even added a step between attention and retention involving encoding a behavior.\nObservational learning leads to a change in an individual's behavior along three dimensions:\nEffect on behavior.\nAccording to Bandura's social cognitive learning theory, observational learning can affect behavior in many ways, with both positive and negative consequences. It can teach completely new behaviors, for one. It can also increase or decrease the frequency of behaviors that have previously been learned. Observational learning can even encourage behaviors that were previously forbidden (for example, the violent behavior towards the Bobo doll that children imitated in Albert Bandura's study). Observational learning can also influence behaviors that are similar to, but not identical to, the ones being modeled. For example, seeing a model excel at playing the piano may motivate an observer to play the saxophone.\nAge difference.\nAlbert Bandura stressed that developing children learn from different social models, meaning that no two children are exposed to exactly the same modeling influence. From infancy to adolescence, they are exposed to various social models. A 2013 study found that a toddlers' previous social familiarity with a model was not always necessary for learning and that they were also able to learn from observing a stranger demonstrating or modeling a new action to another stranger.\nIt was once believed that babies could not imitate actions until the latter half of the first year. However, a number of studies now report that infants as young as seven days can imitate simple facial expressions. By the latter half of their first year, 9-month-old babies can imitate actions hours after they first see them. As they continue to develop, toddlers around age two can acquire important personal and social skills by imitating a social model.\nDeferred imitation is an important developmental milestone in a two-year-old, in which children not only construct symbolic representations but can also remember information. Unlike toddlers, children of elementary school age are less likely to rely on imagination to represent an experience. Instead, they can verbally describe the model's behavior. Since this form of learning does not need reinforcement, it is more likely to occur regularly.\nAs age increases, age-related observational learning motor skills may decrease in athletes and golfers. Younger and skilled golfers have higher observational learning compared to older golfers and less skilled golfers.\nObservational causal learning.\nHumans use observational Moleen causal learning to watch other people's actions and use the information gained to find out how something works and how we can do it ourselves.\nA study of 25-month-old infants found that they can learn causal relations from observing human interventions. They also learn by observing normal actions not created by intentional human action.\nComparisons with imitation.\nObservational learning is presumed to have occurred when an organism copies an improbable action or action outcome that it has observed and the matching behavior cannot be explained by an alternative mechanism. Psychologists have been particularly interested in the form of observational learning known as imitation and in how to distinguish imitation from other processes. To successfully make this distinction, one must separate the degree to which behavioral similarity results from (a) predisposed behavior, (b) increased motivation resulting from the presence of another animal, (c) attention drawn to a place or object, (d) learning about the way the environment works, as distinguished from what we think of as (e) imitation (the copying of the demonstrated behavior).\nObservational learning differs from imitative learning in that it does not require a duplication of the behavior exhibited by the model. For example, the learner may observe an unwanted behavior and the subsequent consequences, and thus learn to refrain from that behavior. For example, Riopelle (1960) found that monkeys did better with observational learning if they saw the \"tutor\" monkey make a mistake before making the right choice. Heyes (1993) distinguished imitation and non-imitative social learning in the following way: imitation occurs when animals learn about behavior from observing conspecifics, whereas non-imitative social learning occurs when animals learn about the environment from observing others.\nNot all imitation and learning through observing is the same, and they often differ in the degree to which they take on an active or passive form. John Dewey describes an important distinction between two different forms of imitation: imitation as an end in itself and imitation with a purpose. Imitation as an end is more akin to mimicry, in which a person copies another's act to repeat that action again. This kind of imitation is often observed in animals. Imitation with a purpose utilizes the imitative act as a means to accomplish something more significant. Whereas the more passive form of imitation as an end has been documented in some European American communities, the other kind of more active, purposeful imitation has been documented in other communities around the world.\nObservation may take on a more active form in children's learning in multiple Indigenous American communities. Ethnographic anthropological studies in Yucatec Mayan and Quechua Peruvian communities provide evidence that the home or community-centered economic systems of these cultures allow children to witness first-hand, activities that are meaningful to their own livelihoods and the overall well-being of the community. These children have the opportunity to observe activities that are relevant within the context of that community, which gives them a reason to sharpen their attention to the practical knowledge they are exposed to. This does not mean that they have to observe the activities even though they are present. The children often make an active decision to stay in attendance while a community activity is taking place to observe and learn. This decision underscores the significance of this learning style in many indigenous American communities. It goes far beyond learning mundane tasks through rote imitation; it is central to children's gradual transformation into informed members of their communities' unique practices. There was also a study, done with children, that concluded that Imitated behavior can be recalled and used in another situation or the same.\nApprenticeship.\nApprenticeship can involve both observational learning and modelling. Apprentices gain their skills in part through working with masters in their profession and through observing and evaluating the work of their fellow apprentices. Examples include renaissance inventor/painter Leonardo da Vinci and Michelangelo; before succeeding in their profession, they were apprentices.\nLearning without imitation.\nMichael Tomasello described various ways of observational learning without the process of imitation in animals (ethology):\nPeer model influences.\nObservational learning is very beneficial when there are positive, reinforcing peer models involved. Although individuals go through four different stages for observational learning: attention; retention; production; and motivation, this does not simply mean that when an individual's attention is captured that it automatically sets the process in that exact order. One of the most important ongoing stages for observational learning, especially among children, is motivation and positive reinforcement.\nPerformance is enhanced when children are positively instructed on how they can improve a situation and where children actively participate alongside a more skilled person. Examples of this are scaffolding and guided participation. Scaffolding refers to an expert responding contingently to a novice so the novice gradually increases their understanding of a problem. Guided participation refers to an expert actively engaging in a situation with a novice so the novice participates with or observes the adult to understand how to resolve a problem.\nCultural variation.\nCultural variation can be seen by the extent of information learned or absorbed by children in non-Western cultures through learning by observation. Cultural variation is not restricted only to ethnicity and nationality, but rather, extends to the specific practices within communities. In learning by observation, children use observation to learn without verbal requests for further information, or without direct instruction. For example, children from Mexican heritage families tend to learn and make better use of information observed during classroom demonstration than children of European heritage. Children of European heritage experience the type of learning that separates them from their family and community activities. They instead participate in lessons and other exercises in special settings such as school. Cultural backgrounds differ from each other in which children display certain characteristics in regards to learning an activity. Another example is seen in the immersion of children in some Indigenous communities of the Americas into the adult world and the effects it has on observational learning and the ability to complete multiple tasks simultaneously. This might be due to children in these communities having the opportunity to see a task being completed by their elders or peers and then trying to emulate the task. In doing so they learn to value observation and the skill-building it affords them because of the value it holds within their community. This type of observation is not passive, but reflects the child's intent to participate or learn within a community.\nObservational learning can be seen taking place in many domains of Indigenous communities. The classroom setting is one significant example, and it functions differently for Indigenous communities compared to what is commonly present in Western schooling. The emphasis of keen observation in favor of supporting participation in ongoing activities strives to aid children to learn the important tools and ways of their community. Engaging in shared endeavors \u2013 with both the experienced and inexperienced \u2013 allows for the experienced to understand what the inexperienced need in order to grow in regards to the assessment of observational learning. The involvement of the inexperienced, or the children in this matter, can either be furthered by the children's learning or advancing into the activity performed by the assessment of observational learning. Indigenous communities rely on observational learning as a way for their children to be a part of ongoing activities in the community (Tharp, 2006).\nAlthough learning in the Indigenous American communities is not always the central focus when participating in an activity, studies have shown that attention in intentional observation differs from accidental observation. Intentional participation is \"keen observation and listening in anticipation of, or in the process of engaging in endeavors\". This means that when they have the intention of participating in an event, their attention is more focused on the details, compared to when they are accidentally observing.\nObservational learning can be an active process in many Indigenous American communities. The learner must take initiative to attend to activities going on around them. Children in these communities also take initiative to contribute their knowledge in ways that will benefit their community. For example, in many Indigenous American cultures, children perform household chores without being instructed to do so by adults. Instead, they observe a need for their contributions, understand their role in their community, and take initiative to accomplish the tasks they have observed others doing. The learner's intrinsic motivations play an important role in the child's understanding and construction of meaning in these educational experiences. The independence and responsibility associated with observational learning in many Indigenous American communities are significant reasons why this method of learning involves more than just watching and imitating. A learner must be actively engaged with their demonstrations and experiences in order to fully comprehend and apply the knowledge they obtain.\nIndigenous communities of the Americas.\nChildren from indigenous heritage communities of the Americas often learn through observation, a strategy that can carry over into adulthood. The heightened value towards observation allows children to multi-task and actively engage in simultaneous activities. The exposure to an uncensored adult lifestyle allows children to observe and learn the skills and practices that are valued in their communities. Children observe elders, parents, and siblings complete tasks and learn to participate in them. They are seen as contributors and learn to observe multiple tasks being completed at once and can learn to complete a task while still engaging with other community members without being distracted.\nIndigenous communities provide more opportunities to incorporate children in everyday life. This can be seen in some Mayan communities where children are given full access to community events, which allows observational learning to occur more often. Other children in Mazahua, Mexico are known to observe ongoing activities intensely . In native northern Canadian and indigenous Mayan communities, children often learn as third-party observers from stories and conversations by others. Most young Mayan children are carried on their mother's back, allowing them to observe their mother's work and see the world as their mother sees it. Often, children in Indigenous American communities assume the majority of the responsibility for their learning. Additionally, children find their own approaches to learning. Children are often allowed to learn without restrictions and with minimal guidance. They are encouraged to participate in the community even if they do not know how to do the work. They are self-motivated to learn and finish their chores. These children act as a second set of eyes and ears for their parents, updating them about the community.\nChildren aged 6 to 8 in an indigenous heritage community in Guadalajara, Mexico participated in hard work, such as cooking or running errands, thus benefiting the whole family, while those in the city of Guadalajara rarely did so. These children participated more in adult regulated activities and had little time to play, while those from the indigenous-heritage community had more time to play and initiate in their after-school activities and had a higher sense of belonging to their community. Children from formerly indigenous communities are more likely to show these aspects than children from cosmopolitan communities are, even after leaving their childhood community\nWithin certain indigenous communities, people do not typically seek out explanations beyond basic observation. This is because they are competent in learning through astute observation and often nonverbally encourage to do so. In a Guatemalan footloom factory, amateur adult weavers observed skilled weavers over the course of weeks without questioning or being given explanations; the amateur weaver moved at their own pace and began when they felt confident. The framework of learning how to weave through observation can serve as a model that groups within a society use as a reference to guide their actions in particular domains of life. Communities that participate in observational learning promote tolerance and mutual understand of those coming from different cultural backgrounds.\nKeen attention is both a requirement and result of learning by observing and pitching-in. Incorporating the children in the community gives them the opportunity to keenly observe and contribute to activities that were not directed towards them. It can be seen from different Indigenous communities and cultures, such as the Mayans of San Pedro, that children can simultaneously attend to multiple events. Most Maya children have learned to pay attention to several events at once in order to make useful observations.\nOne example is simultaneous attention which involves uninterrupted attention to several activities occurring at the same time. Another cultural practice that may relate to simultaneous attention strategies is coordination within a group. San Pedro toddlers and caregivers frequently coordinated their activities with other members of a group in multiway engagements rather than in a dyadic fashion. Research concludes that children with close ties to Indigenous American roots have a high tendency to be especially keen observers.\nThis learning by observing and pitching-in model requires active levels of attention management. The child is present while caretakers engage in daily activities and responsibilities such as: weaving, farming, and other skills necessary for survival. Being present allows the child to focus their attention on the actions being performed by their parents, elders, and/or older siblings. In order to learn in this way, keen attention and focus is required. Eventually the child is expected to be able to perform these skills themselves.\nIn one study, it was found that when looking at a picture, Americans focus more on the center figure than Japanese do, especially after 1 second has passed. Japanese individuals spent larger amounts of time focusing on parts in the background. Miyamoto et al. compared pictures of landscapes in Japan and the US, noting that Japanese scenes contained more boundaries and edges than the American ones.\nAnimal.\nWhen an animal is given a task to complete, they are almost always more successful after observing another animal doing the same task before them. Experiments have been conducted on several different species with the same effect: animals can learn behaviors from peers. However, there is a need to distinguish the propagation of behavior and the stability of behavior. Research has shown that social learning can spread a behavior, but there are more factors regarding how a behavior carries across generations of an animal culture.\nLearning in fish.\nExperiments with ninespine sticklebacks showed that individuals will use social learning to locate food.\nSocial learning in pigeons.\nA study in 1996 at the University of Kentucky used a foraging device to test social learning in pigeons. A pigeon could access the food reward by either pecking at a treadle or stepping on it. Significant correspondence was found between the methods of how the observers accessed their food and the methods the initial model used in accessing the food.\nAcquiring foraging niches.\nStudies have been conducted at the University of Oslo and University of Saskatchewan regarding the possibility of social learning in birds, delineating the difference between cultural and genetic acquisition. Strong evidence already exists for mate choice, bird song, predator recognition, and foraging.\nResearchers cross-fostered eggs between nests of blue tits and great tits and observed the resulting behavior through audio-visual recording. Tits raised in the foster family learned their foster family's foraging sites early. This shift\u2014from the sites the tits would among their own kind and the sites they learned from the foster parents\u2014lasted for life. What young birds learn from foster parents, they eventually transmitted to their own offspring. This suggests cultural transmissions of foraging behavior over generations in the wild.\nSocial learning in crows.\nThe University of Washington studied this phenomenon with crows, acknowledging the evolutionary tradeoff between acquiring costly information firsthand and learning that information socially with less cost to the individual but at the risk of inaccuracy. The experimenters exposed wild crows to a unique \"dangerous face\" mask as they trapped, banded, and released 7\u201315 birds at five different study places around Seattle, WA. An immediate scolding response to the mask after trapping by previously captured crows illustrates that the individual crow learned the danger of that mask. There was a scolding from crows that were captured that had not been captured initially. That response indicates conditioning from the mob of birds that assembled during the capture.\nHorizontal social learning (learning from peers) is consistent with the lone crows that recognized the dangerous face without ever being captured. Children of captured crow parents were conditioned to scold the dangerous mask, which demonstrates vertical social learning (learning from parents). The crows that were captured directly had the most precise discrimination between dangerous and neutral masks than the crows that learned from the experience of their peers. The ability of crows to learn doubled the frequency of scolding, which spread at least 1.2\u00a0 km from where the experiment started to over a 5-year period at one site.\nPropagation of animal culture.\nResearchers at the D\u00e9partement d'Etudes Cognitives, Institut Jean Nicod, Ecole Normale Sup\u00e9rieure acknowledged a difficulty with research in social learning. To count acquired behavior as cultural, two conditions need must be met: the behavior must spread in a social group, and that behavior must be stable across generations. Research has provided evidence that imitation may play a role in the propagation of a behavior, but these researchers believe the fidelity of this evidence is not sufficient to prove the stability of animal culture.\nOther factors like ecological availability, reward-based factors, content-based factors, and source-based factors might explain the stability of animal culture in a wild rather than just imitation. As an example of ecological availability, chimps may learn how to fish for ants with a stick from their peers, but that behavior is also influenced by the particular type of ants as well as the condition. A behavior may be learned socially, but the fact that it was learned socially does not necessarily mean it will last. The fact that the behavior is rewarding has a role in cultural stability as well. The ability for socially-learned behaviors to stabilize across generations is also mitigated by the complexity of the behavior. Different individuals of a species, like crows, vary in their ability to use a complex tool. Finally, a behavior's stability in animal culture depends on the context in which they learn a behavior. If a behavior has already been adopted by a majority, then the behavior is more likely to carry across generations out of a need for conforming.\nAnimals are able to acquire behaviors from social learning, but whether or not that behavior carries across generations requires more investigation.\nHummingbird experiment.\nExperiments with hummingbirds provided one example of apparent observational learning in a non-human organism. Hummingbirds were divided into two groups. Birds in one group were exposed to the feeding of a knowledgeable \"tutor\" bird; hummingbirds in the other group did not have this exposure. In subsequent tests the birds that had seen a tutor were more efficient feeders than the others.\nBottlenose dolphin.\nHerman (2002) suggested that bottlenose dolphins produce goal-emulated behaviors rather than imitative ones. A dolphin that watches a model place a ball in a basket might place the ball in the basket when asked to mimic the behavior, but it may do so in a different manner seen.\nRhesus monkey.\nKinnaman (1902) reported that one rhesus monkey learned to pull a plug from a box with its teeth to obtain food after watching another monkey succeed at this task.\nFredman (2012) also performed an experiment on observational behavior. In experiment 1, human-raised monkeys observed a familiar human model open a foraging box using a tool in one of two alternate ways: levering or poking. In experiment 2, mother-raised monkeys viewed similar techniques demonstrated by monkey models. A control group in each population saw no model. In both experiments, independent coders detected which technique experimental subjects had seen, thus confirming social learning. Further analyses examined copying at three levels of resolution.\nThe human-raised monkeys exhibited the greatest learning with the specific tool use technique they saw. Only monkeys who saw the levering model used the lever technique, by contrast with controls and those who witnessed poking. Mother-reared monkeys instead typically ignored the tool and exhibited fidelity at a lower level, tending only to re-create whichever result the model had achieved by either levering or poking.\nNevertheless, this level of social learning was associated with significantly greater levels of success in monkeys witnessing a model than in controls, an effect absent in the human-reared population. Results in both populations are consistent with a process of canalization of the repertoire in the direction of the approach witnessed, producing a narrower, socially shaped behavioral profile than among controls who saw no model.\nLight box experiment.\nPinkham and Jaswal (2011) did an experiment to see if a child would learn how to turn on a light box by watching a parent. They found that children who saw a parent use their head to turn on the light box tended to do the task in that manner, while children who had not seen the parent used their hands instead.\nSwimming skill performance.\nWhen adequate practice and appropriate feedback follow demonstrations, increased skill performance and learning occurs. Lewis (1974) did a study of children who had a fear of swimming and observed how modelling and going over swimming practices affected their overall performance. The experiment spanned nine days, and included many steps. The children were first assessed on their anxiety and swimming skills. Then they were placed into one of three conditional groups and exposed to these conditions over a few days.\nAt the end of each day, all children participated in a group lesson. The first group was a control group where the children watched a short cartoon video unrelated to swimming. The second group was a peer mastery group, which watched a short video of similar-aged children who had very good task performances and high confidence. Lastly, the third group was a peer coping group, whose subjects watched a video of similar-aged children who progressed from low task performances and low confidence statements to high task performances and high confidence statements.\nThe day following the exposures to each condition, the children were reassessed. Finally, the children were also assessed a few days later for a follow-up assessment. Upon reassessment, it was shown that the two model groups who watched videos of children similar in age had successful rates on the skills assessed because they perceived the models as informational and motivational.\nDo-as-I-do chimpanzee.\nFlexible methods must be used to assess whether an animal can imitate an action. This led to an approach that teaches animals to imitate by using a command such as \"do-as-I-do\" or \"do this\" followed by the action that they are supposed to imitate. Researchers trained chimpanzees to imitate an action that was paired with the command. For example, this might include a researcher saying \"do this\" paired with clapping hands. This type of instruction has been utilized in a variety of other animals in order to teach imitation actions by utilizing a command or request.\nEveryday life.\nObservational learning allows for new skills to be learned in a wide variety of areas. Demonstrations help the modification of skills and behaviors.\nLearning physical activities.\nWhen learning skills for physical activities can be anything that is learned that requires physical movement, this can include learning a sport, learning to eat with a fork, or learning to walk. There are multiple important variables that aid in modifying physical skills and psychological responses from an observational learning standpoint. Modeling is a variable in observational learning where the skill level of the model is considered. When someone is supposed to demonstrate a physical skill such as throwing a baseball the model should be able to execute the behavior of throwing the ball flawlessly if the model of learning is a mastery model. Another model to utilize in observational learning is a coping model, which would be a model demonstrating a physical skill that they have not yet mastered or achieved high performance in. Both models are found to be effective and can be utilized depending on the what skills is trying to be demonstrated. These models can be used as interventions to increase observational learning in practice, competition, and rehabilitation situations.Observational learning is also dependent on the learner's intentions and goals where performance can be enhanced by increasing instruction and beneficial feedback depending on the individual's age, personality, and abilities.\nNeuroscience.\nRecent research in neuroscience has implicated mirror neurons as a neurophysiological basis for observational learning. Mirror neurons were first discovered in 1991 by researchers led by Giacomo Rizzolatti. The scientists had a device connected to a monkey to monitor brain activity. When the scientists came into the lab eating ice cream, the device buzzed. This accidental finding led them to mirror neurons which are an essential part in imitation and observational learning. These specialized visuomotor neurons fire action potentials when an individual performs a motor task and also fire when an individual passively observes another individual performing the same motor task. In observational motor learning, the process begins with a visual presentation of another individual performing a motor task, this acts as a model. The learner then needs to transform the observed visual information into internal motor commands that will allow them to perform the motor task, this is known as visuomotor transformation. Mirror neuron networks provide a mechanism for visuo-motor and motor-visual transformation and interaction. Similar networks of mirror neurons have also been implicated in social learning, motor cognition and social cognition.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52463", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52463", "title": "942", "text": "Calendar year\nCalendar year\nYear 942 (CMXLII) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52464", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52464", "title": "445", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 445 (CDXLV) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Valentinianus and Nomus (or, less frequently, year 1198 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 445 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52465", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52465", "title": "444", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 444 (CDXLIV) was a leap year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Theodosius and Aginatius (or, less frequently, year 1197 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 444 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52467", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52467", "title": "446", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 446 (CDXLVI) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Aetius and Symmachus (or, less frequently, year 1199 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 446 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52468", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52468", "title": "AD 442", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 442 (CDXLII) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Dioscorus and Eudoxius (or, less frequently, year 1195 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 442 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52469", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52469", "title": "Stephen Wolfram", "text": "British-American scientist (born 1959)\nStephen Wolfram ( ; born 29 August 1959) is a British-American computer scientist, physicist, and businessman. He is known for his work in computer algebra and theoretical physics. In 2012, he was named a fellow of the American Mathematical Society. \nAs a businessman, Wolfram is the founder and CEO of the software company Wolfram Research, where he works as chief designer of Mathematica and the Wolfram Alpha answer engine.\nEarly life.\nFamily.\nStephen Wolfram was born in London in 1959 to Hugo and Sybil Wolfram, both German Jewish refugees to the United Kingdom. His maternal grandmother was British psychoanalyst Kate Friedlander.\nWolfram's father, Hugo Wolfram, was a textile manufacturer and served as managing director of the Lurex Company\u2014makers of the fabric Lurex. Wolfram's mother, Sybil Wolfram, was a Fellow and Tutor in Philosophy at Lady Margaret Hall at University of Oxford from 1964 to 1993.\nWolfram is married to a mathematician. They have four children together.\nEducation.\nWolfram was educated at Eton College, but left prematurely in 1976. As a young child, Wolfram had difficulties learning arithmetic. He entered St. John's College, Oxford, at age 17 and left in 1978 without graduating to attend the California Institute of Technology the following year, where he received a PhD in particle physics in 1980. Wolfram's thesis committee was composed of Richard Feynman, Peter Goldreich, Frank J. Sciulli, and Steven Frautschi, and chaired by Richard D. Field.\nEarly career.\nWolfram, at the age of 15, began research in applied quantum field theory and particle physics and published scientific papers in peer-reviewed scientific journals; by the time he left Oxford, he had published ten such papers. Following his PhD, Wolfram joined the faculty at Caltech and became the youngest recipient of a MacArthur Fellowship in 1981, at age 21.\nLater career.\nComplex systems and cellular automata.\nIn 1983, Wolfram left for the School of Natural Sciences of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton. By that time, he was no longer interested in particle physics. Instead, he began pursuing investigations into cellular automata, mainly with computer simulations. He produced a series of papers investigating the class of elementary cellular automata, conceiving the Wolfram code, a naming system for one-dimensional cellular automata, and a classification scheme for the complexity of their behaviour. He conjectured that the Rule 110 cellular automaton might be Turing complete, which a research assistant to Wolfram, Matthew Cook, later proved correct. Wolfram sued Cook and temporarily blocked publication of the work on Rule 110 for allegedly violating a non-disclosure agreement until Wolfram could publish the work in his controversial book \"A New Kind of Science\". Wolfram's cellular-automata work came to be cited in more than 10,000 papers.\nIn the mid-1980s, Wolfram worked on simulations of physical processes (such as turbulent fluid flow) with cellular automata on the Connection Machine alongside Richard Feynman and helped initiate the field of complex systems. In 1984, he was a participant in the Founding Workshops of the Santa Fe Institute, along with Nobel laureates Murray Gell-Mann, Manfred Eigen, and Philip Warren Anderson, and future laureate Frank Wilczek. In 1986, he founded the Center for Complex Systems Research (CCSR) at the University of Illinois at Urbana\u2013Champaign. In 1987, he founded the journal \"Complex Systems\".\nSymbolic Manipulation Program.\nWolfram led the development of the computer algebra system SMP (\"Symbolic Manipulation Program\") in the Caltech physics department during 1979\u20131981. A dispute with the administration over the intellectual property rights regarding SMP\u2014patents, copyright, and faculty involvement in commercial ventures\u2014eventually led him to resign from Caltech. SMP was further developed and marketed commercially by Inference Corp. of Los Angeles during 1983\u20131988.\nMathematica.\nIn 1986, Wolfram left the Institute for Advanced Study for the University of Illinois at Urbana\u2013Champaign, where he had founded their Center for Complex Systems Research, and started to develop the computer algebra system Mathematica, which was released on 23 June 1988, when he left academia. In 1987, he founded Wolfram Research, which continues to develop and market the program.\n\"A New Kind of Science\".\nFrom 1992 to 2002, Wolfram worked on his controversial book \"A New Kind of Science\", which presents an empirical study of simple computational systems. Additionally, it argues that for fundamental reasons these types of systems, rather than traditional mathematics, are needed to model and understand complexity in nature. Wolfram's conclusion is that the universe is discrete in its nature, and runs on fundamental laws that can be described as simple programs. He predicts that a realization of this within scientific communities will have a revolutionary influence on physics, chemistry, biology, and most other scientific areas, hence the book's title. The book was met with skepticism and criticism that Wolfram took credit for the work of others and made conclusions without evidence to support them.\nWolfram Alpha computational knowledge engine.\nIn March 2009, Wolfram announced Wolfram Alpha, an answer engine. Wolfram Alpha launched in May 2009, and a paid-for version with extra features launched in February 2012 that was met with criticism for its high price, which later dropped from $50 to $2. The engine is based on natural language processing and a large library of rules-based algorithms. The application programming interface allows other applications to extend and enhance Wolfram Alpha. \nTouchpress.\nIn 2010, Wolfram co-founded Touchpress with Theodore Gray, Max Whitby, and John Cromie. The company specialised in creating in-depth premium apps and games covering a wide range of educational subjects designed for children, parents, students, and educators. Touchpress published more than 100 apps. The company is no longer active.\nWolfram Language.\nIn March 2014, at the annual South by Southwest (SXSW) event, Wolfram officially announced the Wolfram Language as a new general multi-paradigm programming language, though it was previously available through Mathematica and not an entirely new programming language. The documentation for the language was pre-released in October 2013 to coincide with the bundling of Mathematica and the Wolfram Language on every Raspberry Pi computer with some controversy because of the proprietary nature of the Wolfram Language. While the Wolfram Language has existed for over 30 years as the primary programming language used in Mathematica, it was not officially named until 2014, and is not widely used. \nWolfram Physics Project.\nIn April 2020, Wolfram announced the \"Wolfram Physics Project\" as an effort to reduce and explain all the laws of physics within a paradigm of a hypergraph that is transformed by minimal rewriting rules that obey the Church\u2013Rosser property. The effort is a continuation of the ideas he originally described in \"A New Kind of Science\". Wolfram claims that \"From an extremely simple model, we're able to reproduce special relativity, general relativity and the core results of quantum mechanics.\"\nPhysicists are generally unimpressed with Wolfram's claim, and say his results are non-quantitative and arbitrary.\nPersonal interests and activities.\nWolfram has a log of personal analytics, including emails received and sent, keystrokes made, meetings and events attended, recordings of phone calls, and even physical movement dating back to the 1980s. In the preface of \"A New Kind of Science\", he noted that he recorded over 100 million keystrokes and 100 mouse miles. He has said that personal analytics \"can give us a whole new dimension to experiencing our lives.\"\nWolfram was a scientific consultant for the 2016 film \"Arrival\". He and his son Christopher Wolfram wrote some of the code featured on screen, such as the code in graphics depicting an analysis of the alien logograms, for which they used the Wolfram Language.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52472", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52472", "title": "History of French colonization of the Americas", "text": ""}
{"id": "52474", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52474", "title": "History of Russian colonization of the Americas", "text": ""}
{"id": "52475", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52475", "title": "History of European colonization of the Americas", "text": ""}
{"id": "52476", "revid": "3617193", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52476", "title": "History of Greenland", "text": "The history of Greenland is a history of life under extreme Arctic conditions: currently, an ice sheet covers about eighty percent of the island, restricting human activity largely to the coasts. The first humans are thought to have arrived in Greenland around 2500 BCE. Their descendants most likely died out and were replaced and succeeded by several other human groups migrating from continental North America since then. There has been no evidence discovered that Greenland was known to Norsemen until the 9th century CE, when Norse Icelandic explorers settled on its southwestern coast. The ancestors of the Greenlandic Inuit who live there today appear to have migrated there later, around the year 1200, across the Nares Strait from northern Canada.\nWhile Inuit survived in the icy world of the Little Ice Age, the early Norse settlements, known as the Eastern Settlement, along the southwestern coast disappeared, leaving Inuit as the only inhabitants of the island for several centuries. During this time, Denmark\u2013Norway, apparently believing the Norse settlements had survived, continued to claim sovereignty over the island despite the lack of any contact between the Norsemen (specifically Icelanders) installed in Greenland and their Scandinavian brethren. In 1721, aspiring to become a colonial power, Denmark-Norway sent a missionary expedition to Greenland with the stated aim of reinstating Christianity among descendants of the Norse Greenlanders who may have converted back to paganism. When the missionaries found no descendants of the Norse Greenlanders, they baptised the Inuit they found living there instead. Denmark-Norway then developed trading colonies along the coast and imposed a trade monopoly and other colonial privileges on the area.\nDuring World War II, when Nazi Germany invaded Denmark, Greenlanders became socially and economically less connected to Denmark and more, though informally, connected to the United States. It has never been a US territory. After the war, Denmark resumed control of Greenland and in 1953, converted its status from colony to overseas \"amt\" (county). Although Greenland is still a part of the Danish Realm, it has enjoyed home rule since 1979. In 1985, the island decided to leave the European Economic Community (EEC), which it had joined as a part of Denmark in 1973.\nEarly Paleo-Inuit cultures.\nThe prehistory of Greenland is a story of repeated waves of Paleo-Eskimo immigration from the islands, known as the Arctic Archipelago, north of the North American mainland. (The population of those islands are thought to have descended, in turn, from inhabitants of Siberia who migrated into North America through Beringia thousands of years ago.) Because of Greenland's remoteness and climate, survival there was difficult. Over the course of centuries, one culture succeeded another as groups died out and were replaced by new immigrants. Archaeology can give only approximate dates for the cultures that flourished before the Norse exploration of Greenland in the 10th century.\nThe earliest known cultures in Greenland are the Saqqaq culture (2500\u2013800 BCE) and the Independence I culture in northern Greenland (2400\u20131300 BCE). The practitioners of these two cultures are thought to have descended from separate groups that came to Greenland from North America, nearby Nunavut. Around 800 BCE, the so-called Independence II culture arose in the region where the Independence I culture had previously existed. It was originally thought that Independence II was succeeded by the early Dorset culture (700 BCE\u2013CE 1), but some Independence II artefacts date from as recently as the 1st century BCE. Recent studies suggest that, in Greenland at least, the Dorset culture may be better understood as a continuation of Independence II culture; the two cultures have therefore been designated \"Greenlandic Dorset\". Artefacts associated with early Dorset culture in Greenland have been found as far north as Inglefield Land on the west coast and the Dove Bay area on the east coast.\nAfter the Early Dorset culture disappeared by around CE 1, Greenland was apparently uninhabited until Late Dorset people settled on the Greenlandic side of the Nares Strait around 700 CE. The late Dorset culture in the north of Greenland lasted until about 1300. Meanwhile, the Norse arrived and settled in the southern part of the island in 980.\nNorse settlement.\nEuropeans probably became aware of Greenland's existence in the late 9th century, after Gunnbj\u00f6rn Ulfsson, while sailing from Norway to Iceland, was blown off course by a storm and sighted some islands off Greenland. During the 980s explorers led by Erik the Red set out from Iceland and reached the southwest coast of Greenland. Erik named the island \"Greenland\" (\"Gr\u0153nland\" in Old Norse, \"Gr\u00e6nland\" in modern Icelandic, \"Gr\u00f8nland\" in modern Danish and Norwegian). Both the \"Book of Icelanders\" (\"\u00cdslendingab\u00f3k\", a medieval account of Icelandic history from the 12th century onward) and the \"Saga of Erik the Red\" (\"Eir\u00edks saga rau\u00f0a\", a medieval account of his life and of the Norse settlement of Greenland) state that Erik said that \"it would encourage people to go there that the land had a good name\".\nAccording to the sagas, the Icelanders had exiled Erik the Red for three years for committing murder, c. 982. He sailed to Greenland, where he explored the coastline and claimed certain regions as his own. He then returned to Iceland to persuade people to join him in establishing a settlement on Greenland. The Icelandic sagas say that 25 ships left Iceland with Erik the Red in 985, and that only 14 of them arrived safely in Greenland. Radiocarbon dating of remains at the first settlement at Brattahl\u00ed\u00f0 (Brattahlid) (now Qassiarsuk) have approximately confirmed this timeline, yielding a date of about 1000. According to the sagas, in the year 1000 Erik's son, Leif Erikson, left the settlement to explore the regions around Vinland, which historians generally assume to have been located in present-day Newfoundland.\nThe Norse established settlements along Greenland's south-western fjords. It is possible that the bottom lands of the southern fjords at that time were covered by high grown shrub and surrounded by hills covered with grass and brush (as the Qinngua Valley currently is), but this hasn't been determined yet. If the presumption is true then the Norse probably cleared the landscape by felling trees to use as building material and fuel, and by allowing their sheep and goats to graze there in both summer and winter. Any resultant soil erosion could have become an important factor in the demise of the colonies, as the land was stripped of its natural cover.\nThe Norse settled in three separate locations in south-western Greenland: the larger Eastern Settlement, the smaller Western Settlement, and the still smaller Middle Settlement (often considered part of the Eastern one). Estimates put the combined population of the settlements at their height between 2,000 and 10,000, with recent estimates trending toward the lower figure. Archaeologists have identified the ruins of approximately 620 farms: 500 in the Eastern Settlement, 95 in the Western Settlement, and 20 in the Middle Settlement.\nThe economy of the Norse Greenlanders depended on a combination of pastoral farming with hunting and some fishing. Farmers kept cattle, sheep and goats - shipped into the island - for their milk, cheese and butter, while most of the consumed meat came from hunted caribou and seals. Both individual farmers and groups of farmers organised summer trips to the more northerly Disko Bay area, where they hunted walruses, narwhals and polar bears for their skins, hides, ivory, and tusks. Besides their use in making garments and shoes, these resources also functioned as a form of currency, as well as providing the most important export commodities.\nThe Greenland settlements carried on a trade with Europe in ivory from walrus ivory, as well as exporting rope, sheep, seals, wool and cattle hides (according to one 13th-century account). The Greenlandic Norsemen depended on Icelandic and Norwegian Norsemen for iron tools, wood (especially for boat building, although they may also have obtained wood from coastal Labrador - \"Markland\"), supplemental foodstuffs, and religious and social contacts. For a time, trade ships from Iceland and Norway travelled to Greenland every year and would sometimes overwinter in Greenland. Beginning in the late-13th century, laws required all ships from Greenland to sail directly to Norway. The climate became increasingly colder in the 14th and 15th centuries, during the period of colder weather known as the Little Ice Age.\nIn 1126 the Roman Catholic Church founded a diocese at Gar\u00f0ar (now Igaliku), with the Gar\u00f0ar Cathedral founded there. It was subject to the Roman Catholic Norwegian archdiocese of Nidaros (now Trondheim); at least five churches in Norse Greenland are known from archaeological remains. In 1261 the population accepted the over lordship of the King of Norway, although it continued to have its own law.\nA union between Norway and Sweden, including Greenland and Iceland existed between 1319 and 1355 through Magnus IV of Sweden (In Norway crowned Magnus VII after claims of birthright) and between 1362 and 1364 through Haakon VI, the son \"H\u00e5kan Magnusson\". During this period Greenland runs were made at intervals.\nAfter initially thriving, the Norse settlements in Greenland declined in the 14th century. In 1355 Magnus IV of Sweden (In Norway Magnus VII) sent a ship (or ships) to Greenland to inspect its Western and Eastern Settlements. Sailors found settlements entirely Norse and Christian. The Greenland carrier (\"Groenlands Knorr\") made the Greenland run at intervals till 1369, when she sank and was apparently not replaced. The Western Settlement was probably abandoned before 1400.\nIn 1378 there was no longer a bishop at Gar\u00f0ar in the Eastern Settlement. A single source suggests that in 1379, \"Skr\u00e6lingjar\" (Inuit) attacked the Eastern Settlement, killed 18 men and captured two boys. However, the authenticity and accuracy of this source is doubted by some historians, and both Jared Diamond and Jens Melgaard caution that it may actually describe an attack that occurred between Norse and S\u00e1mi people in Northern Europe, or an attack on the Icelandic coast by European pirates, assuming such an attack really did occur. A church document describes a 1418 attack that has been attributed to Inuit by modern scholars, but Historian Jack Forbes has said that this supposed attack actually refers to a Russian-Karelian attack on Norse settlers in northern Norway, which was known locally as \"Greenland\" and has been mistaken by modern scholars for Greenland located in North American. Archaeological evidence has failed to find any violence by Inuit against Norse settlers.\nIn 1380 the Norwegian kingdom entered into a personal union with the Kingdom of Denmark. From 1402\u20131404 the Black Death hit Iceland for the first time and killed approximately half the population there - but there is no evidence that it reached Greenland. The last written record of the Norse Greenlanders documents a marriage in 1408 at Hvalsey Church, whose ruins are the best-preserved of the Norse buildings of that period.\nAfter 1408 few written records mention the settlers. Correspondence between Pope Gregory XII and the Bishop Bertold af Garde dates from the same year. The Danish cartographer Claudius Clavus seems to have visited Greenland in 1420, according to documents written by Nicolaus Germanus and Henricus Martellus Germanus, who had access to original cartographic notes and a map by Clavus. In the late 20th century the Danish scholars Bj\u00f6nbo and Petersen found two mathematical manuscripts containing the second chart of the Claudius Clavus map from his journey to Greenland (where he himself mapped the area).\nIn 1448, Pope Nicholas V, in a letter from Rome, instructed the bishops of Sk\u00e1lholt and H\u00f3lar (the two Icelandic episcopal sees) to provide the inhabitants of Greenland (\"the island of Greenland, which is said to be placed at the farthest ends of the ocean near the northern region of the kingdom of Norway, in the province of Nidaros\") with priests and a bishop, the latter of which they had not had in the 30 years since a purported attack by \"heathens\"; the letter, while noting that its author does \"not have certain knowledge of their circumstances\", describes \"a barbarian fleet\" from \"the neighboring shores of the heathens\" who destroyed most of the churches and took many prisoners, most of whom later managed to return to their settlement. It is probable that the Eastern Settlement was defunct by the middle of the 15th century, although no exact date has been established. A European ship that landed in the former Eastern Settlement in the 1540s found the corpse of a Norse man there, which may be the last mention of a Norse individual from the settlement.\nThe Icelandic seafarer Jon Greenlander, who visited Greenland around 1540, described the dead Norse Greenlander as a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis was reportedly the last time any European saw any of the Norse Greenlanders dead or alive.\nNorse abandonment.\nThere are many theories as to why the Norse settlements in Greenland collapsed after surviving for some 450\u2013500 years (985 to 1450\u20131500). Among the factors that have been suggested as contributing to the demise of the Greenland colony are:\nNumerous studies have tested these hypotheses and some have led to significant discoveries. In \"The Frozen Echo\", Kirsten Seaver contests some of the more generally accepted theories about the demise of the Greenland colony, and asserts that the colony, towards the end, was healthier than some scholars previously claimed. Seaver believes that the Greenlanders could not have starved to death, but rather may have been wiped out by Inuit or unrecorded European attacks, or they may have abandoned the colony for Iceland or Vinland. However, the physical evidence from archaeological studies of the ancient farm sites does not show evidence of attack. The paucity of personal belongings at these sites is typical of North Atlantic Norse sites that were abandoned in an orderly fashion, with any useful items being deliberately removed; but to others it suggests a gradual but devastating impoverishment. Middens at these sites do show an increasingly impoverished diet for humans and livestock. Else Roesdahl argues that declining ivory prices in Europe due to the influx of Russian and African ivory adversely affected the Norse settlements in Greenland, which depended largely on the export of walrus ivory to Europe.\nAccording to Danielle Kurin and other authors, there is no convincing evidence that violence by Inuit or anyone any other group led to the migration of Norse settlers, and that Norse society in Greenland seems to have slowly declined as climatic conditions worsened and the value of walrus ivory was reduced by African elephant ivory. The violent conflict theory has since been marginalised in favour of ecological theories. One scholar supporting the violent conflict theory is historian Arnved Nedkvitne, who concludes in his work: \"the hypothesis of an ethnic confrontation is today significantly better verified than the alternative hypothesis of an ecological crisis\".\nGreenland was always colder in winter than Iceland and Norway, and its terrain less hospitable to agriculture. Erosion of the soil was a danger from the beginning, one that the Greenland settlements may not have recognised until it was too late. For an extended time, nonetheless, the relatively warm West Greenland Current flowing northwards along the southwestern coast of Greenland made it feasible for the Norse to farm much as their relatives did in Iceland or northern Norway. Palynologists' tests on pollen counts and fossilised plants prove that the Greenlanders must have struggled with soil erosion and deforestation. A Norse farm in the Vatnahverfi district, excavated in the 1950s, had been buried in layers of drifting sand up to deep. As the unsuitability of the land for agriculture became more and more patent, the Greenlanders resorted first to pastoralism and then to hunting for their food. But they never learned to use the hunting techniques of the Inuit, one being a farming culture, the other living on hunting in more northern areas with pack ice.\nTo investigate the possibility of climatic cooling, scientists drilled into the Greenland ice cap to obtain core samples, which suggested that the Medieval Warm Period had caused a relatively milder climate in Greenland, lasting from roughly 800 to 1200. However, from 1300 or so the climate began to cool. By 1420, the \"Little Ice Age\" had reached intense levels in Greenland. Excavations of middens from the Norse farms in both Greenland and Iceland show the shift from the bones of cows and pigs to those of sheep and goats. As the winters lengthened, and the springs and summers shortened, there must have been less and less time for Greenlanders to grow hay. A study of North Atlantic seasonal temperature variability showed a significant decrease in maximum summer temperatures beginning in the late 13th century to early 14th century\u2014as much as lower than modern summer temperatures. The study also found that the lowest winter temperatures of the last 2,000 years occurred in the late 14th century and early 15th century. By the mid-14th-century deposits from a chieftain's farm showed a large number of cattle and caribou remains, whereas, a poorer farm only several kilometres away had no trace of domestic animal remains, only seal. Bone samples from Greenland Norse cemeteries confirm that the typical Greenlander diet had increased by this time from 20 percent sea animals to 80 percent.\nThe Thule people migrated south and finally came into contact with the Norse in the 12th century. There are limited sources showing the two cultures interacting; however, scholars know that the Norse referred to Inuit (and Vinland natives) as skr\u00e6ling. The Icelandic annals are among the few existing sources that confirm contact between the Norse and Inuit. Archaeological evidence seems to show that the two groups traded. There is evidence of Inuit goods at Norse sites, and Norse goods at Inuit sites. According to Magnus Magnusson, relations between Inuit and Norse settlers were mostly positive and the two groups had a \"deep friendship\".\nThe Norse never learned the Inuit techniques of kayak navigation or ring seal hunting. Archaeological evidence plainly establishes that by 1300 or so the Inuit had successfully expanded their winter settlements as close to the Europeans as the outer fjords of the Western Settlement. By 1350, the Norse had completely deserted their Western Settlement. But in 1355 union king Magnus IV of Sweden and Norway (In Norway crowned Magnus VII after claims of birthright) sent a ship (or ships) to Greenland to inspect its Western and Eastern Settlements. Sailors found settlements entirely Norse and Christian. The Greenland carrier (\"Groenlands Knorr\") made the Greenland run at intervals till 1369, when she sank and was apparently not replaced. Arneborg suggests that worsening climatic and economical circumstances caused them to migrate to Iceland or Scandinavia.\nIn mild weather conditions, a ship could make the trip from Iceland to Eastern Settlement within a couple of weeks. Greenlanders had to keep in contact with Iceland and Norway in order to trade. Little is known about any distinctive shipbuilding techniques among the Greenlanders. Greenland lacks a supply of lumber, so was completely dependent on Icelandic merchants or, possibly, logging expeditions to the Canadian coast.\nThe sagas mention Icelanders travelling to Greenland to trade. Settlement chieftains and large farm owners controlled this trade. Chieftains would trade with the foreign ships and then disperse the goods by trading with the surrounding farmers. The Greenlanders' main commodity was the walrus tusk, which was used primarily in Europe as a substitute for elephant ivory for art d\u00e9cor, whose trade had been blocked by conflict with the Islamic world. Professor Gudmundsson suggests a very valuable narwhal tusk trade, through a smuggling route between western Iceland and the Orkney islands.\nIt has been argued that the royal Norwegian monopoly on shipping contributed to the end of trade and contact. However, Christianity and European customs continued to hold sway among the Greenlanders for the greater part of the 14th and 15th centuries. In 1921, a Danish historian, Paul Norland, found human remains from the Eastern Settlement in the Herjolfsnes church courtyard. The bodies were dressed in 15th-century clothing with no indications of malnutrition or inbreeding. Most had crucifixes around their necks with their arms crossed as in a stance of prayer. Roman papal records report that the Greenlanders were excused from paying their tithes in 1345 because the colony was suffering from poverty. The last reported ship to reach Greenland was a private ship that was \"blown off course\", reaching Greenland in 1406, and departing in 1410 with the last news of Greenland: the burning at the stake of Kolgrim, a condemned male witch, the insanity and death of the woman this witch was accused of attempting to seduce through witchcraft, and the marriage of the ship's captain, Thorsteinn \u00d3lafsson, to another Icelander, Sigr\u00ed\u00f0ur Bj\u00f6rnsd\u00f3ttir. However, there are some suggestions of much later unreported voyages from Europe to Greenland, possibly as late as the 1480s. In the 1540s, a ship drifted off-course to Greenland and discovered the body of a dead man lying face down who demonstrated cultural traits of both Norse and Inuit. An Icelandic crew member of the ship wrote: \"He had a hood on his head, well sewn, and clothes from both homespun and sealskin. At his side lay a carving knife bent and worn down by whetting. This knife they took with them for display.\"\nAccording to a 2009 study, \"there is no evidence for perceptible contact between Iceland and Greenland after the mid fifteenth century\u00a0... It is clear that neither Danish and Norwegian nor Icelandic public functionaries were aware that the Norse Greenland colony had ceased to exist. Around 1514, the Norwegian archbishop Erik Valkendorf (Danish by birth, and still loyal to Christian II) planned an expedition to Greenland, which he believed to be part of a continuous northern landmass leading to the New World with all its wealth, and which he fully expected still to have a Norse population, whose members could be pressed anew to the bosom of church and crown after an interval of well over a hundred years. Presumably, the archbishop had better archives at his disposal than most people, and yet he had not heard that the Greenlanders were gone.\"\nOne intriguing fact is that very few fish remains are found among their middens. This has led to much speculation and argument. Most archaeologists reject any decisive judgement based on this one fact, however, as fish bones decompose more quickly than other remains, and may have been disposed of in a different manner. Isotope analysis of the bones of inhabitants shows that marine food sources supplied more and more of the diet of the Norse Greenlanders, making up between 50 percent and 80 percent of their diet by the 14th century.\nOne Inuit story recorded in the 19th century tells that raiding expeditions by Inuit or European ships over the course of three years destroyed the settlements, however archaeological evidence has repeatedly failed to support such stories. This story is thus regarded as a myth that is not based on true events, because archaeological excavations of the farm revealed no evidence of fire or human conflict.\nGenetic legacy.\nGenetic research has found that Inuit men in Western Greenland carry 40 to 60 percent Northwestern European Y-DNA haplogroups. This is consistent with admixture from the earlier Norse settlers of Greenland (1000-1200 AD), as well as more recent colonisation of Greenland by modern Scandinavians in the 18th century. According to several studies, there is no evidence of a European female contribution to the mitochondrial lineages of modern Greenlandic Inuit; their maternal lineages are nearly completely shared with other Inuit populations. This implies that European admixture in Greenlandic people derives primarily from European male ancestors.\nLate Dorset and Thule cultures.\nThe Late Dorset culture inhabited Greenland until the early 14th century. This culture was primarily located in the northwest of Greenland, far from the Norse who lived around the southern coasts. Archaeological evidence points to this culture predating the Norse or Thule settlements. In the region of this culture, there is archaeological evidence of gathering sites for around four to thirty families, living together for a short time during their movement cycle.\nAround CE 1300\u20131400, the Thule arrived from the west settling in the northeast areas of Greenland; genetic data suggest that they colonised the island in a single wave spreading along the coast from the northwest to the south to the east. These people, the ancestors of the modern Greenland Inuit, were flexible and engaged in the hunting of almost all animals on land and in the ocean, including walrus, narwhal, and seal. The Thule adapted well to the environment of Greenland, as archaeological evidence indicates that the Thule were not using all parts of hunting kills, unlike other Arctic groups, meaning they were able to waste more resources due to either surplus or well adapted behaviours. name=\":14\"/&gt; Genetic comparisons indicate gene flow between the ancestors of the Dorset and of the Thule at least 4000 years ago, long before the Thule migrated out of the Bering Strait region, but genetic data from the modern Greenlandic and Canadian Inuit shows no evidence of more recent Dorset admixture, indicating that the Thule replaced the Dorset with little or no interbreeding with them.\nThe nature of the contacts between the Dorset and Norse cultures is not clear, but may have included trade elements. The level of contact is currently the subject of widespread debate, possibly including Norse trade with Thule or Dorset peoples in Canada. Whether the Thule interbred with the medieval Norse cannot be clearly determined from the genetic data, since the modern Greenlandic Inuit population has substantial admixture from the later Danish colonial period; however, the facts that Inuit in southern Greenland, where the Norse settled, have no more European ancestry than the Inughuit of northwestern Greenland, and that even in southern Greenland more than half of village-dwelling Inuit have no European ancestry, indicate that the Thule probably did not interbreed with the Norse.\nDanish recolonisation.\nMost of the old Norse records concerning Greenland were removed from Trondheim to Copenhagen in 1664 and subsequently lost, probably in the Copenhagen Fire of 1728. The precise date of rediscovery is uncertain because south-drifting icebergs during the Little Ice Age long made the eastern coast unreachable. This led to general confusion between Baffin Island, Greenland, and Spitsbergen, as seen, for example, in the difficulty locating the Frobisher \"Strait\", which was not confirmed to be a bay until 1861. Nonetheless, interest in discovering a Northwest Passage to Asia led to repeated expeditions in the area, though none were successful until Roald Amundsen in 1906 and even that success involved his being iced in for two years. Christian I of Denmark purportedly sent an expedition to the region under Pothorst and Pining to Greenland in 1472 or 1473; Henry VII of England sent another under Cabot in 1497 and 1498; Manuel I of Portugal sent a third under Corte-Real in 1500 and 1501. It had certainly been generally charted by the 1502 Cantino map, which includes the southern coastline. The island was \"rediscovered\" yet again by Martin Frobisher in 1578, prompting King Frederick II of Denmark to outfit a new expedition of his own the next year under the Englishman James Alday; this proved a costly failure. The influence of English and Dutch whalers became so pronounced that for a time the western shore of the island itself became known as \"Davis Strait\" () after John Davis's 1585 and 1586 expeditions, which charted the western coast as far north as Disko Bay.\nMeanwhile, following the Swedish War of Liberation and exit from the Kalmar Union, the remaining states in the personal union were reorganised into Denmark\u2013Norway in 1536. In protest against foreign involvement in the region, the Greenlandic polar bear was included in the state's coat of arms in the 1660s (it was removed in 1958 but remains part of the royal coat of arms). In the second half of the 17th century Dutch, German, French, Basque, and Dano-Norwegian ships hunted bowhead whales in the pack ice off the east coast of Greenland, regularly coming to shore to trade and replenish drinking water. Foreign trade was later forbidden by Danish monopoly merchants.\nFrom 1711 to 1721, the Norwegian cleric Hans Egede petitioned King Frederick IV of Denmark for funding to travel to Greenland and re-establish contact with the Norse settlers there. Presumably, such settlers would still be Catholic or even Norse paganism and he desired to establish a mission among them to spread the Reformation. Frederick permitted Egede and some Norwegian merchants to establish the Bergen Greenland Company to revive trade with the island but refused to grant them a monopoly over it for fear of antagonising Dutch whalers in the area. The Royal Mission College assumed authority over the mission and provided the company with a small stipend. Egede found but misidentified the ruins of the Norse colony, went bankrupt amid repeated attacks by the Dutch, and found lasting conversion of the migrant Kalaallit exceedingly difficult. An attempt to found a royal colony under Major Claus Paarss established the settlement of Nuuk, then called Godth\u00e5b (\"Good Hope\"), in 1728, but became a costly debacle which saw most of the soldiers mutiny and the settlers killed by scurvy. Two child converts sent to Copenhagen for the coronation of Christian VI returned in 1733 with smallpox, devastating the island. The same ship that returned them, however, also brought the first Moravian missionaries, who in time would convert a former \"angakkoq\" (Inuit shaman), experience a revival at their mission of Neu-Herrnhut, and establish a string of mission houses along the southwest coast. Around the same time, the merchant Jacob Severin took over administration of the colony and its trade, and having secured a large royal stipend and full monopoly from the king, successfully repulsed the Dutch at the Battle of Jacobshavn in a series of skirmishes in 1738 and 1739. Egede himself quit the colony on the death of his wife, leaving the Lutheran mission to his son Poul. Both of them had studied the Kalaallisut extensively and published works on it; as well, Poul and some of the other clergy sent by the Mission College, such as Otto Fabricius, began wide-ranging study of Greenland's flora, fauna, and meteorology. However, though kale, lettuce, and other herbs were successfully introduced, repeated attempts to cultivate wheat or clover failed throughout Greenland, limiting the ability to raise European livestock.\nAs a result of the Napoleonic Wars, Norway was ceded to Sweden at the 1814 Treaty of Kiel. The colonies, including Greenland, remained in Danish possession. The 19th century saw increased interest in the region on the part of polar explorers and scientists like William Scoresby and Greenland-born Knud Rasmussen. At the same time, the colonial elements of the earlier trade-oriented Danish presence in Greenland expanded. In 1861, the first journal in the Greenlandic language was founded. Danish law still applied to only the Danish settlers, though. At the turn of the 19th century, the northern part of Greenland was still sparsely populated; only scattered hunting inhabitants were found there. During that century, however, Inuit families immigrated from British North America to settle in these areas. The last group from what later became Canada arrived in 1864. During the same time, the northeastern part of the coast became depopulated following the violent 1783 Lakag\u00edgar eruption in Iceland.\nDemocratic elections for the district assemblies of Greenland were held for the first time in 1862\u20131863, although no assembly for the land as a whole was allowed. In 1888, a party of six led by Fridtjof Nansen accomplished the first land crossing of Greenland. The men took 41 days to make the crossing on skis, at approximately 64\u00b0N latitude. In 1911, two Inatsisartut (Landstings) were introduced, one for northern Greenland and one for southern Greenland, not to be finally merged until 1951. All this time, most decisions were made in Copenhagen, where the Greenlanders had no representation. Towards the end of the 19th century, traders criticised the Danish trade monopoly. It was argued that it kept the natives in non-profitable ways of life, holding back the potentially large fishing industry. Many Greenlanders however were satisfied with the \"status quo\", as they felt the monopoly would secure the future of commercial whaling. It probably did not help that the only contact the local population had with the outside world was with Danish settlers. Nonetheless, the Danes gradually moved over their investments to the fishing industry.\nBy 1911, the population was about 14,000, scattered along the southern shores. They were nearly all Christian, because of the missionary efforts of Moravians and especially Hans Egede (1686\u20131758), a Lutheran missionary called \"the Apostle of Greenland\". He founded Greenland's capital Godth\u00e5b, now known as Nuuk. His grandson Hans Egede Saabye (1746\u20131817) continued the missionary activities.\nIn 1951, the Danish authorities initiated the little Danes experiment, a social experiment aimed at creating a new elite in Greenland. As part of this project, 22 children between the ages of five and eight were sent from Greenland to Denmark to learn the Danish language and culture, with the intention that they would later return and serve as a link between the two societies. Upon arrival in Denmark, the children were deprived of contact with their families and placed in foster homes or orphanages. Two years later, 16 of them returned to Greenland, but instead of being reunited with their relatives, they were placed in an orphanage, and many never saw their families again. This experience caused severe damage to their mental health and cultural identity.\nPolar exploration.\nAt the end of the 19th century and beginning of the 20th century, American explorers, including Robert Peary, explored the northern sections of Greenland, which up to that time had been a mystery and were often shown on maps as extending over the North Pole. Peary discovered that Greenland's northern coast in fact stopped well short of the pole. These discoveries were considered to be the basis of an American territorial claim in the area. But after the United States purchased the Virgin Islands from Denmark in 1917, it agreed to relinquish all claims on Greenland.\nStrategic importance.\nAfter Norway regained full independence in 1905, it argued that Danish claims to Greenland were invalid since the island had been a Norwegian possession prior to 1815. In 1931, Norwegian meteorologist Hallvard Devold occupied uninhabited eastern Greenland, on his own initiative. After the fact, the occupation was supported by the Norwegian government, who claimed the area as Erik the Red's Land. Two years later, the Permanent Court of International Justice ruled in favour of Denmark.\nWorld War II.\nThe Nazi invasion and occupation of Denmark in 1940 cut Greenland off from Danish control and supplies. Greenland emerged as strategically important to the Allies and Nazi Germany for use as bases in the Battle of the Atlantic and for vital weather forecasting. Henrik Kauffmann, the Danish Minister to the United States\u00a0\u2014 who had already refused to recognise the German occupation of Denmark\u00a0\u2014 signed a treaty with the United States on 9 April 1941, granting permission to establish stations in Greenland. Kauffmann did this without the knowledge of the Danish government, and consequently \"the Danish government accused him of high treason, fired him and told him to come home immediately \u2013 none of which had any result\". A series of 14 American bases were built on the west and east coasts Greenland to ferry aircraft to Europe and to provide bases for American, Canadian and British forces to attack German submarines. Because it was difficult for the Danish government to govern the island during the war, and because of successful exports, especially of cryolite, Greenland came to enjoy a rather independent status. Its supplies were guaranteed by the United States.\nGerman forces attempted set up a series of weather stations in Eastern Greenland to gain strategic weather intelligence as part of the North Atlantic weather war. Greenland established the Sirius Dog Sled Patrol (\"The Sledge Patrol\") in 1941 using small teams of Greenlanders and sled dogs to locate and attack the stations in conjunction with US naval and air units. In the series of remote attacks and counterattacks that followed, one Dane and a German were killed in fighting and the Germans were forced to abandon their weather stations by 1944.\nCold War.\nDuring the Cold War, Greenland had a strategic importance, controlling parts of the passage between the Arctic Ocean harbours of the Soviet Union and the Atlantic Ocean, as well as being a good base for observing any use of intercontinental ballistic missiles, typically planned to pass over the Arctic. In the first proposed United States acquisition of Greenland, the country offered to buy it for $100,000,000 but Denmark did not agree to sell. In 1951, the 1941 treaty was replaced by another one. The Thule Air Base, now the Pituffik Space Base, in the northwest was made permanent. In 1953, some Inuit families were forced by Denmark to move from their homes to provide space for extension of the base. For this reason, the base has been a source of friction between the Danish government and the Greenlandic people. In the 1968 Thule Air Base B-52 crash of 21 January 1968, four hydrogen bombs contaminated the area with radioactive debris. Although most of the contaminated ice was cleaned up, one of the bombs was not accounted for, and is still missing as of 2022. A 1995 Danish parliamentary scandal, dubbed Thulegate, highlighted that nuclear weapons were routinely present in Greenland's airspace in the years leading up to the accident, and that Denmark had tacitly given the go-ahead for this activity despite its official nuclear free policy.\nThe United States upgraded the Ballistic Missile Early Warning System to a phased array radar. Opponents argue that the system presents a threat to the local population, as it would be targeted in the event of nuclear war. During the period of rapid urbanisation in Greenland, much of the Greenlandic villages were cut off from support, with the Danish government encouraging migration towards the cities. The new immigrants who had lived in a traditional Inuit hunter societies were generally isolated inside cities with no social support, many of them suffered from extreme mental health issues in the cities, with a high rate of suicide, issues which still remain in Greenland to this day.\nHome rule.\nThe American presence in Greenland brought Sears catalogues, from which Greenlanders and Danes purchased modern appliances and other products by mail. From 1948 to 1950, the Greenland Commission studied the conditions on the island, seeking to address its isolation, unequal laws, and economic stagnation. In the end, the Royal Greenland Trading Department's monopolies were finally removed. In 1953, Greenland was raised from the status of colony to that of an autonomous province or constituent country of the Danish Realm. Greenland was also assigned its own Danish county. Despite its small population, it was provided nominal representation in the Danish Folketing.\nA plantation of exotic arctic trees was created in 1954 near Narsarsuaq.\nDenmark began a number of reforms aimed at urbanising the Greenlanders, principally to replace their dependence on dwindling seal populations and provide workers for the then swelling cod fisheries, but also to provide improved social services such as health care, education, and transportation. These reforms led to a number of problems, particularly modern unemployment and the infamous Blok P housing project. The attempt to introduce European-style urban housing suffered from such inattention to local detail that Inuit could not fit through the doors in their winter clothing and fire escapes were constantly blocked by fishing gear too bulky to fit into the cramped apartments. As of 1975[ [update]] Denmark subsidised Greenland with more than $100 million annually. Reportedly, 80 percent of the island's 800 teachers were Danish, while only one doctor and three lawyers were Greenlandic. Television broadcasts began in 1982. The collapse of the cod fisheries and mines in the late 1980s and early 1990s greatly damaged the economy, which now principally depends on Danish aid and cold-water shrimp exports. Large sectors of the economy remain controlled by state-owned corporations, with Air Greenland and the Arctic Umiaq ferry heavily subsidised to provide access to remote settlements. The major airport is Nuuk Airport near the capital Nuuk.\nGreenland's minimal representation in the Folketing meant that despite 70.3 percent of Greenlanders rejecting entry into the European Common Market (EEC), it was pulled in along with Denmark in 1973. Fears that the customs union would allow foreign firms to compete and over fish its waters were quickly realised and the local parties began to push strongly for increased autonomy. The Folketing approved devolution in 1978 and the next year enacted home rule under a local Inatsisartut. On 23 February 1982, a bare majority (53 percent) of Greenland's population voted to leave the EEC, a process which lasted until 1985. This resulted in the Greenland Treaty of 1985 and the withdrawal of Greenland from the European Communities.\nGreenland Home Rule has become increasingly Greenlandised, rejecting Danish and avoiding regional dialects to standardise the country under the language and culture of the Kalaallit (West Greenland Inuit). The capital Godth\u00e5b was renamed Nuuk in 1979; a local flag was adopted in 1985; the Royal Greenland Trading Department became the locally administered Kalaallit Niuerfiat (now KNI A/S) in 1986. Following a successful referendum on self-government in 2008, the local parliament's powers were expanded and Danish was removed as an official language in 2009.\nInternational relations are now largely, but not entirely, also left to the discretion of the home rule government. As part of the treaty controlling Greenland's exit of the EEC, Greenland was declared a \"special case\" with access to the EEC market as a constituent country of Denmark, which remains a member. Greenland is also a member of several small organisations along with Iceland, the Faroes, and the Inuit populations of Nunavut (Canada) and Russia. It was one of the founders of the environmental Arctic Council in 1996. Nuuk was the site of the founding of the Inuit Circumpolar Council (originally the Inuit Circumpolar Conference in Barrow, Alaska), of which Greenlandic politician, Hans-Pavia Rosing was the first president. The US military bases on the island remain a major issue, with some politicians pushing for renegotiation of the 1951 US\u2013Denmark treaty by the Home Rule government. The 1999\u20132003 Commission on Self-Governance even proposed that Greenland should aim at Thule base's removal from American authority and operation under the aegis of the United Nations.\nIn January 2025, US President Donald Trump, newly inaugurated in his second term, pressured Denmark to sell Greenland to the United States, but Denmark has rejected his demand.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52477", "revid": "1319475072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52477", "title": "History of Canada", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"If mobile/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe history of Canada covers the period from the arrival of the Paleo-Indians to North America thousands of years ago to the present day. The lands encompassing present-day Canada have been inhabited for millennia by Indigenous peoples, with distinct trade networks, spiritual beliefs, and styles of social organization. Some of these older civilizations had long faded by the time of the first European arrivals and have been discovered through archeological investigations.\nFrom the late 15th century, French and British expeditions explored, colonized, and fought over various places within North America in what constitutes present-day Canada. The colony of New France was claimed in 1534 by Jacques Cartier, with permanent settlements beginning in 1608. France ceded nearly all its North American possessions to Great Britain in 1763 at the Treaty of Paris after the Seven Years' War. The now British Province of Quebec was divided into Upper and Lower Canada in 1791. The two provinces were united as the Province of Canada by the Act of Union 1840, which came into force in 1841. In 1867, the Province of Canada was joined with two other British colonies of New Brunswick and Nova Scotia through Confederation, forming a self-governing entity. \"Canada\" was adopted as the legal name of the new country and the word \"Dominion\" was conferred as the country's title. Over the next eighty-two years, Canada expanded by incorporating other parts of British North America, finishing with Newfoundland and Labrador in 1949.\nAlthough responsible government had existed in British North America since 1848, Britain continued to set its foreign and defence policies until the end of World War I. The Balfour Declaration of 1926, the 1930 Imperial Conference and the passing of the Statute of Westminster in 1931 recognized that Canada had become co-equal with the United Kingdom. The Patriation of the Constitution in 1982 marked the removal of legal dependence on the British parliament. Canada currently consists of ten provinces and three territories and is a parliamentary democracy and a constitutional monarchy.\nOver centuries, elements of Indigenous, French, British and more recent immigrant customs have combined to form a Canadian culture that has also been strongly influenced by its linguistic, geographic and economic neighbour, the United States. Since the conclusion of the Second World War, Canada's strong support for multilateralism and internationalism has been closely related to its peacekeeping efforts.\nIndigenous peoples.\nIndigenous societies.\nArcheological and Indigenous genetic evidence indicates that North and South America were the last continents into which humans migrated. During the Wisconsin glaciation, which began 100,000\u201375,000 years ago and ended about 11,000 years ago, falling sea levels allowed people to move gradually across the Bering land bridge (Beringia), from Siberia into northwest North America. At that point, they were blocked by the Laurentide ice sheet, then covering most of Canada, confining them to Alaska and the Yukon for thousands of years. The exact dates and routes of the peopling of the Americas are the subject of an ongoing debate. \nAbout 16,000 years ago, the glacial melt allowed people to move by land south and east out of Beringia, and into Canada. The Haida Gwaii islands, Old Crow Flats, and the Bluefish Caves contain some of the earliest Paleo-Indian archeological sites in Canada. Ice Age hunter-gatherers of this period left lithic flake fluted stone tools and the remains of large butchered mammals.\nThe North American climate stabilized around 8000 BCE (10,000 years ago). Climatic conditions were similar to modern patterns; however, the receding glacial ice sheets still covered large portions of the land, creating lakes of meltwater. Most population groups during the Archaic periods were still highly mobile hunter-gatherers. However, individual groups started to focus on resources available to them locally; thus with the passage of time, there is a pattern of increasing regional generalization (i.e.: Paleo-Arctic, Plano and Maritime Archaic traditions).\nThe Woodland cultural period dates from about 2000 BCE to 1000 CE and is applied to the Ontario, Quebec, and Maritime regions. The introduction of pottery distinguishes the Woodland culture from the previous Archaic-stage inhabitants. The Laurentian-related people of Ontario manufactured the oldest pottery excavated to date in Canada.\nThe Hopewell tradition is an Indigenous culture that flourished along American rivers from 300 BCE to 500 CE. At its greatest extent, the Hopewell Exchange System connected cultures and societies to the peoples on the Canadian shores of Lake Ontario. Canadian expression of the Hopewellian peoples encompasses the Point Peninsula, Saugeen, and Laurel complexes.\nThe eastern woodland areas of what became Canada were home to the Algonquian and Iroquoian peoples. The Algonquian language is believed to have originated in the western plateau of Idaho or the plains of Montana and moved with migrants eastward, eventually extending in various manifestations all the way from Hudson Bay to what is today Nova Scotia in the east and as far south as the Tidewater region of Virginia.\nSpeakers of eastern Algonquian languages included the Mi'kmaq and Abenaki of the Maritime region of Canada and likely the extinct Beothuk of Newfoundland. The Ojibwa and other Anishinaabe speakers of the central Algonquian languages retain an oral tradition of having moved to their lands around the western and central Great Lakes from the sea, likely the Atlantic coast. According to oral tradition, the Ojibwe formed the Council of Three Fires in 796 CE with the Odawa and the Potawatomi.\nThe Five Nations of the Iroquois (Haudenosaunee) were centred from at least 1000 CE in northern New York, but their influence extended into what is now southern Ontario and the Montreal area of modern Quebec. They spoke varieties of Iroquoian languages. The Iroquois Confederacy, according to oral tradition, was formed in 1142 CE. In addition, there were other Iroquoian-speaking peoples in the area, including the St. Lawrence Iroquoians, the Erie, and others.\nOn the Great Plains, the Cree or \"N\u0113hilaw\u0113\" (who spoke a closely related Central Algonquian language, the plains Cree language) depended on the vast herds of bison to supply food and many of their other needs. To the northwest were the peoples of the Na-Dene languages, which include the Athapaskan-speaking peoples and the Tlingit, who lived on the islands of southern Alaska and northern British Columbia. The Na-Dene language group is believed to be linked to the Yeniseian languages of Siberia. The Dene of the western Arctic may represent a distinct wave of migration from Asia to North America.\nThe Interior of British Columbia was home to the Salishan language groups such as the Shuswap (Secwepemc), Okanagan and southern Athabaskan language groups, primarily the Dakelh (Carrier) and the Tsilhqot'in. The inlets and valleys of the British Columbia Coast sheltered large, distinctive populations, such as the Haida, Kwakwaka'wakw and Nuu-chah-nulth, sustained by the region's abundant salmon and shellfish. These peoples developed complex cultures dependent on the western red cedar that included wooden houses, both seagoing whaling and war canoes, elaborately carved potlatch items, and totem poles.\nIn the Arctic Archipelago, the distinctive Paleo-Eskimos known as Dorset peoples, whose culture has been traced back to around 500 BCE, were replaced by the ancestors of today's Inuit by 1500 CE. This transition is supported by archeological records and Inuit mythology that tells of having driven off the \"Tuniit\" or 'first inhabitants'. Inuit traditional laws are anthropologically different from Western law. \"Customary law\" was non-existent in Inuit society before the introduction of the Canadian legal system.\nEuropean contact.\nThe Norse, who had settled Greenland and Iceland, arrived around 1000 CE and built a small settlement at L'Anse aux Meadows at the northernmost tip of Newfoundland (carbon dating estimate 990 \u2013 1050 CE). L'Anse aux Meadows, the only confirmed Norse site in North America outside of Greenland, is also notable for its connection with the attempted settlement of Vinland by Leif Erikson around the same period or, more broadly, with Norse exploration of the Americas.\nUnder letters patent from King Henry VII of England, the Italian John Cabot became the first European known to have landed in Canada after the Viking Age. Records indicate that on June 24, 1497, he sighted land at a northern location believed to be somewhere in the Atlantic provinces. Official tradition deemed the first landing site to be at Cape Bonavista, Newfoundland, although other locations are possible. After 1497 Cabot and his son Sebastian Cabot continued to make other voyages to find the Northwest Passage, and other explorers continued to sail out of England to the New World, although the details of these voyages are not well recorded.\nBased on the Treaty of Tordesillas, the Spanish Crown claimed it had territorial rights in the area visited by John Cabot in 1497 and 1498 CE. However, Portuguese explorers like Jo\u00e3o Fernandes Lavrador would continue to visit the north Atlantic coast, which accounts for the appearance of \"Labrador\" on maps of the period. In 1501 and 1502 the Corte-Real brothers explored Newfoundland (Terra Nova) and Labrador claiming these lands as part of the Portuguese Empire. In 1506, King Manuel I of Portugal created taxes for the cod fisheries in Newfoundland waters. Jo\u00e3o \u00c1lvares Fagundes and Pero de Barcelos established fishing outposts in Newfoundland and Nova Scotia around 1521 CE; however, these were later abandoned, with the Portuguese colonizers focusing their efforts on South America. The extent and nature of Portuguese activity on the Canadian mainland during the 16th century remains unclear and controversial.\nCanada under French rule.\nFrench interest in the New World began with Francis I of France, who in 1524 sponsored Giovanni da Verrazzano's navigation of the region between Florida and Newfoundland in hopes of finding a route to the Pacific Ocean. Although the English had laid claims to it in 1497 when John Cabot made landfall somewhere on the North American coast (likely either modern-day Newfoundland or Nova Scotia) and had claimed the land for England on behalf of King Henry VII, these claims were not exercised and England did not attempt to create a permanent colony. \nAs for the French, however, Jacques Cartier planted a cross in the Gasp\u00e9 Peninsula in 1534 and claimed the land in the name of Francis I, creating a region called \"Canada\" the following summer. Cartier had sailed up the St. Lawrence river as far as the Lachine Rapids, to the spot where Montreal now stands. Permanent settlement attempts by Cartier at Charlesbourg-Royal in 1541, at Sable Island in 1598 by Marquis de La Roche-Mesgouez, and at Tadoussac, Quebec in 1600 by Fran\u00e7ois Grav\u00e9 Du Pont all eventually failed. Despite these initial failures, French fishing fleets visited the Atlantic coast communities and sailed into the St. Lawrence River, trading and making alliances with First Nations, as well as establishing fishing settlements such as in Perc\u00e9 (1603). As a result of France's claim and activities in the colony of Canada, the name \"Canada\" was found on international maps showing the existence of this colony within the St. Lawrence river region.\nIn 1604, a North American fur trade monopoly was granted to Pierre Du Gua, Sieur de Mons. The fur trade became one of the main economic ventures in North America. Du Gua led his first colonization expedition to an island located near the mouth of the St. Croix River. Among his lieutenants was a geographer named Samuel de Champlain, who promptly carried out a major exploration of the northeastern coastline of what is now the United States. In the spring of 1605, under Samuel de Champlain, the new St. Croix settlement was moved to Port Royal (today's Annapolis Royal, Nova Scotia). Samuel de Champlain also landed at Saint John Harbour on June 24, 1604 (the feast of St. John the Baptist) and is where the city of Saint John, New Brunswick, and the Saint John River gets their name.\nIn 1608 Champlain founded what is now Quebec City, one of the earliest permanent settlements, which would become the capital of New France. He took personal administration over the city and its affairs and sent out expeditions to explore the interior. Champlain became the first known European to encounter Lake Champlain in 1609. By 1615, he had travelled by canoe up the Ottawa River through Lake Nipissing and Georgian Bay to the centre of Huron country near Lake Simcoe. During these voyages, Champlain aided the Wyandot people (aka \"Hurons\") in their battles against the Iroquois Confederacy. As a result, the Iroquois would become enemies of the French and be involved in multiple conflicts (known as the French and Iroquois Wars) until the signing of the Great Peace of Montreal in 1701.\nThe English, led by Humphrey Gilbert, had claimed St. John's, Newfoundland, in 1583 as the first North American English colony by royal prerogative of Queen Elizabeth I. In the reign of King James I, the English established additional colonies in Cupids and Ferryland, Newfoundland, and soon after established the first successful permanent settlements of Virginia to the south. On September 29, 1621, a charter for the foundation of a New World Scottish colony was granted by King James to William Alexander. In 1622, the first settlers left Scotland. They initially failed and permanent Nova Scotian settlements were not firmly established until 1629 during the end of the Anglo-French War. These colonies did not last long except the fisheries in Ferryland under David Kirke. In 1631, under Charles I of England, the Treaty of Suza was signed, ending the war and returning Nova Scotia to the French. New France was not fully restored to French rule until the 1632 Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye. This led to new French immigrants and the founding of Trois-Rivi\u00e8res in 1634.\nAfter Champlain's death in 1635, the Roman Catholic Church and the Jesuit establishment became the most dominant force in New France and hoped to establish a utopian European and Aboriginal Christian community. In 1642, the Sulpicians sponsored a group of settlers led by Paul Chomedey de Maisonneuve, who founded Ville-Marie, the precursor to present-day Montreal. In 1663 the French crown took direct control of the colonies from the Company of New France.\nAlthough immigration rates to New France remained very low under direct French control, most of the new arrivals were farmers, and the rate of population growth among the settlers themselves had been very high. The women had about 30 per cent more children than comparable women who remained in France. Yves Landry says, \"Canadians had an exceptional diet for their time.\" This was due to the natural abundance of meat, fish, and pure water; the good food conservation conditions during the winter; and an adequate wheat supply in most years. The 1666 census of New France was conducted by France's intendant, Jean Talon, in the winter of 1665\u20131666. The census showed a population count of 3,215 \"Acadians\" and \"habitants\" (French-Canadian farmers) in the administrative districts of Acadia and Canada. The census also revealed a great difference in the number of men at 2,034 versus 1,181 women.\nWars during the colonial era.\nBy the early 1700s, the New France settlers were well established along the shores of the St. Lawrence River and parts of Nova Scotia, with a population of around 16,000. However, new arrivals stopped coming from France in the proceeding decades, meaning that the English and Scottish settlers in Newfoundland, Nova Scotia, and the southern Thirteen Colonies outnumbered the French population approximately ten to one by the 1750s.\nFrom 1670, through the Hudson's Bay Company, the English also laid claim to Hudson Bay and its drainage basin, known as Rupert's Land, establishing new trading posts and forts, while continuing to operate fishing settlements in Newfoundland. French expansion along the Canadian canoe routes challenged the Hudson's Bay Company claims, and in 1686, Pierre Troyes led an overland expedition from Montreal to the shore of the bay, where they managed to capture a handful of outposts. La Salle's explorations gave France a claim to the Mississippi River Valley, where fur trappers and a few settlers set up scattered forts and settlements.\nThere were four French and Indian Wars and two additional wars in Acadia and Nova Scotia between the Thirteen American Colonies and New France from 1688 to 1763. During King William's War (1688 to 1697), military conflicts in Acadia included the Battle of Port Royal (1690); a naval battle in the Bay of Fundy (Action of July 14, 1696); and the Raid on Chignecto (1696). The Treaty of Ryswick in 1697 ended the war between the two colonial powers of England and France for a brief time. During Queen Anne's War (1702 to 1713), the British Conquest of Acadia occurred in 1710, resulting in Nova Scotia (other than Cape Breton) being officially ceded to the British by the Treaty of Utrecht, including Rupert's Land, which France had conquered in the late 17th century (Battle of Hudson's Bay). As an immediate result of this setback, France founded the powerful Fortress of Louisbourg on Cape Breton Island.\nLouisbourg was intended to serve as a year-round military and naval base for France's remaining North American empire and to protect the entrance to the St. Lawrence River. Father Rale's War resulted in both the fall of New France's influence in present-day Maine and the British recognition that it would have to negotiate with the Mi'kmaq in Nova Scotia. During King George's War (1744 to 1748), an army of New Englanders led by William Pepperrell mounted an expedition of 90 vessels and 4,000 men against Louisbourg in 1745. Within three months the fortress surrendered. The return of Louisbourg to French control by the peace treaty prompted the British to found Halifax in 1749 under Edward Cornwallis. Despite the official cessation of war between the British and French empires with the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, the conflict in Acadia and Nova Scotia continued as Father Le Loutre's War.\nThe British ordered the Acadians expelled from their lands in 1755 during the French and Indian War, an event called the Expulsion of the Acadians or . The \"expulsion\" resulted in approximately 12,000 Acadians being shipped to destinations throughout Britain's North America and to France, Quebec and the French Caribbean colony of Saint-Domingue. The first wave of the expulsion of the Acadians began with the Bay of Fundy Campaign (1755) and the second wave began after the final Siege of Louisbourg (1758). Many of the Acadians settled in southern Louisiana, creating the Cajun culture there. Some Acadians managed to hide and others eventually returned to Nova Scotia, but they were far outnumbered by a new migration of New England Planters who settled on the former lands of the Acadians and transformed Nova Scotia from a colony of occupation for the British to a settled colony with stronger ties to New England. Britain eventually gained control of Quebec City after the Battle of the Plains of Abraham and the Battle of Fort Niagara in 1759, and finally captured Montreal in 1760.\nCanada under British rule.\nAs part of the terms of the Treaty of Paris (1763), signed after the defeat of New France in the Seven Years' War, France renounced its claims to territory in mainland North America, except for fishing rights off Newfoundland and the two small islands of Saint Pierre and Miquelon where its fishermen could dry their fish. France had already secretly transferred its vast Louisiana territory to Spain under the Treaty of Fontainebleau (1762) in which King Louis XV of France had given his cousin King Charles III of Spain the entire area of the drainage basin of the Mississippi River from the Great Lakes to the Gulf of Mexico and from the Appalachian Mountains to the Rocky Mountains. France and Spain kept the Treaty of Fontainebleau secret from other countries until 1764. However under the Treaty of Paris, the eastern side of the Mississippi river basin became British territory. Great Britain returned to France its most important sugar-producing colony, Guadeloupe, which the French considered more valuable than Canada. (Guadeloupe produced more sugar than all the British islands combined, and Voltaire had notoriously dismissed Canada as \"\", \"A few acres of snow\").\nFollowing the Treaty of Paris, King George III issued the Royal Proclamation of 1763. The proclamation organized Great Britain's new North American empire and stabilized relations between the British Crown and Aboriginal peoples, formally recognizing aboriginal title, regulated trade, settlement, and land purchases on the western frontier. In the former French territory, the new British rulers of Canada first abolished and then later reinstated most of the property, religious, political, and social culture of the French-speaking , guaranteeing the right of the to practice the Catholic faith and to the use of French civil law (now Quebec Civil Code) in the Quebec Act of 1774, passed by the British Parliament.\nAmerican Revolution and the Loyalists.\nDuring the American Revolution, there was some sympathy for the American cause among the Acadians and the New Englanders in Nova Scotia. Neither party joined the rebels, although several hundred individuals joined the revolutionary cause. An invasion of Quebec by the Continental Army in 1775, with a goal to take Quebec from British control, was halted at the Battle of Quebec by Guy Carleton, with the assistance of local militias. The defeat of the British army during the Siege of Yorktown in October 1781 signalled the end of Great Britain's struggle to suppress the American Revolution.\nWhen the British evacuated New York City in 1783, they took many Loyalist refugees to Nova Scotia, while other Loyalists went to southwestern Quebec. So many Loyalists arrived on the shores of the St. John River that a separate colony\u2014New Brunswick\u2014was created in 1784; followed in 1791 by the division of Quebec into the largely French-speaking Lower Canada (French Canada) along the St. Lawrence River and the Gasp\u00e9 Peninsula and an anglophone Loyalist Upper Canada, with its capital settled by 1796 in York (present-day Toronto). After 1790, most of the new settlers were American farmers searching for new lands; although generally favourable to republicanism, they were relatively non-political and stayed neutral in the War of 1812. In 1785, Saint John, New Brunswick became the first incorporated city in what would later become Canada.\nThe signing of the Treaty of Paris in 1783 formally ended the war. Great Britain made several concessions to the US at the expense of the North American colonies. Notably, the borders between Canada and the United States were officially demarcated; all land south and west of the Great Lakes, which was formerly a part of the Province of Quebec and included modern-day Michigan, Wisconsin, Illinois, Indiana and Ohio, was ceded to the Americans. Fishing rights were also granted to the United States in the Gulf of St. Lawrence and on the coast of Newfoundland and the Grand Banks. The British ignored part of the treaty and maintained their military outposts in the Great Lakes areas it had ceded to the U.S., and they continued to supply their native allies with munitions. The British evacuated the outposts with the Jay Treaty of 1795, but the continued supply of munitions irritated the Americans in the run-up to the War of 1812.\nCanadian historians have had mixed views on the long-term impact of the American Revolution. Arthur Lower in the 1950s provided the long-standard historical interpretation that for English Canada the results were counter-revolutionary:\n[English Canada] inherited, not the benefits, but the bitterness of the Revolution\u2026. English Canada started its life with as powerful a nostalgic shove backward into the past as the Conquest had given to French Canada: two little peoples officially devoted to counter-revolution, to lost causes, to the tawdry ideals of a society of men and masters, and not to the self-reliant freedom alongside of them.\nRecently Michel Ducharme has agreed that Canada did indeed oppose \"republican liberty\", as exemplified by the United States and France. However, he says it did find a different path forward when it fought against British rulers after 1837 to secure \"modern liberty\". That form of liberty focused not on the virtues of citizens but on protecting their rights from infringement by the state.\nWar of 1812.\nThe War of 1812 was fought between the United States and the British, with the British North American colonies being heavily involved. Greatly outgunned by the British Royal Navy, the American war plans focused on an invasion of Canada (especially what is today eastern and western Ontario). The American frontier states voted for war to suppress the First Nations raids that frustrated the settlement of the frontier. The war on the border with the United States was characterized by a series of multiple failed invasions and fiascos on both sides. American forces took control of Lake Erie in 1813, driving the British out of western Ontario, killing the Shawnee leader Tecumseh, and breaking the military power of his confederacy. The war was overseen by British army officers like Isaac Brock and Charles de Salaberry with the assistance of First Nations and loyalist informants, most notably Laura Secord.\nThe War ended with no boundary changes thanks to the Treaty of Ghent of 1814, and the Rush\u2013Bagot Treaty of 1817. A demographic result was the shifting of the destination of American migration from Upper Canada to Ohio, Indiana and Michigan, without fear of Indigenous attacks. After the war, supporters of Britain tried to repress the republicanism that was common among American immigrants to Canada. The troubling memory of the war and the American invasions etched itself into the consciousness of Canadians as a distrust of the intentions of the United States towards the British presence in North America.pp.\u00a0254\u2013255\nRebellions and the Durham Report.\nThe rebellions of 1837 against the British colonial government took place in both Upper and Lower Canada. In Upper Canada, a band of Reformers under the leadership of William Lyon Mackenzie took up arms in a disorganized and ultimately unsuccessful series of small-scale skirmishes around Toronto, London, and Hamilton.\nIn Lower Canada, a more substantial rebellion occurred against British rule. Both English- and French-Canadian rebels, sometimes using bases in the neutral United States, fought several skirmishes against the authorities. The towns of Chambly and Sorel were taken by the rebels, and Quebec City was isolated from the rest of the colony. Montreal rebel leader Robert Nelson read the \"Declaration of Independence of Lower Canada\" to a crowd assembled at the town of Napierville in 1838. The rebellion of the \"Patriote movement\" was defeated after battles across Quebec. Hundreds were arrested, and several villages were burnt in reprisal.\nThe British government then sent Lord Durham to examine the situation; he stayed in Canada for five months before returning to Britain, bringing with him his Durham Report, which strongly recommended responsible government. A less well-received recommendation was the amalgamation of Upper and Lower Canada for the deliberate assimilation of the French-speaking population. The Canadas were merged into a single colony, the United Province of Canada, by the 1840 Act of Union, and responsible government was achieved in 1848, a few months after it was accomplished in Nova Scotia. The parliament of United Canada in Montreal was set on fire by a mob of Tories in 1849 after the passing of an indemnity bill for the people who suffered losses during the rebellion in Lower Canada.\nBetween the Napoleonic Wars and 1850, some 800,000 immigrants came to the colonies of British North America, mainly from the British Isles, as part of the great migration of Canada. These included Gaelic-speaking Highland Scots displaced by the Highland Clearances to Nova Scotia and Scottish and English settlers to the Canadas, particularly Upper Canada. The Irish Famine of the 1840s significantly increased the pace of Irish Catholic immigration to British North America, with over 35,000 distressed Irish landing in Toronto alone in 1847 and 1848.\nPacific colonies.\nSpanish explorers had taken the lead in the Pacific Northwest coast, with the voyages of Juan Jos\u00e9 P\u00e9rez Hern\u00e1ndez in 1774 and 1775. By the time the Spanish determined to build a fort on Vancouver Island, the British navigator James Cook had visited Nootka Sound and charted the coast as far as Alaska, while British and American maritime fur traders had begun a busy era of commerce with the coastal peoples to satisfy the brisk market for sea otter pelts in China, thereby launching what became known as the China Trade.\nIn 1789 war threatened between Britain and Spain on their respective rights; the Nootka Crisis was resolved peacefully largely in favour of Britain, the much stronger naval power at the time. In 1793 Alexander MacKenzie, a Scotsman working for the North West Company, crossed the continent and with his Aboriginal guides and French-Canadian crew, reached the mouth of the Bella Coola River, completing the first continental crossing north of Mexico, missing George Vancouver's charting expedition to the region by only a few weeks. In 1821, the North West Company and Hudson's Bay Company merged, with a combined trading territory that was extended by a licence to the North-Western Territory and the Columbia and New Caledonia fur districts, which reached the Arctic Ocean on the north and the Pacific Ocean on the west.\nThe Colony of Vancouver Island was chartered in 1849, with the trading post at Fort Victoria as the capital. This was followed by the Colony of the Queen Charlotte Islands in 1853, and by the creation of the Colony of British Columbia in 1858 and the Stikine Territory in 1861, with the latter three being founded expressly to keep those regions from being overrun and annexed by American gold miners. The Colony of the Queen Charlotte Islands and most of the Stikine Territory were merged into the Colony of British Columbia in 1863 (the remainder, north of the 60th Parallel, became part of the North-Western Territory).\nConfederation.\nThe Seventy-Two Resolutions from the 1864 Quebec Conference and Charlottetown Conference laid out the framework for uniting British colonies in North America into a federation. The Resolutions became the basis for the London Conference of 1866, which led to the formation of the Dominion of Canada on July 1, 1867. The term \"dominion\" was chosen to indicate Canada's status as a self-governing polity of the British Empire, the first time it was used about a country. With the coming into force of the British North America Act, 1867 (enacted by the British Parliament), Canada became a federated country in its own right. (According to James Bowden, writing in The Dorchester Review, \"Ottawa turned its back on 'Dominion' in the 1940s and 1950s,\" impelled by what historian C.P. Champion referred to as \"neo-nationalism.\")\nFederation emerged from multiple impulses: the British wanted Canada to defend itself; the Maritimes needed railroad connections, which were promised in 1867; English-Canadian nationalism sought to unite the lands into one country, dominated by the English language and loyalist culture; many French-Canadians saw an opportunity to exert political control within a new largely French-speaking Quebecpp.\u00a0323\u2013324 and exaggerated fears of possible U.S. expansion northward. On a political level, there was a desire for the expansion of responsible government and elimination of the legislative deadlock between Upper and Lower Canada, and their replacement with provincial legislatures in a federation. This was especially pushed by the liberal Reform movement of Upper Canada and the French-Canadian \"Parti rouge\" in Lower Canada who favoured a decentralized union in comparison to the Upper Canadian Conservative party and to some degree the French-Canadian \"Parti bleu\", which favoured a centralized union.\nTerritorial expansion west (1867\u20131914).\nUsing the lure of the Canadian Pacific Railway, a transcontinental line that would unite the nation, Ottawa attracted support in the Maritimes and in British Columbia. \nIn 1866, the Colony of British Columbia and the Colony of Vancouver Island merged into a single Colony of British Columbia. After Rupert's Land was transferred to Canada by Britain in 1870, connecting to the eastern provinces, British Columbia joined Canada in 1871. In 1873, Prince Edward Island joined. Newfoundland\u2014which had no use for a transcontinental railway\u2014voted no in 1869, and did not join Canada until 1949.\nIn 1873, John A. Macdonald (First Prime Minister of Canada) created the North-West Mounted Police (now the Royal Canadian Mounted Police) to help police the Northwest Territories. Specifically the Mounties were to assert Canadian sovereignty to prevent possible American encroachments into the area. The Mounties' first large-scale mission was to suppress the second independence movement by Manitoba's M\u00e9tis, a mixed-blood people of joint First Nations and European descent, who originated in the mid-17th century. The desire for independence erupted in the Red River Rebellion in 1869 and the later North-West Rebellion in 1885 led by Louis Riel. Suppressing the Rebellion was Canada's first independent military action and demonstrated the need to complete the Canadian Pacific Railway. It guaranteed Anglophone control of the Prairies and demonstrated the national government was capable of decisive action. However, it lost the Conservative Party most of their support in Quebec and led to a permanent distrust of the Anglophone community on the part of the Francophones.\nAs Canada expanded, the Canadian government rather than the British Crown negotiated treaties with the resident First Nations' peoples, beginning with \"Treaty 1\" in 1871. The treaties extinguished aboriginal title on traditional territories, created reserves for the indigenous peoples' exclusive use, and opened up the rest of the territory for settlement. Indigenous people were induced to move to these new reserves, sometimes forcibly. The government imposed the \"Indian Act\" in 1876 to govern the relations between the federal government and the Indigenous peoples and govern the relations between the new settlers and the Indigenous peoples. Under the \"Indian Act\", the government started the Residential School System to convert the Indigenous peoples to \"industrious Christian Canadians\" and extinguish native language and culture.\nIn the 1890s, legal experts codified a framework of criminal law, culminating in \"The Criminal Code, 1892\". This solidified the liberal ideal of \"equality before the law\" in a way that made an abstract principle into a tangible reality for every adult Canadian. Wilfrid Laurier who served 1896\u20131911 as the Seventh Prime Minister of Canada felt Canada was on the verge of becoming a world power, and declared that the 20th century would \"belong to Canada\"\nThe Alaska boundary dispute, simmering since the Alaska Purchase of 1867, became critical when gold was discovered in the Yukon during the late 1890s, with the U.S. controlling all the possible ports of entry. Canada argued its boundary included the port of Skagway. The dispute went to arbitration in 1903, but the British delegate sided with the Americans, angering Canadians who felt the British had betrayed Canadian interests to curry favour with the U.S.\nIn 1905, Saskatchewan and Alberta were admitted as provinces. They were growing rapidly thanks to abundant wheat crops that attracted immigration to the plains by Ukrainians and Northern and Central Europeans and by settlers from the United States, Britain and eastern Canada.\nLaurier signed a reciprocity treaty with the U.S. that would lower tariffs in both directions. Conservatives under Robert Borden denounced it, saying it would integrate Canada's economy into that of the U.S. and loosen ties with Britain. The Conservative party won the 1911 Canadian federal election.\nWorld Wars and Interwar Years (1914\u20131945).\nFirst World War.\nThe Canadian Forces and civilian participation in the First World War helped to foster a sense of British-Canadian nationhood. The highpoints of Canadian military achievement during the First World War came during the Somme, Vimy, Passchendaele battles and what later became known as \"Canada's Hundred Days\". The reputation Canadian troops earned, along with the success of Canadian flying aces including William George Barker and Billy Bishop, helped to give the nation a new sense of identity. The War Office in 1922 reported approximately 67,000 killed and 173,000 wounded during the war. This excludes civilian deaths in war-time incidents like the Halifax Explosion.\nSupport for Great Britain during the First World War caused a major political crisis over conscription, with Francophones, mainly from Quebec, rejecting national policies. During the crisis, large numbers of enemy aliens (especially German and Ukrainian immigrants) were put under government controls. The Liberal party was deeply split, with most of its Anglophone leaders joining the unionist government headed by Prime Minister Borden, the leader of the Conservative party. The Liberals regained their influence after the war under the leadership of William Lyon Mackenzie King, who served as prime minister with three separate terms between 1921 and 1949.\nWomen's suffrage.\nWhen Canada was founded, women could not vote in federal elections. Women did have a local vote in some provinces, as in Canada West from 1850, where women owning land could vote for school trustees. By 1900 other provinces adopted similar provisions, and in 1916 Manitoba took the lead in extending full women's suffrage. Simultaneously suffragists gave strong support to the prohibition movement, especially in Ontario and the Western provinces.\nThe \"Military Voters Act\" of 1917 gave the vote to British women who were war widows or had sons or husbands serving overseas. Unionist Prime Minister Borden pledged himself during the 1917 campaign to equal suffrage for women. After his landslide victory, he introduced a bill in 1918 for extending the franchise to women. This passed without division but did not apply to Quebec provincial and municipal elections. The women of Quebec gained full suffrage in 1940. The first woman elected to Parliament was Agnes Macphail of Ontario in 1921.\n1920s.\nOn the world stage.\nConvinced that Canada had proven itself on the battlefields of Europe, Prime Minister Borden demanded that it have a separate seat at the Paris Peace Conference in 1919. This was initially opposed not only by Britain but also by the United States, which saw such a delegation as an extra British vote. Borden responded by pointing out that since Canada had lost nearly 60,000 men, a far larger proportion of its men, its right to equal status as a nation had been consecrated on the battlefield. British Prime Minister David Lloyd George eventually relented, and convinced the reluctant Americans to accept the presence of delegations from Canada, India, Australia, Newfoundland, New Zealand, and South Africa. These also received their own seats in the League of Nations. Canada asked for neither reparations nor mandates. It played only a modest role in Paris, but just having a seat was a matter of pride. It was cautiously optimistic about the new League of Nations, in which it played an active and independent role.\nIn 1922 British Prime Minister David Lloyd George appealed repeatedly for Canadian support in the Chanak crisis, in which a war threatened between Britain and Turkey. Canada refused, leading to the fall of Lloyd George. The Department of External Affairs, which had been founded in 1909, was expanded and promoted Canadian autonomy as Canada reduced its reliance on British diplomats and used its own foreign service. Thus began the careers of such important diplomats as Norman Robertson and Hume Wrong, and future prime minister Lester Pearson.\nIn the 1920s, Canada set up a successful wheat marketing \"pool\" to keep prices high. Canada negotiated with the United States, Australia, and the Soviet Union to expand the pool, but the effort failed when the Great Depression caused distrust and low prices.\nWith prohibition underway in the United States, smugglers bought large quantities of Canadian liquor. Both the Canadian distillers and the U.S. State Department put heavy pressure on the Customs and Excise Department to loosen or tighten border controls. Liquor interests paid off corrupt Canadian border officials until the U.S. finally ended prohibition in 1933.\nDomestic affairs.\nIn 1921 to 1926, William Lyon Mackenzie King's Liberal government pursued a conservative domestic policy with the object of lowering wartime taxes and, especially, cooling wartime ethnic tensions, as well as defusing postwar labour conflicts. The Progressives refused to join the government but did help the Liberals defeat non-confidence motions. King faced a delicate balancing act of reducing tariffs enough to please the Prairie-based Progressives, but not too much to alienate his vital support in industrial Ontario and Quebec, which needed tariffs to compete with American imports. King and Conservative leader Arthur Meighen sparred constantly and bitterly in Commons debates. The Progressives gradually weakened. Their effective and passionate leader, Thomas Crerar, resigned to return to his grain business, and was replaced by the more placid Robert Forke. The socialist reformer J.\u00a0S. Woodsworth gradually gained influence and power among the Progressives, and he reached an accommodation with King on policy matters.\nIn 1926 Prime Minister Mackenzie King advised the Governor General, Lord Byng, to dissolve Parliament and call another election, but Byng refused, the only time that the Governor General has exercised such a power. Instead, Byng called upon Meighen, the Conservative Party leader, to form a government. Meighen attempted to do so but was unable to obtain a majority in the Commons and he, too, advised dissolution, which this time was accepted. The episode, the King\u2013Byng affair, marks a constitutional crisis that was resolved by a new tradition of complete non-interference in Canadian political affairs on the part of the British government.\nGreat Depression.\nCanada was hit hard by the worldwide Great Depression that began in 1929. Between 1929 and 1933, the gross national product dropped 40 per cent (compared to 37 per cent in the US). Unemployment reached 27 per cent at the depth of the Depression in 1933. Many businesses closed, as corporate profits of CA$ in 1929 turned into losses of CA$ in 1933. Canadian exports shrank by 50% from 1929 to 1933. Construction all but stopped (down 82 per cent, 1929\u201333), and wholesale prices dropped 30%. Wheat prices plunged from 78c per bushel (1928 crop) to 29c in 1932.\nUrban unemployment nationwide was 19 per cent; Toronto's rate was 17 per cent, according to the census of 1931. Farmers who stayed on their farms were not considered unemployed. By 1933, 30 per cent of the labour force was out of work, and one-fifth of the population became dependent on government assistance. Wages fell as did prices. The worst hit were areas dependent on primary industries such as farming, mining and logging, as prices fell and there were few alternative jobs. Most families had moderate losses and little hardship, though they too became pessimistic and their debts became heavier as prices fell. Some families saw most or all of their assets disappear and suffered severely.\nIn 1930, in the first stage of the long depression, Prime Minister Mackenzie King believed that the crisis was a temporary swing of the business cycle and that the economy would soon recover without government intervention. He refused to provide unemployment relief or federal aid to the provinces, saying that if Conservative provincial governments demanded federal dollars, he would not give them \"a five-cent piece.\" The main issue was the rapid deterioration in the economy and whether the prime minister was out of touch with the hardships of ordinary people. The winner of the 1930 election was Richard Bedford Bennett and the Conservatives. Bennett had promised high tariffs and large-scale spending, but as deficits increased, he became wary and cut back severely on Federal spending. With falling support and the depression getting only worse, Bennett attempted to introduce policies based on the New Deal of President Franklin D. Roosevelt (FDR) in the United States, but he got little passed. Bennett's government became a focus of popular discontent. For example, auto owners saved on gasoline by using horses to pull their cars, dubbing them Bennett Buggies. The Conservative failure to restore prosperity led to the return of Mackenzie King's Liberals in the 1935 election.\nIn 1935, the Liberals used the slogan \"King or Chaos\" to win a landslide in the 1935 election. Promising a much-desired trade treaty with the U.S., the Mackenzie King government passed the 1935 Reciprocal Trade Agreement. It marked the turning point in Canadian-American economic relations, reversing the disastrous trade war of 1930\u201331, lowering tariffs and yielding a dramatic increase in trade.\nThe worst of the Depression had passed by 1935, as the Government of Canada launched relief programs such as the \"National Housing Act\" and the National Employment Commission. The Canadian Broadcasting Corporation became a crown corporation in 1936. Trans-Canada Airlines (the precursor to Air Canada) was formed in 1937, as was the National Film Board of Canada in 1939. In 1938, Parliament transformed the Bank of Canada from a private entity to a crown corporation.\nOne political response was a highly restrictive immigration policy and a rise in nativism.\nTimes were especially hard in western Canada, where a full recovery did not occur until the Second World War began in 1939. One response was the creation of new political parties such as the Social Credit movement and the Cooperative Commonwealth Federation, as well as popular protest in the form of the On-to-Ottawa Trek.\nStatute of Westminster.\nFollowing the Balfour Declaration of 1926, the British Parliament passed the Statute of Westminster in 1931 which acknowledged Canada as coequal with the United Kingdom and the other Commonwealth realms. It was a crucial step in the development of Canada as a separate state in that it provided for nearly complete legislative autonomy from the Parliament of the United Kingdom. Although the United Kingdom retained formal authority over certain Canadian constitutional changes, it relinquished this authority with the passing of the Canada Act 1982 which was the final step in achieving full sovereignty.\nSecond World War.\nCanada's involvement in the Second World War began when Canada declared war on Nazi Germany on September 10, 1939, delaying it one week after Britain acted to symbolically demonstrate independence. Canada played a major role in supplying food, raw materials, munitions and money to the hard-pressed British economy, training airmen for the Commonwealth, guarding the western half of the North Atlantic Ocean against German U-boats, and providing combat troops for the invasions of Italy, France and Germany in 1943\u201345.\nOf a population of approximately 11.5\u00a0million, 1.1\u00a0million Canadians served in the armed forces in the Second World War. Many thousands more served with the Canadian Merchant Navy. In all, more than died, and another were wounded. Building up the Royal Canadian Air Force was a high priority; it was kept separate from Britain's Royal Air Force. The British Commonwealth Air Training Plan Agreement, signed in December 1939, bound Canada, Britain, New Zealand, and Australia to a program that eventually trained half the airmen from those four nations in the Second World War.\nThe Battle of the Atlantic began immediately, and from 1943 to 1945 was led by Leonard W. Murray, from Nova Scotia. German U-boats operated in Canadian and Newfoundland waters throughout the war, sinking many naval and merchant vessels. The Canadian army was involved in the failed defence of Hong Kong, the unsuccessful Dieppe Raid in August 1942, the Allied invasion of Italy, and the highly successful invasion of France and the Netherlands in 1944\u201345.\nOn the political side, Mackenzie King rejected any notion of a government of national unity. The 1940 federal election was held as normally scheduled, producing another majority for the Liberals. The Conscription Crisis of 1944 greatly affected unity between French and English-speaking Canadians, though was not as politically intrusive as that of the First World War. \nDuring the war, Canada became more closely linked to the U.S. The Americans took virtual control of Yukon in order to build the Alaska Highway, and were a major presence in the British colony of Newfoundland with major airbases. After the start of the war with Japan in December 1941, the government, in cooperation with the U.S., began the Japanese-Canadian internment, which sent British Columbia residents of Japanese descent to relocation camps far from the coast. The reason was intense public demand for removal and fears of espionage or sabotage. The government ignored reports from the RCMP and Canadian military that most of the Japanese were law-abiding and not a threat.\nPost-war era (1945\u20131960).\nProsperity returned to Canada during the Second World War and continued in the following years, with the development of universal health care, old-age pensions, and veterans' pensions. The financial crisis of the Great Depression had led the Dominion of Newfoundland to relinquish responsible government in 1934 and become a crown colony ruled by a British governor. In 1948, the British government gave voters three Newfoundland Referendum choices: remaining a crown colony, returning to Dominion status (that is, independence), or joining Canada. The British and Canadian governments collaborated to ensure that joining the United States was not an option. After bitter debate Newfoundlanders voted to join Canada in 1949 as a province.\nThe foreign policy of Canada during the Cold War was closely tied to that of the United States. Canada was a founding member of NATO (which Canada wanted to be a transatlantic economic and political union as well). In 1950, Canada sent combat troops to Korea during the Korean War as part of the United Nations forces. The federal government's desire to assert its territorial claims in the Arctic during the Cold War manifested with the High Arctic relocation, in which Inuit were moved from Nunavik (the northern third of Quebec) to barren Cornwallis Island; this project was later the subject of a long investigation by the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples.\nIn 1956, the United Nations responded to the Suez Crisis by convening a United Nations Emergency Force to supervise the withdrawal of invading forces. The peacekeeping force was initially conceptualized by the Secretary of External Affairs and future Prime Minister Lester B. Pearson. Pearson was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1957 for his work in establishing the peacekeeping operation.\nThroughout the mid-1950s, prime ministers Louis St. Laurent and his successor John Diefenbaker attempted to create a new, highly advanced jet fighter, the Avro Arrow. The controversial aircraft was cancelled by Diefenbaker in 1959. Diefenbaker instead purchased the BOMARC missile defence system and American aircraft. In 1958 Canada established (with the United States) the North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD).\nThere were voices on both left and right that warned against being too close to the United States. Few Canadians listened before 1957. Instead, there was wide consensus on foreign and defence policies from 1948 to 1957. Bothwell, Drummond and English state:\nThat support was remarkably uniform geographically and racially, both coast to coast and among French and English. From the CCF on the left to the Social Credit on the right, the political parties agreed that NATO was a good thing, and communism a bad thing, that a close association with Europe was desirable, and that the Commonwealth embodied a glorious past.\nHowever, the consensus did not last. By 1957 the Suez crisis alienated Canada from both Britain and France; politicians distrusted American leadership, businessmen questioned American financial investments; and intellectuals ridiculed the values of American television and Hollywood offerings that all Canadians watched. \"Public support for Canada's foreign policy came unstuck. Foreign policy, from being a winning issue for the Liberals, was fast becoming a losing one.\"\nIn 1960, the Government under John Diefenbaker passed the Canadian Bill of Rights. While this only applied to the federal government, it provided the groundwork for what became the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms that was added to the Constitution in 1982.\n1960\u20131981.\nIn the 1960s, the Quiet Revolution took place in Quebec, overthrowing the old establishment which centred on the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Quebec and led to modernizing of the economy and society. Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois nationalists demanded independence, and tensions rose until violence erupted during the 1970 October Crisis. John Saywell says, \"The two kidnappings and the murder of Pierre Laporte were the biggest domestic news stories in Canada's history.\" In 1976 the Parti Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois was elected to power in Quebec, with a nationalist vision that included securing French linguistic rights in the province and the pursuit of some form of sovereignty for Quebec. This culminated in the 1980 referendum in Quebec on the question of sovereignty-association, which was turned down by 59% of the voters.\nIn 1965, Canada adopted the maple leaf flag, although not without considerable debate and misgivings among large number of English Canadians. The World's Fair titled Expo 67 came to Montreal, coinciding with the Canadian Centennial that year. The fair opened on April 28, 1967, with the theme \"Man and His World\" and became the best attended of all BIE-sanctioned world expositions until that time.\nLegislative restrictions on Canadian immigration that had favoured British and other European immigrants were amended in the 1960s, opening the doors to immigrants from all parts of the world. While the 1950s had seen high levels of immigration from Britain, Ireland, Italy, and northern continental Europe, by the 1970s immigrants increasingly came from India, China, Vietnam, Jamaica and Haiti. Immigrants of all backgrounds tended to settle in the major urban centres, particularly Toronto, Montreal and Vancouver.\nDuring his long tenure in the office (1968\u20131979, 1980\u20131984), Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau made social and cultural change his political goals, including the pursuit of official bilingualism in Canada and plans for significant constitutional change. The west, particularly the petroleum-producing provinces like Alberta, opposed many of the policies emanating from central Canada, with the National Energy Program creating considerable antagonism and growing western alienation. Multiculturalism in Canada was adopted as the official policy of the Canadian government during the prime ministership of Pierre Trudeau.\n1982\u20132000.\nIn 1981, the Canadian House of Commons and Senate passed a resolution requesting that the British Parliament enact a package of constitutional amendments which would end the last powers of the British Parliament to legislate for Canada and would create an entirely Canadian process for constitutional amendments. The resolution set out the text of the proposed Canada Act, which also included the text of the \"Constitution Act, 1982\". The British Parliament duly passed the Canada Act 1982, the Queen granting Royal Assent on March 29, 1982, 115 years to the day since Queen Victoria granted Royal Assent to the \"Constitution Act, 1867\". On April 17, 1982, the Queen signed the Proclamation on the grounds of Parliament Hill in Ottawa bringing the \"Constitution Act, 1982\" into force, thus patriating the Constitution of Canada. \nPreviously, the main portions of the constitution had existed only as an act passed of the British parliament, though under the constitutional convention recognized in the Balfour Declaration of 1926, it could not be altered without Canadian consent. Canada had established complete sovereignty as an independent country, with the Queen's role as monarch of Canada separate from her role as the British monarch or the monarch of any of the other Commonwealth realms.\nIn addition to the enactment of a constitutional amending formula, the \"Constitution Act, 1982\" enacted the \"Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms\". The Charter is a constitutionally entrenched bill of rights which applies to both the federal government and the provincial governments, unlike the earlier \"Canadian Bill of Rights\". The patriation of the constitution was Trudeau's last major act as Prime Minister; he resigned in 1984.\nOn June 23, 1985, Air India Flight 182 was destroyed above the Atlantic Ocean by a bomb on board exploding; all 329 on board were killed, of whom 280 were Canadian citizens. The Air India attack is the largest mass murder in Canadian history.\nThe Progressive Conservative (PC) government of Brian Mulroney began efforts to gain Quebec's support for the \"Constitution Act, 1982\" and end western alienation. In 1987, the Meech Lake Accord talks began between the provincial and federal governments, seeking constitutional changes favourable to Quebec. The failure of the Meech Lake Accord resulted in the formation of a separatist party, Bloc Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois. The constitutional reform process under Prime Minister Mulroney culminated in the failure of the Charlottetown Accord which would have recognized Quebec as a \"distinct society\" but was rejected in 1992 by a narrow margin.\nUnder Brian Mulroney, relations with the United States began to grow more closely integrated. In 1986, Canada and the U.S. signed the \"Acid Rain Treaty\" to reduce acid rain. In 1989, the federal government adopted the Canada\u2013United States Free Trade Agreement (Agreement) with the United States despite significant animosity from the Canadian public who were concerned about the economic and cultural impacts of close integration with the United States. The Agreement would later be replaced with the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and its side agreement, the North American Agreement on Environmental Cooperation in 1994.\nOn July 11, 1990, the Oka Crisis land dispute began between the Mohawk people of Kanesatake and the adjoining town of Oka, Quebec. The dispute was the first of a number of well-publicized conflicts between First Nations and the Canadian government in the late 20th century. In August 1990, Canada was one of the first nations to condemn Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, and it quickly agreed to join the U.S.-led coalition. Canada deployed destroyers and later a CF-18 Hornet squadron with support personnel, as well as a field hospital to deal with casualties.\nFollowing Mulroney's resignation as prime minister in 1993, Kim Campbell took office and became Canada's first female prime minister. Campbell remained in office for only a few months: the 1993 election saw the collapse of the Progressive Conservative Party from government to two seats, while the Bloc Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois became the official opposition. Prime Minister Jean Chr\u00e9tien of the Liberals took office in November 1993 with a majority government and was re-elected with further majorities during the 1997 and 2000 elections.\nIn 1995, the government of Quebec held a second referendum on sovereignty that was rejected by a margin of 50.6% to 49.4%. In 1998, the Canadian Supreme Court ruled unilateral secession by a province to be unconstitutional, and Parliament passed the \"Clarity Act\" outlining the terms of a negotiated departure.\n2001\u2013present.\nEnvironmental issues increased in importance in Canada during the late 1990s, resulting in the signing of the Kyoto Accord on climate change by Canada's Liberal government in 2002. The accord was in 2007 nullified by Prime Minister Stephen Harper's Conservative government, which proposed a \"made-in-Canada\" solution to climate change.\nCanada became the fourth country in the world and the first country in the Americas to legalize same-sex marriage nationwide with the enactment of the \"Civil Marriage Act\" in 2005. Court decisions, starting in 2003, had already legalized same-sex marriage in eight out of ten provinces and one of three territories. Before the passage of the act, more than 3,000 same-sex couples had married in these areas.\nThe Canadian Alliance and PC Party merged into the Conservative Party of Canada in 2003, ending a 13-year division of the conservative vote. The party was elected twice as a minority government under the leadership of Stephen Harper in the 2006 federal election and 2008 federal election. Harper's Conservative Party won a majority in the 2011 federal election with the New Democratic Party under Jack Layton forming the Official Opposition for the first time.\nUnder Harper, Canada and the United States continued to integrate state and provincial agencies to strengthen security along the Canada\u2013United States border through the Western Hemisphere Travel Initiative. From 2002 to 2011, Canada was involved in the Afghanistan War as part of the U.S. stabilization force and the NATO-commanded International Security Assistance Force. In July 2010, the largest purchase in Canadian military history, totalling CA$\u00a0billion for the acquisition of 65 F-35 fighters, was announced by the federal government. Canada is one of several nations that assisted in the development of the F-35 and has invested over CA$ in the program.\nIn 2008, the Government of Canada formally apologized to the indigenous peoples of Canada for the residential school system and the damage it caused. The government set up the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada that year to document the damage caused by the residential school system and the reconciliation needed to proceed into the future. It provided a \"call to action\" report in 2015.\nOn 19 October 2015, Stephen Harper's Conservatives were defeated by a newly resurgent Liberal party under the leadership of Justin Trudeau and which had been reduced to third-party status in the 2011 elections.\nMulticulturalism (cultural and ethnic diversity) has been emphasized in recent decades. Ambrose and Mudde conclude that: \"Canada's unique multiculturalism policy\u00a0... which is based on a combination of selective immigration, comprehensive integration, and strong state repression of dissent on these policies. This unique blend of policies has led to a relatively low level of opposition to multiculturalism\".\nIn 2013, the consumption of cannabis for medical reasons was legalized. In October 2018, the Canadian government under Justin Trudeau passed the \"Cannabis Act\", legalizing the recreational use and sale of cannabis. Under the new law, Canadians could consume cannabis and cannabis products in public, grow limited numbers of plants themselves, pardons for simple possession convictions were promised, while drivers could not have any traces of THC in their blood.\nFrom January 2020 to May 2022, Canada was greatly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, which caused over 40,000 deaths in the country, the third highest mortality toll in North America (behind the United States and Mexico).\nOn 28 April 2025, Mark Carney's Liberals secured a third consecutive minority government, beating Pierre Poilievre's Conservatives, a Liberal upset largely attributed to a rise in Canadian patriotism following United States President Donald Trump's threats to annex Canada and announcement of tariffs against the country.\nHistoriography.\nThe Conquest of New France has always been a central and contested theme of Canadian memory. Cornelius Jaenen argues:\nThe Conquest has remained a difficult subject for French-Canadian historians because it can be viewed either as economically and ideologically disastrous or as a providential intervention to enable Canadians to maintain their language and religion under British rule. For virtually all Anglophone historians it was a victory for British military, political, and economic superiority which would eventually only benefit the conquered.\nHistorians of the 1950s tried to explain the economic inferiority of the French Canadians by arguing that the Conquest:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;destroyed an integral society and decapitated the commercial class; leadership of the conquered people fell to the Church; and, because commercial activity came to be monopolized by British merchants, national survival concentrated on agriculture.\nAt the other pole, are those Francophone historians who see the positive benefit of enabling the preservation of language, religion, and traditional customs under British rule. French-Canadian debates have escalated since the 1960s, as the Conquest is seen as a pivotal moment in the history of Quebec's nationalism. Historian Jocelyn L\u00e9tourneau suggested in the 21st century, \"1759 does not belong primarily to a past that we might wish to study and understand, but, rather, to a present and a future that we might wish to shape and control.\"\nAnglophone historians, on the other hand, portray the Conquest as a victory for British military, political and economic superiority that was a permanent benefit to the French.\nAllan Greer argues that Whig history was once the dominant style of scholars. He says the:\ninterpretive schemes that dominated Canadian historical writing through the middle decades of the twentieth century were built on the assumption that history had a discernible direction and flow. Canada was moving towards a goal in the nineteenth century; whether this endpoint was the construction of a transcontinental, commercial, and political union, the development of parliamentary government, or the preservation and resurrection of French Canada, it was certainly a Good Thing. Thus the rebels of 1837 were quite literally on the wrong track. They lost because they \"had\" to lose; they were not simply overwhelmed by superior force, they were justly chastised by the God of History.\nSee also.\nHistory by province or territory\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nScholarly article collections.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrimary sources and statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistoriography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52481", "revid": "1416331", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52481", "title": "Behaviour", "text": ""}
{"id": "52482", "revid": "50327452", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52482", "title": "Dutch colonization of the Americas", "text": "Overview of colonies established by the Netherlands\nThe Netherlands began its colonization of the Americas with the establishment of trading posts and plantations. The first forts and settlements along the Essequibo River in Guyana date from the 1590s. Actual colonization, with the Dutch settling in the new lands, was not as common as by other European nations.\nThis colonization preceded the much wider known colonization activities of the Dutch in Asia, as the first Dutch fort in Asia was built in 1600 in present-day Indonesia. \nMany of the Dutch settlements were lost or abandoned by the end of the 17th century, but the Netherlands managed to retain possession of Suriname until it gained independence in 1975. Among its several colonies in the region, only the Dutch Caribbean still remains to be part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands today.\nMainland in North America.\nIn 1602, the Republic of the Seven United Netherlands chartered a young and eager Dutch East India Company (VOC) with the mission of exploring North America's rivers and bays for a direct passage through to the Indies. Along the way, Dutch explorers were charged to claim any uncharted areas for the United Provinces, which led to several significant expeditions. Over time, Dutch explorers founded the province of New Netherland. By 1610, the Dutch East India Company had already commissioned English explorer Henry Hudson who, in an attempt to find the Northwest Passage to the Indies, discovered and claimed for the VOC parts of the present-day United States and Canada. Hudson entered the Upper New York Bay by sailboat, heading up the Hudson River, which now bears his name.\nOn March 27, 1614, the States General would move away from traditional monopolistic endeavors and take a new and freer approach to exploration and commercial development of the New World; the issuance of the \"General Charter for Those who Discover Any New Passages, Havens, Countries, or Places\" stated that \"the said undertaking to be laudable, honorable, and serviceable for the prosperity of the United Provinces and wishing that the experiment be free and open to all and every of the inhabitants of this country, have invited and do hereby invite all and every of the inhabitants of the United Netherlands to the aforesaid search.\"\nIn 1614, Adriaen Block led an expedition to the lower Hudson River in the \"Tyger\", and then explored the East River aboard the \"Onrust\", becoming the first known European to navigate the Hellegat in order to gain access to Long Island Sound. Block Island and Block Island Sound are named in his honor. Upon his return to Amsterdam in 1614, Block compiled a map, and applied the name 'New Netherland' for the first time to the area between English Virginia and French Canada, where he was later granted exclusive trading rights by the Dutch government. Block quickly ascended and became Manhattan's first monopolist.\nAfter some early trading expeditions, the first Dutch settlement in the Americas was founded in 1615: Fort Nassau, on Castle Island along the Hudson, near present-day Albany. The settlement served mostly as an outpost for fur trade with the native Lenape tribespeople, but was later replaced by Fort Orange. Both forts were named in honor of the House of Orange-Nassau.\nBy 1621, the United Provinces had charted a new company, a trading monopoly in the Americas and West Africa: the Dutch West India Company. The Dutch West India Company sought recognition as founders of the New World \u2013 which they ultimately did as founders of a new province in 1623, New Netherland. That year, another Fort Nassau was built on the Delaware River near Gloucester City, New Jersey.\nIn 1624, the first colonists, mostly Walloons and their slaves-bound servants, arrived to New Netherland by the shipload, landing at Governors Island and initially dispensed to Fort Orange, Fort Wilhelmus and Kievits Hoek. In 1626, Director of the Dutch West India Company Peter Minuit purchased the island of Manhattan from the Lenape natives and started construction of Fort Amsterdam, which grew to become the main port and capital, New Amsterdam. The colony expanded to outlying areas at Pavonia, Brooklyn, Bronx, and Long Island.\nOn the Connecticut River, Fort Huys de Goede Hoop was completed in 1633 at present day Hartford. By 1636, the English from Newtown (now Cambridge, Massachusetts) settled on the north side of the Little River. In the Treaty of Hartford, the border of New Netherland was retracted to western Connecticut and by 1653, the English had overtaken the Dutch trading post.\nExpansion along the Delaware River beyond Fort Nassau did not begin until the 1650s, after the takeover of a Swedish colony which had been established at Fort Christina in 1638. Settlements at Fort Nassau and the short-lived Fort Beversreede were abandoned and consolidated at Fort Casimir. By 1655 Fort Christina, sitting in what is today Wilmington, had already been renamed Fort Altena.\nLosses to England.\nIn 1664, an English naval expedition sailed into the harbor at New Amsterdam, threatening to attack. Being greatly outnumbered, Director-General Peter Stuyvesant surrendered after negotiating favorable articles of capitulation. The Province then took a new name, New York (from Prince James's English title). Fort Orange was renamed Fort Albany (from James's Scottish title). The region between the lower Hudson and the Delaware was deeded to proprietors and called New Jersey.\nThe loss of New Netherland led to the Second Anglo\u2013Dutch War during 1665\u20131667. This conflict ended with the Treaty of Breda, which stipulated that the Dutch give up their claim to New Netherland in exchange for Suriname.\nFrom 1673 to 1674, the territories were once again briefly captured by the Dutch in the Third Anglo\u2013Dutch War, only to be returned to England at the Treaty of Westminster. In 1674, Dutch navy captain Jurriaen Aernoutsz also briefly captured two forts in the French colony of Acadia, which he claimed as Dutch territory the new colony of New Holland. However, Aernoutsz's appointed administrator, John Rhoades, quickly lost control of the territory after Aernoutsz himself left for Cura\u00e7ao to seek out new settlers, and with effective control of Acadia remaining in the hands of France, Dutch sovereignty existed only on paper until the Netherlands surrendered their claim in the Treaties of Nijmegen.\nCaribbean Sea.\nDutch Caribbean.\nDutch colonization in the Caribbean started in 1634 on St. Croix and Tobago (1628), followed in 1631 with settlements on Tortuga (now \u00cele Tortue) and Sint Maarten. When the Dutch lost Sint Maarten (and Anguilla where they had built a fort shortly after arriving in Sint Maarten) to the Spanish, they settled Cura\u00e7ao and Sint Eustatius. They regained half of Sint Maarten in 1648, from then on sharing the island with France. The border between the two portions of the island continued to be modified periodically, before being set for good in 1816.\nUntil deep into the 19th century, the now Venezuelan islands of Aves, the Aves archipelago, Los Roques and La Orchila were also considered by the Dutch government to be part of the Dutch West Indies.\nThe Dutch Caribbean remained an overseas territory of the Netherlands. It was granted self-rule in 1954 as the Netherlands Antilles. In 1969, unrest in Cura\u00e7ao led to Dutch marines being sent to quell rioting. The 1969 uprising put an end to white dominance in politics and administration in Cura\u00e7ao, and led to the ascendance of a new black political elite. Nearly all of the governors, prime ministers, and ministers in Cura\u00e7ao since 1969 have been black. In 1986, Aruba gained its own autonomy after separating from the Netherlands Antilles. On October 10, 2010, the Netherlands Antilles was dissolved. Like Aruba, the islands of Cura\u00e7ao and Sint Maarten became constituent countries of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. While Bonaire, Saba, and Sint Eustatius became special municipalities (public bodies) of the Netherlands.\nTobago.\nThe Netherlands made numerous attempts to colonize Tobago (\"Nieuw-Walcheren\") in the 17th century. Each time, the settlements were destroyed by rival European powers. Dutch settlements on Tobago:\nVirgin Islands.\nAs a group, the islands are known as the \"Maagdeneilanden\" in Dutch. The Dutch established a base on St. Croix (\"Sint-Kruis\") in 1625, the same year that the British did. French Protestants joined the Dutch but conflict with the British colony led to its abandonment before 1650. The Dutch established a settlement on Tortola (\"Ter Tholen\") before 1640 and later on Anegada, Saint Thomas (\"Sint-Thomas\"), and Virgin Gorda. The British took Tortola in 1672 and Anegada and Virgin Gorda in 1680.\nSouth America.\nBrazil.\nBeginning in 1630, the Dutch Republic gained control of a large portion of northeastern Brazil from the Portuguese. The Dutch West India Company set up their headquarters in Recife; it also exported a tradition of religious tolerance to its New World colonies, most notable to Dutch Brazil. The governor, Johan Maurits, invited artists and scientists in order to help promote migration to the new South-American colony. However, the Portuguese fought back and won a significant victory at the Second Battle of Guararapes in 1649. On 26\u00a0January 1654, the Dutch Republic surrendered and signed a capitulation returning control of all the northeastern Brazil colony to the Portuguese. After the end of the First Anglo-Dutch War in May 1654, the Dutch Republic demanded that \"Nieuw Holland\" (Dutch Brazil) be returned to Dutch control. Under threat of an occupation of Lisbon and a reoccupation of northeastern Brazil, the Portuguese, already involved in a war against Spain, acceded to the Dutch demand. However, the new Dutch political leader Johan de Witt deemed commerce more important than territory, and saw to it that New Holland was sold back to Portugal on August 6, 1661, through the Treaty of the Hague.\nAfter the devastation caused by World War II, the Dutch government stimulated emigration to Australia, Brazil, and Canada. Brazil was the only nation to allow the arrival of large groups of Catholics. With the consent of the Brazilian government, the Catholic Dutch Farmers and Market-gardeners Union (Dutch: \"Katholieke Nederlandse Boeren- en Tuindersbond\") coordinated the emigration process. A group of approximately 5000\u00a0migrants from the province of North Brabant arrived in Brazil, establishing their first colony at the farm of Fazenda Ribeir\u00e3o in the state of S\u00e3o Paulo. Holambra I was founded in 14\u00a0July 1948. After a referendum in 1991 where 98% of the population voted in favor of political autonomy for the area, Holambra gained city status in January 1993.\nFamous for its large production of flowers and plants and for the yearly event Expoflora, Holambra receives thousands of tourists each year. In April 1998 this fact was recognized as Holambra gained the status of Est\u00e2ncia Tur\u00edstica, touristic location. Further immigration from the Netherlands, ended up creating the cities in Brazil where the majority of the population descends from these Dutch immigrants. These cities are Holambra, Castrolanda, Carambei, N\u00e3o me Toque, Witmarsum (where most of the population are descended from Dutch Frisian immigrants), Arapoti and Campos de Holambra.\nChile.\nIn 1600, the Chilean city of Valdivia was captured by the Dutch pirate Sebastian de Cordes. He left the city only after a few months. In 1642, the VOC and WIC sent a fleet to Chile in an attempt to conquer Valdivia and its supposed gold mines. This expedition was led by Hendrik Brouwer, a Dutch admiral. In 1643, Brouwer died before effecting the conquest of the Chilo\u00e9 Archipelago; his lieutenant Elias Herckmans succeeded in capturing the ruins of the city, which he refortified and named \"Brouwershaven\". Finding no gold but many hostile natives, the Dutch soon abandoned the outpost that would be incorporated into the Spanish Empire.\nThe second emigration from the Netherlands to Chile was in 1895, when Chile was now independent. Under the so-called \"Chilean General Inspector of Colonization and Immigration\", a dozen Dutch families settled between 1895 and 1897 in Chilo\u00e9, particularly in Mechaico, Huillinco and Chacao. In the same period Hageman Egbert arrived in Chile. with his family, 14 April 1896, settling in Rio Gato, near Puerto Montt. In addition, family Wennekool which inaugurated the Dutch colonization of Villarrica.\nIn the early twentieth century, there arrived in Chile a large group of Dutch people from South Africa, which had been established where they worked mainly in construction of the railway. When the Boer War, which would eventually lead to the British annexation of both republics in 1902. These emigrants decided to emigrate to Chile with the help of the Chilean government.\nOn 4 May 1903, a group of over 200 Dutch emigrants sailed on the steamship \"Oropesa\" shipping company \"Pacific Steam Navigation Company, from La Rochelle (La Pallice) in France. The majority of migrants were born in the Netherlands: 35% were from North Holland and South Holland, 13% of North Brabant, 9% of Zeeland and equal number of Gelderland.\nOn June 5, arrived by train to their final destination, the city of Pitrufqu\u00e9n, located south of Temuco, near the hamlet of Donguil. Another group of Dutchmen arrived shortly after to Talcahuano, in the \"Oravi\" and the \"Orissa\". The Netherlands colony in Donguil was christened \"New Transvaal Colony. There were established more than 500 families in order to start a new life. Between 7 February 1907 and February 18, 1909, above the last group of families Boers.\nIt is currently estimated at 50,000 descendants of Dutch, mostly located in Malleco, Gorbea, Pitrufqu\u00e9n, Faja Maisan and around Temuco and Osorno.\nGuianas.\nThe Dutch West Indian Company built a fort in 1616 on the Essequibo River. The Dutch traded with the Indian peoples and, as in Suriname, established sugar plantations worked by African slaves. While the coast remained under Dutch control, the English established plantations west of the Suriname River. Conflict between the two countries meant parts of the region changed hands a number of times, but by 1796 Britain had control of the region. The Netherlands ceded the colonies of Essequibo, Demerara, and Berbice to Britain in 1814.\nThe colony in Suriname had originally been founded in the 1650s by Lord Francis Willoughby, the British governor of Barbados. It was captured by the Dutch under Abraham Crijnsen during the Second Anglo\u2013Dutch War. On July 31, 1667, under the Treaty of Breda the Dutch offered New Netherland (including New Amsterdam, modern-day New York City) in exchange for their sugar factories on the coast of Suriname. In 1683 Suriname was sold to the Dutch West India Company. The colony developed an agricultural economy based on African slavery. England controlled Suriname during the Napoleonic Wars from 1799 until 1816, when it was returned to the Dutch. The Netherlands abolished slavery in 1863 and later imported indentured labor from the British Raj and the Dutch East Indies to keep the economy going. Internal self governance was granted in 1954 and full independence in 1975. The prospect of independence prompted many to migrate to the Netherlands. Political instability and economic decline after independence resulted in even more migration to the Netherlands. The Surinamese community in the Netherlands is now almost as large as half of the population in the country itself (about 350,000).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52483", "revid": "44117142", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52483", "title": "Electronic mailing list", "text": ""}
{"id": "52484", "revid": "22066013", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52484", "title": "Danish colonization of the Americas", "text": "Denmark and the former real union of Denmark\u2013Norway had a colonial empire from the 17th through to the 20th centuries, large portions of which were found in the Americas. Denmark and Norway in one form or another also maintained land claims in Greenland since the 13th century, the former up through the twenty-first century.\nWest Indies (1754\u20131917).\nExplorers (mainly Norwegians), scientists, merchants (mainly Danish) and settlers from Denmark\u2013Norway took possession of the Danish West Indies (present-day U.S. Virgin Islands) in the late 17th and early 18th centuries.\nDenmark\u2013Norway started colonies on St. Thomas in 1665 and St. John in 1683 (though control of the latter was disputed with Great Britain until 1718), and purchased St. Croix from France in 1733. During the 18th century, the Virgin Islands in the Caribbean Sea were divided into two territorial units, one British and the other Dano-Norwegian. The Dano-Norwegian islands were run by the Danish West India and Guinea Company until 1755, when the Dano-Norwegian king bought them out. \nFollowing the Battle of Leipzig in 1813, the Treaty of Kiel signed on 14 January 1814, Frederick VI ceded the Kingdom of Norway to the King of Sweden. Despite Norway then being under the Swedish crown some Norwegians kept coming due to family connections.\nSugar cane, produced by slave labor, drove the islands' economy during the 18th and early 19th centuries. A triangular trade existed with Danish manufacturers buying African slaves which in turn were traded for West Indian sugar meant for Denmark and Norway. Although the slave trade was abolished in 1803, slavery itself was not abolished until 1848, after several mass slave escapes to the free British islands and an ensuing slave protest. The Danish Virgin Islands were also used as a base for pirates. The British and Dutch settlers became the largest non-slave groups on the islands. Their languages predominated, so much so that the Danish government, in 1839, declared that slave children must attend school in the English language. The colony reached its largest population in the 1840\u201350s, after which an economic downturn increased emigration and the population dropped, a trend that continued until after the islands' purchase by the United States. The Danish West Indies had 34,000 inhabitants in 1880.\nIn 1868, Denmark voted to sell the colony to the United States but their offer was rebuffed. In 1902, Denmark rejected an American purchase offer. On 31 March 1917, the United States finally purchased the islands, which had been in economic decline since the abolition of slavery.\nGreenland (1728/1814\u2013present).\nGreenland, which had been settled by the Norsemen in the 980s, submitted to Norwegian rule in 1261. Denmark and Sweden entered the Kalmar Union with Norway in 1397 under the Queen of Norway, and Norway's overseas territories including Greenland later became subject to the king in Copenhagen. Scandinavian settlement in Greenland declined over the years and the last written record is a marriage recorded in 1408, although the Norwegian claims to the land remained. Following the establishment of an independent Sweden, Norway and Denmark were reorganized into a polity now known as Denmark\u2013Norway in 1536/1537 and the nominal Norwegian sovereignty over Greenland was taken up by the new union. Despite the decline of European settlement and the loss of contact, Denmark\u2013Norway continued to maintain its claim to lordship over Greenland.\nBetween the years 1605\u20131607, King Christian IV of Denmark\u2013Norway commissioned three expeditions to Greenland. These expeditions were conducted in order to locate the lost Norse Eastern Settlement as well as to reassert Danish sovereignty over Greenland. The expeditions were largely unsuccessful, partly due to its leaders lacking experience with the arctic ice and difficult weather conditions. Additionally later expeditions were searching on the east coast of Greenland, which was almost inaccessible at the time due to southward-drifting ice.\nIn the 1660s, a polar bear was added to the royal coat of arms. Around this same time Dano-Norwegian ships, joined by ships from various other European countries, began journeying to Greenland to hunt bowhead whales, though no formal recolonization was attempted.\nIn 1721, the Norwegian Lutheran minister Hans Egede and his Bergen Greenland Company received a royal charter from King Frederick IV granting them broad authority over Greenland and commissioning them to seek out the old Norse colony and spread the Reformation among its inhabitants, who were presumed to still be Catholic or to have reverted to paganism. Egede led three boats to Baal's River (the modern Nuup Kangerlua) and established Hope Colony on Kangeq with his family and a few dozen colonists. Finding no Norse survivors, he started a mission among the Inuit and baptized the first child converts in 1724. Meanwhile, his settlers had been ravaged by scurvy and the Dutch attacked and burnt a whaling station erected on Nipisat. The Bergen company went bankrupt in 1727. King Frederick attempted to replace it with a royal colony by sending Major Claus Paarss and several dozen soldiers and convicts to erect a fortress for the colony in 1728 but this new settlement of Good Hope (Godthaab) failed due to mutiny and scurvy and the retinue was recalled in 1730.\nThree Moravian missionaries led by Matthias Stach arrived in 1733 and began the first of a series of mission stations at Neu-Herrnhut (which later developed into the modern capital Nuuk), but a returning Inuk child brought smallpox from Denmark and a large proportion of the Native population died over the next few years. The death of Egede's wife prompted his return to Denmark, with his son Paul left in charge of the settlement. The Danish merchant Jacob Severin was granted authority over the colony from 1734 to 1740, which was extended until 1749, assisted by royal patronage and Moravian sponsorship of some of Egede's missionary activities. He was succeeded by the General Trade Company (\"Det almindelige Handelskompagni\"). Both were granted armed ships and full monopolies over trade around their settlements, to prevent better-armed, lower-priced, and better-quality Dutch goods from bankrupting the enterprise. The ranged nature of their monopolies spurred them to found new settlements: Christiansh\u00e5b (1734), Jacobshavn (1741), Frederiksh\u00e5b (1742), Claushavn (1752), Fisken\u00e6s (1754), Ritenbenck and Egedesminde and Sukkertoppen (1755), Holstensborg (1756), Umanak (1758), Upernavik (1771), Godhavn (1773), and Julianehaab (1774). The GTC folded in 1774 and was replaced by the Royal Greenland Trade Department (\"Kongelige Gr\u00f8nlandske Handel\", KGH), which recognized that the island possessed neither fertile farmland nor easily accessible mineral wealth and that income would be dependent on the whaling and seal-hunting trade with the Native Inuit. An early attempt to man a government-run Scandinavian whaling fleet was aborted and instead the KGH's Instruction of 1782 banned further attempts to urbanize the Inuit or alter their traditional way of life through improved employment opportunities or sales of luxury items. One effect was that construction of new settlements was effectively suspended after Nennortalik (1797) for a century until the establishment of Amassalik on the eastern shore in 1894. The 1782 Instructions also established separate governing councils for North and South Greenland.\nDanish intervention on France's behalf during the Napoleonic Wars ended with the severing of Denmark\u2013Norway under the 1814 Treaty of Kiel, which granted mainland Norway to Sweden but retained the former Norwegian colonies under the Danish crown. Repeated inquiries into the Greenlandic trade and the end of absolutism in Denmark did not end the KGH's monopolies. In 1857, the administrators did set up \"parsissaets\", local councils conducted in Kalaallisut with minor control over spending decisions at each station. In 1912, Royal Greenland's independence was ended and its operations were folded into the Ministry of the Interior.\nArctic exploration placed claims of Danish sovereignty over the whole of Greenland in doubt: the principle of \"terra nullius\" seemed to leave huge tracts of the territory available to new entrants. Denmark responded by acquiring diplomatic agreements recognizing its sovereignty from the parties involved, beginning with the treaty selling the Danish Virgin Islands to the United States in 1917. Norway\u00a0\u2013 which had become independent of Sweden in 1905\u00a0\u2013 eventually protested and claimed Erik the Red's Land in eastern Greenland during 1931. The Permanent Court of International Justice ruled against Norway and supported the Danish sovereignty two years later.\nThe invasion of Denmark in early 1940 increased the power and importance of the governors greatly, but by 1941 the island had become an American protectorate. Following the war, the former corporate policy was discontinued: the North and South Greenland colonies were united and the RGTD's monopoly officially ended. In 1953, Greenland's colonial status was ended and it was made an integral part of the Kingdom of Denmark with representation in the Folketing. In 1979, the Folketing granted the island home rule and, in 2009, all matters other than defense and foreign policy were transferred to the regional parliament.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52485", "revid": "7279", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52485", "title": "Ported", "text": ""}
{"id": "52486", "revid": "41307770", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52486", "title": "History of Suriname", "text": "The early history of Suriname dates from 3000 BCE when Native Americans first inhabited the area. The Dutch acquired Suriname from the English, and European settlement in any numbers dates from the 17th century, when it was a plantation colony utilizing slavery for sugar cultivation. With abolition in the late 19th century, planters sought labor from China, Portugal (Madeira), the British Raj, and the Dutch East Indies (Java), which was also colonized by the Dutch. Dutch is Suriname's official language. Owing to its diverse population, it has also developed a creole language, Sranan Tongo.\nIndigenous settlement.\nSuriname was populated millennia before the Europeans by many distinct indigenous cultures. The largest nations at the time of colonialization were the Arawaks, a nomadic coastal tribe that lived from hunting and fishing, and the Caribs. The Caribs conquered the Arawaks along much of the coast, and into the Caribbean, using sailing ships. They settled in Galibi (\"Kupali Yum\u00ef\", meaning \"tree of the forefathers\") on the mouth of the Marowijne river. While the Arawak and Carib lived off the coast and savanna, smaller groups of indigenous peoples lived in the rainforest inland, such as the Akurio, Tri\u00f3, Warrau, and Wayana.\nEuropean colonization.\nIntermittent Settlement.\nThe first Europeans who came to Suriname were Spanish explorers and Dutch traders who visited the area along with other parts of South America's 'Wild Coast.' In 1613, a Dutch trading post near the village \"Parmurbo\" was in existence on the Suriname River, while in the same year the Spanish took over another Dutch trading post on the Corantijn River. The first significant attempt to settle the area by Europeans was in 1630, when English settlers led by Captain Marshall attempted to found a colony. They cultivated crops of tobacco, but the venture failed financially. In 1640, perhaps while the English were still at Marshall's Creek, the French built an outpost near the mouth of the Suriname River.\nEnglish Colonization.\nIn 1650, Lord Willoughby, the governor of Barbados, furnished out a vessel to settle a colony in Suriname. At his own cost he equipped a ship of 20 guns, and two smaller vessels with things necessary for the support of the plantation. Major Anthony Rowse settled there in his name. Two years later, for the better settling of the colony, he went in person, fortified and furnished it with things requisite for defence and trade. The settlement consisted of around and \"Fort Willoughby\" near the mouth of the Suriname River, expanded from the abandoned French outpost. In 1663 most of the work on the 50 or so plantations was done by native Indians and 3,000 African slaves. There were around 1,000 whites there, joined by Brazilian Jews, attracted by religious freedom which was granted to all the settlers by the English.\nDutch colonization.\nThe settlement was invaded by seven Dutch ships (from the Zeeland region), led by Abraham Crijnssen, on February 26, 1667. Fort Willoughby was captured the next day after a three-hour fight and renamed Fort Zeelandia. On July 31, 1667, the English and Dutch signed the Treaty of Breda, in which for the time being the status quo was respected: the Dutch could keep occupying Suriname and the English the formerly Dutch colony New Amsterdam (modern-day New York). This arrangement was made official in the Treaty of Westminster of 1674, after the English had regained and again lost Suriname in 1667. In 1683 the Society of Suriname was set up, modelled on the ideas of Jean-Baptiste Colbert to profit from the management and defence of the Dutch Republic's colony. It had three participants, with equal shares in the society's responsibilities and profits\u2014the city of Amsterdam, the family Van Aerssen van Sommelsdijck, and the Dutch West India Company. The Van Aerssen family only managed to sell its share in 1770. The Society came to an end in 1795 when this kind of trade and business was no longer seen as acceptable.\nSlavery and emancipation.\nIn South America, slavery was the norm. The native people proved to be in limited supply and consequently the Atlantic slave trade supplied the workforce for the plantations. The plantations were producing sugar, coffee, cocoa, and cotton which were exported for the Amsterdam market. In 1713, for instance, most of the work on the 200 plantations was done by 13,000 African slaves. Their treatment was horrific, and slaves periodically escaped to the jungle from the start. These \"Maroons\" (also known as \"Djukas\" or \"Bakabusi Nengre\") attacked the plantations in order to acquire goods that were in short supply and to free enslaved women. Notable leaders of the Surinam Maroons were Alabi, Boni, Joli-coeur and Broos (Captain Broos). In the 18th century, three of the Maroon people signed a peace treaty, similar to the peace treaty ending the First Maroon War in Jamaica, whereby they were recognised as free people and received a yearly tribute that provided them with the goods they used to \"liberate\" from the plantations. A contemporary description of the war between the Maroons and the plantation owners in Suriname can be found in \"Narrative of a Five Years Expedition Against the Revolted Negroes of Surinam\" by John Gabriel Stedman.\nSuriname was occupied by the British in 1799, after the Netherlands were incorporated by France, and was returned to the Dutch in 1816, after the defeat of Napoleon. In 1861\u201363, President Abraham Lincoln of the United States and his administration looked abroad for places to relocate freed slaves who wanted to leave the United States. It opened negotiations with the Dutch government regarding African-American emigration to and colonization of the Dutch colony of Suriname in South America. Nothing came of it and after 1864, the proposal was dropped. The Dutch abolished slavery only in 1863, although the British had already abolished it during their short rule. The freed slaves were, however, still required to continue their plantation work on a contract basis and were not released until 1873; up to that date they conducted obligatory but paid work at the plantations. Slaves were required to work on plantations for 10 transition years for minimal pay, which was considered as partial compensation for their masters. Besides that, the Dutch government in 1863 also compensated each slave-owner for the loss of the working force of each slave 300 Dutch florins - in 2021 worth about 3,500 euros. After 1873, most freedmen largely abandoned the plantations where they had worked for several generations in favor of the capital city, Paramaribo. In the meantime, many more workers had been imported from the Dutch East Indies, mostly Chinese inhabitants of that colony, creating a Chinese Surinamese population. From 1873 to 1916, many laborers were imported from India, creating the Indo-Surinamese. After 1916, many laborers were again imported from the Dutch East Indies, especially Java, creating the Javanese Surinamese.\nTwentieth century.\nIn the 20th century, the natural resources of Suriname, rubber, gold and bauxite, were exploited. The US company Alcoa had a claim on a large area in Suriname where bauxite, from which aluminum can be made, was found. Given that the peace treaties with the Maroon people granted them title to the lands, there have been international court cases that negated the right of the Surinam government to grant these claims (meaning the right to take the land for themselves and ignoring autonomy). \nOn November 23, 1941, under an agreement with the Dutch government-in-exile, the United States stationed troops in Suriname to protect the bauxite mines.\nDecolonization.\nIn 1949, the first full election was held. Julius Caesar de Miranda was elected as first Prime Minister of Suriname. As a member of the Colonial States, he had been critical of Governor Kielstra and had argued for end to subservience to the Ministry of Colonies.\nIn 1954, Suriname gained self-government, with the Netherlands retaining control of defence and foreign affairs. It would become one of three member states - the others being the Netherlands Antilles and the Netherlands under one Kingdom.\nIndependence.\nIn 1973 the Dutch government started independence negotiations with the local government, led by the NPS (a largely Creole party), at the request of members of the NPS, which was granted on November 25, 1975. The Dutch instituted an aid programme worth US$1.5 billion to last till 1985. The first President of the country was Johan Ferrier, with Henck Arron (leader of the NPS) as Prime Minister. Despite agreements with the new Surinam government roughly a third of the population emigrated to the Netherlands prior to and after independence, fearing that the new country would not be viable. Also contrary to the agreements with the new Surinam government, many originally Dutch settlers (\"bakra's/boeroes\") were expropriated by the new Surinam Government.\nIn 1980, the government of Henck Arron was overthrown in a military coup led by Sergeant-Major D\u00e9si Bouterse. President Ferrier refused to recognise the new government, appointing Henk Chin A Sen (of the Nationalist Republican Party). Another coup followed five months later, with the army replacing Ferrier with Chin A Sen. These developments were largely welcomed by a population that expected the new army-installed government to put an end to corruption and improve the standard of living. This was despite the fact that the new regime banned opposition parties and became increasingly dictatorial. The Dutch initially accepted the new government; however, relations between Suriname and the Netherlands collapsed when 15 members of the political opposition were killed by the army on December 8, 1982, in Fort Zeelandia. This event is also known as the \"Decembermoorden\" ('December murders'). The Dutch and Americans cut off their aid in protest at the move.\nIn 1985, the ban on opposition parties was lifted, and work began on devising a new constitution. The following year saw the start of an anti-government rebellion of the Maroons in the interior, calling themselves the Jungle Commando and led by Ronnie Brunswijk. The Bouterse government violently tried to suppress the insurgency by burning villages and other similar means. More than 10,000 Maroons fled to French Guiana, and were recognised refugees. The number of illegal refugees is unknown.\nIn 1987, Suriname got a new civilian constitution and next year Ramsewak Shankar was elected as president. He was ousted in a military coup organized by Bouterse in 1990. In 1991, opposition the New Front for Democracy and Development won majority in parliamentary elections. Ronald Venetiaan was elected as new president. The civil war ended after a peace agreement between the government of Suriname and the Surinamese Liberation Army (SLA), commonly known as the Jungle Commando (or Commandos), led by Ronnie Brunswijk, was reached in August 1992.\nIn 1992, an ally of Bouterse, Jules Wijdenbosch, was elected as new president. In 2000, Ronald Venetiaan became president again after winning the early elections. In 2005, Venetiaan was re-elected and his New Front coalition won narrowly the parliamentary election.\nIn July 2010, the parliament elected Bouterse as the new president. In 2015, his party National Democratic Party (NDP) narrowly won the parliamentary election, giving Bouterse a second five-year period in power.\nIn 2019, Bouterse was sentenced to 20 years in prison over the execution of 15 political opponents in 1982. Before, he was convicted in absentia of drug trafficking by a court in the Netherlands in 1999. Bouterse has denied any wrongdoing.\nIn 2020, the COVID-19 crisis began and oil prices fell. There was an economic crisis. On 25 May 2020, a general election took place. The Progressive Reform Party (PRP) got 20 seats (+11) out of 51 and the National Democratic Party (NDP) got 16 seats (-10). In July 2020, Chandrikapersad \"Chan\" Santokhi (PRP) was elected as the new President of Suriname, replacing Bouterse. The PRP formed a coalition with the General Liberation and Development Party led by former guerilla leader Ronnie Brunswijk, the new vice president.\nIn February 2023, protests against rising living costs occurred in the capital Paramaribo. Protesters accused the government of President Chan Santokhi of corruption. They stormed the National Assembly, demanding that the government resign. However, the government condemned the protests. In December 2024, Desi Bouterse, Suriname\u2019s fugitive former president, died.\nOn 6 July 2025, Jennifer Geerlings-Simons of the National Democratic Party (NDP) was elected as Suriname's first woman president by the parliament.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52487", "revid": "50529384", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52487", "title": "Ivan Pavlov", "text": "Russian physiologist (1849\u20131936)\nIvan Petrovich Pavlov (, ; 26 September\u00a0[O.S. 14 September]\u00a01849\u00a0\u2013 27 February 1936) was a Russian and Soviet experimental neurologist and physiologist known for his discovery of classical conditioning through his experiments with dogs. Pavlov also conducted significant research on the physiology of digestion, for which he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1904.\nEducation and early life.\nPavlov was born on 26 September 1849, the first of ten children, in Ryazan, Russian Empire. His father, Peter Dmitrievich Pavlov (1823\u20131899), was a village Russian Orthodox priest. His mother, Varvara Ivanovna Uspenskaya (1826\u20131890), was a homemaker. As a child, Pavlov willingly participated in house duties such as doing the dishes and taking care of his siblings. He loved to garden, ride his bicycle, row, swim, and play gorodki; he devoted his summer vacations to these activities. Although able to read by the age of seven, Pavlov did not begin formal schooling until he was 11 years old, due to serious injuries he had sustained when falling from a high wall onto a stone pavement.\nFrom his childhood days, Pavlov demonstrated intellectual curiosity along with what he referred to as \"the instinct for research\". He attended the Ryazan church school before entering the local theological seminary. Inspired by the progressive ideas which Dmitry Pisarev, a Russian literary critic of the 1860s, and Ivan Sechenov, the father of Russian physiology, were spreading, Pavlov abandoned his religious career without graduating and devoted his life to science.\nIn 1870, he enrolled in the physics and mathematics department at the University of Saint Petersburg to study natural science. In his fourth year, his first research project on the physiology of the nerves of the pancreas won him a prestigious university award. In 1875, Pavlov received the degree of Candidate of Natural Sciences. Impelled by his interest in physiology, Pavlov decided to continue his studies and proceeded to the Imperial Academy of Medical Surgery. While at the academy, Pavlov became an assistant to his former teacher, Elias von Cyon. He left the department when de Cyon was replaced by another instructor.\nAfter some time, Pavlov obtained a position as a laboratory assistant to Konstantin Ustimovich at the physiological department of the Veterinary Institute. For two years, Pavlov investigated the circulatory system for his medical dissertation. In 1878, Professor Sergey Botkin, a clinician, invited Pavlov to work in the physiological laboratory as the clinic's chief. In 1879, he graduated from the Medical Military Academy with a gold medal for his research work. After a competitive examination, Pavlov won a fellowship at the academy for postgraduate work.\nThe fellowship and his position as director of the Physiological Laboratory at Botkin's clinic enabled Pavlov to continue his research work. In 1883, he presented his doctor's thesis on the subject of \"The centrifugal nerves of the heart\" and posited the idea of \"nerves\" and the basic principles on the trophic function of the nervous system. Additionally, his collaboration with the Botkin Clinic produced evidence of a basic pattern in the regulation of reflexes in the activity of circulatory organs.\nHe was inspired to pursue a scientific career by Dmitry Pisarev, a literary critic and natural science advocate and Ivan Sechenov, a physiologist, whom Pavlov described as \"the father of physiology\".\nCareer.\nStudies in Germany.\nAfter completing his doctorate, Pavlov went to Germany, where he studied in Leipzig with Carl Ludwig and Eimear Kelly in the Heidenhain laboratories in Breslau. He remained there from 1884 to 1886. Heidenhain was studying digestion in dogs, using an exteriorized section of the stomach. However, Pavlov perfected the technique by overcoming the problem of maintaining the external nerve supply. The exteriorized section became known as the Heidenhain or Pavlov pouch.\nReturn to Russia.\nIn 1886, Pavlov returned to Russia to look for a new position. His application for the chair of physiology at the University of Saint Petersburg was rejected. Eventually, Pavlov was offered the chair of pharmacology at Tomsk University in Siberia and at the University of Warsaw in Poland. He did not take up either post. In 1890, he was appointed the role of professor of Pharmacology at the Military Medical Academy and occupied the position for five years. In 1891, Pavlov was invited to the Institute of Experimental Medicine in St. Petersburg to organize and direct the Department of Physiology.\nOver a 45-year period, under his direction, the institute became one of the most important centers of physiological research in the world. Pavlov continued to direct the Department of Physiology at the institute, while taking up the chair of physiology at the Medical Military Academy in 1895. Pavlov would head the physiology department at the academy continuously for three decades.\nNobel Prize.\nStarting in 1901, Pavlov was nominated over four successive years for the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. He did not win the prize until 1904 because his previous nominations were not specific to any discovery, but based on a variety of laboratory findings. When Pavlov received the Nobel Prize it was specified that he did so \"in recognition of his work on the physiology of digestion, through which knowledge on vital aspects of the subject has been transformed and enlarged\".\nStudies of digestion.\nAt the Institute of Experimental Medicine, Pavlov carried out his classical experiments on the digestive glands, which would eventually grant him the aforementioned Nobel prize.\nPavlov's laboratory housed a full-scale kennel for the experimental canines. Pavlov was interested in observing their long-term physiological processes. This required keeping them alive and healthy to conduct chronic experiments, as he called them. These were experiments over time, designed to understand the normal functions of dogs. This was a new kind of study, because previously experiments had been \"acute\", meaning that the dog underwent vivisection which ultimately killed it. Pavlov would often remove the esophagus of several dogs and created a fistula in their throats.\nOther activities.\nA 1921 article by Sergius Morgulis in the journal \"Science\" reported the effects of the Allied blockade on Russian scientists' access to scientific literature and resources. Morgulis quoted from a report by H. G. Wells (later collected in \"Russia in the Shadows\") that Pavlov grew potatoes and carrots in his laboratory. He added \"It is gratifying to be assured that Professor Pavlov is raising potatoes only as a pastime and still gives the best of his genius to scientific investigation\". That same year, Pavlov began holding laboratory meetings known as the 'Wednesday meetings' at which he spoke frankly on many topics, including his views on psychology. These meetings lasted until he died in 1936.\nRelationship with the Soviet government.\nPavlov was highly regarded by the Soviet government, and he was able to continue his research. He was praised by Vladimir Lenin. Despite praise from the Soviet Union government, the money that poured in to support his laboratory, and the honours he was given, Pavlov made no attempts to conceal the disapproval and contempt with which he regarded Soviet Communism.\nIn 1923, Pavlov stated that he would not sacrifice even the hind leg of a frog to the type of social experiment that the Communist regime was conducting in Russia. Four years later, he wrote to Joseph Stalin, protesting at what was being done to Russian intellectuals and saying he was ashamed to be a Russian. After the murder of Sergei Kirov in 1934, Pavlov wrote several letters to Vyacheslav Molotov criticizing the mass persecutions that followed, and asking for the reconsideration of cases pertaining to several people he knew personally.\nIn the final years of his life, Pavlov's attitude towards the Soviet government softened; without fully endorsing its policies, he praised the Soviet government for its support of scientific institutions. In 1935, a few months before his death, Pavlov read a draft of the 1936 \"Stalin Constitution\" and expressed his pleasure at the apparent dawn of a more free and democratic Soviet Union.\nDeath and burial.\nConscious until his final moments, Pavlov asked one of his students to sit beside his bed and to record the circumstances of his dying. He wanted to create unique evidence of subjective experiences of this terminal phase of life. Pavlov died on 27 February 1936 of double pneumonia at the age of 86. He was given a grand funeral, and his study and laboratory were preserved as a museum in his honour. His grave is in the Literatorskie mostki (writers' footways) section of Volkovo Cemetery in St. Petersburg.\nReflex system research.\nPavlov contributed to many areas of physiology and neurological sciences. Most of his work involved research in temperament, conditioning and involuntary reflex actions.\nPavlov performed and directed experiments on digestion, eventually publishing \"The Work of the Digestive Glands\" in 1897, after 12 years of research. His experiments earned him the 1904 Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine.\nThese experiments included surgically extracting portions of the digestive system from nonhuman animals, severing nerve bundles to determine the effects, and implanting fistulas between digestive organs and an external pouch to examine the organ's contents. This research served as a base for broad research on the digestive system. Further work on reflex actions involved involuntary reactions to stress and pain.\nNervous system research.\nPavlov was always interested in biomarkers of temperament types described by Hippocrates and Galen. He called these biomarkers \"properties of nervous systems\" and identified three main properties: (1) strength, (2) mobility of nervous processes and (3) a balance between excitation and inhibition and derived four types based on these three properties. He extended the definitions of the four temperament types under study at the time: choleric, phlegmatic, sanguine, and melancholic, updating the names to \"the strong and impetuous type, the strong equilibrated and quiet type, the strong equilibrated and lively type, and the weak type\", respectively.\nPavlov and his researchers observed and began the study of transmarginal inhibition (TMI), the body's natural response of shutting down when exposed to overwhelming stress or pain by electric shock. This research showed how all temperament types responded to the stimuli the same way, but different temperaments move through the responses at different times. He commented \"that the most basic inherited difference ... was how soon they reached this shutdown point and that the quick-to-shut-down have a fundamentally different type of nervous system.\"\nPavlov carried out experiments on the digestive glands, as well as investigated the gastric function of dogs, and eventually won the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine in 1904, becoming the first Russian Nobel laureate. A survey in the \"Review of General Psychology\", published in 2002, ranked Pavlov as the 24th most cited psychologist of the 20th century.\nPavlov's principles of classical conditioning have been found to operate across a variety of behavior therapies and in experimental and clinical settings, such as educational classrooms and even reducing phobias with systematic desensitization.\nClassical conditioning.\nThe basics of Pavlov's classical conditioning serve as a historical backdrop for current learning theories. However, the Russian physiologist's initial interest in classical conditioning occurred almost by accident during one of his experiments on digestion in dogs. Considering that Pavlov worked closely with nonhuman animals throughout many of his experiments, his early contributions were primarily about learning in nonhuman animals. However, the fundamentals of classical conditioning have been examined across many different organisms, including humans. The basic underlying principles of Pavlov's classical conditioning have extended to a variety of settings, such as classrooms and learning environments.\nClassical conditioning focuses on using preceding conditions to alter behavioral reactions. The principles underlying classical conditioning have influenced preventative antecedent control strategies used in the classroom. Classical conditioning set the groundwork for the present day behavior modification practices, such as antecedent control. Antecedent events and conditions are defined as those conditions occurring before the behavior. Pavlov's early experiments used manipulation of events or stimuli preceding behavior (i.e., a tone) to produce salivation in dogs much like teachers manipulate instruction and learning environments to produce positive behaviors or decrease maladaptive behaviors. Although he did not refer to the tone as an antecedent, Pavlov was one of the first scientists to demonstrate the relationship between environmental stimuli and behavioral responses. Pavlov systematically presented and withdrew stimuli to determine the antecedents that were eliciting responses, which is similar to the ways in which educational professionals conduct functional behavior assessments.\n Antecedent strategies are supported by empirical evidence to operate implicitly within classroom environments. Antecedent-based interventions are supported by research to be preventative, and to produce immediate reductions in problem behaviors.\nAwards and honours.\nPavlov was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1904. He was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 1907, elected an International Member of the United States National Academy of Sciences in 1908, was awarded the Royal Society's Copley Medal in 1915, and elected an International Member of the American Philosophical Society in 1932. He became a foreign member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1907. Pavlov's dog, the Pavlovian session and Pavlov's typology are named in his honour. The asteroid 1007\u00a0Pawlowia and the lunar crater \"Pavlov\" were also named after him.\nLegacy.\nThe concept for which Pavlov is best known is the \"conditioned reflex\", or what he called the \"conditional reflex\", which he developed jointly with his assistant Ivan Tolochinov in 1901; Edwin B. Twitmyer at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia published similar research in 1902, a year before Pavlov published his. The concept was developed after observing the rates of salivation in dogs. Pavlov noticed that his dogs began to salivate in the presence of the technician who normally fed them, rather than simply salivating in the presence of the food. If a buzzer or metronome was sounded before the food was given, the dog would later come to associate the sound with the presentation of the food and salivate upon the presentation of the sound stimulus alone.\nTolochinov, whose own term for the phenomenon had been \"reflex at a distance\", communicated the results at the Congress of Natural Sciences in Helsinki in 1903. Later the same year Pavlov more fully explained the findings, at the 14th International Medical Congress in Madrid, where he read a paper titled \"The Experimental Psychology and Psychopathology of Animals\".\nPavlov's work became known in the West, particularly through the writings of John B. Watson and B. F. Skinner, and the idea of \"conditioning\", as an automatic form of learning, became a key concept in the developing specialism of comparative psychology, and the general approach to psychology that underlay it, behaviorism. Pavlov's work with classical conditioning was of huge influence on how humans perceived themselves, their behavior and learning processes; his studies of classical conditioning continue to be central to modern behavior therapy.\nThe Pavlov Institute of Physiology of the Russian Academy of Sciences was founded by Pavlov in 1925 and named after him following his death.\nBritish philosopher Bertrand Russell observed that \"[w]hether Pavlov's methods can be made to cover the whole of human behaviour is open to question, but at any rate they cover a very large field and within this field they have shown how to apply scientific methods with quantitative exactitude\".\nPavlov's research on conditional reflexes greatly influenced not only science, but also popular culture. Pavlovian conditioning is a major theme in Aldous Huxley's dystopian novel, \"Brave New World\" (1932), and in Thomas Pynchon's \"Gravity's Rainbow\" (1973).\nIt is popularly believed that Pavlov always signalled the occurrence of food by ringing a bell. However, his writings record the use of a wide variety of stimuli, including electric shocks, whistles, metronomes, tuning forks, and a range of visual stimuli, in addition to the ring of a bell. In 1994, A. Charles Catania cast doubt on whether Pavlov ever actually used a bell in his experiments. Littman tentatively attributed the popular imagery to Pavlov's contemporaries Vladimir Mikhailovich Bekhterev and John B. Watson. Roger K. Thomas, of the University of Georgia, however, said they had found \"three additional references to Pavlov's use of a bell that strongly challenge Littman's argument\". In reply, Littman suggested that Catania's recollection, that Pavlov did not use a bell in research, was \"convincing ... and correct\".\nIn 1964, the psychologist Hans Eysenck reviewed Pavlov's \"Lectures on Conditioned Reflexes\" for \"The BMJ\": Volume I \u2013 \"Twenty-five Years of Objective Study of the Higher Nervous Activity of Animals\", Volume II \u2013 \"Conditioned Reflexes and Psychiatry\".\nPersonal life.\nPavlov married Seraphima Vasilievna Karchevskaya on 1 May 1881. Seraphima, called Sara for short, was born in 1855. They had met in 1878 or 1879 when she went to St. Petersburg to study at the Pedagogical Institute. In her later years, she suffered from ill health and died in 1947.\nThe first nine years of their marriage were marred by financial problems; Pavlov and his wife often had to stay with others to have a home and, for a time, the two lived apart so that they could find hospitality. Although their poverty caused despair, material welfare was a secondary consideration. Sara's first pregnancy ended in a miscarriage. When she conceived again, the couple took precautions, and she safely gave birth to their first child, a boy whom they named Mirchik; Sara became deeply depressed following Mirchik's sudden death in childhood.\nPavlov and his wife eventually had four more children: Vladimir, Victor, Vsevolod, and Vera. Their youngest son, Vsevolod, died of pancreatic cancer in 1935, only one year before his father.\nPavlov was an atheist. Pavlov's follower E. M. Kreps asked him whether he was religious. Kreps writes that Pavlov smiled and replied: \"Listen, good fellow, in regard to [claims of] my religiosity, my belief in God, my church attendance, there is no truth in it; it is sheer fantasy. I was a seminarian, and like the majority of seminarians, I became an unbeliever, an atheist in my school years.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52488", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52488", "title": "Ivan Petrovich Pavlov", "text": ""}
{"id": "52489", "revid": "2386927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52489", "title": "Pavlov", "text": "Pavlov (or its variant Pavliv) may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
