{"id": "44552", "revid": "50494174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44552", "title": "Bloemfontein", "text": "Judicial capital of South Africa\nBloemfontein ( ; ), also known as Bloem, is the capital and the largest city of the Free State province in South Africa and it is often, and has been traditionally, referred to as the country's \"judicial capital\", alongside the legislative capital Cape Town and administrative capital Pretoria, although the highest court in South Africa, the Constitutional Court, has been in Johannesburg since 1994.\nSituated at an elevation of above sea level, the city is home to 256,185 (as of 2011) residents and forms part of the Mangaung Metropolitan Municipality which has a population of 747,431. It was one of the host cities for the 2010 FIFA World Cup.\nThe city of Bloemfontein hosts the Supreme Court of Appeal, the Franklin Game Reserve, , the Maselspoort Resort and the Sand du Plessis Theatre. The city hosts numerous museums, including the National Women's Monument, the Anglo-Boer War Museum, the National Museum, and the Oliewenhuis Art Museum. Bloemfontein also hosts the first digital planetarium in the southern hemisphere, the Naval Hill Planetarium, and Boyden Observatory, an astronomical research observatory.\nBloemfontein is popularly and poetically known as \"the city of roses\" for its abundance of these flowers and the annual rose festival held there. The city is situated in the middle of the country; hence it is referred to as \"Central South Africa\". The city's Sesotho name is \"Mangaung\", meaning \"place of cheetahs\".\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThough historically a !Orana and Barolong settlement, and then a Boer settlement, Bloemfontein was officially founded in 1846 as a fort by British Army major Henry Douglas Warden as a British outpost in the Transoranje region, at that stage occupied by various groups of peoples including !Orana (so-called \"Korana\" of the \u01c0H\u00f5a\u01c1\u02bcaes, \u01c0H\u0169di\u01c1\u02bcaes, Eini\u01c1\u02bcaes, and others), Cape Colony Trekboers, Griqua (at that time known as \"Baasters\") and Barolong.\nWarden initially chose the site primarily because of its proximity to the main route to Winburg, the spacious open country, and the absence of horse sickness. Bloemfontein was the original farm of Johannes Nicolaas Brits, born on 21 February 1790, owner and first inhabitant of Bloemfontein. Johann \u2013 as he was known \u2013 sold the farm to Major Warden.\nWith colonial policy shifts, the region changed into the Orange River Sovereignty (1848\u20131854) and eventually the Orange Free State Republic (1854\u20131902). From 1902 to 1910, it served as the capital of the Orange River Colony and since that time as the provincial capital of the Free State. In 1910, it became the Judicial capital of the Union of South Africa. A possible etymology for the city's name is that it is called Bloemfontein lit. \"Bloem's fountain\", after Jan Bloem II, a Griqua leader.\nOrange Free State (1854\u20131902).\nThe Orange Free State was an independent Boer Republic in southern Africa during the second half of the 19th century. Extending between the Orange and Vaal rivers, its borders were determined by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland in 1848 when the region was proclaimed as the Orange River Sovereignty, with a seat of a British Resident in Bloemfontein.\nAs the capital of the Orange Free State Republic, the growth and maturing of the republic resulted in the development of Bloemfontein. The city constructed numerous public buildings that remain in use today, facilitated by the republic's governance and compensation from the British for the loss of the diamond-rich Griqua Land area. The old Orange Free State's presidential residence, the Old Presidency, is currently a museum and cultural space in the city.\nA railway line was built in 1890 connecting Bloemfontein to Cape Town. The railway line provided a centrally located railway station and proved critical to the British in occupying the city later.\nThe writer J. R. R. Tolkien was born in the city on 3 January 1892. However, his family left Orange Free State (now Free State province, South Africa) following the death of his father, Arthur Tolkien, when Tolkien was three (1895). He recorded that his earliest memories were of \"a hot country\".\nIn 1899, the city was the site of the Bloemfontein Conference, which failed to prevent the outbreak of the Second Boer War. The conference was a final attempt to avert a war between Britain and the South African Republic, and its failure set the stage for war, which broke out on 11 October 1899.\nOn 13 March 1900, following the Battle of Paardeberg, the British captured the city and built a concentration camp nearby to house Boer women and children. In 1913, the National Women's Monument was constructed on the outskirts of the city to commemorate all Boer civilians who died in concentration camps during the war.\nThe hill in town was named Naval Hill after the naval guns brought in by the British to fortify the position against attack.\nUnionisation of South Africa (1910s).\nOn 31 May 1910, exactly eight years after the Boers signed the Peace Treaty of Vereeniging that ended the Anglo-Boer War between the British Empire and two Boer states, the South African Republic (Republic of Transvaal) and the Orange Free State, South Africa became a Union.\nDue to disagreements over where the Union's capital should be, a compromise was reached that allowed Bloemfontein to host Appellate Division and become the Union's judicial capital. Bloemfontein was also given financial compensation.\nOn 8 January 1912, the South African Native National Congress (SANNC) was founded in Bloemfontein. The Union of South Africa had not granted rights to black South Africans, causing the organisation's creation. Its primary aim was to fight for the rights of black South Africans. During the implementation of pass laws, the city saw major demonstrations that forced South African authorities to exempt women from them for nearly four decades.\nFrom 1 to 9 January 1914, James Barry Munnik Hertzog and his supporters met in Bloemfontein to form the National Party of the Orange Free State, and to lay down its principles, following Hertzog's exit from the South African Party in 1913. The National Party grew to govern South Africa in 1948 and implement the policy of racial segregation known as apartheid.\nApartheid era (1948\u20131994).\nWhen the National Party won the 1948 South African national government elections, they began implementing the policy known as apartheid. The policy was built on separate development of ethnic groups, and racial segregation was enforced. In Bloemfontein, residential segregation had begun in the 19th century with the passing of Ordinance 1 of 1860, which determined that no non-white, without written permission from the landlord (British government), had the right to occupy urban land in towns where local municipalities did not yet exist. On 3 June 1861, the council demarcated three locations in the following areas; the black population was to move to the area that lay to the right of a neighbourhood that was known as Kaffirfontein, Coloureds were to move to the Waaihoek Black residential area on the eastern outskirts of the town. The inhabitants of these settlements had to pay the so-called hut tax and grazing rights tax. This laid the foundation for the implementation of residential urban segregation as envisaged by the architects of apartheid.\nWhen the South African apartheid government passed the Group Areas Act of 1950, the Bloemfontein municipality put into effect changes in the racial set-up of the city. The municipality demolished the Cape Stands residential area, which was occupied by the city's coloured population, and moved the residents to Heidedal. However, due to Coloureds living in such proximity to black people, intermarriages across racial lines occurred, resulting in a partially mixed population in Heidedal and Mangaung. In 1952, the Bloemfontein municipality began building new residential areas for the city's black population. New residential areas to separate ethnic groups such as Sotho, Xhosa and Tswana were formed. The residential areas were jointly known as Mangaung. Phahameng, a Sotho township, was the first formal housing projects to be approved by the municipality in 1956. Physical buffers such as the railway line and roads were put into place to separate black ethnic groups, the white and coloured population. Eleven thousand housing structures, of which approximately 6,000 were government-built rental accommodations, were erected in Mangaung between 1952 and 1968.\nIn 1968, Mangaung faced severe housing shortages when as many as 3,000 to 6,000 housing units were needed. To counter this problem, a 55\u00a0km eastward expansion called Botshabelo was added in 1979. The Bloemfontein municipality channelled off all black urbanisation to Thaba 'Nchu and Botshabelo, which were developed as a source of cheap labour for the city of Bloemfontein. A subsidised bus service was established, and Botshabelo was declared a decentralisation point, meaning it was designated to become an industrial development point to reduce the distance between the place of employment and the place of residence.\nIn 1988, approximately 14,500 people were commuting daily between Botshabelo and Bloemfontein. This meant that 55% of Botshabelo's workforce was employed outside the city. In 1994, after the disestablishment of the apartheid government, Bloemfontein, Botshabelo, and Thaba Nchu became part of Motheo District Municipality. The Motheo District Municipality was disestablished on 18 May 2011, and Mangaung was upgraded to become an autonomous metropolitan municipality with Bloemfontein as the main seat.\nSince 1994.\nUntil 1994, the city was South Africa's sole judicial capital. It remains the seat for the Supreme Court of Appeal (formerly the Appellate Division of the Supreme Court). The city is also an administrative centre with many private hospitals and educational institutions.\nGovernment.\nFree State Provincial Government building\nBloemfontein forms part of the Mangaung Metropolitan Municipality, which was upgraded from a Local Municipality in 2011.\nThe Mangaung Metropolitan Municipality elects a municipal council for five-year periods through a mixed-member proportional representation (MMP) system in which wards elect individual councillors alongside those named from party lists. Voters get two votes: one for a representative to become a ward councillor and the other for a political party. The latter vote distributes seats in the municipal council amongst parties, while the former distributes seats through the individual representatives.\nGeography and climate.\nBloemfontein is located in central South Africa on the southern edge of the Highveld at an elevation of , bordering on the semi-arid region of the Karoo. The area is generally flat with occasional hills (\"koppies\" in Afrikaans), and the general vegetation is Highveld grassland. \nBloemfontein experiences a cold semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen BSk), with hot summer days and cool, dry winters with frosty nights. Rainfall usually arrives in the summer months, often in the form of dramatic but short-lived afternoon/evening thunderstorms that serve as a temporary relief from the heat. The city tends to be dry and dusty in winter with freezing nights and mostly mild, sunny days. Frost is very common but snow is rare. Snowfall was reported in August 2006 with snowfalls occurring again at the airport on 26 July 2007. As recently as August 2020 and July 2021 very light snow fell across the city with heavier snowfall on 4 June 2024. In addition, the city's highland elevation allows for exceptional temperature diurnal of about 15\u201320\u00b0C (27\u201336\u00b0F)\nSuburbs.\nBloemfontein suburbs include Heidedal to the east and southeast, Bain's Vlei, Woodland Hills Wildlife Estate, Brandwag, Ehrlich Park, Fauna, Fichardt Park, Fleurdal, Gardenia Park, Generaal De Wet, Hospitaalpark, Kiepersol, Lourier Park, Park West, Pellissier, Uitsig, Universitas, Westdene, Wilgehof and Willows to the south of the city. In the centre is Bloemfontein Central. To the west of Bloemfontein, you will find Langenhoven Park. To the north you will find Arboretum, Baysvalley, Bayswater, Dan Pienaar, Helicon Heights, Heuwelsig, Hillsboro, Hillside, Hilton, Naval Hill, Navalsig, Noordhoek, Pentagon Park, Panorama Park, and Waverley. To the northeast, you will find Roodewal and Vallombrosa. The predominantly black suburbs are Rocklands, Phahameng, Phelindaba, Bloemanda, Bochabela, JB Mafora, and the most historic Batho, where the Maphikela House (where the African National Congress started) is situated.\nSports.\nStadium.\nThe Free State Stadium and the surrounding sports complex are the primary sports venues in the city and province. The venue was the hosting stadium of the 2010 FIFA World Cup South Africa matches played in Bloemfontein. There are several other sports venues in the city, however, including facilities belonging to the university, schools and sports clubs. Other stadiums in the city are Mangaung Oval, Dr. Petrus Molemela Stadium and Clive Solomons Stadium.\nSoccer.\nBloemfontein was joint home (together with nearby Botshabelo) to South African Premiership team Bloemfontein Celtic before the team sold their franchise in 2021. Some of the matches of the 2010 FIFA World Cup were played at the Free State Stadium, including the historic 4\u20131 defeat of England by Germany in the round of 16\nRugby.\nBloemfontein's Free State Stadium is home to two rugby union teams; the Cheetahs, who as of 2023 compete as in invited side in the EPCR Challenge Cup, and the Free State Cheetahs who play in the domestic Currie Cup. The Free State Cheetahs won the Currie Cup in 2005 against the Blue Bulls; they drew the final with the Blue Bulls in 2006 and retained the Currie Cup title in 2007 by beating the Golden Lions, resulting in the Cheetahs remaining Currie Cup champions until 2008 when the failed to make the final for the first time since 2004. 2009 saw the Cheetahs return to the Currie Cup final, but they could not beat the Blue Bulls at Loftus Versfeld. In 2016, the Cheetahs won the Currie Cup after a perfect season, beating the Blue Bulls in Bloemfontein.\nCricket.\nThe Knights cricket team representing the Free State and Northern Cape in various series is located at Mangaung Oval, part of the Free State Stadium complex. Bloemfontein features as a regular venue for touring international and local cricket teams.\nSoaring.\nThe town has one of the most active soaring communities in South Africa and the world, using the New Tempe Airport, north of Bloemfontein. \nMotor sports.\nBloemfontein has a motocross track (tempe) run by the Bloemfontein Off Road Club, as well as a go-kart circuit (M&amp;F Raceway), which was closed down in early 2015.\nShooting sports.\nBloemfontein has a comprehensive shooting centre south of the city, offering most forms of shooting, including various clay target, pistol, and rifle disciplines. Bloemfontein's shooting sports community has produced many provincial and national representatives.\nMetallic Silhouette Shooting.\nBloemfontein's Metallic Silhouette Shooting Range is one of the top metallic silhouette shooting ranges in the world. Three IMSSU international championships have been held here :\nRock climbing.\nBloemfontein has two rock climbing clubs with a wall and boulder cave.\nRose Festival.\nEvery year Bloemfontein, the 'City of Roses', celebrates the 'Bloemfontein Rose Festival', also known as the 'Mangaung Rose Festival', in October\u2014the cool month in which roses in the Free State bloom best. The majority of the events happen at the Loch Logan Waterfront in Bloemfontein. The festival attracts rose enthusiasts from all over South Africa and the world to participate in and experience this grand showcase of roses and other local events and attractions. The festival has made Bloemfontein a popular tourist destination with thousands of people attending the festival annually.\nHistory of the Rose Festival.\nThe first rose festival occurred in 1976, when council members decided that hosting such a festival was appropriate, given the area's name. In 1976, the events spanned over a few days and included activities related to roses in the Sanlam Plaza. Since then, the rose festival has expanded and grown to meet the needs and interests of the public.\nActivities.\nHorticulturalists are invited to participate in competitions to design and improve unkempt gardens around the city. \nFestival activities occur in private gardens all over Bloemfontein as city residents open their gardens to the general public.\nLoch Logan Waterfront.\nMost festival activities occur at the Loch Logan Waterfront, the largest shopping centre in central South Africa. It spans about 80 000 m2 of space and is the hub of shopping, entertainment, sport, and culture in Bloemfontein. The waterfront displays flowers created by local nurseries as well as the official municipal display created by the parks department, which the Mangaung Municipality organises. The Free State Rose Society's champion Rose Cut Competition, with approximately 700 entrants every year, is also hosted at the Waterfront, along with the Miss Volksblad Rosebud competition for girls aged 3\u20134 years old, organised in conjunction with the Volksblad daily newspaper.\nRose Morning High Tea.\nThe Rose Morning High Tea usually occurs at the Urth Garden Centre, where tea and treats are served. The Urth Garden Centre is a retail and wholesale nursery that is located on Kenneth Kaunda Road in Bloemfontein. The crowning of the King and Mangaung in the year of nomination.\nMangaung Rose Classic Cycle Tour.\nThe Mangaung Rose Classic Cycle Tour is a road race that takes place during the festival every year. The event is organised by AfriCycle Tours, and the dates are announced annually. The race starts at the Urth, and the race distances include 22\u00a0km, 56\u00a0km, and 106\u00a0km.\nLet's Green Bloem Expo.\nThis expo forms part of the Mangaung/Bloemfontein Rose Festival and gives 'green' and organic local businesses an opportunity to promote their businesses. This includes showcasing different products and services that support a green environment, such as solar power, grey water systems, vegetable tunnels, JoJo tank systems, etc.\nEducation.\nBloemfontein houses many institutions of learning, from pre-schools to universities and colleges. Classes are taught in different languages from school to school, with some even teaching all their classes in two languages. The languages are predominantly Afrikaans, English, and Sesotho.\nMuseums.\nBloemfontein is home to a number of museums.\nEconomy.\nThe private sector mainly drives Bloemfontein's economy. Bloemfontein's share of National GDP, employment, and population is the lowest among the benchmark group of South African and Southern African cities, falling just below the city of Port Elizabeth. The city's share of the National GDP is 1.73%, with a share of national employment at 1.86% and a share of the national population at 1.67%. Bloemfontein's GDP growth, at 0.57% in 2015, stood in the lower half of the benchmark group of cities. Like other major cities in South Africa, Bloemfontein's GDP growth has slowly decreased in recent years.\nMajor companies.\nThe city is home to two of South Africa's top construction and infrastructure companies. Raubex Group Ltd, established in 1974 and listed on the JSE Limited since March 2007 and Ruwacon (Pty Ltd), established in 1999.\nOther major companies included the retail department store, Kloppers, established in 1967 and EconoFoods (Pty Ltd) established in 1996.\nEntertainment.\nQueen of Roses also happens during this event. The competition recognizes citizens of the City of Bloemfontein for contributions that go beyond their regular duties to enrich the Mangaung Metro. Nominees need to be citizens.\nMedia.\nNewspapers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRadio.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTransport.\nRoad.\nThe N1, a major highway running roughly SW to NE from Cape Town to Johannesburg, Pretoria and Zimbabwe largely bypasses the city centre to the west as the Bloemfontein Western Bypass. The N8 runs east/west connecting Bloemfontein to Kimberley in the west and Maseru, the capital of Lesotho, in the east. Bloemfontein is also the northern end of the N6 road heading roughly southwards to Maletswai, Komani and the port of East London.\nThe R64 is the old road to Kimberley, passing through Dealesville and Boshof. The R30 begins north of Bloemfontein and connects northwards to Welkom, Klerksdorp, Ventersdorp and Rustenburg.\nThe R706 takes origin from the N8 in the city centre, and heads south-west towards Jagersfontein and Fauresmith. The R702 originates from the N6 south of the city centre and heads south-east towards the towns of Dewetsdorp and Wepener. The R700 starts in the city centre from the N8 and heads north, crossing the N1 towards Bultfontein and Hoopstad.\nBelow that level, Bloemfontein has several metropolitan or M roads. These roads are numbered independently of M-roads in other South African cities.\nRail.\nBloemfontein is well connected with rail. It is located on the most important rail junction between Johannesburg and Cape Town, with daily trains to Port Elizabeth, East London and Johannesburg.\nAir.\nBloemfontein has two airports: \nPublic transport.\nIn October 2016, the Mangaung Metropolitan Municipality and various taxi associations agreed on the Integrated Public Transport system, which is currently under construction. The project consists of two phases. The first phase will involve the construction of busways along the city's roads. The second will be the building of depots and stations.\nNotable people.\nMany famous people are associated with Bloemfontein; these include:\nReligion.\nBloemfontein has a large and diverse Christian population. The city houses several churches and denominations:\nThe city also has a large Jewish population, established in the mid-19th century.\nThere are two main cemeteries in Bloemfontein:\nOn 7 October 2010, Several tombstones in the Jewish cemetery in Bloemfontein were defaced with swastikas and antisemitic graffiti.\nOn 10 April 2012, Bloemfontein's historic Memorium cemetery was vandalized, with 35 tombstones toppled and obscene graffiti daubed on the walls of the adjoining Ohel. The graffiti included images of money bags and diamonds, as well as of a crudely drawn Magen David, allegedly as part of an anti-Semitic act.\nThere is also the old Phahameng cemetery, which dates back to the 1960s and was explicitly reserved for Africans during the apartheid era and has a Heroes Acre, where freedom fighters are laid to rest.\nThe Heide Heights cemetery in Heidedal was reserved for coloured people during the apartheid era, but all races could bury their dead after 1994. This cemetery has been closed due to it being full.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44554", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44554", "title": "Cape Colony", "text": "British colony from 1806 to 1910\nThe Cape Colony (), also known as the Cape of Good Hope, was a British colony in present-day South Africa named after the Cape of Good Hope. It existed from 1795 to 1802, and again from 1806 to 1910, when it united with three other colonies to form the Union of South Africa, then became the Cape Province, which existed even after 1961, when South Africa had become a republic, albeit temporarily outside the Commonwealth of Nations (1961\u201394).\nThe British colony was preceded by an earlier corporate colony that became an original Dutch colony of the same name, which was established in 1652 by the Dutch East India Company (VOC). The Cape was under VOC rule from 1652 to 1795 and under rule of the Napoleonic Batavia Republic from 1803 to 1806. The VOC lost the colony to Great Britain following the 1795 Battle of Muizenberg, but it was ceded to the Batavia Republic following the 1802 Treaty of Amiens. It was re-occupied by the British following the Battle of Blaauwberg in 1806, and British possession affirmed with the Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1814. The Cape of Good Hope then remained in the British Empire, becoming self-governing in 1872.\nThe colony was coextensive with the later Cape Province, stretching from the Atlantic coast inland and eastward along the southern coast, constituting about half of modern South Africa: the final eastern boundary, after several wars against the Xhosa, stood at the Fish River. In the north, the Orange River, natively known as the (Black River) and subsequently called the Gariep River, served as the boundary for some time, although some land between the river and the southern boundary of Botswana was later added to it. From 1878, the colony also included the enclave of Walvis Bay and the Penguin Islands, both in what is now Namibia.\nIt united with three other colonies to form the Union of South Africa in 1910, and was accordingly renamed the Province of the Cape of Good Hope. South Africa became a sovereign state in 1931 by the Statute of Westminster. In 1961, it became the Republic of South Africa. Following the 1994 creation of the present-day South African provinces, the Cape Province was partitioned into the Eastern Cape, Northern Cape, and Western Cape, with smaller parts in North West province.\nHistory.\nVOC settlement.\nAn expedition of the VOC led by Jan van Riebeeck established a trading post and naval victualing station at the Cape of Good Hope in 1652. Van Riebeeck's objective was to secure a harbour of refuge for VOC ships during the long voyages between Europe and Asia. Within about three decades, the Cape had become home to a large community of , also known as ('free citizens'), former VOC employees who settled in the colonies overseas after completing their service contracts. were mostly married citizens who undertook to spend at least twenty years farming the land within the fledgling colony's borders; in exchange they received tax exempt status and were loaned tools and seeds. Reflecting the multi-national nature of the early trading companies, the VOC granted status to Dutch, Swiss, Scandinavian and German employees, among others. In 1688 they also sponsored the immigration of nearly two hundred French Huguenot refugees who had fled to the Netherlands upon the Edict of Fontainebleau. This so-called \"Huguenot experiment\" was deemed a failure by the colonial authorities a decade later, as many of the Huguenot arrivals had little experience with agriculture and had become a net burden on the colonial government. There was a degree of cultural assimilation due to Dutch cultural hegemony that included the almost universal adoption of the Dutch language.\nMany of the colonists who settled directly on the frontier became increasingly independent and localised in their loyalties. Known as \"Boers\", they migrated beyond the Cape Colony's initial borders and had soon penetrated almost a thousand kilometres inland. Some Boers even adopted a nomadic lifestyle permanently and were denoted as . The VOC colonial period had a number of bitter, genocidal conflicts between the colonists and the Khoe-speaking indigenes, followed by the Xhosa, both of which they perceived as unwanted competitors for prime farmland.\nVOC traders imported thousands of slaves to the Cape of Good Hope from the Dutch East Indies and other parts of Africa. By the end of the eighteenth century the Cape's population swelled to about 26,000 people of European descent and 30,000 slaves.\nBritish conquest.\nIn 1795, France occupied the Seven Provinces of the Dutch Republic, the mother country of the Dutch United East India Company. This prompted Great Britain to occupy the Cape Colony in 1795 as a way to better control the seas in order to stop any potential French attempt to reach India. The British sent a fleet of nine warships which anchored at Simon's Town and, following the defeat of the VOC militia at the Battle of Muizenberg, took control of the territory. The United East India Company transferred its territories and claims to the Batavian Republic (the Revolutionary period Dutch state) in 1798, and went bankrupt in 1799. Improving relations between Britain and Napoleonic France, and its vassal state the Batavian Republic, led the British to hand the Cape of Good Hope over to the Batavian Republic in 1803, under the terms of the Treaty of Amiens.\nIn 1806, the Cape, now nominally controlled by the Batavian Republic, was occupied again by the British after their victory in the Battle of Blaauwberg. The temporary peace between the UK and Napoleonic France had crumbled into open hostilities, whilst Napoleon had been strengthening his influence on the Batavian Republic (which Napoleon would subsequently abolish and directly administer later the same year). The British, who set up a colony on 8 January 1806, hoped to keep Napoleon out of the Cape, and to control the Far East trade routes.\nThe Cape Colony at the time of British occupation was three months' sailing distance from London. The White colonial population was small, no more than 25,000 in all, scattered across a territory of 100,000 square miles. Most lived in Cape Town and the surrounding farming districts of the Boland, an area favoured with rich soils, a Mediterranean Climate and reliable rainfall. Cape Town had a population of 16,000 people. \nIn 1814 the Dutch government formally ceded sovereignty over the Cape to the British, under the terms of the Convention of London.\nBritish colonisation.\nThe British started to settle the eastern border of the Cape Colony, with the arrival in Port Elizabeth of the 1820 Settlers. They also began to introduce the first rudimentary rights for the Cape's Black African population and, in 1834, abolished slavery; however, the government proved unable to rein in settler violence against the San, which continued largely unabated as it had during the Dutch period. The resentment that the Boers felt against this social change, as well as the imposition of English language and culture, caused them to trek inland en masse. This was known as the Great Trek, and the migrating Boers settled inland, eventually forming the Boer Republics.\nBritish Immigration continued in the Cape, even as many of the Boers continued to trek inland, and the ending of the British East India Company's monopoly on trade led to economic growth.\nAt the same time, the long series of Xhosa Wars fought between the Xhosa people in the east and the government of the Cape Colony as well as Boer settlers finally died down when the Xhosa took part in a mass destruction of their own crops and cattle, in the belief that this would cause their ancestors to wake from the dead. The resulting famine crippled Xhosa country and ushered in a long period of stability on the border.\nPeace and prosperity, in addition to the Convict crisis of 1849, led to a desire for political independence. In 1853, the Cape Colony became a British Crown colony with representative government. In 1854, the Cape of Good Hope elected its first parliament, on the basis of the multi-racial Cape Qualified Franchise. Cape residents qualified as voters based on a universal minimum level of property ownership, regardless of race.\nExecutive power remaining completely in the authority of the British governor did not relieve tensions in the colony between its eastern and western sections.\nResponsible government.\nIn 1872, after a long political battle, the Cape of Good Hope achieved responsible government under its first Prime Minister, John Molteno. Henceforth, an elected Prime Minister and his cabinet had total responsibility for the affairs of the country. A period of strong economic growth and social development ensued, and the eastern-western division was largely laid to rest. The system of multi-racial franchise also began a slow and fragile growth in political inclusiveness, and ethnic tensions subsided. In 1877, the state expanded by annexing Griqualand West and Griqualand East \u2013 that is, the Mount Currie district (Kokstad). The emergence of two Boer mini-republics along the Missionary Road resulted in 1885 in the Warren Expedition, sent to annex the republics of Stellaland and Goshen (lands annexed to British Bechuanaland). Major-General Charles Warren annexed the land south of the Molopo River as the colony of British Bechuanaland and proclaimed a protectorate over the land lying to the North of the river. Vryburg, the capital of Stellaland, became capital of British Bechuanaland, while Mafeking (now Mahikeng), although situated south of the protectorate border, became the protectorate's administrative centre. The border between the protectorate and the colony ran along the Molopo and Nossob rivers. In 1895, British Bechuanaland became part of the Cape Colony.\nHowever, the discovery of diamonds around Kimberley and gold in the Transvaal led to a return to instability, particularly because they fuelled the rise to power of the ambitious imperialist Cecil Rhodes. On becoming the Cape's Prime Minister in 1890, he instigated a rapid expansion of British influence into the hinterland. In particular, he sought to engineer the conquest of the Transvaal, and although his ill-fated Jameson Raid failed and brought down his government, it led to the Second Boer War and British conquest at the turn of the century. The politics of the colony consequently came to be increasingly dominated by tensions between the British colonists and the Boers. Rhodes also brought in the first formal restrictions on the political rights of the Cape of Good Hope's black African citizens.\nThe Cape of Good Hope remained nominally under British rule until the formation of the Union of South Africa in 1910, when it became the province of the Cape of Good Hope, better known as the Cape Province.\nDistricts.\nThe districts of the colony in 1850 were:\nDemographics.\nPopulation figures for the 1865, 1875, 1891 and 1904 censuses. Groups marked \"nd\" are Not Distinguished in the censuses for those years.\nReferences.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44555", "revid": "49299962", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44555", "title": "Union of South Africa", "text": "1910\u20131961 Dominion of the British Empire\nThe Union of South Africa (; , ) was a British Dominion and, later, a Commonwealth realm in southern Africa from 1910 to 1961. It was the historical predecessor to the present-day Republic of South Africa. It came into existence on 31 May 1910 with the unification of the Cape, Natal, Transvaal, and Orange River colonies. It included the territories that were formerly part of the South African Republic and the Orange Free State.\nFollowing World War I, the Union of South Africa was a signatory of the Treaty of Versailles and became one of the founding members of the League of Nations. It was mandated by the League with the administration of South West Africa (now known as Namibia). South West Africa became treated in most respects as another province of the Union, but it never was formally annexed.\nThe Union of South Africa was a self-governing dominion of the British Empire. Its full sovereignty was confirmed with the Balfour Declaration of 1926 and the Statute of Westminster 1931. It was governed under a form of constitutional monarchy, with the Crown being represented by a governor-general. The Union came to an end with the enactment of the constitution of 1961, by which it became a republic and left the Commonwealth of Nations. The Republic of South Africa rejoined the Commonwealth on 1 June 1994.\nConstitution.\nMain features.\nThe Union of South Africa was a unitary state, rather than a federation like Canada and Australia, with each colony's parliaments being abolished and replaced with provincial councils. A bicameral parliament was created, consisting of the House of Assembly and Senate, with members of the parliament being elected mostly by the country's white minority. During the course of the Union, the franchise changed on several occasions always to suit the needs of the government of the day. Parliamentary sovereignty was a convention of the constitution, inherited from the United Kingdom; save for procedural safeguards in respect of the entrenched sections of franchise and language, the courts were unable to intervene in Parliament's decisions.\nCapitals.\nPretoria was the seat of government, while the Parliament sat in Cape Town and the Appellate Division in Bloemfontein.\nRelationship to the Crown.\nThe Union initially remained under the British Crown as a self-governing dominion of the British Empire. With the passage of the Statute of Westminster in 1931, the Union and other dominions became equal in status to the United Kingdom, and the Parliament of the United Kingdom could no longer legislate on behalf of them. This had the effect of making the Union and the other dominions \"de jure\" sovereign nations. The Status of the Union Act, passed by the South African Parliament in 1934, incorporated the applicable portions of the Statute of Westminster into South African law, underscoring its status as a sovereign nation. It removed what remaining authority Whitehall had to legislate for South Africa, as well as any nominal role that the United Kingdom had in granting Royal Assent. The governor-general was now required to sign or veto bills passed by Parliament, without the option of seeking advice from London.\nThe monarch was represented in South Africa by a governor-general, while effective power was exercised by the Executive Council, headed by the prime minister. Louis Botha, formerly a Boer general, was appointed the first prime minister of the Union, heading a coalition representing the white Afrikaner and English-speaking British diaspora communities.\nProsecutions before courts were instituted in the name of the Crown (cited in the format \"Rex / Regina v Accused\") and government officials served in the name of the Crown.\nLanguages.\nAn entrenched clause in the Constitution mentioned Dutch and English as official languages of the Union, but the meaning of Dutch was changed by the Official Languages of the Union Act, 1925 to include both Dutch and Afrikaans.\nFinal days of the South Africa Act and legacy.\nMost English-speaking whites in South Africa supported the United Party of Jan Smuts, which favoured close relations with the United Kingdom and the Commonwealth, unlike the Afrikaans-speaking National Party, which had held anti-British sentiments and was opposed to South Africa's intervention in the Second World War. Some Nationalist organisations, like the \"Ossewabrandwag\", were openly supportive of Nazi Germany during the Second World War. Additionally, most English-speaking South Africans were opposed to the creation of a republic, many of them voting \"no\" in the 5 October 1960 referendum. But due to the much larger number of Afrikaans-speaking voters, the referendum passed, leading to the establishment of a republic on 31 May 1961. The government led by the National Party consequently withdrew South Africa from the Commonwealth. Following the results of the referendum, some whites in Natal, which had an English-speaking majority, called for secession from the Union. Five years earlier, some 33,000 Natalians had signed the Natal Covenant in opposition to the plans for a republic.\nSubsequently, the National Party government had passed a Constitution that repealed the South Africa Act. The features of the Union were carried over with very little change to the newly formed Republic. The decision to transform from a Union to Republic was narrowly decided in the referendum. The decision together with the South African Government's insistence on adhering to its policy of apartheid resulted in South Africa's \"de facto\" expulsion from the Commonwealth of Nations.\nSegregation.\nThe South Africa Act dealt with race in two specific provisions. First it entrenched the liberal (by South African standards) Cape Qualified Franchise system of the Cape Colony which operated free of any racial considerations (although due to socio-economic restrictions no real political expression of non-whites was possible). The Cape Prime Minister at the time, John X. Merriman, fought hard, but ultimately unsuccessfully, to extend this system of multi-racial franchise to the rest of South Africa.\nSecond it made \"native affairs\" a matter for the national government. The practice therefore was to establish a Minister of Native Affairs.\nAccording to Stephen Howe, \"colonialism in some cases\u2014most obviously among white minorities in South Africa\u2014meant mainly that these violent settlers wanted to maintain more racial inequalities than the colonial empire found just\".\nPrevious attempts at unification.\nSeveral previous unsuccessful attempts to unite the colonies were made, with proposed political models ranging from unitary, to loosely federal.\nEarly unification attempt under Sir George Grey (1850s).\nSir George Grey, the Governor of Cape Colony from 1854 to 1861, decided that unifying the states of southern Africa would be mutually beneficial. The stated reasons were that he believed that political divisions between the white-controlled states \"weakened them against the natives\", threatened an ethnic divide between British and Boer, and left the Cape vulnerable to interference from other European powers. He believed that a united \"South African Federation\", under British control, would resolve all three of these concerns.\nHis idea was greeted with cautious optimism in southern Africa; the Orange Free State agreed to the idea in principle and the Transvaal may also eventually have agreed. However, he was overruled by the British Colonial Office which ordered him to desist from his plans. His refusal to abandon the idea eventually led to him being recalled.\nThe imposition of confederation (1870s).\nIn the 1870s, the London Colonial Office, under Secretary for the Colonies Lord Carnarvon, decided to apply a system of confederation onto southern Africa. On this occasion, however, it was largely rejected by southern Africans, primarily due to its very bad timing. The various component states of southern Africa were still simmering after the last bout of British expansion, and inter-state tensions were high. The Orange Free State this time refused to even discuss the idea, and Prime Minister John Molteno of the Cape Colony called the idea badly informed and irresponsible. In addition, many local leaders resented the way it was imposed from outside without understanding of local issues. The Confederation model was also seen as unsuitable for the disparate entities of southern Africa, with their wildly different sizes, economies and political systems.\nThe Molteno Unification Plan (1877), put forward by the Cape government as a more feasible unitary alternative to confederation, largely anticipated the final act of Union in 1909. A crucial difference was that the Cape's liberal constitution and multiracial franchise were to be extended to the other states of the union. These smaller states would gradually accede to the much larger Cape Colony through a system of treaties, whilst simultaneously gaining elected seats in the Cape parliament. The entire process would be locally driven, with Britain's role restricted to policing any set-backs. While subsequently acknowledged to be more viable, this model was rejected at the time by London. At the other extreme, another powerful Cape politician at the time, Saul Solomon, proposed an extremely loose system of federation, with the component states preserving their very different constitutions and systems of franchise.\nLord Carnarvon rejected the (more informed) local plans for unification, as he wished to have the process brought to a conclusion before the end of his tenure and, having little experience of southern Africa, he preferred to enforce the more familiar model of confederation used in Canada. He pushed ahead with his Confederation plan, which unraveled as predicted, leaving a string of destructive wars across southern Africa. These conflicts eventually fed into the first and second Anglo-Boer Wars, with far-reaching consequences for the subcontinent.\nSecond Boer War (1899\u20131902).\nAfter the discovery of gold in the 1880s, thousands of British immigrants flocked to the gold mines of the Transvaal Republic and the Orange Free State. The newly arrived miners, though needed for the mines, were distrusted by the politically dominant Afrikaners, who called them \"uitlanders\", imposed heavy taxes on them and granted them very limited civil rights, with no right to vote. The British government, interested in profiting from the gold and diamond mines there and highly protective of its own citizens, demanded reforms, which the Afrikaners rejected. A small-scale private British effort to overthrow Transvaal's President Paul Kruger, the Jameson Raid of 1895, proved a fiasco, and presaged full-scale conflict as diplomatic efforts all failed.\nThe Second Boer War started on 11 October 1899 and ended on 31 May 1902. The United Kingdom gained the support of its Cape Colony, of its Colony of Natal and of some African allies. Volunteers from across the British Empire further supplemented the British war effort. All other nations remained neutral, but public opinion in them was largely hostile to Britain. Inside Britain and its Empire there was also significant opposition to the Second Boer War, spearheaded by anti-war activists such as Emily Hobhouse.\nAt the onset of the war, the British were both overconfident about the chances of success in a military confrontation with the Boer republics and underprepared for a long-term conflict. British Prime Minister Lord Salisbury and members of his cabinet, in particular Colonial Secretary Joseph Chamberlain, ignored repeated warnings that Boer forces were more powerful than previous reports had suggested. In the last months of 1899, Boer forces launched the first attacks of the war, besieging the British-held settlements of Ladysmith, Kimberley and Mafeking, and winning several engagements against British troops at Colenso, Magersfontein and Stormberg. However, by the next year the British soon organised an effective response to these attacks, lifting the three sieges and winning several battles against Boer forces. The British, now deploying approximately 400,000 soldiers from across their colonial empire, successfully invaded and occupied the Boer republics. Numerous Boer soldiers refused to surrender and took to the countryside to carry out guerrilla operations against the British, who responded by implementing scorched earth tactics. These tactics included interning Afrikaner civilians from the Boer republics in concentration camps (in which roughly 28,000 people died) and destroying homesteads owned by Afrikaners to flush out the guerillas and deny them a base of civilian support. Using these tactics combined with a system of blockhouses and barriers to seal off Boer holdouts, the British were able to gradually track down and defeat the guerillas. In the 1902 Treaty of Vereeniging, the British formally annexed the Boer republics into the Cape Colony, ending the war.\nImpact of the Bhambatha Rebellion.\nThe Bhambatha Rebellion was a rebellion by the Zulu against colonial rule in the Colony of Natal in 1906. It saw around 3000-4000 Zulus killed by the British, and popularised the thought among colonisers that the unification of the colonies was necessary to maintain white supremacy.\nHistory of the Union of South Africa.\nNational Convention.\nThe National Convention was a constitutional convention held between 1908 and 1909 in Durban (12 October to 5 November 1908), Cape Town (23 November to 18 December 1908, 11 January to 3 February 1909) and Bloemfontein (3 to 11 May 1909). This convention led to the British Parliament's adoption of the South Africa Act, which ratified the Union. The four colonies that would become South Africa were represented, along with a delegation from Rhodesia. The 33 delegates assembled behind closed doors, in the fear that a public affair would lead delegates to refuse compromising on contentious areas. The delegates drew up a constitution that would, subject to some amendments by the British government, become the South Africa Act. This was South Africa's constitution between 1910 and 1961, when the country became a republic under the Constitution of 1961.\nUnion of South Africa and Southern Rhodesia.\nIn 1922 the colony of Southern Rhodesia had a chance (but ultimately rejected) to join the Union through a referendum. The referendum resulted from the fact that by 1920 British South Africa Company rule in Southern Rhodesia was no longer practical with many favouring some form of 'responsible government'. Some favoured responsible government within Southern Rhodesia while others (especially in Matabeleland) favoured membership of the Union of South Africa. Politician Sir Charles Coghlan claimed that such membership with the Union would make Southern Rhodesia the \"Ulster of South Africa\".\nPrior to the referendum, representatives of Southern Rhodesia visited Cape Town where the Prime Minister of South Africa, Jan Smuts, eventually offered terms he considered reasonable and which the United Kingdom government found acceptable. Although opinion among the United Kingdom government, the South African government and the British South Africa Company favoured the union option (and none tried to interfere in the referendum), when the referendum was held the results saw 59.4% in favour of responsible government for a separate colony and 40.6% in favour of joining the Union of South Africa.\nUnion of South Africa and South West Africa.\nBackground.\nThe inhospitable coast of what is now Namibia remained uncolonised up until the end of the 19th century.\nFrom 1874, the leaders of several Indigenous peoples, notably Maharero of the Herero nation, approached the Cape Parliament to the south. Anticipating invasion by a European power and already suffering Portuguese encroachment from the north and Afrikaner encroachment from the south, these leaders approached the Cape Colony government to discuss the possibility of accession and the political representation it would entail. Accession to the Cape Colony, a self-governing state with a system of multi-racial franchise and legal protection for traditional land rights, was at the time considered marginally preferable to annexation by either the Kingdom of Portugal or the German Empire.\nIn response, the Cape Parliament appointed a special Commission under William Palgrave, to travel to the territory between the Orange and Cunene rivers and to confer with these leaders regarding accession to the Cape. In the negotiations with the Palgrave Commission, some indigenous nations such as the Damara and the Herero responded positively (October 1876), other reactions were mixed. Discussions regarding the magisterial structure for the area's political integration into the Cape dragged on until, from 1876, it was blocked by Britain. Britain relented, insofar as allowing the Cape to incorporate Walvis Bay as an exclave, which was brought under the magisterial district of Cape Town, but when the Germans established a protectorate over the area in 1884, South West Africa was predominantly autonomous.\nThereafter, South West Africa became a German colony, except for Walvis Bay and the Offshore Islands which remained part of the Cape, outside of German control.\nSouth African occupation.\nFollowing the outbreak of the First World War in 1914, the Union of South Africa occupied and annexed the German colony of German South West Africa. With the establishment of the League of Nations and cessation of the war, South Africa obtained a Class C Mandate to administer South West Africa \"under the laws of the mandatory (South Africa) as integral portions of its territory\". Subsequently, the Union of South Africa generally regarded South West Africa as a fifth province, although this was never an official status. \nWith the creation of the United Nations, the Union applied for the incorporation of South West Africa, but its application was rejected by the U.N., which invited South Africa to prepare a Trusteeship agreement instead. This invitation was in turn rejected by the Union, which subsequently did not modify the administration of South West Africa and continued to adhere to the original mandate. This caused a complex set of legal wranglings that were not finalised when the Union was replaced with the Republic of South Africa. In 1949, the Union passed a law bringing South West Africa into closer association with it including giving South West Africa representation in the South African parliament.\nWalvis Bay, which is now in Namibia, was originally a part of the Union of South Africa as an exclave as it was a part of the Cape Colony at the time of Unification. In 1921, Walvis Bay was integrated with the Class C Mandate over South West Africa for the rest of the Union's duration and for part of the republican era.\nStatute of Westminster.\nThe Statute of Westminster passed by the British Parliament in December 1931, which repealed the Colonial Laws Validity Act and implemented the Balfour Declaration 1926, had a profound impact on the constitutional structure and status of the Union. The most notable effect was that the South African Parliament was released from many restrictions concerning the handling of the so-called \"native question\". However, the repeal was not sufficient to enable the South African Parliament to ignore the entrenched clauses of its constitution (the South Africa Act) which led to the coloured-vote constitutional crisis of the 1950s wherein the right of coloureds to vote in the main South African Parliament was removed and replaced with a separate, segregated, and largely powerless assembly.\nMilitary.\nThe military of the Union of South Africa was the Union Defence Force (UDF) until 1957, when it became the South African Defence Force (SADF).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44557", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44557", "title": "Cape Province", "text": "Former province of South Africa\nThe Province of the Cape of Good Hope (), commonly referred to as the Cape Province () and colloquially as The Cape (), was a province in the Union of South Africa and subsequently the Republic of South Africa. It encompassed the old Cape Colony, as well as Walvis Bay, and had Cape Town as its capital. In 1994, the Cape Province was divided into the new Eastern Cape, Northern Cape and Western Cape provinces, along with part of the North West.\nHistory.\nWhen the Union of South Africa was formed in 1910, the original Cape Colony was renamed the Cape Province.\nIt was by far the largest of South Africa's four provinces, as it contained regions it had previously annexed, such as British Bechuanaland (not to be confused with the Bechuanaland Protectorate, now Botswana), Griqualand East (the area around Kokstad) and Griqualand West (area around Kimberley). As a result, it encompassed two-thirds of South Africa's territory, and covered an area of approximately .\nAt the time of the formation of the Union of South Africa, South Africa consisted of four provinces: Transvaal (previously the South African Republic), Natal, Orange Free State and the Cape Province.\nCape Franchise.\nBefore union, the Cape Colony had traditionally implemented a system of non-racial franchise, whereby qualifications for suffrage were applied equally to all males, regardless of race. During the union negotiations, the Cape Prime Minister, John X. Merriman fought unsuccessfully to extend this multi-racial franchise system to the rest of South Africa. This failed, as it was strongly opposed by the former Boer Republics which were determined to entrench white rule. \nAfter union, the Cape Province was permitted to keep a restricted version of its multi-racial qualified franchise, and thus became the only province where Coloureds (mixed-race people) and Black Africans could vote.\nOver the following years, successive acts were passed to erode this colour-blind voters roll. \nIn 1931, the restricting franchise qualifications were removed for white voters, but kept for Black and Coloured voters. In 1956, the Apartheid government removed all remaining suffrage rights for \"non-whites\". The government had to appoint many extra senators in parliament to force through this change.\nPartitioning under Apartheid.\nDuring the apartheid era, so-called \"bantustans\" or homelands for the different Bantu nations were carved out of the existing provinces as part of the policy of perpetuating white control over South Africa. These became known as the four independent TBVC States and the six Non-Independent Homelands.\nIn the Cape Province, the Transkei (1976) and Ciskei (1981) regions were declared independent of South Africa. Griqualand East was transferred to Natal Province after Transkei was declared independent, since it was cut off from the rest of the province. With the 1994 adoption of the Interim Constitution, these homelands were re-incorporated into South Africa, both part of the new Eastern Cape province.\nPost-apartheid.\nAfter the first fully democratic elections in April 1994, the Transkei and Ciskei bantustans were reunited with Cape Province, then the country was divided into what are now the current nine provinces of South Africa. Cape Province was broken up into three smaller provinces: the Western Cape, Eastern Cape and Northern Cape. Parts of it were also absorbed into the North West. Walvis Bay, a territory of the original Cape Colony, had been ceded to Namibia two months earlier.\nDistricts in 1991.\nDistricts of the province and population at the 1991 census. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44558", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44558", "title": "Republic of South Africa", "text": ""}
{"id": "44561", "revid": "9098806", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44561", "title": "ISO/IEC 8859-15", "text": "ASCII-based standard character encodings in the ISO/IEC 8859 series\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Mono/styles.css\" /&gt;\nISO/IEC 8859-15:1999, \"Information technology \u2014 8-bit single-byte coded graphic character sets \u2014 Part 15: Latin alphabet No. 9\", is part of the ISO/IEC 8859 series of ASCII-based standard character encodings, first edition published in 1999. It is informally referred to as Latin-9 (and for a while Latin-0). It is similar to ISO 8859-1, and thus also intended for \u201cWestern European\u201d languages, but replaces some less common symbols with the euro sign and some letters that were deemed necessary.\nISO-8859-15 is the IANA preferred charset name for this standard when supplemented with the C0 and C1 control codes from ISO/IEC 6429.\nMicrosoft has assigned code page 28605 a.k.a. Windows-28605 to ISO-8859-15. IBM has assigned code page 923 (CCSID 923) to ISO 8859-15.\nAll the printable characters from both ISO/IEC 8859-1 and ISO/IEC 8859-15 are also found in Windows-1252. Since October 2016, less than 0.1% (actually currently less than 0.02%) of all web sites use ISO-8859-15.\nHistory.\nThe identifier ISO 8859-15 was proposed for the Sami languages in 1996, which was eventually rejected, but was passed as ISO-IR 197.\nISO 8859-16 was proposed as a similar encoding to today's ISO 8859-15, to replace 11 unused or rarely used ISO 8859-1 characters with the missing French \u0152 \u0153 (at the same spot as same place as DEC-MCS and Lotus International Character Set) and \u0178 (which was not at the same place as these sets, as \u00dd was in that spot for Icelandic), Dutch \u0132 \u0133, and Turkish \u011e \u011f \u0130 \u0131 \u015e \u015f. The euro sign did not exist at the time.\nThe draft was as follows:\nThe name was later changed to ISO-8859-0 and was restructured by 1997. The Turkish characters were removed because it was considered that it would potentially do more harm to Turkish then-current practice while UCS (Unicode) implementation was not that far away, and the Dutch \"IJ\" ligature was removed as the existing digraph \"ij\" was found to be adequate. It was also considered to add the Welsh \u0174 \u0175 and \u0176 \u0177, but that was postponed pending further investigation. 4 unused or rarely used ISO 8859-1 characters (\u00a4, \u00a8, \u00b4, and \u00b8) were replaced with \u20ac, \u0178, \u0152, and \u0153 respectively. \u20ac became necessary when the euro was introduced. \u0178 is needed so that French text can be converted from lower-case to all-caps and back again without loss, and \u0152 and \u0153 are French ligatures. Ironically, the last three had already been present in DEC's Multinational Character Set (MCS) in 1983, a character set from which ECMA-94 (1985) and ISO-8859-1 (1987) were derived. Since their original codepoints were now occupied by other characters, less logical codepoints had to be chosen for their reintroduction.\nThe same proposal also recommended replacing 6 more characters (\u00a2, \u00a6, \u00b1, \u00bc, \u00bd, \u00be) with \"some other characters to cover a maximum of languages\". The reasons for choosing these characters was stated in the proposal.\nFor the euro sign, some wanted to replace the plus\u2013minus sign instead of the currency sign. The currency sign is used in some applications as a field separator and in some others to indicate subtotal. There was strong opposition to this. One person said \"The proposed \u00ab+-\u00bb is not an adequate fall-back, as this sequence, though rarely used, has already a fixed mathematical meaning, quite different from \u00ab\u00b1\u00bb; and, even if a reader would deduce the intended meaning, \u00ab\u00b1\u00bb, from the context, \u00ab+-\u00bb in lieu of \u00ab\u00b1\u00bb will hurt a physicist's \u00e6sthetic feelings at least as much as \u00aboe\u00bb in lieu of an o-e ligature a Francophone's.\"\nIn the end, \u00b1 was kept, and \u00a4 was removed (as originally planned).\nCirca 1997/1998 (when Windows-1252 was updated) four characters were selected: \u0160, \u0161, \u017d, and \u017e, which are used in Finnish and Estonian for the transliteration of Russian loanwords and names. The proposal was renamed to ISO 8859-15 at the same time. In the end the characters \u00a6, \u00bc, \u00bd, and \u00be were removed, while \u00a2 was kept because it was more common than the other four.\nThere were attempts to make ISO 8859-15 the default character set for 8-bit communication, but it was never able to supplant the popular ISO 8859-1. It did see some use as the default character set for the text console and terminal programs under Linux when the euro sign was needed, but the use of full Unicode was not practical, but this has since been replaced with UTF-8.\nCoverage.\nISO 8859-15 encodes what it refers to as \"Latin alphabet no. 9\". This character set is used throughout the Americas, Western Europe, Oceania, and much of Africa. It is also commonly used in most standard romanizations of East-Asian languages.\nEach character is encoded as a single eight-bit code value. These code values can be used in almost any data interchange system to communicate in the following languages:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCoverage of punctuation signs and apostrophes.\nFor some languages listed above, the correct typographical quotation marks are missing, since only \u00ab, \u00bb, \", and ' are included.\nAlso, this encoding does not provide the correct character for the apostrophe, and oriented single high quotation marks, although some texts use the spacing grave accent and spacing acute accent, which are both part of ISO 8859-1, instead of the 6-shaped/9-shaped quotations marks or apostrophes (and this works reliably with some font styles, where all these characters are displayed as slanted wedge glyphs).\nCodepage layout.\nDifferences from ISO-8859-1 have the Unicode code point shown underneath the character.\nAliases.\nISO 8859-15 also has the following, vendor-specific aliases:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44563", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44563", "title": "Graphics suite", "text": "A graphics suite is a software suite for graphics work that are distributed together. The programs are usually able to interact with each other on a higher level than the operating system would normally allow.\nThere is no hard, fast rule regarding the programs to be included in a graphics application suite, but most will include at least a bitmap graphics editor and a vector graphics editor. In addition to these, the suite may contain VRML editors, animation editors, and morphing tools.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44564", "revid": "20468248", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44564", "title": "Raster graphics editor", "text": "Type of application software\nA raster graphics editor (also called bitmap graphics editor) is a computer program that allows users to create and edit images interactively on the computer screen and save them in one of many raster graphics file formats (also known as bitmap images) such as JPEG, PNG, and GIF.\nComparison to vector graphic editors.\nVector graphics editors are often contrasted with raster graphics editors, yet their capabilities complement each other. The technical difference between vector and raster editors stem from the difference between vector and raster images. Vector graphics are created mathematically, using geometric formulas. Each element is created and manipulated numerically; essentially using Cartesian coordinates for the placement of key points, and then a mathematical algorithm to connect the dots and define the colors.\nRaster images include digital photos. A raster image is made up of rows and columns of dots, called pixels, and is generally more photo-realistic. This is the standard form for digital cameras; whether it be a .raw file or .jpg file, the concept is the same. The image is represented pixel by pixel, like tiny squares in a grid.\nVector editors tend to be better suited for graphic design, page layout, typography, logos, sharp-edged artistic illustrations, \"e.g.\", cartoons, clip art, complex geometric patterns, technical illustrations, diagramming and flowcharting.\nAdvanced raster editors, like GIMP and Adobe Photoshop, use vector methods (mathematics) for general layout and elements such as text, but are equipped to deal with raster images down to the pixel and often have special capabilities in doing so, such as brightness/contrast, and even adding \"lighting\" to a raster image or photograph.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44565", "revid": "17304657", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44565", "title": "Vector graphics editor", "text": "Type of application software\nA vector graphic editor is a computer program that enables its users to create, compose and edit images with the use of mathematical and geometrical commands rather than individual pixels. This software is used in creating high-definition vector graphic images that can be scaled indefinitely without losing their quality. The output is saved in vector graphic formats, such as EPS, ODG, or SVG.\nVector editors versus bitmap editors.\nVector editors are often contrasted with bitmap editors, and their capabilities complement each other. Vector editors are often better for page layout, typography, logos, sharp-edged artistic illustrations (e.g. cartoons, clip art, complex geometric patterns), technical illustrations, diagramming and flowcharting. Bitmap editors are more suitable for retouching, photo processing, photorealistic illustrations, collage, and illustrations drawn by hand with a pen tablet. Recent versions of bitmap editors such as GIMP and Adobe Photoshop support vector tools (e.g. editable paths), and vector editors have adopted raster effects that were once limited to bitmap editors (e.g. blurring).\nSpecialized features.\nSome vector editors support animation, while others (e.g. Synfig Studio) are specifically geared towards producing animated graphics. Generally, vector graphics are more suitable for animation, though there are raster-based animation tools as well. \n3D computer graphics software such as Maya, Blender or Autodesk 3ds Max can also be thought of as an extension of the traditional 2D vector editors, as they share some common concepts and tools.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44566", "revid": "432632", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44566", "title": "Notes on Russia", "text": ""}
{"id": "44568", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44568", "title": "Herbivore", "text": "Organism that eats mostly or exclusively plant material\nA herbivore is an animal anatomically and physiologically evolved to feed on plants, especially upon vascular tissues such as foliage, fruits or seeds, as the main component of its diet. These more broadly also encompass animals that eat non-vascular autotrophs such as mosses, algae and lichens, but do not include those feeding on decomposed plant matters (i.e. detritivores) or macrofungi (i.e. fungivores).\nAs a result of their plant-based diet, herbivorous animals typically have mouth structures (jaws or mouthparts) well adapted to mechanically break down plant materials, and their digestive systems have special enzymes (e.g. amylase and cellulase) to digest polysaccharides. Grazing herbivores such as horses and cattles have wide flat-crowned teeth that are better adapted for grinding grass, tree bark and other tougher lignin-containing materials, and many of them evolved rumination or cecotropic behaviors to better extract nutrients from plants. A large percentage of herbivores also have mutualistic gut flora made up of bacteria and protozoans that help to degrade the cellulose in plants, whose heavily cross-linking polymer structure makes it far more difficult to digest than the protein- and fat-rich animal tissues that carnivores eat.\nEtymology.\nHerbivore is the anglicized form of a modern Latin coinage, \"herbivora\", cited in Charles Lyell's 1830 \"Principles of Geology\". Richard Owen employed the anglicized term in an 1854 work on fossil teeth and skeletons. \"Herbivora\" is derived from Latin \"herba\" 'small plant, herb' and \"vora\", from \"vorare\" 'to eat, devour'.\nDefinition and related terms.\nHerbivory is a form of consumption in which an organism principally eats autotrophs such as plants, algae and photosynthesizing bacteria. More generally, organisms that feed on autotrophs in general are known as primary consumers.\nHerbivory is usually limited to animals that eat plants. Insect herbivory can cause a variety of physical and metabolic alterations in the way the host plant interacts with itself and other surrounding biotic factors. Fungi, bacteria, and protists that feed on living plants are usually termed plant pathogens (plant diseases), while fungi and microbes that feed on dead plants are described as saprotrophs. Plants that obtain nutrition from other living plants are usually termed parasitic plants. There is, however, no single exclusive and definitive ecological classification of consumption patterns; each textbook has its own variations on the theme.\nEvolution of herbivory.\nThe understanding of herbivory in geological time comes from three sources: fossilized plants, which may preserve evidence of defence (such as spines), or herbivory-related damage; the observation of plant debris in fossilised animal faeces; and the construction of herbivore mouthparts.\nAlthough herbivory was long thought to be a Mesozoic phenomenon, fossils have shown that plants were being consumed by arthropods within less than 20\u00a0million years after the first land plants evolved. Insects fed on the spores of early Devonian plants, and the Rhynie chert also provides evidence that organisms fed on plants using a \"pierce and suck\" technique.\nDuring the next 75\u00a0million years, plants evolved a range of more complex organs, such as roots and seeds. There is no evidence of any organism being fed upon until the middle-late Mississippian, https://\u00a0million years ago. There was a gap of 50 to 100\u00a0million years between the time each organ evolved and the time organisms evolved to feed upon them; this may be due to the low levels of oxygen during this period, which may have suppressed evolution. Further than their arthropod status, the identity of these early herbivores is uncertain. Hole feeding and skeletonization are recorded in the early Permian, with surface fluid feeding evolving by the end of that period.\nHerbivory among four-limbed terrestrial vertebrates, the tetrapods, developed in the Late Carboniferous (307\u2013299\u00a0million years ago). The oldest known herbivorous tetrapod is \"Desmatodon hesperis\", belonging to the clade Diadectidae. Early anamniotic tetrapods were feeding on other aquatic vertebrates and invertebrates, and some amphibians would also evolve into terrestrial carnivores. The first amniotes were insectivores due to their small size, but later forms were larger and carnivious, before some eventually adated to a herbivorous lifestyle. In addition to Diadectidae, four other tetrapod clades independently evolved adaptations towards herbivory from the Late Carboniferous to early Permian; the Captorhinidae, the parareptilian Bolosauridae, and the two synapsid clades Edaphosauridae and Caseidae. The entire dinosaur order ornithischia, which existed during Jurassic and Cretaceous, was composed of herbivorous dinosaurs. Carnivory was a natural transition from insectivory for medium and large tetrapods, requiring minimal adaptation. In contrast, a complex set of adaptations was necessary for feeding on highly fibrous plant materials.\nArthropods evolved herbivory in four phases, changing their approach to it in response to changing plant communities. Tetrapod herbivores made their first appearance in the fossil record of their jaws near the Permio-Carboniferous boundary, approximately 300\u00a0million years ago. The earliest evidence of their herbivory has been attributed to dental occlusion, the process in which teeth from the upper jaw come in contact with teeth in the lower jaw is present. The evolution of dental occlusion led to a drastic increase in plant food processing and provides evidence about feeding strategies based on tooth wear patterns. Examination of phylogenetic frameworks of tooth and jaw morphologies has revealed that dental occlusion developed independently in several lineages tetrapod herbivores. This suggests that evolution and spread occurred simultaneously within various lineages.\nFood chain.\nHerbivores form an important link in the food chain because they consume plants to digest the carbohydrates photosynthetically produced by a plant. Carnivores in turn consume herbivores for the same reason, while omnivores can obtain their nutrients from either plants or animals. Due to a herbivore's ability to survive solely on tough and fibrous plant matter, they are termed the primary consumers in the food cycle (chain). Herbivory, carnivory, and omnivory can be regarded as special cases of consumer\u2013resource interactions.\nFeeding strategies.\nTwo herbivore feeding strategies are grazing (e.g. cows) and browsing (e.g. moose). For a terrestrial mammal to be called a grazer, at least 90% of the forage has to be grass, and for a browser at least 90% tree leaves and twigs. An intermediate feeding strategy is called \"mixed-feeding\". In their daily need to take up energy from forage, herbivores of different body mass may be selective in choosing their food. \"Selective\" means that herbivores may choose their forage source depending on, e.g., season or food availability, but also that they may choose high quality (and consequently highly nutritious) forage before lower quality. The latter especially is determined by the body mass of the herbivore, with small herbivores selecting for high-quality forage, and with increasing body mass animals are less selective. Several theories attempt to explain and quantify the relationship between animals and their food, such as Kleiber's law, Holling's disk equation and the marginal value theorem (see below).\nKleiber's law describes the relationship between an animal's size and its feeding strategy, saying that larger animals need to eat less food per unit weight than smaller animals. Kleiber's law states that the metabolic rate (q0) of an animal is the mass of the animal (M) raised to the 3/4 power: q0=M3/4\nTherefore, the mass of the animal increases at a faster rate than the metabolic rate.\nHerbivores employ numerous types of feeding strategies. Many herbivores do not fall into one specific feeding strategy, but employ several strategies and eat a variety of plant parts.\nOptimal foraging theory is a model for predicting animal behavior while looking for food or other resources, such as shelter or water. This model assesses both individual movement, such as animal behavior while looking for food, and distribution within a habitat, such as dynamics at the population and community level. For example, the model would be used to look at the browsing behavior of a deer while looking for food, as well as that deer's specific location and movement within the forested habitat and its interaction with other deer while in that habitat.\nThis model has been criticized as circular and untestable. Critics have pointed out that its proponents use examples that fit the theory, but do not use the model when it does not fit the reality. Other critics point out that animals do not have the ability to assess and maximize their potential gains, therefore the optimal foraging theory is irrelevant and derived to explain trends that do not exist in nature.\nHolling's disk equation models the efficiency at which predators consume prey. The model predicts that as the number of prey increases, the amount of time predators spend handling prey also increases, and therefore the efficiency of the predator decreases. In 1959, S. Holling proposed an equation to model the rate of return for an optimal diet: Rate (R )=Energy gained in foraging (Ef)/(time searching (Ts) + time handling (Th))formula_1\nWhere s=cost of search per unit time f=rate of encounter with items, h=handling time, e=energy gained per encounter.\nIn effect, this would indicate that a herbivore in a dense forest would spend more time handling (eating) the vegetation because there was so much vegetation around than a herbivore in a sparse forest, who could easily browse through the forest vegetation. According to the Holling's disk equation, a herbivore in the sparse forest would be more efficient at eating than the herbivore in the dense forest.\nThe marginal value theorem describes the balance between eating all the food in a patch for immediate energy, or moving to a new patch and leaving the plants in the first patch to regenerate for future use. The theory predicts that absent complicating factors, an animal should leave a resource patch when the rate of payoff (amount of food) falls below the average rate of payoff for the entire area. According to this theory, an animal should move to a new patch of food when the patch they are currently feeding on requires more energy to obtain food than an average patch. Within this theory, two subsequent parameters emerge, the Giving Up Density (GUD) and the Giving Up Time (GUT). The Giving Up Density (GUD) quantifies the amount of food that remains in a patch when a forager moves to a new patch. The Giving Up Time (GUT) is used when an animal continuously assesses the patch quality.\nPlant-herbivore interactions.\nInteractions between plants and herbivores can play a prevalent role in ecosystem dynamics such community structure and functional processes. Plant diversity and distribution is often driven by herbivory, and it is likely that trade-offs between plant competitiveness and defensiveness, and between colonization and mortality allow for coexistence between species in the presence of herbivores. However, the effects of herbivory on plant diversity and richness is variable. For example, increased abundance of herbivores such as deer decrease plant diversity and species richness, while other large mammalian herbivores like bison control dominant species which allows other species to flourish. Plant-herbivore interactions can also operate so that plant communities mediate herbivore communities. Plant communities that are more diverse typically sustain greater herbivore richness by providing a greater and more diverse set of resources.\nCoevolution and phylogenetic correlation between herbivores and plants are important aspects of the influence of herbivore and plant interactions on communities and ecosystem functioning, especially in regard to herbivorous insects. This is apparent in the adaptations plants develop to tolerate and/or defend from insect herbivory and the responses of herbivores to overcome these adaptations. The evolution of antagonistic and mutualistic plant-herbivore interactions are not mutually exclusive and may co-occur. Plant phylogeny has been found to facilitate the colonization and community assembly of herbivores, and there is evidence of phylogenetic linkage between plant beta diversity and phylogenetic beta diversity of insect clades such as butterflies. These types of eco-evolutionary feedbacks between plants and herbivores are likely the main driving force behind plant and herbivore diversity.\nAbiotic factors such as climate and biogeographical features also impact plant-herbivore communities and interactions. For example, in temperate freshwater wetlands herbivorous waterfowl communities change according to season, with species that eat above-ground vegetation being abundant during summer, and species that forage below-ground being present in winter months. These seasonal herbivore communities differ in both their assemblage and functions within the wetland ecosystem. Such differences in herbivore modalities can potentially lead to trade-offs that influence species traits and may lead to additive effects on community composition and ecosystem functioning. Seasonal changes and environmental gradients such as elevation and latitude often affect the palatability of plants which in turn influences herbivore community assemblages and vice versa. Examples include a decrease in abundance of leaf-chewing larvae in the fall when hardwood leaf palatability decreases due to increased tannin levels which results in a decline of arthropod species richness, and increased palatability of plant communities at higher elevations where grasshoppers abundances are lower. Climatic stressors such as ocean acidification can lead to responses in plant-herbivore interactions in relation to palatability as well.\nHerbivore offense.\nThe myriad defenses displayed by plants means that their herbivores need a variety of skills to overcome these defenses and obtain food. These allow herbivores to increase their feeding and use of a host plant. Herbivores have three primary strategies for dealing with plant defenses: choice, herbivore modification, and plant modification.\nFeeding choice involves which plants a herbivore chooses to consume. It has been suggested that many herbivores feed on a variety of plants to balance their nutrient uptake and to avoid consuming too much of any one type of defensive chemical. This involves a tradeoff however, between foraging on many plant species to avoid toxins or specializing on one type of plant that can be detoxified.\nHerbivore modification is when various adaptations to body or digestive systems of the herbivore allow them to overcome plant defenses. This might include detoxifying secondary metabolites, sequestering toxins unaltered, or avoiding toxins, such as through the production of large amounts of saliva to reduce effectiveness of defenses. Herbivores may also utilize symbionts to evade plant defenses. For example, some aphids use bacteria in their gut to provide essential amino acids lacking in their sap diet.\nPlant modification occurs when herbivores manipulate their plant prey to increase feeding. For example, some caterpillars roll leaves to reduce the effectiveness of plant defenses activated by sunlight.\nPlant defense.\nA plant defense is a trait that increases plant fitness when faced with herbivory. This is measured relative to another plant that lacks the defensive trait. Plant defenses increase survival and/or reproduction (fitness) of plants under pressure of predation from herbivores.\nDefense can be divided into two main categories, tolerance and resistance. Tolerance is the ability of a plant to withstand damage without a reduction in fitness. This can occur by diverting herbivory to non-essential plant parts, resource allocation, compensatory growth, or by rapid regrowth and recovery from herbivory. Resistance refers to the ability of a plant to reduce the amount of damage it receives from herbivores. This can occur via avoidance in space or time, physical defenses, or chemical defenses. Defenses can either be constitutive, always present in the plant, or induced, produced or translocated by the plant following damage or stress.\nPhysical, or mechanical, defenses are barriers or structures designed to deter herbivores or reduce intake rates, lowering overall herbivory. Thorns such as those found on acacia trees are one example, as are the spines on a cactus or the prickles on roses. Smaller hairs known as trichomes may cover leaves or stems and are especially effective against invertebrate herbivores. In addition, some plants have waxes or resins that alter their texture, making them difficult to eat. Also the incorporation of silica into cell walls is analogous to that of the role of lignin in that it is a compression-resistant structural component of cell walls; so that plants with their cell walls impregnated with silica are thereby afforded a measure of protection against herbivory.\nChemical defenses are secondary metabolites produced by the plant that deter herbivory. There are a wide variety of these in nature and a single plant can have hundreds of different chemical defenses. Chemical defenses can be divided into two main groups, carbon-based defenses and nitrogen-based defenses.\nPlants have also changed features that enhance the probability of attracting natural enemies to herbivores. Some emit semiochemicals, odors that attract natural enemies, while others provide food and housing to maintain the natural enemies' presence, e.g. ants that reduce herbivory. A given plant species often has many types of defensive mechanisms, mechanical or chemical, constitutive or induced, which allow it to escape from herbivores.\nPredator\u2013prey theory.\nAccording to the theory of predator\u2013prey interactions, the relationship between herbivores and plants is cyclic. When prey (plants) are numerous their predators (herbivores) increase in numbers, reducing the prey population, which in turn causes predator number to decline. The prey population eventually recovers, starting a new cycle. This suggests that the population of the herbivore fluctuates around the carrying capacity of the food source, in this case, the plant.\nSeveral factors play into these fluctuating populations and help stabilize predator-prey dynamics. For example, spatial heterogeneity is maintained, which means there will always be pockets of plants not found by herbivores. This stabilizing dynamic plays an especially important role for specialist herbivores that feed on one species of plant and prevents these specialists from wiping out their food source. Prey defenses also help stabilize predator-prey dynamics, and for more information on these relationships see the section on Plant Defenses. Eating a second prey type helps herbivores' populations stabilize. Alternating between two or more plant types provides population stability for the herbivore, while the populations of the plants oscillate. This plays an important role for generalist herbivores that eat a variety of plants. Keystone herbivores keep vegetation populations in check and allow for a greater diversity of both herbivores and plants. When an invasive herbivore or plant enters the system, the balance is thrown off and the diversity can collapse to a monotaxon system.\nThe back and forth relationship of plant defense and herbivore offense drives coevolution between plants and herbivores, resulting in a \"coevolutionary arms race\". The escape and radiation mechanisms for coevolution, presents the idea that adaptations in herbivores and their host plants, has been the driving force behind speciation.\nMutualism.\nWhile much of the interaction of herbivory and plant defense is negative, with one individual reducing the fitness of the other, some is beneficial. This beneficial herbivory takes the form of mutualisms in which both partners benefit in some way from the interaction. Seed dispersal by herbivores and pollination are two forms of mutualistic herbivory in which the herbivore receives a food resource and the plant is aided in reproduction. Plants can also be indirectly affected by herbivores through nutrient recycling, with plants benefiting from herbivores when nutrients are recycled very efficiently. Another form of plant-herbivore mutualism is physical changes to the environment and/or plant community structure by herbivores which serve as ecosystem engineers, such as wallowing by bison. Swans form a mutual relationship with the plant species that they forage by digging and disturbing the sediment which removes competing plants and subsequently allows colonization of other plant species.\nImpacts.\nTrophic cascades and environmental degradation.\nWhen herbivores are affected by trophic cascades, plant communities can be indirectly affected. Often these effects are felt when predator populations decline and herbivore populations are no longer limited, which leads to intense herbivore foraging which can suppress plant communities. With the size of herbivores having an effect on the amount of energy intake that is needed, larger herbivores need to forage on higher quality or more plants to gain the optimal amount of nutrients and energy compared to smaller herbivores. Environmental degradation from white-tailed deer (\"Odocoileus virginianus\") in the US alone has the potential to both change vegetative communities through over-browsing and cost forest restoration projects upwards of $750\u00a0million annually. Another example of a trophic cascade involved plant-herbivore interactions are coral reef ecosystems. Herbivorous fish and marine animals are important algae and seaweed grazers, and in the absence of plant-eating fish, corals are outcompeted and seaweeds deprive corals of sunlight.\nEconomic impacts.\nAgricultural crop damage by the same species totals approximately $100\u00a0million every year. Insect crop damages also contribute largely to annual crop losses in the U.S. Herbivores also affect economics through the revenue generated by hunting and ecotourism. For example, the hunting of herbivorous game species such as white-tailed deer, cottontail rabbits, antelope, and elk in the U.S. contributes greatly to the billion-dollar annually, hunting industry. Ecotourism is a major source of revenue, particularly in Africa, where many large mammalian herbivores such as elephants, zebras, and giraffes help to bring in the equivalent of millions of US dollars to various nations annually.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44569", "revid": "44008019", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44569", "title": "Helen Hunt", "text": "American actress (born 1963)\n \nHelen Elizabeth Hunt (born June 15, 1963) is an American actress. Her accolades include an Academy Award, four Primetime Emmy Awards, and four Golden Globe Awards.\nHunt rose to fame portraying newlywed Jamie Buchman in the sitcom \"Mad About You\" (1992\u20131999), which earned her three Golden Globe Awards for Best Actress and four Primetime Emmy Awards for Lead Actress. Hunt won the Academy Award for Best Actress for starring as a single mother in the romantic comedy film \"As Good as It Gets\" (1997), and she established a film career by starring in \"Twister\" (1996), \"Cast Away\" (2000), \"What Women Want\" (2000), and \"Pay It Forward\" (2000).\nHunt made her directorial film debut with \"Then She Found Me\" (2007). For her portrayal of Cheryl Cohen-Greene in \"The Sessions\" (2012), she gained a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress. Her other notable films include \"Bobby\" (2006), \"Soul Surfer\" (2011), and \"The Miracle Season\" (2018), and she has directed the film \"Ride\" (2014), and episodes of television series, including \"House of Lies\" in 2016, \"This Is Us\" in 2016, \"\" in 2017, \"American Housewife\" in 2018, and the premiere episode of the \"Mad About You\" revival in 2019.\nEarly life.\nHelen Hunt was born in Culver City, California. Her mother, Jane Elizabeth (n\u00e9e Novis), worked as a photographer, and her father, Gordon Hunt, was a film, voice and stage director and acting coach. Her uncle, Peter H. Hunt, was also a director. Her maternal grandmother, Dorothy (n\u00e9e Anderson) Fries, was a voice coach. Hunt's paternal grandmother was from a German-Jewish family, while Hunt's other grandparents were of English descent (her maternal grandfather was born in England), with a Methodist religious background. \nWhen she was three, Hunt's family moved to New York City, where her father directed theatre and Hunt attended plays as a child several times a week. Hunt graduated from Providence High School in Burbank, California. She also studied ballet, and briefly attended the University of California, Los Angeles.\nCareer.\n1976\u20131989: Child actress and early work.\nHunt began working as a child actress in the 1970s. Her early roles included an appearance on season 2, episode 3 of TV series \"Family\" (first aired Oct 26, 1976), playing Robin Trask, a classmate of Kristy McNichol's. She also had an appearance as Murray Slaughter's daughter on \"The Mary Tyler Moore Show\" in the 1977 episode \u201cMurray Ghosts for Ted\u201d, as the daughter of George Segal's main character in \"Rollercoaster\" (1977), alongside Lindsay Wagner in an episode of \"The Bionic Woman\", an appearance in an episode of \"Ark II\" called \"Omega\", and a regular role in the television series \"The Swiss Family Robinson\". She appeared as a marijuana-smoking classmate on an episode of \"The Facts of Life\". In 1982, Hunt played a young woman who, while on PCP, jumps out of a second-story window, in a made-for-television film called \"Desperate Lives\" (a scene which she mocked during a \"Saturday Night Live\" monologue in 1994), and she was cast on the ABC sitcom \"It Takes Two\", which lasted only one season. In 1983, she starred in \"\", with Mickey Rooney and played Tami Maida in the fact-based production \"Quarterback Princess\"; both were made-for-television films. She also had a recurring role on \"St. Elsewhere\" as Clancy Williams, the girlfriend of Jack \"Boomer\" Morrison (David Morse), and made a notable guest appearance as a cancer-stricken mother-to-be in a two-part episode of \"Highway to Heaven\".\nBy the mid and late 1980s, Hunt had begun appearing in studio films aimed at a teenage audience. Her first major film role was that of a punk rock girl in the sci-fi film \"Trancers\" (1984). She played the friend of an army brat in the comedy \"Girls Just Want to Have Fun\" (1985), with Sarah Jessica Parker and Shannen Doherty, and appeared as the daughter of a woman on the verge of divorce in Francis Ford Coppola's \"Peggy Sue Got Married\" (1986), alongside Kathleen Turner. In 1987, Hunt starred with Matthew Broderick in \"Project X\", as a graduate student assigned to care for chimpanzees used in a secret Air Force project. In 1988, she appeared in \"Stealing Home\", as Hope Wyatt, the sister of Billy Wyatt, played by Mark Harmon and a cast featuring Jodie Foster and Harold Ramis. \"Next of Kin\" (1989) featured her as the pregnant wife of a respectable lawman, opposite Patrick Swayze and Liam Neeson.\n1990\u20131999: \"Mad About You\" and film roles.\nIn 1990, Hunt appeared with Tracey Ullman and Morgan Freeman in a Wild West version of \"The Taming of the Shrew\", at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park. In 1991, Hunt starred in \"Trancers II\", the direct-to-video sequel to \"Trancers\" (1984), and played the lead female role in the drama \"My Life and Times\", which only aired for 6 episodes. In 1992, she appeared in the drama \"The Waterdance\" as a married woman having an affair with a writer; in the romantic comedy \"Only You\", as a travel agent and the love interest of a doll's house designer; in the mockumentary \"Bob Roberts\", as Rose Pondell, a field reporter at WLNO; and in \"Mr. Saturday Night\", as a young agent named Annie Well. Also in 1992, Hunt returned for her fourth and final outing as Lena in \"Trancers III\", which was among her five film releases that year.\nHunt came to prominence in North America with the sitcom \"Mad About You\" (1992\u201399), in which she starred opposite Paul Reiser, as a public relations specialist and one half of a couple in NYC. She went on to win Emmy Awards for her performances in 1996, 1997, 1998, and 1999. For the show's final season, Reiser and Hunt received $1\u00a0million ($ million today) per episode. She directed several episodes of \"Mad About You\", including the series finale.\nIn 1995, Hunt played the wife of an ex-con living in Queens, alongside Nicolas Cage, in \"Kiss of Death\", a very loosely based remake of the 1947 film noir classic of the same name. In the disaster action film \"Twister\" (1996), Hunt starred with Bill Paxton as storm chasers researching tornadoes. Both actors were temporarily blinded by bright electronic lamps halfway through filming, and needed hepatitis shots after shooting in a particularly unsanitary ditch. \"Twister\" was the second-highest-grossing film of 1996, behind \"Independence Day\". The film sold an estimated 54,688,100 tickets in the US. It made US$494.5\u00a0million around the globe.\nHunt went on to win the Academy Award for Best Actress in the romantic comedy \"As Good as It Gets\" (1997), in which she took on the role of a waitress and single mother who finds herself falling in love with a misanthropic, obsessive-compulsive romance novelist, played by Jack Nicholson. Hunt and Nicholson got along well during the filming, and they connected immediately: \"It wasn't even what we said\", Hunt added. \"It was just some frequency we both could tune into that was very, very compatible.\" Author and screenwriter Andrew Horton described their on-screen relationship as being like \"fire and ice, oil and water\u2014seemingly complete opposites\". Nonetheless, Hunt was Nicholson's perfect counterpart, and delivered \"a simply stunning performance\", wrote critic Louise Keller. The film was a tremendous box office success, grossing US$314 million worldwide. In 1998, she played the love interest of Moe Szyslak on \"The Simpsons\" episode \"Dumbbell Indemnity\", and played Viola in Shakespeare's \"Twelfth Night\", at Lincoln Center in New York.\n2000\u20132012: Career fluctuations.\nTwo of Hunt's four film releases in 2000\u2014the comedy \"Dr. T &amp; the Women\" and the drama \"Pay It Forward\"\u2014were both released in October. While the first featured her as one of the women that encompasses the everyday life of a wealthy gynecologist, opposite Richard Gere, the second showcased her as the love interest of a physically and emotionally scarred grade school teacher, played by Kevin Spacey. Critic Roger Ebert highlighted her performance in \"Pay It Forward\", despite finding the film itself to be \"too emotionally manipulative\". Her other two 2000 films\u2014the Nancy Meyers' directed romantic comedy \"What Women Want\", and the Robert Zemeckis' directed survival drama \"Cast Away\"\u2014were released in December, to outstanding box office receipts. In \"What Women Want\", Hunt starred with Mel Gibson as the co-worker and love interest of a Chicago executive, and in \"Cast Away\", she portrayed the long-term girlfriend of a FedEx employee marooned on an uninhabited island, played by Tom Hanks.\nHunt starred in Woody Allen's \"The Curse of the Jade Scorpion\" (2001), as an efficiency expert hypnotized by a crooked hypnotist into stealing jewels. Despite the film's limited success, Roger Ebert asserted: \"Hunt in particular has fun with a wisecracking dame role that owes something, perhaps, to Rosalind Russell in \"His Girl Friday\".\" In 2003, Hunt returned to Broadway in Yasmina Reza's \"Life x 3\", and in 2004, she starred in the drama \"A Good Woman\", as a femme fatale in 1930s NYC. \"AV Club\", in its review for the latter, remarked: \"Helen Hunt looks embarrassingly out of place trying to play an infamous seductress\". She played a socialite, as part of an ensemble cast, in Emilio Estevez's drama \"Bobby\" (2006), about the hours leading up to the Robert F. Kennedy assassination. As a member of the cast, she was nominated for the Screen Actors Guild Award and the Hollywood Film Festival Award for Best Ensemble Cast, winning for the later.\nHunt made her feature film directorial debut in \"Then She Found Me\" (2007), in which she also starred as a 39-year-old Brooklyn elementary school teacher, who after many years is contacted by the flamboyant host of a local talk show, played by Bette Midler, who introduces herself as her biological mother. After first reading Elinor Lipman's novel, she tried to interest numerous studios in the material, and her unsuccessful efforts led her to begin writing the screenplay and raising funds to produce it herself. Upon its release, Ruthe Stein of the \"San Francisco Chronicle\" observed, \"You would think that frontloading \"Then She Found Me\" with so much plot would make it play like a soap opera. But Hunt saves the movie from this fate in two ways. First she turns in a touchingly real performance, the best of her big-screen career. Forget that \"As Good as It Gets\" won her an Oscar. She's eons better and more realistic in this one [...] By directing \"Then She Found Me\", Helen becomes its savior as well [...] Hunt knows when to rein in the Divine Miss M instead of allowing her to go into full Kabuki mode. [She] also coaxes pitch-perfect performances from Broderick and Firth.\"\nHunt starred in the dramedy \"Every Day\" (2010), as one half of a married couple pulled apart by increasing responsibilities. According to \"Los Angeles Times\", the film \"comes as a reminder of [Hunt's] talent for understatement, and a wish to see more of her\". In the biographical drama \"Soul Surfer\" (2011), she played the mother of the Hawaiian-born champion surfer Bethany Hamilton, on whose life the film was based. Her first wide release since 2001's \"The Curse of the Jade Scorpion\", \"Soul Surfer\" made US$47.1 million internationally.\nHunt starred as sex surrogate Cheryl Cohen-Greene in \"The Sessions\" (2012), alongside John Hawkes and William H. Macy. The role required Hunt to perform multiple scenes of full-frontal nudity, on which she further said: \"Being naked was challenging, but even more than that was the vulnerability. I felt vulnerable because I was naked. I felt vulnerable because we were having such a vulnerable moment in this character's life. This was a real journey that someone had gone on, and I wanted to do right by that.\" Her performance was acclaimed by critics and earned her several award nominations, including an Oscar nomination for Best Supporting Actress. Todd McCarthy of \"The Hollywood Reporter\" wrote: \"Hunt's performance may be physically bold but is equally marked by its maturity and composure.\"\n2013\u2013present: Focus on directing.\nHunt played research geneticist Mary-Claire King in the independent drama \"Decoding Annie Parker\" (2013), which was released to a mixed critical response. She wrote and directed the drama \"Ride\" (2014), in which she also starred as a mother who travels cross-country to California to be with her son after he decides to drop out of school and become a surfer. Rotten Tomatoes' critical consensus read: \"\"Ride\" reaffirms Helen Hunt's immense acting talent\u2014but suggests that she still needs time to develop as a director.\"\nIn \"The Miracle Season\" (2018), based on the true story of the Iowa City West High School volleyball team, Hunt played Kathy Bresnahan, a volleyball coach. In 2019, Hunt appeared in the BBC series \"World on Fire\" as journalist Nancy Campbell, a character inspired by real-life war correspondent Clare Hollingworth, and reprised the role of Jamie Buchman in the \"Mad About You\" revival, which premiered in the form of a limited series, by Spectrum Originals. In December 2018, Hunt was a guest narrator at Disney's Candlelight Processional at Walt Disney World. In 2020, Hunt appeared in the crime drama film \"The Night Clerk\", alongside Tye Sheridan. Hunt appeared in a leading role in the 2021-2023 Starz series \"Blindspotting\", created by Daveed Diggs and Rafael Casal and based on their 2018 film of the same name. In September 2022, she starred in the European premiere of \"Eureka Day\" at The Old Vic theatre in London.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1994, Hunt started dating actor Hank Azaria. They married in 1999, and divorced 17 months later. In 2001, Hunt began a relationship with producer Matthew Carnahan. In 2004, they had a daughter. The couple split in August 2017.\nHunt was one of the demonstrators at the 2017 Women's March held on January 21 in Los Angeles, California.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44572", "revid": "32990417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44572", "title": "Hackney", "text": "Hackney may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "44574", "revid": "16680171", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44574", "title": "Weight training", "text": ""}
{"id": "44575", "revid": "50719924", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44575", "title": "Russo-Japanese War", "text": "1904-05 war for Manchuria and Korea\nThe Russo-Japanese War (8 February 1904 \u2013 5 September 1905) was fought between the Russian Empire and the Empire of Japan over rival imperial ambitions in Manchuria and the Korean Empire. The major land battles of the war were fought on the Liaodong Peninsula and near Mukden in Southern Manchuria, with naval battles taking place in the Yellow Sea and the Sea of Japan.\nRussia had pursued an expansionist policy in Siberia and the Far East since the reign of Ivan the Terrible in the 16th century. At the end of the First Sino-Japanese War, the Treaty of Shimonoseki of 1895 had ceded the Liaodong Peninsula and Port Arthur to Japan before the Triple Intervention, in which Russia, Germany, and France forced Japan to relinquish its claim. Japan feared that Russia would impede its plans to establish a sphere of influence in mainland Asia, especially as Russia built the Trans-Siberian Railroad, began making inroads in Korea, and acquired a lease of the Liaodong Peninsula and Port Arthur from China in 1898. Japan signed the Anglo-Japanese Alliance in 1902, and began offering to recognize Russia's dominance in Manchuria in exchange for recognition of Korea as part of Japan's sphere of influence. However, this was rejected by Russia.\nAfter negotiations broke down, Japan opened hostilities in a surprise attack on the Russian Pacific Fleet at Port Arthur on 9 February\u00a0[O.S. 27 January]\u00a01904. Both sides declared war, and Japanese troops landed in Korea, crossed the Yalu River into Manchuria in May, and landed more forces on the Liaodong Peninsula. In August, the Japanese laid siege to Port Arthur, which eventually fell in January 1905. In March 1905, Japanese troops took Mukden, the Manchurian capital, after heavy fighting. The Russian Baltic Fleet, which had sailed over seven months and 18,000 nautical miles (33,000\u00a0km) from the Baltic Sea to reinforce its Pacific Fleet, arrived in the region in May and was intercepted and destroyed by the Japanese Combined Fleet at the Battle of Tsushima. The war was concluded with the Treaty of Portsmouth (5 September\u00a0[O.S. 23 August]\u00a01905), mediated by US President Theodore Roosevelt.\nThe treaty recognized Japanese interests in Korea, and awarded to Japan Russia's lease on the Liaodong Peninsula, control of the Russian-built South Manchuria Railway, and the southern half of the island of Sakhalin (Karafuto). The complete military victory of an Asian and non-Western nation over a European and Western power surprised international observers, and transformed the global balance of power, with the Empire of Japan emerging as a great power and the Russian Empire declining in prestige among the European powers. Russia's incurrence of substantial casualties and losses for a cause which resulted in a humiliating defeat contributed to internal unrest culminating in the 1905 Russian Revolution, during which the Russian autocracy was forced to make concessions. More widely, however, Japan's win effectively damaged the credibility of European dominance in Asia.\nHistorical background.\nModernization of Japan.\nAfter the Meiji Restoration in 1868, the Meiji government endeavoured to assimilate Western ideas, technological advances and ways of warfare. By the late 19th century, Japan had transformed itself into a modernized industrial state. The Japanese wanted to be recognized as equal with the Western powers. The Meiji Restoration had been intended to make Japan a modernized state, not a Westernized one, and Japan was an imperialist power, looking towards overseas expansionism.\nA Japanese sphere of influence.\nThe United States saw Japan as an ally in the U.S.'s quest to control the Pacific and maintain for the U.S. China's \"Open Door Policy.\" In Autumn 1872, U.S. minister to Japan Charles DeLong explained to U.S. General Charles LeGendre that he had been urging the Government of Japan to occupy Taiwan and \"civilize\" the Taiwanese indigenous people just as the U.S. had taken over the land of the Native Americans and \"civilized\" them. General LeGendre encouraged the Japanese to declare a Japanese \"sphere of influence\" modeled on the Monroe Doctrine that the U.S. had declared for the exclusion of other powers from the Western Hemisphere. Such a Japanese sphere of influence would be the first time a non-White state would adopt such a policy. The stated aim of the sphere of influence would be to civilize the barbarians of Asia. \"Pacify and civilize them if possible, and if not...exterminate them or otherwise deal with them as the United States and England have dealt with the barbarians,\" LeGendre explained to the Japanese.\nIn the years 1869\u20131873, the \"Seikanron\" (\"Conquer Korea Argument\") had bitterly divided the Japanese elite: one faction wanted to conquer Korea immediately, while the other wanted to wait until Japan was further modernized before embarking on a war to conquer Korea. Significantly, no one in the Japanese elite had ever accepted the idea that the Koreans had the right to be independent, with only the question of timing dividing the two factions. In much the same way that Europeans used the \"backwardness\" of African and Asian nations as a reason for why they had to conquer them, for the Japanese elite the \"backwardness\" of China and Korea was proof of the inferiority of those nations, thus giving the Japanese the \"right\" to conquer them.\nCount Inoue Kaoru, the foreign minister, gave a speech in 1887 saying \"What we must do is to transform our empire and our people, make the empire like the countries of Europe and our people like the peoples of Europe,\" going on to say that the Chinese and Koreans had essentially forfeited their right to be independent by not modernizing. Much of the pressure for an aggressive foreign policy in Japan came from below, with the advocates of a \"people's rights\" movement calling for an elected parliament also favouring an ultra-nationalist line that took it for granted the Japanese had the \"right\" to annex Korea, as the \"people's rights\" movement was led by those who favoured invading Korea in the years 1869\u20131873.\nAs part of the modernization process in Japan, social Darwinist ideas about the \"survival of the fittest\" were common from the 1880s onward and many ordinary Japanese resented the heavy taxes imposed by the government to modernize Japan, demanding something tangible like an overseas colony as a reward for their sacrifices.\nFurthermore, the educational system of Meiji Japan was meant to train the schoolboys to be soldiers when they grew up, and as such, Japanese schools indoctrinated their students into \"Bushid\u014d\" (\"way of the warrior\"), the fierce code of the samurai. Having indoctrinated the younger generations into \"Bushid\u014d\", the Meiji elite found themselves faced with a people who clamored for war, and regarded diplomacy as a weakness.\nPressure from the people.\nThe British Japanologist Richard Storry wrote that the biggest misconception about Japan in the West was that the Japanese people were the \"docile\" instruments of the elite, when in fact much of the pressure for Japan's wars from 1894 to 1941 came from the ordinary people, who demanded a \"tough\" foreign policy, and tended to engage in riots and assassination when foreign policy was perceived to be pusillanimous.\nThough the Meiji oligarchy refused to allow liberal democracy, they did seek to appropriate some of the demands of the \"people's rights\" movement by allowing an elected Imperial Diet in 1890 (with limited powers and an equally limited franchise) and by pursuing an aggressive foreign policy towards Korea.\nIn 1884, Japan had encouraged a coup in the Kingdom of Korea by a pro-Japanese reformist faction, which led to the conservative government calling upon China for help, leading to a clash between Chinese and Japanese soldiers in Seoul. At the time, Tokyo did not feel ready to risk a war with China, and the crisis was ended by the Convention of Tientsin, which left Korea more strongly in the Chinese sphere of influence, though it did give the Japanese the right to intervene in Korea. All through the 1880s and early 1890s, the government in Tokyo was regularly criticized for not being aggressive enough in Korea, leading Japanese historian Masao Maruyama to write: Just as Japan was subject to pressure from the Great Powers, so she would apply pressure to still weaker countries\u00a0\u2013 a clear case of the transfer psychology. In this regard it is significant that ever since the Meiji period demands for a tough foreign policy have come from the common people, that is, from those who are at the receiving end of oppression at home.\nRussian Eastern expansion.\nTsarist Russia, as a major imperial power, had ambitions in the East. By the 1890s it had extended its realm across Central Asia to Afghanistan, absorbing local states in the process. The Russian Empire stretched from Poland in the west to the Kamchatka Peninsula in the east. With its construction of the Trans-Siberian Railway to the port of Vladivostok, Russia hoped to further consolidate its influence and presence in the region. In the Tsushima incident of 1861 Russia had directly assaulted Japanese territory.\nFirst Sino-Japanese War (1894\u201395).\nThe first major war the Empire of Japan fought following the Meiji Restoration was against China, from 1894 to 1895. The war revolved around the issue of control and influence over Korea under the rule of the Joseon dynasty. From the 1880s onward, there had been vigorous competition for influence in Korea between China and Japan. The Korean court was prone to factionalism, and at the time was badly divided between a reformist camp that was pro-Japanese and a more conservative faction that was pro-Chinese. In 1884, a pro-Japanese coup attempt was put down by Chinese troops, and a \"residency\" under General Yuan Shikai was established in Seoul. A peasant rebellion led by the Tonghak religious movement led to a request by the Korean government for the Qing dynasty to send in troops to stabilize the country. The Empire of Japan responded by sending their own force to Korea to crush the Tonghak and installed a puppet government in Seoul. China objected and war ensued. Hostilities proved brief, with Japanese ground troops routing Chinese forces on the Liaodong Peninsula and nearly destroying the Chinese Beiyang Fleet in the Battle of the Yalu River. Japan and China signed the Treaty of Shimonoseki, which ceded the Liaodong Peninsula and the island of Taiwan to Japan. After the peace treaty, Russia, Germany, and France forced Japan to withdraw from the Liaodong Peninsula. The leaders of Japan did not feel that they possessed the strength to resist the combined might of Russia, Germany and France, and so gave in to the ultimatum. At the same time, the Japanese did not abandon their attempts to force Korea into the Japanese sphere of influence. On 8 October 1895, Queen Min of Korea, the leader of the anti-Japanese and pro-Chinese faction at the Korean court was murdered by Japanese agents within the halls of the Gyeongbokgung palace, an act that backfired badly as it turned Korean public opinion against Japan. In early 1896, King Gojong of Korea fled to the Russian legation in Seoul, believing that his life was in danger from Japanese agents, and Russian influence in Korea started to predominate. In the aftermath of the flight of the King, a popular uprising overthrew the pro-Japanese government and several cabinet ministers were lynched in the streets.\nIn 1897, Russia occupied the Liaodong Peninsula, built the Port Arthur fortress, and based the Russian Pacific Fleet in the port. Russia's acquisition of Port Arthur was primarily an anti-British move to counter the British occupation of Wei-hai-Wei, but in Japan this was perceived as an anti-Japanese move. Germany occupied Jiaozhou Bay, built the Tsingtao fortress, and based the German East Asia Squadron in this port. Between 1897 and 1903, the Russians built the Chinese Eastern Railway (CER) in Manchuria. The Chinese Eastern Railroad was owned jointly by the Russian and Chinese governments, but the company's management was entirely Russian, the line was built to the Russian gauge and Russian troops were stationed in Manchuria to protect rail traffic on the CER from bandit attacks. The headquarters of the CER company was located in the new Russian-built city of Harbin, the \"Moscow of the Orient\". From 1897 onwards, Manchuria\u00a0\u2013 while still nominally part of the \"Great Qing Empire\"\u00a0\u2013 started to resemble more and more a Russian province.\nRussian encroachment.\nIn December 1897, a Russian fleet appeared off Port Arthur. After three months, in 1898, China and Russia negotiated a convention by which China leased (to Russia) Port Arthur, Talienwan and the surrounding waters. The two parties further agreed that the convention could be extended by mutual agreement. The Russians clearly expected such an extension, for they lost no time in occupying the territory and in fortifying Port Arthur, their sole warm-water port on the Pacific coast and of great strategic value. A year later, to consolidate their position, the Russians began to build a new railway from Harbin through Mukden to Port Arthur, the South Manchurian Railroad. The development of the railway became a contributory factor to the Boxer Rebellion, when Boxer forces burned the railway stations.\nThe Russians also began to make inroads into Korea. A large point of Russia's growing influence in Korea was Gojong's internal exile to the Russian legation. A pro-Russian cabinet emerged in the Korean Empire. In 1901, Tsar Nicholas II told Prince Henry of Prussia, \"I do not want to seize Korea but under no circumstances can I allow Japan to become firmly established there. That will be a \"casus belli\".\" By 1898 they had acquired mining and forestry concessions near the Yalu and Tumen rivers, causing the Japanese much anxiety. Japan decided to attack before the Russians completed the Trans-Siberian Railway.\nBoxer Rebellion.\nThe Russians and the Japanese both contributed troops to the Eight-Nation Alliance sent in 1900 to quell the Boxer Rebellion and to relieve the international legations besieged in the Chinese capital, Beijing. Russia had already sent 177,000 soldiers to Manchuria, nominally to protect its railways under construction. Though the Qing imperial army and the Boxer rebels united to fight against the invasion, they were quickly overrun and ejected from Manchuria. After the Boxer Rebellion, 100,000 Russian soldiers were stationed in Manchuria. The Russian troops settled in and despite assurances they would vacate the area after the crisis, by 1903 the Russians had not established a timetable for withdrawal and had actually strengthened their position in Manchuria.\nPre-war negotiations.\nThe Japanese statesman It\u014d Hirobumi started to negotiate with the Russians. He regarded Japan as too weak to evict the Russians militarily, so he proposed giving Russia control over Manchuria in exchange for Japanese control of northern Korea. Of the five \"Genr\u014d\" (elder statesmen) who made up the Meiji oligarchy, It\u014d Hirobumi and Count Inoue Kaoru opposed the idea of war against Russia on financial grounds, while Katsura Tar\u014d, Komura Jutar\u014d and Field Marshal Yamagata Aritomo favored war. Meanwhile, Japan and Britain had signed the Anglo-Japanese Alliance in 1902 \u2013 the British seeking to restrict naval competition by keeping the Russian Pacific seaports of Vladivostok and Port Arthur from their full use. Japan's alliance with the British meant, in part, that if any nation allied itself with Russia during any war against Japan, then Britain would enter the war on Japan's side. Russia could no longer count on receiving help from either Germany or France without the danger of British involvement in the war. With such an alliance, Japan felt free to commence hostilities if necessary.\nThe 1890s and 1900s marked the height of the \"Yellow Peril\" propaganda by the German government, and the German Emperor Wilhelm II (r.\u20091888\u00a0\u2013\u00a01918) often wrote letters to his cousin Emperor Nicholas II of Russia, praising him as the \"saviour of the white race\" and urging Russia forward in Asia. From November 1894 onward, Wilhelm had been writing letters praising Nicholas as Europe's defender from the \"Yellow Peril\", assuring the Tsar that God Himself had \"chosen\" Russia to defend Europe from the alleged Asian threat. On 1 November 1902 Wilhelm wrote to Nicholas that \"certain symptoms in the East seem to show that Japan is becoming a rather restless customer\" and \"it is evident to every unbiased mind that Korea must and will be Russian\". Wilhelm ended his letter with the warning that Japan and China would soon unite against Europe, writing: Twenty to thirty million Chinese, supported by a half dozen Japanese divisions, led by competent, intrepid Japanese officers, full of hatred for Christianity\u00a0\u2013 that is a vision of the future that cannot be contemplated without concern, and it is not impossible. On the contrary, it is the realisation of the yellow peril, which I described a few years ago and I was ridiculed by the majority of people for my graphic depiction of it\u00a0... Your devoted friend and cousin, Willy, Admiral of the Atlantic.\nWilhelm aggressively encouraged Russia's ambitions in Asia because France, Russia's closest ally since 1894, was less than supportive of Russian expansionism in Asia, and it was believed in Berlin that German support of Russia might break up the Franco-Russian alliance and lead to a new German\u2013Russian alliance.\nThe French had made it clear that they disapproved of Nicholas's forward policy in Asia; the French Premier Maurice Rouvier (in office: May to December 1887) publicly declaring that the Franco-Russian alliance applied only in Europe, not to Asia,\nand that France would remain neutral if Japan attacked Russia. The American president Theodore Roosevelt (in office 1901\u20131909), who was attempting to mediate the Russian\u2013Japanese dispute, complained that Wilhelm's \"Yellow Peril\" propaganda, which strongly implied that Germany might go to war against Japan in support of Russia, encouraged Russian intransigence. On 24 July 1905, in a letter to the British diplomat Cecil Spring Rice, Roosevelt wrote that Wilhelm bore partial responsibility for the war as \"he has done all he could to bring it about\", charging that Wilhelm's constant warnings about the \"Yellow Peril\" had made the Russians uninterested in compromise as Nicholas believed that Germany would intervene if Japan attacked.\nThe implicit promise of German support suggested by Wilhelm's \"Yellow Peril\" speeches and letters to Nicholas led many decision-makers in Saint Petersburg to believe that Russia's military weaknesses in the Far East (like the uncompleted Trans-Siberian railroad line) did not matter\u00a0\u2013 they assumed that the \"Reich\" would come to Russia's assistance if war should come. In fact, neither Wilhelm nor his Chancellor Prince Bernhard von B\u00fclow (in office: 1900\u20131909) had much interest in East Asia, and Wilhelm's letters to Nicholas praising him as Europe's saviour against the \"Yellow Peril\" were really meant to provoke change in the balance of power in Europe, as Wilhelm believed that any Russian entanglement with Japan would break up the Franco-Russian alliance and lead to Nicholas signing an alliance with Germany. This was especially the case as Germany had embarked upon the \"Tirpitz Plan\" and a policy of \"Weltpolitik\" (from 1897) meant to challenge Britain's position as the world's leading power. Since Britain was allied to Japan, if Germany could manipulate Russia and Japan into going to war with each other, this in turn would allegedly lead to Russia turning towards Germany.\nFurthermore, Wilhelm believed if a Russian\u2013German alliance emerged, France would be compelled to join it. He also hoped that having Russia pursue an expansionist policy in Asia would distract and keep Russia out of the Balkans, thus removing the main source of tension between Russia and Germany's ally Austria-Hungary. During the war, Nicholas, who took at face value Wilhelm's \"Yellow Peril\" speeches, placed much hope in German intervention on his side. More than once Nicholas chose to continue the war out of the belief that the Kaiser would come to his aid.\nDespite previous assurances that Russia would completely withdraw from Manchuria the forces it had sent to crush the Boxer Rebellion by 8 April 1903, that day passed with no reduction in Russian forces in that region. In Japan, university students demonstrated both against Russia and against their own government for not taking any action. On 28 July 1903 Kurino Shin'ichir\u014d, the Japanese minister in Saint Petersburg, was instructed to present his country's view opposing Russia's consolidation plans in Manchuria. On 3 August 1903 the Japanese minister handed in the following document to serve as the basis for further negotiations:\nOn 3 October 1903 the Russian minister to Japan, Roman Rosen, presented to the Japanese government the Russian counter proposal as the basis of negotiations, as follows:\nDuring the Russian\u2013Japanese talks, the Japanese historian Hirono Yoshihiko noted, \"once negotiations commenced between Japan and Russia, Russia scaled back its demands and claims regarding Korea bit by bit, making a series of concessions that Japan regarded as serious compromises on Russia's part\". The war might not have broken out had not the issues of Korea and Manchuria become linked. The Korean and Manchurian issues had become linked as the Prime Minister of Japan, Katsura Tar\u014d (in office 1901\u20131906), decided if war did come, that Japan was more likely to have the support of the United States and Great Britain if the war could be presented as a struggle for free trade against the highly protectionist Russian empire, in which case, Manchuria, which was the larger market than Korea, was more likely to engage Anglo-American sympathies. Throughout the war, Japanese propaganda presented the recurring theme of Japan as a \"civilized\" power (that supported free trade and would implicitly allow foreign businesses into the resource-rich region of Manchuria) vs. Russia the \"uncivilized\" power (that was protectionist and wanted to keep the riches of Manchuria all to itself).\nEmperor Gojong of Korea (King from 1864 to 1897, Emperor from 1897 to 1907) came to believe that the issue dividing Japan and Russia was Manchuria, and chose to pursue a policy of neutrality as the best way of preserving Korean independence as the crisis mounted. In a series of reports to Beijing, Hu Weide, the Chinese ambassador in Saint Petersburg from July 1902 to September 1907, looked closely at whether a Russian or a Japanese victory would be favourable to China, and argued that the latter was preferable, as he maintained a Japanese victory presented the better chance for China to regain sovereignty over Manchuria. In December 1903 China decided to remain neutral if war came, because though Japan was the only power capable of evicting Russia from Manchuria, the extent of Japanese ambitions in Manchuria was not clear to Beijing.\nRussian\u2013Japanese negotiations then followed, although by early January 1904 the Japanese government had realised that Russia was not interested in settling the Manchurian or Korean issues. Instead, Russia's goal was buying time\u00a0\u2013 via diplomacy\u00a0\u2013 to further build up militarily. In December 1903, Wilhelm wrote in a marginal note on a diplomatic dispatch about his role in inflaming Russo\u2013Japanese relations:Since 97\u00a0\u2013 Kiaochow\u00a0\u2013 we have never left Russia in any doubt that we would cover her back in Europe, in case she decided to pursue a bigger policy in the Far East that might lead to military complications (with the aim of relieving our eastern border from the fearful pressure and threat of the massive Russian army!). Whereupon, Russia took Port Arthur and \"trusting us\", took her fleet \"out of the Baltic\", thereby making herself \"vulnerable to us\" by sea. In Danzig 01 and Reval 02, the same assurance was given again, with result that entire Russian divisions from Poland and European Russia were and are being sent to the Far East. This would not had happened if our governments had not been in agreement!\nA recurring theme of Wilhelm's letters to Nicholas was that \"Holy Russia\" had been \"chosen\" by God to save the \"entire white race\" from the \"Yellow Peril\", and that Russia was \"entitled\" to annex all of Korea, Manchuria, and northern China up to Beijing. Wilhelm went on to assure Nicholas that once Russia had defeated Japan, this would be a deadly blow to British diplomacy, and that the two emperors, the self-proclaimed \"Admiral of the Atlantic\" and the \"Admiral of the Pacific\", would rule Eurasia together, making them able to challenge British sea power as the resources of Eurasia would make their empires immune to a British blockade, and thus allowing Germany and Russia to \"divide up the best\" of the British colonies in Asia between them.\nNicholas had been prepared to compromise with Japan, but after receiving a letter from Wilhelm attacking him as a coward for his willingness to compromise with the Japanese (who, Wilhelm never ceasing reminding Nicholas, represented the \"Yellow Peril\") for the sake of peace, became more obstinate. Wilhelm had written to Nicholas stating that the question of Russian interests in Manchuria and Korea was beside the point, saying instead it was a matter of Russia:...undertaking the protection and defence of the White Race, and with it, Christian civilization, against the Yellow Race. And whatever the Japs are determined to ensure the domination of the Yellow Race in East Asia, to put themselves at its head and organise and lead it into battle against the White Race. That is the kernel of the situation, and therefore there can be very little doubt about where the sympathies of all half-way intelligent Europeans should lie. England betrayed Europe's interests to America in a cowardly and shameful way over the Panama Canal question, so as to be left in 'peace' by the Yankees. Will the 'Tsar' likewise betray the interests of the White Race to the Yellow as to be 'left in peace' and not embarrass the Hague tribunal too much?.\nWhen Nicholas replied that he still wanted peace, Wilhelm wrote back in a telegram \"You innocent angel!\", telling his advisors \"This is the language of an innocent angel. But not that of a White Tsar!\" Nevertheless, Tokyo believed that Russia was not serious about seeking a peaceful solution to the dispute. On 13 January 1904, Japan proposed a formula by which Manchuria would remain outside Japan's sphere of influence and, reciprocally, Korea outside Russia's. On 21 December 1903, the Katsura cabinet voted to go to war against Russia.\nBy 4 February 1904, no formal reply had been received from Saint Petersburg. On 6 February the Japanese minister to Russia, Kurino Shin'ichir\u014d, was recalled, and Japan severed diplomatic relations with Russia.\nPotential diplomatic resolution of territorial concerns between Japan and Russia failed; historians have argued that this directly resulted from the actions of Emperor Nicholas II. Crucially, Nicholas mismanaged his government. Although certain scholars contend that the situation arose from the determination of Nicholas II to use the war against Japan to spark a revival in Russian patriotism, no historical evidence supports this claim. The Tsar's advisors did not support the war, foreseeing problems in transporting troops and supplies from European Russia to the East. The Tsar himself repeatedly delayed negotiations with the Japanese government as he believed that he was protected by God and the autocracy. The Japanese understanding of this can be seen in a telegram from Japanese minister of foreign affairs, Komura, to the minister to Russia, in which he stated:\n...the Japanese government have at all times during the progress of the negotiations made it a special point to give prompt answers to all propositions of the Russian government. The negotiations have now been pending for no less than four months, and they have not yet reached a stage where the final issue can with certainty be predicted. In these circumstances the Japanese government cannot but regard with grave concern the situation for which the delays in negotiations are largely responsible.\nSome scholars have suggested that Nicholas II dragged Japan into war intentionally, in hopes of reviving Russian nationalism. This notion conflicts with a comment made by Nicholas to Kaiser Wilhelm of Germany, saying there would be no war because he \"did not wish it\".\nThis does not reject the claim that Russia played an aggressive role in the East, which it did; rather, it means that Russia unwisely calculated and supposed that Japan would not go to war against Russia's far larger and seemingly superior navy and army. Nicholas held the Japanese in contempt as \"yellow monkeys\", and he took for granted that the Japanese would simply yield in the face of Russia's superior power, which thus explains his unwillingness to compromise. Evidence of Russia's false sense of security and superiority to Japan is seen by Russian reference to Japan's choosing war as a big mistake.\nStatus of combatants.\nJapan.\nJapan had conducted detailed studies of the Russian Far East and Manchuria prior to the war and, as it was mandatory for Japanese officers to speak one foreign language, Japan had access to superior maps during the conflict. The Japanese army relied on conscription, introduced in 1873, to maintain its military strength and to provide a large army in times of war. This system of conscription gave Japan a large pool of reserves to draw upon. The Active army and the 1st line reserve (used to bring the active army to wartime strength) totalled 380,000; the 2nd line reserve contained 200,000; the conscript reserve a further 50,000; and the kokumin (akin to a national guard or militia) 220,000. This amounted to 850,000 trained troops available for service, in addition to 4,250,000 men in the untrained reserve.\nImmediately available to Japan on the declaration of war were 257,000 infantry, 11,000 cavalry and 894 pieces of artillery. These figures were divided between the Imperial Guards division, 12 regular divisions, 2 cavalry brigades, 2 artillery brigades, 13 reserve brigades, depot troops and the garrison of Taiwan. A regular Japanese division contained 11,400 infantry, 430 cavalry and 36 guns \u2013 the guns being organised into batteries of 6. Though another 4 divisions and 4 reserve brigades were formed in 1904, no further formations were created as the reserves were used to replace losses sustained in combat. Japanese reserves were given a full year of training before entering combat, though as the war progressed this was reduced to 6 months due to high casualties. The Japanese army did not follow the European convention of implementing Corps, thus there were no corps troops or command and the Japanese divisions were immediately subordinate to armies.\nOlender gives a different appraisal of Japanese strength, maintaining that there were 350,000 men of the standing army and 1st reserve, with an additional 850,000 trained men in reserve, creating a total trained force of 1,200,000 men. The breakdown of the Japanese standing army was different too, with Olender giving each Japanese division 19,000 men including auxiliary troops; he also states that the 13 reserve brigades contained 8,000 men each and mentions 20 fortress battalions, which is omitted by Connaughton. It is further stated that the Japanese army possessed 1,080 field guns and between 120 and 150 heavy guns at the war's commencement.\nJapanese cavalry was not considered the elite of the army as was the case in Russia; instead Japanese cavalry primarily acted as scouts and fought dismounted, armed with carbine and sword; this was reflected in the fact that each cavalry brigade contained 6 machine guns.\nRussia.\nThere is no consensus over how many Russian troops were present in the Far East around the time of the commencement of the war. One estimate states that the Russian army possessed 60,000 infantry, 3,000 cavalry and 167 guns, mostly at Vladivostok and Port Arthur with a portion at Harbin. This was reinforced by the middle of February to 95,000 with 45,000 at Vladivostok, 8,000 at Harbin, 9,000 at Haicheng, 11,000 on the Yalu River and 22,000 at Port Arthur.\nOlender gives the figure at 100,000 men including 8 infantry divisions, fortress troops and support troops. The entire Russian army in 1904 amounted to 1,200,000 men in 29 Corps. The Russian plan was immensely flawed as the Russians possessed only 24,000 potential reinforcements east of Lake Baikal when the war commenced. They would be reinforced by 35,000 men after 4 months and a further 60,000 men 10 months after the commencement of the war at which point they would take the offensive. This plan was based on the erroneous belief that the Japanese army could only mobilise 400,000 with them being unable to field more than 250,000 in an operational sense and 80,000\u2013100,000 of their operational strength being necessary to secure supply lines and therefore only 150,000\u2013170,000 Japanese soldiers would be available for field action. The possibility of Port Arthur being taken was dismissed entirely.\nAn alternative figure for forces in the Far East is given at over 150,000 men and 266 guns, with Vladivostok and Port Arthur containing a combined force of 45,000 men and with an additional 55,000 engaged in guarding lines of communication, leaving only 50,000 troops to take the field.\nUnlike the Japanese, the Russians did utilise the Corps system and in fact maintained two distinct styles of Corps: the European and the Siberian. The two corps both possessed two divisions and their corresponding troop numbers, but a Siberian Division was much smaller, containing only 3,400 men and 20 guns, with a corps containing around 12,000 men and lacking both artillery and divisional guns. Russia only possessed two Siberian Corps, both unprepared for war. After war was declared, this number was raised to seven as the conflict progressed. The European Corps in comparison contained 28,000 soldiers and 112 guns with 6 such corps sent to the Far East during the war \u2013 a further three being dispatched that did not arrive before the war ended.\nRussian Logistics were hampered by the fact that the only connection to European Russia was the Trans-Siberian Railway, which remained incomplete as the railway was not connected at Lake Baikal. A single train would take between 15 and 40 days to traverse the railway, with the common figure being closer to 40 days. A single battalion would take a month to transport from Moscow to Shenyang. After the line's eventual completion, 20 trains ran daily and by the conclusion of the war some 410,000 soldiers, 93,000 horses and 1,000 guns had been transported.\nThe tactics utilised by the Russians were outdated. Russian infantry still held to the maxim of Suvorov over a century after his death. The Russian command still used strategies from the Crimean war, attacking en echelon across a wide front in closed formations; it was not uncommon for Russian higher command to bypass their intermediate commanders and issue orders directly to battalions, thus creating confusion during combat.\nDeclaration of war.\nJapan issued a declaration of war on 8 February 1904. However, three hours before Japan's declaration of war was received by the Russian government, and without warning, the Imperial Japanese Navy attacked the Russian Far East Fleet at Port Arthur.\nTsar Nicholas II was stunned by news of the attack. He could not believe that Japan would commit an act of war without a formal declaration, and had been assured by his ministers that the Japanese would not fight. When the attack came, according to Cecil Spring Rice, first secretary at the British Embassy, it left the Tsar \"almost incredulous\". The Tsar declared war on Japan eight days after the attack. Japan, in response, made reference to the Russian attack on Sweden in 1808 without declaration of war, although the requirement to mediate disputes between states before commencing hostilities was made international law in 1899, and again in 1907, with the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907.\nThe Principality of Montenegro also declared war on Japan in gratitude for Russia's political support of the Montenegrin prince. The gesture was symbolic and no soldiers from the army were ever deployed in the far East but a few Montenegrins volunteered and joined the Russian army.\nThe Qing Empire favoured the Japanese position and even offered military aid, but Japan declined it. However, Yuan Shikai sent envoys to Japanese generals several times to deliver foodstuffs and alcoholic drinks. Native Manchurians joined the war on both sides as hired troops.\nCampaign of 1904.\nPort Arthur, on the Liaodong Peninsula in the south of Manchuria, had been fortified into a major naval base by the Russian Imperial Army. Since it needed to control the sea in order to fight a war on the Asian mainland, Japan's first military objective was to neutralize the Russian fleet at Port Arthur.\nBattle of Port Arthur.\nOn the night of 8 February 1904, the Japanese fleet under Admiral T\u014dg\u014d Heihachir\u014d opened the war with a surprise torpedo boat destroyer attack on the Russian ships at Port Arthur. The attack heavily damaged the and , the heaviest battleships in Russia's Far Eastern theatre, and the 6,600\u00a0ton protected cruiser . These attacks developed into the Battle of Port Arthur the next morning. A series of indecisive naval engagements followed, in which Admiral T\u014dg\u014d was unable to attack the Russian fleet successfully as it was protected by the shore batteries of the harbour, and the Russians were reluctant to leave the harbour for the open seas, especially after the death of Admiral Stepan Osipovich Makarov from a naval mine on 13 April 1904. Although the actual Battle of Port Arthur was indecisive, the initial attacks had a devastating psychological effect on Russia, which had been confident about the prospect of war. The Japanese had seized the initiative while the Russians waited in port.\nThese engagements provided cover for a Japanese landing near Incheon in Korea. From Incheon the Japanese occupied Hanseong and then the rest of Korea. By the end of April, the Japanese Imperial Army under Kuroki Tamemoto was ready to cross the Yalu River into Russian-occupied Manchuria.\nBlockade of Port Arthur.\nThe Japanese attempted to deny the Russians use of Port Arthur. During the night of 13\u201314 February, the Japanese attempted to block the entrance to Port Arthur by sinking several concrete-filled steamers in the deep water channel to the port, but they sank too deep to be effective. A similar attempt to block the harbour entrance during the night of 3\u20134 May also failed. In March, the charismatic Vice Admiral Makarov had taken command of the First Russian Pacific Squadron with the intention of breaking out of the Port Arthur blockade.\nOn 12 April 1904, two Russian pre-dreadnought battleships, the flagship and the , slipped out of port but struck Japanese mines off Port Arthur. The \"Petropavlovsk\" sank almost immediately, while the \"Pobeda\" had to be towed back to port for extensive repairs.\nOn 15 April 1904, the Russian government made overtures threatening to seize the British war correspondents who were taking the ship into war zones to report for the London-based \"Times\" newspaper, citing concerns about the possibility of the British giving away Russian positions to the Japanese fleet.\nThe Russians quickly learned, and soon employed, the Japanese tactic of offensive minelaying. On 15 May 1904, two Japanese battleships, the and the , were lured into a recently laid Russian minefield off Port Arthur, each striking at least two mines. The \"Hatsuse\" sank within minutes, taking 450 sailors with her, while the \"Yashima\" sank while under tow towards Korea for repairs. On 23 June 1904, a breakout attempt by the Russian squadron, now under the command of Admiral Wilgelm Vitgeft, failed. By the end of the month, Japanese artillery were firing shells into the harbour.\nSiege of Port Arthur.\nThe siege of Port Arthur commenced in April 1904. Japanese troops tried numerous frontal assaults on the fortified hilltops overlooking the harbour, which were defeated with Japanese casualties in the thousands. With the aid of several batteries of 11-inch (280\u00a0mm) L/10 howitzers, the Japanese were eventually able to capture the key hilltop bastion in December 1904. With a spotter at the end of a phone line located at this vantage point, the long-range artillery was able to shell the Russian fleet, which was unable to retaliate against the land-based artillery invisible over the other side of hilltop, and was unable or unwilling to sail out against the blockading fleet. Four Russian battleships and two cruisers were sunk in succession, with the fifth and last battleship being forced to scuttle a few weeks later. Thus, all capital ships of the Russian fleet in the Pacific were sunk. This is probably the only example in military history when such a scale of devastation was achieved by land-based artillery against major warships.\nMeanwhile, attempts to relieve the besieged city by land also failed, and, after the Battle of Liaoyang in late August, the northern Russian force that might have been able to relieve Port Arthur retreated to Mukden (Shenyang). Major General Anatoly Stessel, commander of the Port Arthur garrison, believed that the purpose of defending the city was lost after the fleet had been destroyed. In general, the Russian defenders were suffering disproportionate casualties each time the Japanese attacked. In particular, several large underground mines were exploded in late December, resulting in the costly capture of a few more pieces of the defensive line. Stessel, therefore, decided to surrender to the surprised Japanese generals on 2 January 1905. He made his decision without consulting either the other military staff present, or the Tsar and military command, all of whom disagreed with the decision. Stessel was convicted by a court-martial in 1908 and sentenced to death on account of an incompetent defense and for disobeying orders. He was later pardoned.\nAnglo\u2013Japanese intelligence co-operation.\nEven before the war, British and Japanese intelligence had co-operated against Russia due to the Anglo-Japanese Alliance. During the war, Indian Army stations in Malaya and China often intercepted and read wireless and telegraph cable traffic relating to the war, which was shared with the Japanese. In their turn, the Japanese shared information about Russia with the British with one British official writing of the \"perfect quality\" of Japanese intelligence. In particular, British and Japanese intelligence gathered much evidence that Germany was supporting Russia in the war as part of a bid to disturb the balance of power in Europe, which led to British officials increasingly perceiving Germany as a threat to the international order.\nBattle of Yalu River.\nIn contrast to the Japanese strategy of rapidly gaining ground to control Manchuria, Russian strategy focused on fighting delaying actions to gain time for reinforcements to arrive via the long Trans-Siberian Railway, which was incomplete near Irkutsk at the time. On 1 May 1904, the Battle of Yalu River became the first major land battle of the war; Japanese troops stormed a Russian position led by General Mikhail Zasulich after crossing the river. The defeat of the Russian Eastern Detachment removed the perception that the Japanese would be an easy enemy, that the war would be short, and that Russia would be the overwhelming victor. This was also the first battle in decades to be an Asian victory over a European power and marked Russia's inability to match Japan's military prowess. Japanese troops proceeded to land at several points on the Manchurian coast, and in a series of engagements, drove the Russians back towards Port Arthur. The subsequent battles, including the Battle of Nanshan on 25 May 1904, were marked by heavy Japanese losses largely from attacking entrenched Russian positions.\nBattle of the Yellow Sea.\nWith the death of Admiral Stepan Makarov during the siege of Port Arthur in April 1904, Admiral Wilgelm Vitgeft was appointed commander of the battle fleet and was ordered to make a sortie from Port Arthur and deploy his force to Vladivostok. Flying his flag in the French-built pre-dreadnought , Vitgeft proceeded to lead his six battleships, four cruisers, and 14 torpedo boat destroyers into the Yellow Sea in the early morning of 10 August 1904. Waiting for him was Admiral T\u014dg\u014d and his fleet of four battleships, 10 cruisers, and 18 torpedo boat destroyers.\nAt approximately 12:15, the battleship fleets obtained visual contact with each other, and at 13:00 with T\u014dg\u014d crossing Vitgeft's \"T\", they commenced main battery fire at a range of about eight miles, the longest ever conducted up to that time. For about thirty minutes the battleships pounded one another until they had closed to less than four miles and began to bring their secondary batteries into play. At 18:30, a hit from one of T\u014dg\u014d's battleships struck Vitgeft's flagship's bridge, killing him instantly.\nWith the \"Tsesarevich\"'s helm jammed and their admiral killed in action, she turned from her battle line, causing confusion among her fleet. However, T\u014dg\u014d was determined to sink the Russian flagship and continued pounding her, but she was saved by the gallant charge of the American-built , whose captain successfully drew away T\u014dg\u014d's heavy fire from the Russian flagship. Knowing of the impending battle with the battleship reinforcements arriving from Russia (the Baltic Fleet), T\u014dg\u014d chose not to risk his battleships by pursuing his enemy as they turned about and headed back into Port Arthur, thus ending naval history's longest-range gunnery duel up to that time and the first modern clash of steel battleship fleets on the high seas.\nBaltic Fleet redeploys.\nMeanwhile, the Russians were preparing to reinforce their Far East Fleet by sending the Baltic Fleet, under the command of Admiral Zinovy Rozhestvensky. After a false start caused by engine problems and other mishaps, the squadron finally departed on 15 October 1904, and sailed halfway around the world from the Baltic Sea to the Pacific via the Cape Route around the Cape of Good Hope in the course of a seven-month odyssey that was to attract worldwide attention.\nThe Dogger Bank incident on 21 October 1904, where the Russian fleet fired on British fishing boats that they mistook for Japanese torpedo boats, nearly sparked a war with the United Kingdom (an ally of Japan, but neutral, unless provoked). The British pressured the French and Portuguese not to let the Russians fleet in their colonial ports to recoal, forcing the Russians to coal in the open ocean or at anchorages which was much more inefficient. Being denied docking at ports also exacerbated existing problems in the fleet, such as rotting food supplies, irregular mail delivery, and lack of shore leave. All of these plus the long voyage further sapped Russia sailors' health and morale, so for the upcoming battle they would be facing Japanese sailors who were well-rested by contrast.\nConcerns that the draught of the newer battleships, which had proven to be considerably greater than designed, would prevent their passage through the Suez Canal caused the fleet to separate after leaving Tangiers on 3 November 1904. These concerns though may have been an excuse to hide worries over passing through British controlled waters. The newer battleships and a few cruisers proceeded around the Cape of Good Hope under Rozhestvensky while the older battleships and lighter cruisers passed through the Suez Canal under the command of Admiral Dmitry Gustavovich von F\u00f6lkersahm. Both sections of the fleet then rendezvoused at Madagascar as planned.\nEffects on civilians.\nDuring the fighting in Manchuria, there were Russian troops that looted and burned some Chinese villages, raped women and often killed those who resisted or did not understand what they wanted. The Russian justification for all this was that Chinese civilians, being Asian, must have been helping their fellow Asians (the Japanese) inflict defeat on the Russians, and therefore deserved to be punished. The Russian troops were gripped by the fear of the \"Yellow Peril\", and saw all Asians, not just the Japanese, as the enemy. All of the Russian soldiers were much feared by the Chinese population of Manchuria, but it was the Cossacks whom they feared the most on the account of their brutality and insatiable desire to loot. Largely because of the more disciplined behavior of the Japanese, the Han and Manchu population of Manchuria tended to be pro-Japanese. Russian soldiers also reportedly raped Korean women, for example in the city of Chongju. The Japanese were also prone to looting, albeit in a considerably less brutal manner than the Russians, and summarily executed any Chinese or Manchu whom they suspected of being spies. The city of Liaoyang had the misfortune to be sacked three times within three days: first by the Russians, then by the Chinese police, and finally by the Japanese.\nThe Japanese hired Chinese bandits known variously as the honghuzi, hunghutze, or \"khunkhuzy\" to engage in guerrilla warfare by attacking Russian supply columns. Only once did the honghuzi attack Japanese forces, and that attack was apparently motivated by the honghuzi mistaking the Japanese forces for a Russian one. Zhang Zuolin, a prominent bandit leader and the future \"Old Marshal\" who would rule Manchuria as a warlord between 1916 and 1928, worked as a honghuzi for the Japanese. Manchuria was still officially part of the Chinese Empire, and the Chinese civil servants tried their best to be neutral as Russian and Japanese troops marched across Manchuria. In the parts of Manchuria occupied by the Japanese, Tokyo appointed \"civil governors\" who worked to improve health, sanitation and the state of the roads. These activities were also self-interested, as improved roads lessened Japanese logistics problems while improved health amongst the Chinese lessened the dangers of diseases infecting the Japanese troops. By contrast, the Russians made no effort to improve sanitation or health amongst the Chinese, and destroyed everything when they retreated. Many Chinese tended to see the Japanese as the lesser evil.\nCampaign of 1905.\nWith the fall of Port Arthur, the Japanese 3rd Army could continue northward to reinforce positions south of Russian-held Mukden. With the onset of the severe Manchurian winter, there had been no major land engagements since the Battle of Shaho the previous year. The two sides camped opposite each other along 60 to of front lines south of Mukden.\nBattle of Sandepu.\nThe Russian Second Army under General Oskar Gripenberg, between 25 and 29 January, attacked the Japanese left flank near the town of Sandepu, almost breaking through. This caught the Japanese by surprise. However, without support from other Russian units the attack stalled, Gripenberg was ordered to halt by Kuropatkin and the battle was inconclusive. The Japanese knew that they needed to destroy the Russian army in Manchuria before Russian reinforcements arrived via the Trans-Siberian railroad.\nBattle of Mukden.\nThe Battle of Mukden commenced on 20 February 1905. In the following days Japanese forces proceeded to assault the right and left flanks of Russian forces surrounding Mukden, along a front. Approximately half a million men were involved in the fighting. Both sides were well entrenched and were backed by hundreds of artillery pieces. After days of harsh fighting, added pressure from the flanks forced both ends of the Russian defensive line to curve backwards. Seeing they were about to be encircled, the Russians began a general retreat, fighting a series of fierce rearguard actions, which soon deteriorated in the confusion and collapse of Russian forces. On 10 March 1905, after three weeks of fighting, General Kuropatkin decided to withdraw to the north of Mukden. The Russians suffered an estimated 90,000 casualties in the battle.\nThe retreating Russian Manchurian Army formations disbanded as fighting units, but the Japanese failed to destroy them completely. The Japanese themselves had suffered heavy casualties and were in no condition to pursue. Although the Battle of Mukden was a major defeat for the Russians and was the most decisive land battle ever fought by the Japanese, the final victory still depended on the navy.\nBattle of Tsushima.\nAfter a stopover of several weeks at the minor port of Nossi-B\u00e9, Madagascar, that had been reluctantly allowed by neutral France in order not to jeopardize its relations with its Russian ally, the Russian Baltic fleet proceeded to Cam Ranh Bay in French Indochina passing on its way through the Singapore Strait between 7 and 10 April 1905. The fleet finally reached the Sea of Japan in May 1905. The logistics of such an undertaking in the age of coal power was astounding. The squadron required approximately 500,000\u00a0tons of coal to complete the journey, yet by international law, it was not allowed to coal at neutral ports, forcing the Russian authorities to acquire a large fleet of colliers to supply the fleet at sea. The weight of the ships' stores needed for such a long journey was to be another major problem.\nThe Russian Second Pacific Squadron (the renamed Baltic Fleet) sailed 18,000 nautical miles (33,000\u00a0km) to relieve Port Arthur only to hear the demoralizing news that Port Arthur had fallen while it was still at Madagascar. Admiral Rozhestvensky's only hope now was to reach the port of Vladivostok. There were three routes to Vladivostok, with the shortest and most direct passing through Tsushima Strait between Korea and Japan. However, this was also the most dangerous route as it passed between the Japanese home islands and the Japanese naval bases in Korea.\nAdmiral T\u014dg\u014d was aware of Russian progress and understood that, with the fall of Port Arthur, the Second and Third Pacific squadrons would try to reach the only other Russian port in the Far East, Vladivostok. Battle plans were laid down and ships were repaired and refitted to intercept the Russian fleet.\nThe Japanese Combined Fleet, which had originally consisted of six battleships, was now down to four battleships and one second class battleship (two had been lost to mines), but still retained its cruisers, destroyers, and torpedo boats. The Russian Second Pacific Squadron contained eight battleships, including four new battleships of the , as well as cruisers, destroyers and other auxiliaries for a total of 38 ships.\nBy the end of May, the Second Pacific Squadron was on the last leg of its journey to Vladivostok, taking the shorter, riskier route between Korea and Japan, and travelling at night to avoid discovery. Unfortunately for the Russians, while in compliance with the rules of war, the two trailing hospital ships had continued to burn their lights, which were spotted by the Japanese armed merchant cruiser \"Shinano Maru\". Wireless communication was used to inform Togo's headquarters, where the Combined Fleet was immediately ordered to sortie. Still receiving reports from scouting forces, the Japanese were able to position their fleet to \"cross the \"T\"\" of the Russian fleet. The Japanese engaged the Russians in the Tsushima Straits on 27\u201328 May 1905. The Russian fleet was virtually annihilated, losing eight battleships, numerous smaller vessels, and more than 5,000 men, while the Japanese lost three torpedo boats and 116 men. Only three Russian vessels escaped to Vladivostok, while six others were interned in neutral ports. After the Battle of Tsushima, a combined Japanese Army and Navy operation commanded by Admiral Kataoka Shichir\u014d occupied Sakhalin Island to force the Russians into suing for peace.\nPeace and aftermath.\nTreaty of Portsmouth.\nMilitary leaders and senior tsarist officials agreed before the war that Russia was a much stronger nation and had little to fear from the Empire of Japan. The fanatical zeal of the Japanese infantrymen astonished the Russians, who were dismayed by the apathy, backwardness, and defeatism of their own soldiers. Russian soldiers fought fiercely but this was contrasted by the cautiousness of their officers, who sometimes chose to retreat without a good reason, and the Russian commander Kuropatkin on two occasions prohibited his subordinates from counter-attacking the Japanese. In both of the major battles in the fall of 1904 (Liaoyang and Shaho), Kuropatkin ordered a withdrawal. As a result of this leadership the Russians were always reacting to the Japanese rather than taking the initiative. After the loss of Russia's main supply base and headquarters at Mukden, Kuropatkin was relieved of command, and his replacement, Linevich, planned on going on the offensive but peace talks began before then. The Russian mobilization was initially of older reservists, with less training (some having no experience with the Mosin-Nagant rifle) and no interest in the war in the Far East. It was not until after the Battle of Mukden that new recruits and younger reservists began arriving, and by the summer of 1905 the Russian army fielded almost one million well-equipped and -trained soldiers in the Far East against an exhausted Japanese army, but the naval defeat at Tsushima made negotiations more desired.\nThe defeats of the Army and Navy shook Russian confidence. Throughout 1905, the Imperial Russian government was rocked by revolution. The population was against escalation of the war. The empire was certainly capable of sending more troops, but this would make little difference in the outcome due to the poor state of the economy, the embarrassing defeats of the Russian Army and Navy by the Japanese, and the relative unimportance to Russia of the disputed land, which made the war extremely unpopular.\nBoth sides accepted the offer of United States President Theodore Roosevelt to mediate. Meetings were held in Portsmouth, New Hampshire, with Sergei Witte leading the Russian delegation and Baron Komura leading the Japanese delegation. The Treaty of Portsmouth was signed on 5 September 1905 at the Portsmouth Naval Shipyard. Witte became Russian Prime Minister the same year.\nAfter courting the Japanese, Roosevelt decided to support the Tsar's refusal to pay indemnities, a move that policymakers in Tokyo interpreted as signifying that the United States had more than a passing interest in Asian affairs. Russia recognized Korea as part of the Japanese sphere of influence and agreed to evacuate Manchuria. Japan would annex Korea in 1910 (Japan\u2013Korea Treaty of 1910), with scant protest from other powers. From 1910 until the end of its rule of Korea in 1945, the Japanese adopted a strategy of using the Korean Peninsula as a gateway to the Asian continent and making Korea's economy subordinate to Japanese economic interests.\nRussia also signed over its 25-year leasehold rights to Port Arthur, including the naval base and the peninsula around it, and ceded the southern half of Sakhalin Island to Japan. Sakhalin would be taken back by the Soviet Union following the defeat of the Japanese in World War II.\nRoosevelt earned the Nobel Peace Prize for his effort. George E. Mowry concludes that Roosevelt handled the arbitration well, doing an \"excellent job of balancing Russian and Japanese power in the Orient, where the supremacy of either constituted a threat to growing America\". As Japan had won every major battle on land and sea and as the Japanese people, who had received news about victory after victory did not understand that the costs of the war had pushed their nation to the verge of bankruptcy, the Japanese public was enraged by the Treaty of Portsmouth as many Japanese had expected the war to end with Russia ceding the Russian Far East to Japan and for Russia to pay an indemnity. The United States was widely blamed in Japan for the Treaty of Portsmouth with Roosevelt having allegedly \"cheated\" Japan out of its rightful claims at the peace conference. On 5 September 1905 the Hibiya incendiary incident \u2013 as the anti-American riots were euphemistically described \u2013 erupted in Tokyo and lasted for three days, forcing the government to declare martial law.\nThe Treaty of Portsmouth overlooked Montenegro's participation in the war against Japan, leaving the two countries still technically belligerents until 2006, when the Japanese prime minister dispatched the Vice-Minister of Foreign affairs (Akiko Yamanaka) with a personal letter from him for the Prime Minister of Montenegro formally ending the war.\nCasualties.\nSources do not agree on a precise number of deaths from the war because of a lack of body counts for confirmation. The number of Japanese Army dead in combat or died of wounds is put at around 59,000 with around 27,000 additional casualties from disease, and between 6,000 and 12,000 wounded. Estimates of Russian Army dead range from around 34,000 to around 53,000 men with a further 9,000\u201319,000 dying of disease and around 75,000 captured. The total number of dead for both sides is generally stated as around 130,000 to 170,000.\nAfter the siege of Port Arthur in 1905, General Nogi Maresuke, who led the Japanese army during the siege, felt so guilty about the loss of many Japanese soldiers that he wanted to commit ritual suicide, but the Japanese Emperor Meiji refused to allow it; instead, Maresuke mentored the future Emperor Hirohito and built hospitals. After Emperor Meiji died in 1912, Maresuke and his wife committed suicide, 7 years after the siege of Port Arthur.\nPolitical consequences.\nThis was the first major military victory in the modern era of an Asian power over a European nation. Russia's defeat was met with shock in the West and across the Far East. Japan's prestige rose greatly as it came to be seen as a modern nation. Concurrently, Russia lost virtually its entire Pacific and Baltic fleets, and also much international esteem. This was particularly true in the eyes of Germany and Austria-Hungary before World War I. Russia was France's and Serbia's ally; its loss of prestige emboldened Germany in planning for war with France and supporting Austria-Hungary's war with Serbia.\nEffects on Russia.\nThe defeat of 1905 led in the short term to Russian military reforms that allowed it to face Germany in World War I.\nThough there had been popular support for the war among the Russian public following the Japanese attack at Port Arthur in 1904, that popular support soon turned to discontent after suffering multiple defeats at the hands of the Japanese forces. For many Russians, the immediate shock of unexpected humiliation at the hands of Japan caused the conflict to be viewed as a metaphor for the shortcomings of the Romanov autocracy. This discontent added fuel to the simmering Russian Revolution of 1905, an event Nicholas II had hoped to avoid by taking intransigent negotiating stances. To quell the uprising, Nicholas II issued the October Manifesto, which included only limited reforms such as the Duma and failed to address the societal problems of Russia at the time. Twelve years later, that discontent would boil over into the February Revolution of 1917.\nIn Poland, which Russia partitioned in the late 18th century, and where Russian rule already caused two major uprisings, the population was so restless that an army of 250,000\u2013300,000\u00a0\u2013 larger than the one facing the Japanese\u00a0\u2013 had to be stationed to put down the unrest. Russia had mobilized thousands of Polish reservists during the war with Japan, contributing to unrest. Contemporary reports found that some Poles preferred death over fighting the Japanese for Russia.\nSome political leaders of the Polish insurrection movement (in particular, J\u00f3zef Pi\u0142sudski and Roman Dmowski) sent emissaries to Japan to collaborate on sabotage and intelligence gathering within the Russian Empire and even plan a Japanese-aided uprising, but Japan never took these Polish requests seriously.\nEffects on Japan.\nJapan had become the rising Asian power and had proven that its military could fight the major powers in Europe with success. Most Western powers were stunned that the Japanese not only prevailed but decisively defeated Russia. In the Russo\u2013Japanese War, Japan had also portrayed a sense of readiness in taking a more active and leading role in Asian affairs, which in turn had led to widespread nationalism throughout the region.\nAlthough the war had ended in a victory for Japan, Japanese public opinion was shocked by the very restrained peace terms which were negotiated at the war's end. Widespread discontent spread through the populace upon the announcement of the treaty terms, causing the Hibiya incendiary incident. Riots erupted in major cities in Japan following the incident, including demonstrations in front of the US Legation in Tokyo. Two specific requirements, expected after such a costly victory, were especially lacking: territorial gains and monetary reparations to Japan. The peace accord led to feelings of distrust, as the Japanese had intended to retain all of Sakhalin Island but were forced to settle for half of it after being pressured by the United States, with President Roosevelt opting to support Nicholas II's stance on not ceding territory or paying reparations. The Japanese had wanted reparations to help families recover from lost fathers and sons as well as heavy taxation by the government to finance the war. Without them, they were at a loss. The outcome of the Portsmouth peace negotiations, mediated by the U.S., was received by the general Japanese population with disbelief on 5 and 6 September when all the major newspapers reported the content of the signed treaty in lengthy editorials.\nAs a result, the wartime government, the First Katsura Cabinet, which remained in power for the longest period (1,681 days) in the history of Japanese democracy to date, declared martial law to suppress the riots on 6 September (one day after the signing in Portsmouth). Martial law was lifted on 29 November after more than 2,000 people were arrested, but the Cabinet resigned on 22 December after ratifying the treaty on 10 October, as if taking the responsibility for a lost war.\nAssessment.\nHistorical significance.\nThe Russo\u2013Japanese War introduced a number of characteristics that came to define 20th-century politics and warfare. Many of the innovations brought by the Industrial Revolution, such as rapid-firing artillery and machine guns, as well as more accurate rifles, were first tested on a mass scale. Military operations on both sea and land showed that modern warfare had undergone a considerable change since the Franco-Prussian War of 1870\u201371. Most army commanders had previously envisioned using these weapon systems to dominate the battlefield on an operational and tactical level but as events played out, the technological advances would forever alter the conditions of war as well.\nFor East Asia this was the first confrontation in thirty years involving two modern armed forces. The advanced weaponry led to massive casualties. Neither Japan nor Russia had prepared for the number of deaths that would occur in this new kind of warfare, and neither had the resources to compensate for such losses. This also left its impression on society at large, with the emergence of transnational and nongovernmental organizations, like the Red Cross, becoming prominent after the war. The consequent identification of common problems and challenges began the slow process that came to dominate much of the 20th century.\nIt has also been argued that the conflict had characteristics of what was later to be described as \"total war\". These included the mass mobilization of troops into battle and the need for so extensive a supply of equipment, armaments, and supplies that both domestic support and foreign aid were required. It is also argued that domestic response in Russia to the inefficiencies of the tsarist government set in motion the eventual dissolution of the Romanov dynasty.\nReception around the world.\nTo the Western powers, Japan's victory demonstrated the emergence of a new Asian regional power. With the Russian defeat, some scholars have argued that the war had set in motion a change in the global world order with the emergence of Japan as not only a regional power but as the main Asian power. Rather more than the possibilities of diplomatic partnership were emerging, however. The US and Australian reaction to the changed balance of power brought by the war was mixed with fears of a Yellow Peril eventually shifting from China to Japan. American figures such as W. E. B. Du Bois and Lothrop Stoddard saw the victory as a challenge to western supremacy. This was reflected in Austria, where Baron Christian von Ehrenfels interpreted the challenge in racial as well as cultural terms, arguing that \"the absolute necessity of a radical sexual reform for the continued existence of the western races of men has\u00a0... been raised from the level of discussion to the level of a scientifically proven fact\". To stop the Japanese \"Yellow Peril\" would require drastic changes to society and sexuality in the West.\nCertainly the Japanese success increased self-confidence among anti-colonial nationalists in colonised Asian countries \u2013 Vietnamese, Indonesians, Indians and Filipinos \u2013 and to those in declining countries like the Ottoman Empire and Persia in immediate danger of being absorbed by the Western powers. It also encouraged the Chinese who, despite having been at war with the Japanese only a decade before, still considered Westerners the greater threat. As Sun Yat-sen commented, \"We regarded that Russian defeat by Japan as the defeat of the West by the East. We regarded the Japanese victory as our own victory\". Even in far-off Tibet the war was a subject of conversation when Sven Hedin visited the Panchen Lama in February 1907. While for Jawaharlal Nehru, then only an aspiring politician in British India, \"Japan's victory lessened the feeling of inferiority from which most of us suffered. A great European power had been defeated, thus Asia could still defeat Europe as it had done in the past.\" Within the Ottoman Empire, the Committee of Union and Progress embraced Japan as a role model.\nLike many Asians, many African Americans welcomed the Japanese victory as a blow against global white supremacy. Whether left or right, moderate or radical, black politicians and activists saw Japan as a role model that showed that the white man should not underestimate non-white nations. Joseph Bryant, writing in The Colored American Magazine, claimed that the Japanese victory marked \"the beginning of a new era\" and predicted that Japan's rise would mean the death of \"absolute Aryan domination of the world\" and that in the next century Asians, not Europeans, would lead civilization.\nIn Europe, subject populations were similarly encouraged. James Joyce's novel \"Ulysses\", set in Dublin in 1904, contains hopeful Irish allusions as to the outcome of the war. And in partitioned Poland the artist J\u00f3zef Mehoffer chose 1905 to paint his \"Europa Jubilans\" (Europe rejoicing), which portrays an aproned maid taking her ease on a sofa against a background of Eastern artefacts. Painted following demonstrations against the war and Russian cultural suppression, and in the year of Russia's defeat, its subtly coded message looks forward to a time when the Tsarist masters will be defeated in Europe as they had been in Asia.\nThe significance of the war was also evident to Socialist thinkers:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Russo-Japanese War now gives to all an awareness that even war and peace in Europe\u00a0\u2013 its destiny\u00a0\u2013 is not decided between the four walls of the European concert, but outside it, in the gigantic maelstrom of world and colonial politics. And it's in this that the real meaning of the current war resides for social-democracy, even if we set aside its immediate effect: the collapse of Russian absolutism. This war brings the gaze of the international proletariat back to the great political and economic connectedness of the world, and violently dissipates in our ranks the particularism, the pettiness of ideas that form in any period of political calm.\u2014\u200a\nMilitary results.\nRussia had lost two of its three fleets. Only its Black Sea Fleet remained, the result of the 1878 Treaty of Berlin which had prevented the fleet from leaving the Black Sea through the Bosphorus, since Turkey and Britain would not waive the relevant clauses. The Berlin treaty superseded the London Straits Convention of 1841, which had been favourable to Russia.\nJapan became the sixth-most powerful naval force by combined tonnage, while the Russian Navy declined to one barely stronger than that of Austria\u2013Hungary. The actual costs of the war were large enough to affect the Russian economy and, despite grain exports, the nation developed an external balance of payments deficit. The cost of military re-equipment and re-expansion after 1905 pushed the economy further into deficit, although the size of the deficit was obscured.\nThe Japanese were on the offensive for most of the war and used massed infantry assaults against defensive positions, which would later become the standard of all European armies during World War I. The battles of the Russo\u2013Japanese War, in which machine guns and artillery took a heavy toll on Russian and Japanese troops, were a precursor to the trench warfare of World War I. A German military advisor sent to Japan, Jakob Meckel, had a tremendous impact on the development of the Japanese military training, tactics, strategy, and organization. His reforms were credited with Japan's overwhelming victory over China in the First Sino-Japanese War of 1894\u20131895. However, his over-reliance on infantry in offensive campaigns also led to a large number of Japanese casualties.\nMilitary and economic exhaustion affected both countries. Japanese historians regard this war as a turning point for Japan, and a key to understanding the reasons why Japan may have failed militarily and politically later. After the war, acrimony was felt at every level of Japanese society, and it became the consensus within Japan that their nation had been treated as the defeated power during the peace conference. As time went on, this feeling, coupled with the sense of \"arrogance\" at becoming a Great Power, grew and added to growing Japanese hostility towards the West, and fuelled Japan's military and imperial ambitions. Furthermore, Japan's substantiated interests in Korea and Liaodong led to the creation of a Kwantung Army, which became an autonomous and increasingly powerful regional force. Only five years after the war, Japan \"de jure\" annexed Korea as part of its colonial empire. Two decades after that, the Kwantung Army staged an incident that led to the invasion of Manchuria in the Mukden Incident; the Kwantung Army eventually came to be heavily involved in the state's politics and administration, leading to a series of localized conflicts with Chinese regional warlords that finally extended into the Second Sino-Japanese War in 1937. As a result, most Chinese historians consider the Russo\u2013Japanese War as a key development in Japan's spiral into militarism in the 1920s\u201330s.\nFollowing the victory of the Battle of Tsushima, Japan's erstwhile British ally presented a lock of Admiral Nelson's hair to the Imperial Japanese Navy, judging its performance then as on a par with Britain's victory at Trafalgar in 1805. It is still on display at Kyouiku Sankoukan, a public museum maintained by the Japan Self-Defence Force. Nevertheless, there was a consequent shift in British strategic thinking, resulting in enlargement of its naval docks at Auckland, New Zealand; Bombay, British India; Fremantle and Sydney, Australia; Simon's Town, Cape Colony; Singapore and British Hong Kong. The naval war confirmed the direction of the British Admiralty's thinking in tactical terms even as it undermined its strategic grasp of a changing world. Tactical orthodoxy, for example, assumed that a naval battle would imitate the conditions of stationary combat and that ships would engage in one long line sailing on parallel courses; but more flexible tactical thinking would now be required as a firing ship and its target manoeuvred independently.\nMilitary attach\u00e9s and observers.\nMilitary and civilian observers from every major power closely followed the course of the war. Most were able to report on events from the perspective of embedded positions within the land and naval forces of both Russia and Japan. These military attach\u00e9s and other observers prepared first-hand accounts of the war and analytical papers. In-depth observer narratives of the war and more narrowly focused professional journal articles were written soon after the war; these post-war reports conclusively illustrated the battlefield destructiveness of this conflict. This was the first time the tactics of entrenched positions for infantry defended with machine guns and artillery became vitally important. Both would become dominant factors in World War I. Even though entrenched positions had already been a significant part of both the Franco-Prussian War and the American Civil War, it is now apparent that the high casualty counts, and the tactical lessons readily available to observer nations, were completely disregarded in preparations for war in Europe, and during much of the course of World War I.\nIn 1904\u20131905, Ian Standish Monteith Hamilton was the military attach\u00e9 of the British Indian Army serving with the Imperial Japanese Army in Manchuria. As one of the several military attach\u00e9s from Western countries, he was the first to arrive in Japan after the start of the war.\nHe therefore would be recognized as the dean of multi-national attach\u00e9s and observers in this conflict, although out-ranked by British field marshal, William Gustavus Nicholson, 1st Baron Nicholson, who was later to become chief of the Imperial General Staff.\nEconomics.\nDespite its gold reserves of 106.3\u00a0million pounds, Russia's pre-war financial situation was not enviable. The country had large annual budget deficits, and was largely dependent on borrowed money.\nRussia's war effort was funded primarily by France, in a series of loans totalling 800\u00a0million francs (\u00a330.4\u00a0million); another loan in the amount of 600\u00a0million francs was agreed upon, but later cancelled. These loans were extended within a climate of mass bribing of the French press (made necessary by Russia's precarious economic and social situation and poor military performance). Although initially reluctant to participate in the war, the French government and major banks were co-operative since it became clear that Russian and French economic interests were tied. In addition to French money, Russia secured a loan in the amount of 500\u00a0million marks (\u00a324.5\u00a0million) from Germany, who also financed Japan's war effort.\nJapan's pre-war gold reserves were a modest \u00a311.7\u00a0million; a major portion of the total cost of the war was covered by money borrowed from the United Kingdom, Canada, and the United States. During his canvassing expedition in London, the Japanese vice-governor of the Bank of Japan Takahashi Korekiyo met Jacob Schiff, an American banker and head of Kuhn, Loeb &amp; Co. Schiff, in response to Russia's anti-Jewish pogroms and sympathetic to Japan's cause, extended a critical series of loans to the Empire of Japan, in the amount of 200\u00a0million US dollars (\u00a341.2\u00a0million). He also raised loans from the Rothschild family in Britain. Japan's total war expenditure was 2,150\u00a0million yen, of which 38%, or 820\u00a0million yen, was raised overseas.\nCultural legacy.\nVisual arts.\nThe Russo\u2013Japanese War was covered by dozens of foreign journalists who sent back sketches that were turned into lithographs and other reproducible forms. Propaganda images were circulated by both sides, often in the form of postcards and based on insulting racial stereotypes. These were produced not only by the combatants but by those from European countries who supported one or the other side or had a commercial or colonial stake in the area. War photographs were also popular, appearing in both the press and in book form.\nIn Russia, the war was covered by anonymous satirical graphic luboks for sale in markets, recording the war for the domestic audience. Around 300 were made before their creation was banned by the Russian government. Their Japanese equivalents were woodblock prints. These had been common during the Sino-Japanese war a decade earlier and celebrations of the new conflict tended to repeat the same imagery and situations. But by this time in Japan postcards had become the most common form of communication and they soon replaced prints as a medium for topographical imagery and war reportage. In some ways, however, they were still dependent on the print for their pictorial conventions, not least in issuing the cards in series that assembled into a composite scene or design, either as diptychs, triptychs or even more ambitious formats. However, captioning swiftly moved from the calligraphic side inscription to a printed title below, and not just in Japanese but in English and other European languages. There was a lively sense that these images served not only as mementoes but also as propaganda statements.\nWar artists were to be found on the Russian side and even figured among the casualties. Vasily Vereshchagin went down with the \"Petropavlovsk\", Admiral Makarov's flagship, when it was sunk by mines. However, his last work, a picture of a council of war presided over by the admiral, was recovered almost undamaged. Another artist, Mykola Samokysh, first came to notice for his reports during the war and the paintings worked up from his diary sketch-books. Other depictions appeared after the event. The two by the Georgian na\u00efve painter Niko Pirosmani from 1906 must have been dependent on newspaper reports since he was not present. Then, in 1914 at the outset of World War I, Yury Repin made an episode during the Battle of Yalu River the subject of a broad heroic canvas.\nMusic.\nOn either side, there were lyrics lamenting the necessity of fighting in a foreign land, far from home. One of the earliest of several Russian songs still performed today was the waltz \"Amur's Waves\" (\"Amurskie volny\"), which evokes the melancholy of standing watch on the motherland far east frontier.\nTwo others grew out of incidents during the war. \"On the Hills of Manchuria\" (\"Na sopkah Manchzhurii\"; 1906) is another waltz composed by Ilya Shatrov, a decorated military musician whose regiment suffered badly in the Battle of Mukden. Originally only the music was published, and the words by Stepan Petrov were added later.\nThe second song, \"Variag\", commemorates the Battle of Chemulpo Bay in which that cruiser and the gunboat \"Korietz\" steamed out to confront an encircling Japanese squadron rather than surrender. That act of heroism was first celebrated in a German song by Rudolf Greintz in 1907, which was quickly translated into Russian and sung to a martial accompaniment. These lyrics mourned the fallen lying in their graves and threatened revenge.\nNikolai Rimsky-Korsakov also reacted to the war by composing the satirical opera \"The Golden Cockerel\", completed in 1907. Although it was ostensibly based on a verse fairy tale by Alexander Pushkin written in 1834, the authorities quickly realised its true target and immediately banned it from performance. The opera was premiered in 1909, after Rimsky-Korsakov's death, and even then with modifications required by the censors.\nPoetry.\nSome Japanese poetry dealing with the war has remained popular more than a century later. General Nogi Maresuke's \"Outside the Goldland Fortress\" was learned by generations of schoolchildren and valued for its bleak stoicism. The army surgeon Mori \u014cgai kept a verse diary which tackled such themes as racism, strategic mistakes, and the ambiguities of victory, which has gained appreciation with historical hindsight. In the present day there is also a growing appreciation of Yosano Akiko's parting poem to her brother as he left for the war, which includes the critical lines:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEven the Emperor Meiji himself entered the poetic lists, writing in answer to all the lamentations about death in a foreign land that the patriotic soul returns to the homeland.\nEuropean treatments were similarly varied. Jane H. Oakley attempted an epic treatment of the conflict in 86 cantos. The French poet Blaise Cendrars was later to represent himself as on a Russian train on its way to Manchuria at the time in his \"La prose du Transsib\u00e9rien et de la Petite Jehanne de France\" (1913) and energetically evoked the results of the war along the way:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMuch later, the Scottish poet Douglas Dunn devoted an epistolary poem in verse to the naval war in \"The Donkey's Ears: Politovsky's Letters Home\" (2000). This follows the voyage of the Russian Imperial Navy flagship \"Kniaz\" to its sinking at the Battle of Tsushima.\nFiction.\nFictional coverage of the war in English began even before it was over. An early example was Allen Upward's \"The International Spy\". Set in both Russia and Japan, it ends with the Dogger Bank incident involving the Baltic Fleet. The political thinking displayed there is typical of the time. There is great admiration for the Japanese, who were British allies. Russia is in turmoil, but the main impetus towards war is not imperialism as such but commercial forces. \"Every student of modern history has remarked the fact that all recent wars have been promoted by great combinations of capitalists. The causes which formerly led to war between nation and nation have ceased to operate\" (p.\u00a040). The true villain plotting in the background, however, is the German Emperor, seeking to destabilise the European balance of power in his country's favour. Towards the end of the novel, the narrator steals a German submarine and successfully foils a plot to involve the British in the war. The submarine motif reappeared in George Griffith's science fiction novel, \"The Stolen Submarine\" (1904), although in this case it is a French super-submarine which its developer sells to the Russians for use against the Japanese in another tale of international intrigue.\nThough most English-language fiction of the period took the Japanese side, the Rev. W. W. Walker's Canadian novella, \"Alter Ego\", is an exception. It features a Canadian volunteer in the Russian army who, on his return, agrees to talk about his experiences to an isolated upcountry community and relates his part in the Battle of Mukden. Though this incident only occupies two of the book's six chapters, it is used to illustrate the main message there, that war is \"anti-Christian and barbarous, except in a defensive sense\" (Ch. 3).\nVarious aspects of the war were also common in contemporary children's fiction. Categorised as Boys' Own adventure stories, they offer few insights into the conflict, being generally based on news articles and sharing without any reflection in the contemporary culture of imperialism. Among these, Herbert Strang was responsible for two novels: \"Kobo\" told from the Japanese side, and \"Brown of Moukden\" viewed from the Russian side. Three more were written by the prolific American author, Edward Stratemeyer: \"Under the Mikado's Flag\", \"At the Fall of Port Arthur\", and \"Under Togo for Japan, or Three Young Americans on Land and Sea\" (1906). Two other English-language stories begin with the action at Port Arthur and follow the events thereafter: \"A Soldier of Japan: a tale of the Russo\u2013Japanese War\" by Captain Frederick Sadleir Brereton, and \"The North Pacific\" by Willis Boyd Allen (1855\u20131938). Two more also involve young men fighting in the Japanese navy: Americans in \"For the Mikado\" by Kirk Munroe, and a temporarily disgraced English officer in \"Under the Ensign of the Rising Sun\" by Harry Collingwood, the pen-name of William Joseph Cosens Lancaster (1851\u20131922), whose speciality was naval fiction.\nAnother literary genre affected by the outcome of the war was invasion literature, either fuelled by racialist fears or generated by the international power struggle. Shunr\u014d Oshikawa's novel \"The Submarine Battleship\" (\"Kaitei Gunkan\") was published in 1900 before the actual fighting began but shared the imperial tensions that produced it. It is the story of an armoured ram-armed submarine involved in a Russo\u2013Japanese conflict. Three other novels appeared in 1908 and are thought of as significant now because of their prophetic dimension. American author Arthur Wellesley Kipling (1885\u20131947) prefaced his \"The New Dominion \u2013 A Tale of Tomorrow's Wars\" with a note counselling future vigilance. The scenario there is an attack by German and Japanese allies which the US and British navies victoriously fend off. In Germany itself an air attack on the American fleet is described by Ferdinand Heinrich Grautoff (1871\u20131935), writing under the name Parabellum, in his novel \"Banzai!\". Published in Berlin in 1908, it was translated into English the following year. An Australian author using the pseudonym Charles H. Kirmess first serialised his \"The Commonwealth Crisis\" and then revised it for book publication as \"The Australian Crisis\" in 1909. It is set in 1912 and told from the standpoint of 1922, following a military invasion of Australia's Northern Territory and colonisation by Japanese settlers.\nMost Russian fictional accounts of the war had a documentary element. Alexey Novikov-Priboy served in the Baltic Fleet and wrote about the conflict on his return, but his early work was suppressed. It was not until the changed political climate under Soviet rule that he began writing his historical epic \"Tsushima\", based on his own experiences on board the battleship as well as on testimonies of fellow sailors and government archives. The first part was published in 1932, the second in 1935, and the whole novel was later awarded the Stalin Prize. It describes the heroism of Russian sailors and certain officers whose defeat, in accordance with the new Soviet thinking, was due to the criminal negligence of the Imperial Naval command. A German novel by Frank Thiess, originally published as \"Tsushima\" in 1936 (and later translated as \"The Voyage of Forgotten Men\"), covered the same journey round the world to defeat.\nLater there appeared a first-hand account of the siege of Port Arthur by Alexander Stepanov (1892\u20131965). He had been present there as the 12-year-old son of a battery commander and his novel, \"Port Arthur: a historical narrative\" (1944), is based on his own diaries and his father's notes. The work is considered one of the best historical novels of the Soviet period. A later novel in which the war appears is Valentin Pikul's \"The Three Ages of Okini-San\" (1981). Centred on the life of Vladimir Kokovtsov, who rose through the ranks to admiral of the Russian fleet, it covers the period from the Russo\u2013Japanese War through to the February and October Revolutions. A much later Russian genre novel uses the period of the war as background. This is Boris Akunin's \"The Diamond Chariot\" (2003), in the first part of which the detective Erast Fandorin is charged with protecting the Trans-Siberian Railway from Japanese sabotage.\nThe main historical novel dealing with the war from the Japanese side is Shiba Ry\u014dtar\u014d's \"Clouds Above the Hill\", published serially in several volumes between 1968 and 1972, and translated in English in 2013. The closely researched story spans the decade from the Sino-Japanese War to the Russo\u2013Japanese War and went on to become the nation's favourite book.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44576", "revid": "45789152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44576", "title": "Polynomial time", "text": ""}
{"id": "44578", "revid": "20466351", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44578", "title": "Big O notation", "text": "Describes approximate behavior of a function\nBig \"O\" notation is a mathematical notation that describes the approximate size of a function on a domain. Big O is a member of a family of notations invented by German mathematicians Paul Bachmann and Edmund Landau \nand expanded by others, collectively called Bachmann\u2013Landau notation. The letter O was chosen by Bachmann to stand for \"Ordnung\", meaning the order of approximation.\nIn computer science, big O notation is used to classify algorithms according to how their run time or space requirements\n grow as the input size grows. \nIn analytic number theory, big O notation is often used to express bounds on the growth of an arithmetical function; one well-known example is the remainder term in the prime number theorem.\nIn mathematical analysis, including calculus,\nBig O notation is used to bound the error when truncating a power series and to express the quality\nof approximation of a real or complex valued function\nby a simpler function.\nOften, big O notation characterizes functions according to their growth rates as the variable becomes large: different functions with the same asymptotic growth rate may be represented using the same O notation. The letter O is used because the growth rate of a function is also referred to as the order of the function. A description of a function in terms of big O notation only provides an upper bound on the growth rate of the function.\nAssociated with big O notation are several related notations, using the symbols formula_1, formula_2, formula_3, formula_4, formula_5, formula_6, formula_7, and formula_8 to describe other kinds of bounds on growth rates.\nFormal definition.\nLet formula_9 the function to be estimated, be a real or complex valued function defined on a domain formula_10, and let formula_11 the comparison function, be a non-negative real valued function defined on the same set formula_10. Common choices for the domain are intervals of real numbers, bounded or unbounded, the set of positive integers, the set of complex numbers and tuples of real/complex numbers. With the domain written explicitly or understood implicitly, one writes\nformula_13\nand it is read \"formula_14 is big\u00a0O of formula_15\" if there exists a positive real number formula_16 such that\nformula_17\nWhen formula_18 throughout the domain formula_10, an equivalent definition is that\nformula_20 is a bounded function.\nThis definition encompasses all of the usage of big O\nin computer science and mathematics, including usages where\nthe domain is finite, infinite, real, complex, single variate and multivariate. \nIn most applications, the function formula_15 appearing within the formula_22 is typically chosen to be as simple as possible, omitting constant factors and lower order terms.\nThe number formula_23 is called the \"implied constant\". \nWhen using Big O notation, what matters is that formula_23 exists, not any specific value. This simplifies the presentation of many analytic inequalities.\nFor functions defined on positive real numbers or positive integers, a more restrictive and somewhat conflicting definition\nis still in common use \n, especially in computer science. \nWhen restricted to functions which are eventually positive, the notation\nformula_25\nmeans that for some real number formula_26, \nformula_27 in the domain formula_28. Here, the expression formula_29\ndoesn't indicate a limit, but the notion that the inequality holds for large enough formula_30. Often the expression\nformula_29 is omitted.\nSimilarly, for a finite real number formula_26, the notation\nformula_33\nmeans that for some constant formula_34, formula_27 on the interval formula_36, that is, in a small neighborhood of formula_26.\nIn addition, the notation\nformula_38\nmeans formula_39.\nMore complicated expressions are also possible.\nDespite the use of the equal sign in the notation,\nformula_40 does not refer to an equation\nbut to an inequality relating formula_41 and formula_42.\nIn the 1930s, the Russian number theorist Ivan Matveyevich Vinogradov introduced his notation formula_4, which has been increasingly used in number theory\nas an alternative to the formula_44 notation. We have\nformula_45\nand frequently both notations are used in the same paper.\nSet version of big O.\nIn computer science it is common to\nalso define big O as a set. \nWithin the restricted class of positive (or eventually positive) functions defined on\npositive integers,\none writes formula_46 for the \"set\" of\nall functions formula_41 satisfying formula_48. One can then write\nformula_49.\nExamples with an infinite domain.\nIn typical usage the formula_50 notation is applied to an infinite interval of real numbers formula_51 and captures the behavior of the function for very large formula_52. In this setting, the contribution of the terms that grow \"most quickly\" will eventually make the other ones irrelevant. As a result, the following simplification rules can be applied:\nFor example, let formula_56, and suppose we wish to simplify this function, using formula_50 notation, to describe its growth rate for large formula_52. This function is the sum of three terms: formula_59, formula_60, and formula_61. Of these three terms, the one with the highest growth rate is the one with the largest exponent as a function of formula_52, namely formula_59. Now one may apply the second rule: formula_64is a product of formula_65 and formula_66 in which the first factor does not depend on formula_52. Omitting this factor results in the simplified form formula_66. Thus, we say that formula_53 is a \"big O\" of formula_66. Mathematically, we can write formula_71 for all formula_72. One may confirm this calculation using the formal definition: let formula_56 and formula_74. Applying the formal definition from above, the statement that formula_71 is equivalent to its expansion,\nformula_76\nfor some suitable choice of a positive real number formula_77 and for all formula_78. To prove this, let formula_79. Then, for all formula_80:\nformula_81\nso\nformula_82\nWhile it is also true, by the same argument, that\nformula_83, this is a less precise\napproximation of the function formula_41.\nOn the other hand, the statement formula_85 is false, because the term formula_86 causes\nformula_87 to be unbounded.\nWhen a function formula_88 describes the number\nof steps required in an algorithm with input formula_89, an expression such as \nformula_90\nwith the implied domain being the set of positive integers, may be interpreted as saying that the algorithm has \"at most the order of formula_91\" time complexity.\nExample with a finite domain.\nBig O can also be used to describe the error term in an approximation to a mathematical function on a finite interval. The most significant terms are written explicitly, and then the least-significant terms are summarized in a single big O term. Consider, for example, the exponential series and two expressions of it that are valid when formula_30 is small:\nformula_93\nThe middle expression (the line with \"formula_94 is at most some constant times formula_95 when formula_96 is small.\nThis is an example of the use of Taylor's theorem.\nThe behavior of a given function may be very different on finite domains than on infinite domains, for example,\nformula_97\nwhile\nformula_98\nMultivariate examples.\nformula_99\nformula_100\nformula_101\nformula_102\nHere we have a complex variable function of two variables.\nIn general, any bounded function is formula_103.\nformula_104\nThe last example illustrates a mixing of finite and infinite domains on the different variables.\nIn all of these examples, the bound is uniform\nin both variables. Sometimes in a multivariate expression, one variable is\nmore important than others, and one may express\nthat the implied constant formula_23 depends on one\nor more of the variables using subscripts to the big O symbol or the formula_4 symbol. For example, consider the expression\nformula_107\nThis means that for each real number formula_108, there \nis a constant formula_109, \"which depends on formula_108\", so that for all formula_111,\nformula_112\nThis particular statement follows from the general binomial theorem.\nAnother example, common in the theory of Taylor series, is\nformula_113\nHere the implied constant depends on the size of the domain.\nThe subscript convention applies to all of the other\nnotations in this page.\nformula_114\nformula_115\nProperties.\nSum.\nIf formula_116 and formula_117 then formula_118. It follows that if formula_119 and formula_120 then formula_121.\nMultiplication by a constant.\nLet k be a nonzero constant. Then formula_122. In other words, if formula_123, then formula_124\nTransitive property.\nIf formula_125 and formula_126 then\nformula_127.\nIf the function formula_41 of a positive integer\nformula_89 can be written as a finite sum of other functions, then the fastest growing one determines the order of formula_130. For example,\nformula_131\nSome general rules about growth \"toward infinity\"; the 2nd and 3rd property below\ncan be proved rigorously using L'H\u00f4pital's rule:\nLarge powers dominate small powers.\nFor formula_132, then\nformula_133\nPowers dominate logarithms.\nFor any positive formula_134 \nformula_135\nno matter how large formula_136 is and how small\nformula_108 is. Here, the implied constant depends\non both formula_138 and formula_108.\nExponentials dominate powers.\nFor any positive formula_134 \nformula_141\nno matter how large formula_136 is and how small\nformula_108 is.\nA function that grows faster than formula_144 for any formula_145 is called \"superpolynomial\". One that grows more slowly than any exponential function of the form formula_146 with formula_147 is called \"subexponential\". An algorithm can require time that is both superpolynomial and subexponential; examples of this include the fastest known algorithms for integer factorization and the function formula_148.\nWe may ignore any powers of formula_149 inside of the logarithms. For any positive formula_150, the notation formula_151 means exactly the same thing as formula_152, since formula_153. Similarly, logs with different constant bases are equivalent with respect to Big O \nnotation. On the other hand, exponentials with different bases are not of the same order. For example, formula_154 and formula_155 are not of the same order.\nMore complicated expressions.\nIn more complicated usage, formula_156 can appear in different places in an equation, even several times on each side. For example, the following are true for formula_157 a positive integer:\nformula_158\nThe meaning of such statements is as follows: for \"any\" functions which satisfy each formula_156 on the left side, there are \"some\" functions satisfying each formula_156 on the right side, such that substituting all these functions into the equation makes the two sides equal. For example, the third equation above means: \"For any function satisfying formula_161, there is some function formula_162 such that formula_163\". The implied constant in the statement \"formula_162\" may\ndepend on the implied constant in the expression\n\"formula_161\".\nSome further examples:\nformula_166\nVinogradov's \u226b and Knuth's big \u03a9.\nWhen formula_167 are both positive functions,\nVinogradov introduced the notation formula_168, which means the same as formula_169. Vinogradov's two notations enjoy visual symmetry, as\nfor positive functions formula_170, we have\nformula_171\nIn 1976, Donald Knuth\ndefined\nformula_172\nwhich has the same meaning as Vinogradov's formula_173.\nMuch earlier, Hardy and Littlewood defined formula_174 differently, but this it seldom used anymore (Ivi\u010d's book being one exception).\nJustifying his use of the formula_175-symbol to describe a stronger property, Knuth wrote: \"For all the applications I have seen so far in computer science, a stronger requirement ... is much more appropriate\". Knuth further wrote, \"Although I have changed Hardy and Littlewood's definition of formula_175, I feel justified in doing so because their definition is by no means in wide use, and because there are other ways to say what they want to say in the comparatively rare cases when their definition applies.\"\nIndeed, Knuth's big formula_177 enjoys much more widespread use today than the Hardy\u2013Littlewood big formula_178, being a common feature\nin computer science and combinatorics.\nHardy's \u224d and Knuth's big \u0398.\nIn analytic number theory, the\nnotation formula_179 means both\nformula_180 and formula_181. This notation is originally due to Hardy. Knuth's notation for the same notion \nis formula_182. Roughly speaking, these statements assert that formula_183 and formula_184 have the \"same order\". These notations mean that there are \npositive constants formula_185\nso that \nformula_186\nfor all formula_187 in the common domain of \nformula_170. When the functions are defined on the positive integers or positive real numbers, as with big O, writers oftentimes interpret statements\nformula_189 and formula_190 as holding for all sufficiently large formula_187, that is, for all formula_30 beyond some point formula_193. Sometimes this\nis indicated by appending \"formula_29\" to the statement. For example,\nformula_195\nis true for the domain formula_196 but false if the\ndomain is all positive integers, since the function is zero at formula_197.\nFurther examples.\nformula_198\nformula_199\nThe notation\nformula_200\nmeans that there is a positive constant formula_77\nso that formula_202 for all formula_203. By contrast,\nformula_204\nmeans that there is a positive constant formula_77\nso that formula_206 for all formula_203 and\nformula_208\nmeans that there are positive constants formula_185\nso that formula_210 for all formula_203.\nFor any domain formula_212,\nformula_213\neach statement being for all formula_30 in formula_10.\nOrders of common functions.\nHere is a list of classes of functions that are commonly encountered when analyzing the running time of an algorithm. In each case, \"c\" is a positive constant and \"n\" increases without bound. The slower-growing functions are generally listed first.\nThe statement formula_216 is sometimes weakened to formula_217 to derive simpler formulas for asymptotic complexity.\nIn many of these examples, the running time is\nactually formula_218, which conveys more\nprecision.\nLittle-o notation.\nFor real or complex-valued functions of a real variable\nformula_30 with formula_18 for sufficiently large formula_30, one writes\nformula_222\nif \nformula_223\nThat is, for every positive constant \u03b5 there exists a constant formula_224 such that\nformula_225\nIntuitively, this means that formula_226 grows much faster than formula_14, or equivalently formula_14 grows much slower than \nformula_226.\nFor example, one has\n formula_230 and formula_231 \u00a0 \u00a0 both as formula_232\nWhen one is interested in the behavior of a function for large values of formula_30, little-o notation makes a \"stronger statement\" than the corresponding big-O notation: every function that is little-o of formula_42 is also big-O of formula_42 on some interval formula_51, but not every function that is big-O of formula_42 is little-o of formula_42. For example, formula_239 but formula_240 for formula_72.\nLittle-o respects a number of arithmetic operations. For example,\n if formula_150 is a nonzero constant and formula_243 then formula_244, and\n if formula_245 and formula_246 then formula_247\n if formula_245 and formula_246 then formula_250\nIt also satisfies a transitivity relation:\n if formula_243 and formula_252 then formula_253\nLittle-o can also be generalized to the finite case:\nformula_254 if \nformula_255\nIn other words,\nformula_256 for some formula_257 with formula_258.\nThis definition is especially useful in the computation of limits using Taylor series. For example:\nformula_259, so formula_260\nAsymptotic notation.\nA relation related to litte-o is the \"asymptotic\" notation\nformula_2. \nFor real valued functions formula_262, the expression formula_263\nmeans \nformula_264\nOne can connect this to little-o by observing that\nformula_265 is also equivalent to\nformula_266. Here formula_267 refers to a function tending to zero as formula_268. One reads this as\n\"formula_14 is \"asymptotic to\" formula_226\". For nonzero functions on the same (finite or infinite) domain, formula_271 forms an\nequivalence relation.\nOne of the most famous theorems using the notation \nformula_2 is Stirling's formula\nformula_273\nIn number theory, the famous prime number theorem states that\nformula_274\nwhere formula_275 is the number of primes which\nare at most formula_30 and formula_277 is the\nnatural logarithm of formula_30.\nAs with little-o, there is a version with finite limits (two-sided or one-sided) as well, for example \nformula_279\nFurther examples:\nformula_280\nformula_281\nformula_282\nThe last asymptotic is a basic property of the\nRiemann zeta function.\nKnuth's little \ud835\udf14.\nFor eventually positive, real valued functions formula_283 the notation\nformula_284\nmeans \nformula_285\nIn other words, formula_286.\nRoughly speaking, this means that formula_14\ngrows much faster than does formula_226.\nThe Hardy\u2013Littlewood \u03a9 notation.\nIn 1914 G.H. Hardy and J.E. Littlewood introduced the new symbol formula_289 which is defined as follows:\nformula_290 as formula_291 if formula_292\nThus formula_293 is the negation of formula_294\nIn 1916 the same authors introduced the two new symbols formula_295 and formula_296 defined as:\nformula_297 as formula_291 if formula_299\nformula_300 as formula_291 if formula_302\nThese symbols were used by E. Landau, with the same meanings, in 1924. Authors that followed Landau, however, use a different notation for the same definitions: The symbol formula_295 has been replaced by the current notation formula_304 with the same definition, and formula_305 became formula_306\nThese three symbols formula_307 as well as formula_308 (meaning that formula_309 and formula_310 are both satisfied), are now currently used in analytic number theory.\nSimple examples.\nWe have\nformula_311 as formula_312\nand more precisely\nformula_313 as formula_314\nwhere formula_315 means that the left side is both formula_316 and formula_317,\nWe have\nformula_318 as formula_312\nand more precisely\nformula_320 as formula_321\nhowever\nformula_322 as formula_323\nFamily of Bachmann\u2013Landau notations.\nFor understanding the fomal definitions, consult the\nlist of logic symbols used in mathematics.\nor formula_336\nformula_341 (Vinogradov's notation)\nwhere formula_26 can be finite, formula_335 or formula_348\nThe limit definitions assume formula_356 for\nformula_89 in a neighborhood of the limit; when the\nlimit is formula_335, this means that formula_359 for sufficiently large formula_89.\nComputer science and combinatorics use the big formula_361, big Theta formula_362, little formula_363, little omega formula_364 and Knuth's big Omega formula_365 notations.\nAnalytic number theory often uses the big formula_361, small formula_363, Hardy's formula_6,\nHardy\u2013Littlewood's big Omega formula_365 (with or without the +, \u2212 or \u00b1 subscripts), Vinogradov's formula_4 and formula_5 notations and formula_2 notations.\nThe small omega formula_364 notation is not used as often in analysis or in number theory.\nQuality of approximations using different notation.\nInformally, especially in computer science, the big formula_44 notation often can be used somewhat differently to describe an asymptotic tight bound where using big Theta formula_375 notation might be more factually appropriate in a given context\nFor example, when considering a function formula_376, all of the following are generally acceptable, but tighter bounds (such as numbers 2,3 and 4 below) are usually strongly preferred over looser bounds (such as number 1 below).\nWhile all three statements are true, progressively more information is contained in each. In some fields, however, the big O notation (number 2 in the lists above) would be used more commonly than the big Theta notation (items numbered 3 in the lists above). For example, if formula_382 represents the running time of a newly developed algorithm for input size formula_89, the inventors and users of the algorithm might be more inclined to put an upper bound on how long it will take to run without making an explicit statement about the lower bound or asymptotic behavior.\nExtensions to the Bachmann\u2013Landau notations.\nAnother notation sometimes used in computer science is formula_384 (read \"soft-O\"), which hides polylogarithmic factors. There are two definitions in use: some authors use formula_385 as shorthand for formula_386 for some formula_387, while others use it as shorthand for formula_388\nWhen formula_389 is polynomial in formula_89, there is no difference; however, the latter definition allows one to say, e.g. that formula_391 while the former definition allows for formula_392 for any constant formula_387. Some authors write \"O\"* for the same purpose as the latter definition. Essentially, it is big \"O\" notation, ignoring logarithmic factors because the growth-rate effects of some other super-logarithmic function indicate a growth-rate explosion for large-sized input parameters that is more important to predicting bad run-time performance than the finer-point effects contributed by the logarithmic-growth factor(s). This notation is often used to obviate the \"nitpicking\" within growth-rates that are stated as too tightly bounded for the matters at hand (since \nformula_394\nfor any constant formula_387 and any \nformula_396\nAlso, the \"L\" notation, defined as\nformula_397\nis convenient for functions that are between polynomial and exponential in terms of formula_398.\nGeneralizations and related usages.\nThe generalization to functions taking values in any normed vector space is straightforward (replacing absolute values by norms), where formula_41 and formula_42 need not take their values in the same space. A generalization to functions formula_42 taking values in any topological group is also possible.\nThe \"limiting process\" formula_402 can also be generalized by introducing an arbitrary filter base, i.e. to directed nets formula_41 and formula_42. The formula_405 notation can be used to define derivatives and differentiability in quite general spaces, and also (asymptotical) equivalence of functions,\nformula_406\nwhich is an equivalence relation and a more restrictive notion than the relationship \"formula_41 is formula_408\" from above. (It reduces to formula_409 if formula_41 and formula_42 are positive real valued functions.) For example, formula_412 is, but \nformula_413.\nHistory.\nWe sketch the history of the Bois-Reymond, Bachmann\u2013Landau, Hardy, Vinogradov and Knuth notations.\nIn 1870, Paul du Bois-Reymond \ndefined formula_414, formula_265 and formula_416\nto mean, respectively,\nformula_417\nThese were note widely adopted and are not used today.\nThe first and third enjoy a symmetry: formula_416 means the same as formula_419. \nLater, Landau adopted formula_271 in the narrower\nsense that the limit of formula_421 equals 1. None of these notations is in use today.\nThe symbol O was first introduced by number theorist Paul Bachmann in 1894, in the second volume of his book \"Analytische Zahlentheorie\" (\"analytic number theory\"). The number theorist Edmund Landau adopted it, and was thus inspired to introduce in 1909 the notation o; hence both are now called Landau symbols. These notations were used in applied mathematics during the 1950s for asymptotic analysis.\nThe symbol formula_175 (in the sense \"is not an \"o\" of\") was introduced in 1914 by Hardy and Littlewood. Hardy and Littlewood also introduced in 1916 the symbols formula_423 (\"right\") and formula_424 (\"left\"). This notation formula_175 became somewhat commonly used in number theory at least since the 1950s.\nThe symbol formula_2, although it had been used before with different meanings, was given its modern definition by Landau in 1909 and by Hardy in 1910. Just above on the same page of his tract Hardy defined the symbol formula_6, where formula_428 means that both formula_40 and formula_430 are satisfied. The notation is still currently used in analytic number theory.\nIn his tract Hardy also proposed the symbol formula_431, where formula_432 means that formula_433 for some constant formula_434 (this \ncorresponds to Bois-Reymond's notation formula_435).\nIn the 1930s, Vinogradov popularized the notation formula_436\nand formula_437, both of which mean\nformula_180. This notation became standard in analytic number theory.\nIn the 1970s the big O was popularized in computer science by Donald Knuth, who proposed the different notation formula_439 for Hardy's formula_428, and proposed a different definition for the Hardy and Littlewood Omega notation.\nHardy introduced the symbols formula_441 and advocated for Boid-Reymond's formula_442 (as well as the already mentioned other symbols) in his 1910 tract \"Orders of Infinity\", but made use of them only in three papers (1910\u20131913). In his nearly 400 remaining papers and books he consistently used the Landau symbols O and o.\nHardy's symbols formula_443 and formula_431 are not used anymore.\nMatters of notation.\nArrows.\nIn mathematics, an expression such as formula_29 indicates the presence of a limit. In big-O notation and related notations\nformula_446, there is no implied limit, in contrast with little-o,\nformula_2 and formula_448 notations.\nNotation such as formula_449 can be considered an abuse of notation.\nEquals sign.\nSome consider formula_40 to also be an abuse of notation, since the use of the equals sign could be misleading as it suggests a symmetry that this statement does not have. As de Bruijn says, formula_451 is true but formula_452 is not. Knuth describes such statements as \"one-way equalities\", since if the sides could be reversed, \"we could deduce ridiculous things like \nformula_453 from the identities formula_454 and formula_455. In another letter, Knuth also pointed out that\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;the equality sign is not symmetric with respect to such notations [as, in this notation,] mathematicians customarily use the '=' sign as they use the word 'is' in English: Aristotle is a man, but a man isn't necessarily Aristotle.\nFor these reasons, some advocate for using set notation and write formula_49,\nread as \"formula_14 is an element of \nformula_458\", or \"formula_14 is in the set \nformula_458\"\u00a0\u2013 thinking of \nformula_458 as the class of all functions \nformula_462 such that formula_463. However, the use of the equals sign is customary.\nand is more convenient in more complex expressions of the form\nformula_464\nThe Vinogradov notations formula_4 and formula_5, which are widely used in number theory\ndo not suffer from this defect, as they more clearly indicate that big-O indicates an \"inequality\" rather than an \"equality\". They also enjoy a symmetry that big-O notation lacks: formula_467 \nmeans the same as formula_468. \nIn combinatorics and computer science, these notations\nare rarely seen.\nTypesetting.\nBig O is typeset as an italicized uppercase \"O\", as in the following example: formula_469. In TeX, it is produced by simply typing 'O' inside math mode. Unlike Greek-named Bachmann\u2013Landau notations, it needs no special symbol. However, some authors use the calligraphic variant formula_470 instead.\nThe big-O originally stands for \"order of\" (\"Ordnung\", Bachmann 1894), and is thus a Latin letter. Neither Bachmann nor Landau ever call it \"Omicron\". The symbol was much later on (1976) viewed by Knuth as a capital omicron, probably in reference to his definition of the symbol Omega. The digit zero should not be used.\nReferences and notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44581", "revid": "39842100", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44581", "title": "Exponential time", "text": ""}
{"id": "44582", "revid": "50755956", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44582", "title": "John of the Cross", "text": "Spanish Catholic priest and Christian mystic (1542\u20131591)\nSt. John of the Cross (; ; n\u00e9 Juan de Yepes y \u00c1lvarez; 24 June 1542 \u2013 14 December 1591) was a Spanish Roman Catholic priest, mystic, and Carmelite friar of \"Converso\" ancestry. He is a major figure of the Counter-Reformation in Spain, and he is one of the 38 Doctors of the Church.\nJohn of the Cross is known for his writings. He was mentored by and corresponded with the older Carmelite nun Teresa of \u00c1vila. Both his poetry and his studies on the development of the soul, particularly his \"Noche Obscura\", are considered the summit of mystical Christian literature and among the greatest works of all Spanish literature. He was canonized by Pope Benedict XIII in 1726. In 1926, he was declared a Doctor of the Church by Pope Pius XI, and is also known as the \"mystical doctor\".\nLife.\nEarly life and education.\nHe was born Juan de Yepes y \u00c1lvarez at Fontiveros, Old Castile, into a \"New Christian\" family of \"Converso\" origins (descendants of Iberian Jewish converts to Roman Catholicism) in Fontiveros, near \u00c1vila, a town of around 2,000 people. His father, Gonzalo, was an accountant to richer relatives who were silk merchants. In 1529 Gonzalo married John's mother, Catalina, an orphan of humble origins; he was rejected by his family and forced to work with his wife as a weaver. John's father died in 1545, when John was around three years old. Two years later, John's older brother, Luis, died, probably from malnourishment due to the family's poverty. John's mother Catalina moved with John and his surviving brother Francisco, first to Ar\u00e9valo in 1548, and then in 1551 to Medina del Campo, where she was able to find work.\nIn Medina, John entered a school for 160 poor children, mostly orphans, to receive a basic education, mainly in Christian doctrine. They were given some food, clothing, and lodging. While there, he was chosen to serve as an altar boy at a nearby convent of Augustinian nuns. Growing up, John worked at a hospital and studied the humanities at a Jesuit school from 1559 to 1563. The Society of Jesus was at that time a new organization, having been founded only a few years earlier by the Spaniard St. Ignatius of Loyola. In 1563 he entered the Carmelite Order, adopting the name John of St. Matthias.\nIn 1564, he made his first vows and enrolled in Salamanca University, where he studied theology and philosophy. There he met Fray Luis de Le\u00f3n, who taught biblical studies (Exegesis, Hebrew, and Aramaic) at the university.\nJoining the Reform of Teresa of \u00c1vila.\nJohn was ordained as a priest in 1567. He subsequently considered joining the strict Carthusian Order, which appealed to him because of its practice of solitary and silent contemplation. His journey from Salamanca to Medina del Campo, probably in September 1567, became pivotal. In Medina he met the influential Carmelite nun Teresa of \u00c1vila. She was in Medina to found the second of her new convents. She told him about her reform projects for the Order, which sought to restore the purity of the Carmelite Order by reverting to the observance of its \"Primitive Rule\" of 1209, which had been relaxed by Pope Eugene IV in 1432.\nUnder the Rule, much of the day and night was to be divided between the recitation of the Liturgy of the Hours, study and devotional reading, the celebration of Mass, and periods of solitude. In the case of friars, time was to be spent evangelizing the population around the monastery. There was to be total abstinence from meat and a lengthy period of fasting from the Feast of the Exaltation of the Cross (14 September) until Easter. There were to be long periods of silence, especially between Compline and Prime. Simpler, coarser, and shorter habits were to be adopted. There was also an injunction against wearing covered shoes (also previously mitigated in 1432). That particular observance distinguished the \"discalced\", i.e., barefoot, followers of Teresa from traditional Carmelites, and they would be formally recognized as the separate Order of Discalced Carmelites in 1580.\nTeresa asked John to delay his entry into the Carthusian order and to follow her. Having spent a final year studying in Salamanca, in August 1568 John traveled with Teresa from Medina to Valladolid, where Teresa intended to found another convent. After a spell at Teresa's side in Valladolid, learning more about the new form of Carmelite life, John left Valladolid in October 1568 accompanied by Fray Antonio de Jes\u00fas de Heredia, intending to found a new monastery for Carmelite friars \u2014 the first to follow Teresa's principles. They were given the use of a derelict house at Duruelo, which had been donated to Teresa. On 28 November 1568, the monastery was established, and on that same day, John changed his name to \"John of the Cross.\"\nSoon after, in June 1570, the friars moved to the nearby town of Mancera de Abajo, midway between \u00c1vila and Salamanca. John moved from the first community to set up a new community at Pastrana in October 1570, and then another community at Alcal\u00e1 de Henares, as a house for the academic training of the friars. In 1572 he arrived in \u00c1vila, at Teresa's invitation. She had been appointed prioress of the Convent of the Incarnation there in 1571. John became the spiritual director and confessor of Teresa and the other 130 nuns there, as well as for a wide range of laypeople in the city. In 1574, John accompanied Teresa for the foundation of a new religious community in Segovia, returning to \u00c1vila after staying there a week. Aside from the one trip, John seems to have remained in \u00c1vila between 1572 and 1577.\nSome time between 1574 and 1577, while praying in a loft overlooking the sanctuary in the Monastery of the Incarnation in \u00c1vila, John had a vision of the crucified Christ, which led him to create his drawing of Christ \"from above\". In 1641, this drawing was placed in a small monstrance and kept in \u00c1vila. This same drawing inspired the artist Salvador Dal\u00ed's 1951 work \"Christ of Saint John of the Cross\".\nHeight of Carmelite tensions.\nThe years 1575\u201377 saw a great increase in tensions among Spanish Carmelite friars over the reforms of Teresa and John. Since 1566 the reforms had been overseen by Canonical Visitors from the Dominican Order, with one appointed to Castile and a second to Andalusia. The Visitors had substantial powers: they could move members of religious communities from one house to another or from one province to the next. They could assist religious superiors in the discharge of their office, and could delegate superiors between the Dominican or Carmelite orders. In Castile, the Visitor was Pedro Fern\u00e1ndez, who prudently balanced the interests of the Discalced Carmelites with those of the nuns and friars who did not desire reform.\nIn Andalusia to the south, the Visitor was Francisco Vargas, and tensions rose due to his clear preference for the Discalced friars. Vargas asked them to make foundations in various cities, in contradiction to the express orders from the Carmelite Prior General to curb expansion in Andalusia. As a result, a General Chapter of the Carmelite Order was convened at Piacenza in Italy in May 1576, out of concern that events in Spain were getting out of hand. It concluded by ordering the total suppression of the Discalced houses.\nThat measure was not immediately enforced. King Philip II of Spain was supportive of Teresa's reforms, and so was not immediately willing to grant the necessary permission to enforce the ordinance. The Discalced friars also found support from the papal nuncio to Spain, Nicol\u00f2 Ormaneto, Bishop of Padua, who still had ultimate power to visit and reform religious orders. When asked by the Discalced friars to intervene, Nuncio Ormaneto replaced Vargas as Visitor of the Carmelites in Andalusia with Jer\u00f3nimo Graci\u00e1n, a priest from the University of Alcal\u00e1, who was in fact a Discalced Carmelite friar himself. The nuncio's protection helped John avoid problems for a time. In January 1576, John was detained in Medina del Campo by traditional Carmelite friars, but through the nuncio's intervention, he was soon released. When Ormaneto died on 18 June 1577, John was left without protection, and the friars opposing his reforms regained the upper hand.\nFoundations, imprisonment, torture and death.\nOn the night of 2 December 1577, a group of Carmelites opposed to reform broke into John's dwelling in \u00c1vila and took him prisoner. John had received an order from superiors, opposed to reform, to leave \u00c1vila and return to his original house. John had refused on the basis that his reform work had been approved by the papal nuncio to Spain, a higher authority than these superiors. The Carmelites therefore took John captive. John was taken from \u00c1vila to the Carmelite monastery in Toledo, at that time the order's leading monastery in Castile, with a community of 40 friars.\nJohn was brought before a court of friars, accused of disobeying the ordinances of Piacenza. Despite his argument that he had not disobeyed the ordinances, he was sentenced to a term of imprisonment. He was jailed in a monastery where he was kept under a brutal regime that included public lashings before the community at least weekly, and severe isolation in a tiny stifling cell measuring barely . Except when rarely permitted an oil lamp, he had to stand on a bench to read his breviary by the light through the hole into the adjoining room. He had no change of clothing and a penitential diet of water, bread and scraps of salt fish. During his imprisonment, he composed a great part of his most famous poem, \"Spiritual Canticle\", as well as a few shorter poems. The paper was passed to him by the friar who guarded his cell. He managed to escape eight months later, on 15 August 1578, through a small window in a room adjoining his cell. (He had managed to pry open the hinges of the cell door earlier that day.)\nAfter being nursed back to health, first by Teresa's nuns in Toledo, and then during six weeks at the Hospital of Santa Cruz, John continued with the reforms. In October 1578 he joined a meeting at Almod\u00f3var del Campo of reform supporters, better known as the Discalced Carmelites. There, in part as a result of the opposition faced from other Carmelites, they decided to request from the Pope their formal separation from the rest of the Carmelite order.\nAt that meeting John was appointed superior of El Calvario, an isolated monastery of around thirty friars in the mountains about away from Beas in Andalusia. During that time he befriended the nun Ana de Jes\u00fas, superior of the Discalced nuns at Beas, through his visits to the town every Saturday. While at El Calvario he composed the first version of his commentary on his poem \"The Spiritual Canticle\", possibly at the request of the nuns in Beas.\nIn 1579 he moved to Baeza, a town of around 50,000 people, to serve as rector of a new college, the Colegio de San Basilio, for Discalced friars in Andalusia. It opened on 13 June 1579. He remained in post until 1582, spending much of his time as a spiritual director to the friars and townspeople.\n1580 was a significant year in the resolution of disputes between the Carmelites. On 22 June, Pope Gregory XIII signed a decree, entitled \"Pia Consideratione\", which authorised the separation of the old (later \"calced\") and the newly reformed, \"Discalced\" Carmelites. The Dominican friar Juan Vel\u00e1zquez de las Cuevas was appointed to oversee the decision. At the first General Chapter of the Discalced Carmelites, in Alcal\u00e1 de Henares on 3 March 1581, John of the Cross was elected one of the \"Definitors\" of the community, and wrote a constitution for them. By the time of the Provincial Chapter at Alcal\u00e1 in 1581, there were 22 houses, some 300 friars and 200 nuns among the Discalced Carmelites.\nIn November 1581, John was sent by Teresa to help Ana de Jes\u00fas to found a convent in Granada. Arriving in January 1582, she set up a convent, while John stayed in the monastery of Los M\u00e1rtires, near the Alhambra, becoming its prior in March 1582. While there, he learned of Teresa's death in October of that year.\nIn February 1585, John travelled to M\u00e1laga where he established a convent for Discalced nuns. In May 1585, at the General Chapter of the Discalced Carmelites in Lisbon, John was elected Vicar Provincial of Andalusia, a post which required him to travel frequently, making annual visitations to the houses of friars and nuns in Andalusia. During this time he founded seven new monasteries in the region, and is estimated to have travelled around 25,000\u00a0km.\nIn June 1588, he was elected third Councillor to the Vicar General for the Discalced Carmelites, Father Nicolas Doria. To fulfill this role, he had to return to Segovia in Castile, where he also took on the role of prior of the monastery. After disagreeing in 1590\u20131 with some of Doria's remodelling of the leadership of the Discalced Carmelite Order, John was removed from his post in Segovia, and sent by Doria in June 1591 to an isolated monastery in Andalusia called La Pe\u00f1uela. There he fell ill, and travelled to the monastery at \u00dabeda for treatment. His condition worsened, however, and he died there of erysipelas on 14 December 1591.\nVeneration.\nThe morning after John's death huge numbers of townspeople in \u00dabeda entered the monastery to view his body; in the crush, many were able to take home bits of his habit. He was initially buried at \u00dabeda, but, at the request of the monastery in Segovia, his body was secretly moved there in 1593. The people of \u00dabeda, however, unhappy at this change, sent a representative to petition the pope to move the body back to its original resting place. Pope Clement VIII, impressed by the petition, issued a Brief on 15 October 1596 ordering the return of the body to \u00dabeda. Eventually, in a compromise, the superiors of the Discalced Carmelites decided that the monastery at \u00dabeda would receive one leg and one arm of the corpse from Segovia (the monastery at \u00dabeda had already kept one leg in 1593, and the other arm had been removed as the corpse passed through Madrid in 1593, to form a relic there). A hand and a leg remain visible in a reliquary at the Oratory of San Juan de la Cruz in \u00dabeda, a monastery built in 1627 though connected to the original Discalced monastery in the town founded in 1587.\nThe head and torso were retained by the monastery at Segovia. They were venerated until 1647, when on orders from Rome designed to prevent the veneration of remains without official approval, the remains were buried in the ground. In the 1930s they were disinterred, and are now sited in a side chapel in a marble case above a special altar.\nProceedings to beatify John began between 1614 and 1616. He was eventually beatified in 1675 by Pope Clement X, and was canonized by Benedict XIII in 1726. When his feast day was added to the General Roman Calendar in 1738, it was assigned to 24 November, since his date of death was impeded by the then-existing octave of the Feast of the Immaculate Conception. This obstacle was removed in 1955 and in 1969 Pope Paul VI moved it to the \"dies natalis\" (birthday to heaven) of John, 14 December. The Church of England and the Episcopal Church honor him on the same date. In 1926, he was declared a Doctor of the Church by Pope Pius XI after the definitive consultation of Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange OP, professor of philosophy and theology at the Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, \"Angelicum\" in Rome.\nLiterary works.\n John of the Cross is considered one of the foremost poets in Spanish. Although his complete poems add up to fewer than 2,500 verses, two of them, the \"Spiritual Canticle\" and the \"Dark Night of the Soul\", are widely considered masterpieces of Spanish poetry, both for their formal style and their rich symbolism and imagery. His theological works often consist of commentaries on the poems. All the works were written between 1578 and his death in 1591.\nThe \"Spiritual Canticle\" is an eclogue in which the bride, representing the soul, searches for the bridegroom, representing Jesus Christ, and is anxious at having lost him. Both are filled with joy upon reuniting. It can be seen as a free-form Spanish version of the Song of Songs at a time when vernacular translations of the Bible were forbidden. The first 31 stanzas of the poem were composed in 1578 while John was imprisoned in Toledo. After his escape it was read by the nuns at Beas, who made copies of the stanzas. Over the following years, John added further lines. Today, two versions exist: one with 39 stanzas and one with 40 with some of the stanzas ordered differently. The first redaction of the commentary on the poem was written in 1584, at the request of Madre Ana de Jes\u00fas, when she was prioress of the Discalced Carmelite nuns in Granada. A second edition, which contains more detail, was written in 1585\u20136.\nThe \"Dark Night\", from which the phrase \"Dark Night of the Soul\" takes its name, narrates the journey of the soul from its bodily home to union with God. It happens during the \"dark\", which represents the hardships and difficulties met in detachment from the world and reaching the light of the union with the Creator. There are several steps during the state of darkness, which are described in successive stanzas. The main idea behind the poem is the painful experience required to attain spiritual maturity and union with God. The poem was likely written in 1578 or 1579. In 1584\u20135, John wrote a commentary on the first two stanzas and on the first line of the third stanza.\nThe \"Ascent of Mount Carmel\" is a more systematic study of the ascetical endeavour of a soul seeking perfect union with God and the mystical events encountered along the way. Although it begins as a commentary on \"The Dark Night\", after the first two stanzas of the poem, it rapidly diverts into a full treatise. It was composed some time between 1581 and 1585.\nA four-stanza work, \"Living Flame of Love\", describes a greater intimacy, as the soul responds to God's love. It was written in a first version at Granada between 1585 and 1586, apparently in two weeks, and in a mostly identical second version at La Pe\u00f1uela in 1591.\nThese, together with his \"Dichos de Luz y Amor\" or \"Sayings of Light and Love\" along with Teresa's own writings, are the most important mystical works in Spanish, and have deeply influenced later spiritual writers across the world. They include: T. S. Eliot, Th\u00e9r\u00e8se de Lisieux, Edith Stein (Teresa Benedicta of the Cross) and Thomas Merton. John is said to have also influenced philosophers (Jacques Maritain), theologians (Hans Urs von Balthasar), pacifists (Dorothy Day, Daniel Berrigan and Philip Berrigan) and artists (Salvador Dal\u00ed). Pope John Paul II wrote his theological dissertation on the mystical theology of John of the Cross.\nEditions of his works.\nHis writings were first published in 1618 by Diego de Salablanca. The numerical divisions in the work, still used by modern editions of the text, were introduced by Salablanca (they were not in John's original writings) to help make the work more manageable for the reader. This edition does not contain the \"Spiritual Canticle\", however, and also omits or adapts certain passages, perhaps for fear of falling foul of the Inquisition.\nThe \"Spiritual Canticle\" was first included in the 1630 edition, produced by Fray Jeronimo de San Jos\u00e9, at Madrid. This edition was largely followed by later editors, although editions in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries gradually included a few more poems and letters.\nThe first French edition was published in Paris in 1622, and the first Castilian edition in 1627 in Brussels.\nA critical edition of John's works in English was published by E. Allison Peers in 1935.\nIntellectual influences.\nThe influences on John's writing are subject to an ongoing debate. It is widely acknowledged that at Salamanca university there would have existed a range of intellectual positions. In John's time they included the influences of Thomas Aquinas, of Scotus and of Durandus. It is often assumed that John would have absorbed the thought of Aquinas, to explain the scholastic framework of his writings.\nHowever, the belief that John was taught at both the Carmelite College of San Andr\u00e8s and at the University of Salamanca has been challenged. Bezares calls into question whether John even studied theology at the University of Salamanca. The philosophy courses John probably took in logic, natural and moral philosophy, can be reconstructed, but Bezares argues that John in fact abandoned his studies at Salamanca in 1568 to join Teresa, rather than graduating. In the first biography of John, published in 1628, it is claimed, on the basis of information from John's fellow students, that he in 1567 made a special study of mystical writers, in particular of Pseudo-Dionysius and Pope Gregory I. There is little consensus from John's early years or potential influences.\nScripture.\nJohn was influenced heavily by the Bible. Scriptural images are common in both his poems and prose. In total, there are 1,583 explicit and 115 implicit quotations from the Bible in his works. The influence of the Song of Songs on John's \"Spiritual Canticle\" has often been noted, both in terms of the structure of the poem, with its dialogue between two lovers, the account of their difficulties in meeting each other and the \"offstage chorus\" that comments on the action, and also in terms of the imagery, for example, of pomegranates, wine cellar, turtle dove and lilies, which echoes that of the Song of Songs.\nIn addition, John shows at occasional points the influence of the Divine Office. This demonstrates how John, steeped in the language and rituals of the Church, drew at times on the phrases and language here.\nPseudo-Dionysius.\nIt has rarely been disputed that the overall structure of John's mystical theology, and his language of the union of the soul with God, is influenced by the Pseudo-Dionysian tradition. However, it has not been clear whether John might have had direct access to the writings of Pseudo-Dionysius, or whether this influence may have been mediated through various later authors.\nMedieval mystics.\nIt is widely acknowledged that John may have been influenced by the writings of other medieval mystics, though there is debate about the exact thought which may have influenced him, and about how he might have been exposed to their ideas.\nThe possibility of influence by the so-called \"Rhineland mystics\" such as Meister Eckhart, Johannes Tauler, Henry Suso and John of Ruysbroeck has also been mooted by many authors.\nSecular Spanish poetry.\nA strong argument can also be made for contemporary Spanish literary influences on John. This case was first made in detail by D\u00e1maso Alonso, who believed that as well as drawing from scripture, John was transforming non-religious, profane themes, derived from popular songs (\"romanceros\") into religious poetry.\nIslamic influence.\nA controversial theory on the origins of John's mystical imagery is that he may have been influenced by Islamic sources. This was first proposed in detail by Miguel As\u00edn Palacios and has been most recently put forward by the Puerto Rican scholar Luce L\u00f3pez-Baralt. Arguing that John was influenced by Islamic sources on the peninsula, she traces Islamic antecedents of the images of the \"dark night\", the \"solitary bird\" of the \"Spiritual Canticle\", wine and mystical intoxication (the \"Spiritual Canticle\"), lamps of fire (the \"Living Flame\"). However, Peter Tyler concludes, there \"are sufficient Christian medieval antecedents for many of the metaphors John employs to suggest we should look for Christian sources rather than Muslim sources.\" As Jos\u00e9 Nieto indicates, in trying to locate a link between Spanish Christian mysticism and Islamic mysticism, it might make more sense to refer to the common Neo-Platonic tradition and mystical experiences of both, rather than seek direct influence.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44584", "revid": "20542576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44584", "title": "Robert of Ketton", "text": "12th-century English translator and priest\nRobert of Ketton, known in Latin as Rodbertus Ketenensis (fl. 1141\u20131157), was an English astronomer, translator, priest and diplomat active in Spain. He translated several works of Arabic into Latin, including the first translation of the Quran into any Western language. Between 1144 and 1157 he held an archdeaconry in the diocese of Pamplona. In the past he has been confounded with Robert of Chester (Latin \"Robertus Castrensis\"), another English translator active in Spain in the mid-twelfth century; and at least one modern scholar believes they are the same person.\nRobert's byname, \"Ketenensis\" or on one occasion \"de Ketene\", is usually taken to refer to Ketton, a village in Rutland, a few miles from Stamford, Lincolnshire. It was probably Robert's birthplace. This nickname was never used in official documents associated with Pamplona, where he was always simply \"Master Robert\" (\"magister Rodbertus\"), indicating that he had a master of arts degree. The identification of the translator known as Robert of Ketton and the archdeacon known as Master Robert is provided by a letter of Peter the Venerable, abbot of Cluny. In the spring or summer of 1144, when Peter sent some of Robert's translations to Bernard of Clairvaux. In the accompanying letter he named the translator as \"Robert of Ketton from England, who is now archdeacon of the church of Pamplona\" (\"Roberto Ketenensi de Anglia, qui nunc Pampilonensis ecclesiae archidiaconus est\").\nTranslations.\nPrior to 1141, Robert and Hermann of Carinthia were engaged in a project of translating Arabic texts into Latin for their own use and education. Richard Hakluyt surmised that the two men had travelled in Arabic-speaking countries. Only one product of Robert from this early collaboration is known or has survived. On Hermann's request, Robert translated al-Kindi's \"Astrological Judgements\", under the Latin title \"Judicia\". (Many later manuscripts misattribute it to the astronomer Robertus Anglicus.) In the preface to this translation, he explains that his interest is in geometry and astronomy, but that he is undertaking an astrological work for the sake of his friendship with Hermann. Their real plan, he says, is to work through Euclid's \"Elements\" and Theodosius's \"Spherics\" in order to be capable of understanding Ptolemy's \"Almagest\". All of these texts would have been available to them only in Arabic at that time.\nIt has been suggested that one other text that survives might be Robert's work from his and Hermann's private collaboration: a translation of Euclid's \"Elements\" known as \"Adelard II\", which is usually attributed to Adelard of Bath and sometimes to Robert of Chester. It was the most popular of several Latin translations of Euclid from the twelfth century. In his translation of Ptolemy's \"Planisphere\" of 1143, Hermann also mentions that Robert gave him the astronomical tables of al-Battani, perhaps in translation.\nIn 1141, Robert and Hermann met Abbot Peter the Venerable on the banks of the Ebro, probably at Logro\u00f1o, and he convinced them to translate some Islamic texts for his collection, which has become known as the Toledan Collection. For this project, Robert translated a history of the early Caliphate under the title \"Chronica mendosa Saracenorum\" (Lying Chronicle of the Saracens) and the Quran itself under the title \"Lex Mahumet pseudoprophete\" (Law of the False Prophet Muhammad). For the latter work he was assisted by a certain Muhammad. His translation is very free and he does not subdivide the text according to the suras. The entire Toledan Collection was printed by the Protestant printer Theodore Bibliander at Basel in 1543.\nAs late as 1143, Robert still had in mind his and Hermann's pet project of astronomical translations, for he wrote a letter to Peter the Venerable promising \"a celestial gift which embraces within itself the whole of science \u2026 revealing most accurately, according to number, proportion and measure, all the celestial circles and their quantities, orders and conditions, and, finally, all the various movements of the stars, and their effects and natures.\"\nEcclesiastical career.\nRobert's career in the church began after his career as a translator had ended. (Perhaps he received his benefice as a reward for his work.) He was an archdeacon at Pamplona from at least 1144\u2014and probably shortly before that\u2014until 1157, when he was transferred to a canonry of Tudela. His presence at Pamplona is known from documents of 1145, 1147, 1149 and 1151. He was in Barcelona on official business in 1152. He seems to have held the archdeaconry of Valdonsella, which included the town of Uncastillo. Since the Kingdom of Navarre regained its independence in 1134, this lay on the border with and was disputed by the Kingdom of Aragon. Robert served King Garc\u00eda Ram\u00edrez of Navarre (whose grandfather, Sancho Garc\u00e9s, was lord of Uncastillo) as a diplomat, even drawing up the peace treaty signed with Raymond Berengar IV, regent of Aragon, on 1 July 1149. For this effort on behalf of peace, he was commended by Pope Eugenius III.\nIn 1151, Robert's bishop, Lope de Artajona, sent him as his delegate to a conference to resolve the disputed boundary between the dioceses of Pamplona and Zaragoza. Later, Robert led some of the Pamplonese clergy into rebellion against Lope. Their dispute was for a time patched up, but when Lope came into conflict with King Sancho VI, Robert joined the king's side. It was probably through the king that he obtained the canonry in Tudela after his archdeaconry had become untenable. There is no record of him after 1157. Charles Burnett notes that \"Robert's education fit him well for the roles of diplomat, royal adviser and redactor of official documents.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44585", "revid": "44209868", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44585", "title": "Cyclotron", "text": "Type of particle accelerator\nA cyclotron is a type of particle accelerator invented by Ernest Lawrence in 1929\u20131930 at the University of California, Berkeley, and patented in 1932. A cyclotron accelerates charged particles outwards from the center of a flat cylindrical vacuum chamber along a spiral path. The particles are held to a spiral trajectory by a static magnetic field and accelerated by a rapidly varying electric field. Lawrence was awarded the 1939 Nobel Prize in Physics for this invention.\nThe cyclotron was the first \"cyclical\" accelerator. The primary accelerators before the development of the cyclotron were electrostatic accelerators, such as the Cockcroft\u2013Walton generator and the Van de Graaff generator. In these accelerators, particles would cross an accelerating electric field only once. Thus, the energy gained by the particles was limited by the maximum electrical potential that could be achieved across the accelerating region. This potential was in turn limited by electrostatic breakdown to a few million volts. In a cyclotron, by contrast, the particles encounter the accelerating region many times by following a spiral path, so the output energy can be many times the energy gained in a single accelerating step.\nCyclotrons were the most powerful particle accelerator technology until the 1950s, when they were surpassed by the synchrotron. Nonetheless, they are still widely used to produce particle beams for nuclear medicine and basic research. As of 2020, close to 1,500 cyclotrons were in use worldwide for the production of radionuclides for nuclear medicine and ultimately, for the production of radiopharmaceuticals. In addition, cyclotrons can be used for particle therapy, where particle beams are directly applied to patients.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nA key limitation of the earliest charged particle accelerators was that increasing the particle energy required extending the length of the acceleration path, which was only feasible and practical up to a certain point. In 1927, while a student at Kiel, German physicist Max Steenbeck was the first to formulate the concept of the cyclotron, but he was discouraged from pursuing the idea further. In late 1928 and early 1929, Hungarian physicist Leo Szil\u00e1rd filed patent applications in Germany for the linear accelerator, cyclotron, and betatron. In these applications, Szil\u00e1rd became the first person to discuss the resonance condition for a circular accelerating apparatus. However, neither Steenbeck's ideas nor Szilard's patent applications were ever published and therefore did not contribute to the development of the cyclotron. \nSeveral months later, in the early summer of 1929, Ernest Lawrence independently conceived the cyclotron concept after reading a paper by Rolf Wider\u00f8e describing a drift tube accelerator. He published a paper in \"Science\" in 1930 (the first published description of the cyclotron concept), after a student of his built a crude model in April of that year. He patented the device in 1932.\nTo construct the first such device, Lawrence used large electromagnets recycled from obsolete arc converters provided by the Federal Telegraph Company. He was assisted by a graduate student, M. Stanley Livingston. Their first working cyclotron became operational on January 2, 1931. This machine had a diameter of , and accelerated protons to an energy up to 80\u00a0keV.\nAt the Radiation Laboratory on the campus of the University of California, Berkeley (now the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory), Lawrence and his collaborators went on to construct a series of cyclotrons which were the most powerful accelerators in the world at the time; a 4.8\u00a0MeV machine (1932), a 8\u00a0MeV machine (1937), and a 16\u00a0MeV machine (1939). Lawrence received the 1939 Nobel Prize in Physics for the invention and development of the cyclotron and for results obtained with it.\nThe first European cyclotron was constructed in 1934 in the Soviet Union by Mikhail Alekseevich Eremeev, at the Leningrad Physico-Technical Institute. It was a small design based on a prototype by Lawrence, with a 28 cm diameter capable of achieving 530 keV proton energies. Research quickly refocused around the construction of a larger MeV-level cyclotron, in the physics department of the V.G. Khlopin Radium Institute in Leningrad, headed by Vitaly Khlopin. This instrument was first proposed in 1932 by George Gamow and Lev Mysovskii and was installed and became operative in March 1937 at 100 cm (39 in) diameter and 3.2 MeV proton energies.\nThe first Asian cyclotron was constructed at the Riken laboratory in Tokyo, by a team including Yoshio Nishina, Sukeo Watanabe, Tameichi Yasaki, and Ryokichi Sagane. Yasaki and Sagane had been sent to Berkeley Radiation Laboratory to work with Lawrence. The device had a 26 in diameter and the first beam was produced on April 2, 1937, at 2.9 MeV deuteron energies.\nDuring World War II.\nCyclotrons played a key role in the Manhattan Project. The published 1940 discovery of neptunium and the withheld 1941 discovery of plutonium both used bombardment in the Berkeley Radiation Laboratory's 60-inch cyclotron. Furthermore Lawrence invented the calutron (California University cyclotron), which was industrially developed at the Y-12 National Security Complex from 1942. This provided the bulk of the uranium enrichment process, taking low-enriched uranium (&lt;5% uranium-235) from the S-50 and K-25 plants and electromagnetically separating isotopes up to 84.5% highly enriched uranium (HEU). This was the first production of HEU in history, and was shipped to Los Alamos and used in the Little Boy bomb dropped on Hiroshima, and its precursor Water Boiler and Dragon test reactors.\nIn France, Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Joliot-Curie constructed a large 7 MeV cyclotron at the Coll\u00e8ge de France in Paris, achieving the first beam in March 1939. With the Nazi occupation of Paris in June 1940 and an incoming contingent of German scientists, Joliot ceased research into uranium fission, and obtained an understanding with his German former colleague Wolfgang Gentner that no research of military use would be carried out. In 1943 Gentner was recalled for weakness, and a new German contingent attempted to operate the cyclotron. However, it is likely that Joliot, a member of French Communist Party and in fact president of the National Front resistance movement, sabotaged the cyclotron to prevent its use to the Nazi German nuclear program.\nIn Nazi Germany, one cyclotron was built in Heidelberg, under the supervision of Walther Bothe and Wolfgang Gentner, with support from the Heereswaffenamt. At the end of 1938, Gentner was sent to Berkeley Radiation Laboratory and worked most closely with Emilio Segr\u00e8 and Donald Cooksey, returning before the start of the war. Construction was slowed by the war and completed in January 1944, but difficulties in testing made it unusable until the war's end.\nIn Japan, the large Riken cyclotron was used to bombard uranium processed in their Clusius tube gaseous diffusion device. The experiment indicated that no enrichment of the uranium-235 content had occurred. Following the occupation of Japan, American forces, fearing continuation of the Japanese nuclear weapons program, dissembled the Riken laboratory's cyclotron and dumped it in Tokyo Bay. During the disassembly, Yoshio Nishina begged otherwise, saying \"This is ten years of my life ... It has nothing to do with bombs.\" Secretary of War Robert P. Patterson later admitted the decision was a mistake.\nPost-war.\nBy the late 1930s it had become clear that there was a practical limit on the beam energy that could be achieved with the traditional cyclotron design, due to the effects of special relativity. As particles reach relativistic speeds, their effective mass increases, which causes the resonant frequency for a given magnetic field to change. To address this issue and reach higher beam energies using cyclotrons, two primary approaches were taken, synchrocyclotrons (which hold the magnetic field constant, but decrease the accelerating frequency) and isochronous cyclotrons (which hold the accelerating frequency constant, but alter the magnetic field).\nLawrence's team built one of the first synchrocyclotrons in 1946. This machine eventually achieved a maximum beam energy of 350\u00a0MeV for protons. However, synchrocyclotrons suffer from low beam intensities (&lt;\u00a01\u00a0\u03bcA), and must be operated in a \"pulsed\" mode, further decreasing the available total beam. As such, they were quickly overtaken in popularity by isochronous cyclotrons.\nThe first isochronous cyclotron (other than classified prototypes) was built by F. Heyn and K.T. Khoe in Delft, the Netherlands, in 1956. Early isochronous cyclotrons were limited to energies of ~50\u00a0MeV per nucleon, but as manufacturing and design techniques gradually improved, the construction of \"spiral-sector\" cyclotrons allowed the acceleration and control of more powerful beams. Later developments included the use of more compact and power-efficient superconducting magnets and the separation of the magnets into discrete sectors, as opposed to a single large magnet.\nPrinciple of operation.\nA cyclotron is essentially a linear particle accelerator wrapped in a circle. A uniform magnetic field perpendicular to the plane of particle motion causes the particles to orbit. During each orbit the particles are accelerated by electric fields.\nCyclotron principle.\nIn a particle accelerator, charged particles are accelerated by applying an electric field across a gap. The force on a particle crossing this gap is given by the Lorentz force law:\nformula_1\nwhere q is the charge on the particle, E is the electric field, v is the particle velocity, and B is the magnetic flux density. It is not possible to accelerate particles using only a static magnetic field, as the magnetic force always acts perpendicularly to the direction of motion, and therefore can only change the direction of the particle, not the speed.\nIn practice, the magnitude of an unchanging electric field which can be applied across a gap is limited by the need to avoid electrostatic breakdown. As such, modern particle accelerators use alternating (radio frequency) electric fields for acceleration. Since an alternating field across a gap only provides an acceleration in the forward direction for a portion of its cycle, particles in RF accelerators travel in bunches, rather than a continuous stream. In a linear particle accelerator, in order for a bunch to \"see\" a forward voltage every time it crosses a gap, the gaps must be placed further and further apart, in order to compensate for the increasing speed of the particle.\nA cyclotron, by contrast, uses a magnetic field to bend the particle trajectories into a spiral, thus allowing the same gap to be used many times to accelerate a single bunch. As the bunch spirals outward, the increasing distance between transits of the gap is exactly balanced by the increase in speed, so a bunch will reach the gap at the same point in the RF cycle every time.\nThe frequency at which a particle will orbit in a perpendicular magnetic field is known as the cyclotron frequency, and depends, in the non-relativistic case, solely on the charge and mass of the particle, and the magnetic flux density:\nformula_2\nwhere f is the (linear) frequency, q is the charge of the particle, B is the component of the magnetic flux density that is perpendicular to the plane in which the particle is travelling, and m is the particle mass. The property that the frequency is independent of particle velocity is what allows a single, fixed gap to be used to accelerate a particle travelling in a spiral.\nParticle energy.\nEach time a particle crosses the accelerating gap in a cyclotron, it is given an accelerating force by the electric field across the gap, and the total particle energy gain can be calculated by multiplying the increase per crossing by the number of times the particle crosses the gap.\nHowever, given the typically high number of revolutions, it is usually simpler to estimate the energy by combining the equation for frequency in circular motion:\nformula_3\nwith the cyclotron frequency equation to yield:\nformula_4\nThe kinetic energy for particles with speed v is therefore given by:\nformula_5\nwhere r is the radius at which the energy is to be determined. The limit on the beam energy which can be produced by a given cyclotron thus depends on the maximum radius which can be reached by the magnetic field and the accelerating structures, and on the maximum strength of the magnetic field which can be achieved.\nK-factor.\nIn the nonrelativistic approximation, the maximum kinetic energy per atomic mass for a given cyclotron is given by:\nformula_6\nwhere formula_7 is the elementary charge, formula_8 is magnetic flux density, formula_9 is the maximum radius of the beam, formula_10 is the atomic mass constant, formula_11 is the charge of the beam particles, and formula_12 is the atomic mass of the beam particles. The value of \"K\"\nformula_13\nis known as the \"K-factor\", and is used to characterize the maximum kinetic beam energy of protons (quoted in MeV). It represents the theoretical maximum energy of protons (with \"Q\" and \"A\" equal to 1) accelerated in a given machine.\nParticle trajectory.\nWhile the trajectory followed by a particle in the cyclotron is conventionally referred to as a \"spiral\", it is more accurately described as a series of arcs of constant radius. The particles' speed, and therefore orbital radius, only increases at the accelerating gaps. Away from those regions, the particle will orbit (to a first approximation) at a fixed radius.\nAssuming a uniform energy gain per orbit (which is only valid in the non-relativistic case), the average orbit may be approximated by a simple spiral. If the energy gain per turn is given by , the particle energy after n turns will be:\nformula_14\nCombining this with the non-relativistic equation for the kinetic energy of a particle in a cyclotron gives:\nformula_15\nThis is the equation of a Fermat spiral.\nStability and focusing.\nAs a particle bunch travels around a cyclotron, two effects tend to make its particles spread out. The first is simply the particles injected from the ion source having some initial spread of positions and velocities. This spread tends to get amplified over time, making the particles move away from the bunch center. The second is the mutual repulsion of the beam particles due to their electrostatic charges. Keeping the particles focused for acceleration requires confining the particles to the plane of acceleration (in-plane or \"vertical\" focusing), preventing them from moving inward or outward from their correct orbit (\"horizontal\" focusing), and keeping them synchronized with the accelerating RF field cycle (longitudinal focusing).\nTransverse stability and focusing.\nThe in-plane or \"vertical\" focusing is typically achieved by varying the magnetic field around the orbit, i.e. with azimuth. A cyclotron using this focusing method is thus called an azimuthally-varying field (AVF) cyclotron. The variation in field strength is provided by shaping the steel poles of the magnet into sectors which can have a shape reminiscent of a spiral and also have a larger area towards the outer edge of the cyclotron to improve the vertical focus of the particle beam. This solution for focusing the particle beam was proposed by L. H. Thomas in 1938 and almost all modern cyclotrons use azimuthally-varying fields. \nThe \"horizontal\" focusing happens as a natural result of cyclotron motion. Since for identical particles travelling perpendicularly to a constant magnetic field the trajectory curvature radius is only a function of their speed, all particles with the same speed will travel in circular orbits of the same radius, and a particle with a slightly incorrect trajectory will simply travel in a circle with a slightly offset center. Relative to a particle with a centered orbit, such a particle will appear to undergo a horizontal oscillation relative to the centered particle. This oscillation is stable for particles with a small deviation from the reference energy.\nLongitudinal stability.\nThe instantaneous level of synchronization between a particle and the RF field is expressed by phase difference between the RF field and the particle. In the first harmonic mode (i.e. particles make one revolution per RF cycle) it is the difference between the instantaneous phase of the RF field and the instantaneous azimuth of the particle. Fastest acceleration is achieved when the phase difference equals 90\u00b0 (modulo 360\u00b0).ch.2.1.3 Poor synchronization, i.e. phase difference far from this value, leads to the particle being accelerated slowly or even decelerated (outside of the 0\u2013180\u00b0 range).\nAs the time taken by a particle to complete an orbit depends only on particle's type, magnetic field (which may vary with the radius), and Lorentz factor (see ), cyclotrons have no longitudinal focusing mechanism which would keep the particles synchronized to the RF field. The phase difference, that the particle had at the moment of its injection into the cyclotron, is preserved throughout the acceleration process, but errors from imperfect match between the RF field frequency and the cyclotron frequency at a given radius accumulate on top of it.ch.2.1.3 Failure of the particle to be injected with phase difference within about \u00b120\u00b0 from the optimum may make its acceleration too slow and its stay in the cyclotron too long. As a consequence, half-way through the process the phase difference escapes the 0\u2013180\u00b0 range, the acceleration turns into deceleration, and the particle fails to reach the target energy. Grouping of the particles into correctly synchronized bunches before their injection into the cyclotron thus greatly increases the injection efficiency.ch.7\nRelativistic considerations.\nIn the non-relativistic approximation, the cyclotron frequency does not depend upon the particle's speed or the radius of the particle's orbit. As the beam spirals outward, the rotation frequency stays constant, and the beam continues to accelerate as it travels a greater distance in the same time period. In contrast to this approximation, as particles approach the speed of light, the cyclotron frequency decreases due to the change in relativistic mass. This change is proportional to the particle's Lorentz factor.\nThe relativistic mass can be written as:\nformula_16\nwhere:\nSubstituting this into the equations for cyclotron frequency and angular frequency gives:\nformula_20\nThe gyroradius for a particle moving in a static magnetic field is then given by:\nformula_21\nExpressing the speed in this equation in terms of frequency and radius\nformula_22\nyields the connection between the magnetic field strength, frequency, and radius:\nformula_23\nApproaches to relativistic cyclotrons.\nSynchrocyclotron.\nSince formula_24 increases as the particle reaches relativistic velocities, acceleration of relativistic particles requires modification of the cyclotron to ensure the particle crosses the gap at the same point in each RF cycle. If the frequency of the accelerating electric field is varied while the magnetic field is held constant, this leads to the \"synchrocyclotron\". \nIn this type of cyclotron, the accelerating frequency is varied as a function of particle orbit radius such that: \nformula_25\nThe decrease in accelerating frequency is tuned to match the increase in gamma for a constant magnetic field.\nIsochronous cyclotron.\nIf instead the magnetic field is varied with radius while the frequency of the accelerating field is held constant, this leads to the \"isochronous cyclotron\".\nformula_26\nKeeping the frequency constant allows isochronous cyclotrons to operate in a continuous mode, which makes them capable of producing much greater beam current than synchrocyclotrons. On the other hand, as precise matching of the orbital frequency to the accelerating field frequency is the responsibility of the magnetic field variation with radius, the variation must be precisely tuned.\nFixed-field alternating gradient accelerator (FFA).\nAn approach which combines static magnetic fields (as in the synchrocyclotron) and alternating gradient focusing (as in a synchrotron) is the fixed-field alternating gradient accelerator (FFA). In an isochronous cyclotron, the magnetic field is shaped by using precisely machined steel magnet poles. This variation provides a focusing effect as the particles cross the edges of the poles. In an FFA, separate magnets with alternating directions are used to focus the beam using the principle of strong focusing. The field of the focusing and bending magnets in an FFA is not varied over time, so the beam chamber must still be wide enough to accommodate a changing beam radius within the field of the focusing magnets as the beam accelerates.\nClassifications.\nCyclotron types.\nThere are a number of basic types of cyclotron:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Glossary/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBeam types.\nThe particles for cyclotron beams are produced in ion sources of various types.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Glossary/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTarget types.\nTo make use of the cyclotron beam, it must be directed to a target.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Glossary/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUsage.\nBasic research.\nFor several decades, cyclotrons were the best source of high-energy beams for nuclear physics experiments. With the advent of strong focusing synchrotrons, cyclotrons were supplanted as the accelerators capable of producing the highest energies. However, due to their compactness, and therefore lower expense compared to high-energy synchrotrons, cyclotrons are still used to create beams for research where the primary consideration is not achieving the maximum possible energy. Cyclotron-based nuclear physics experiments are used to measure basic properties of isotopes (particularly short lived radioactive isotopes) including half-life, mass, interaction cross sections, and decay schemes.\nMedical uses.\nRadioisotope production.\nCyclotron beams can be used to bombard other atoms to produce short-lived isotopes with a variety of medical uses, including medical imaging and radiotherapy. Positron and gamma emitting isotopes, such as fluorine-18, carbon-11, and technetium-99m are used for PET and SPECT imaging. While cyclotron produced radioisotopes are widely used for diagnostic purposes, therapeutic uses are still largely in development. Proposed isotopes include astatine-211, palladium-103, rhenium-186, and bromine-77, among others.\nBeam therapy.\nThe first suggestion that energetic protons could be an effective treatment method was made by Robert R. Wilson in a paper published in 1946 while he was involved in the design of the Harvard Cyclotron Laboratory.\nBeams from cyclotrons can be used in particle therapy to treat cancer. Ion beams from cyclotrons can be used, as in proton therapy, to penetrate the body and kill tumors by radiation damage, while minimizing damage to healthy tissue along their path. \nAs of 2020, there were approximately 80 facilities worldwide for radiotherapy using beams of protons and heavy ions, consisting of a mixture of cyclotrons and synchrotrons. Cyclotrons are primarily used for proton beams, while synchrotrons are used to produce heavier ions.\nAdvantages and limitations.\nThe most obvious advantage of a cyclotron over a linear accelerator is that because the same accelerating gap is used many times, it is both more space efficient and more cost efficient; particles can be brought to higher energies in less space, and with less equipment. The compactness of the cyclotron reduces other costs as well, such as foundations, radiation shielding, and the enclosing building. Cyclotrons have a single electrical driver, which saves both equipment and power costs. Furthermore, cyclotrons are able to produce a continuous beam of particles at the target, so the average power passed from a particle beam into a target is relatively high compared to the pulsed beam of a synchrotron.\nHowever, as discussed above, a constant frequency acceleration method is only possible when the accelerated particles are approximately obeying Newton's laws of motion. If the particles become fast enough that relativistic effects become important, the beam becomes out of phase with the oscillating electric field, and cannot receive any additional acceleration. The classical cyclotron (constant field and frequency) is therefore only capable of accelerating particles up to a few percent of the speed of light. Synchro-, isochronous, and other types of cyclotrons can overcome this limitation, with the tradeoff of increased complexity and cost.\nAn additional limitation of cyclotrons is due to space charge effects \u2013 the mutual repulsion of the particles in the beam. As the amount of particles (beam current) in a cyclotron beam is increased, the effects of electrostatic repulsion grow stronger until they disrupt the orbits of neighboring particles. This puts a functional limit on the beam intensity, or the \"number\" of particles which can be accelerated at one time, as distinct from their energy.\nSuperconducting cyclotron examples.\nA superconducting cyclotron uses superconducting magnets to achieve high magnetic field in a small diameter and with lower power requirements. These cyclotrons require a cryostat to house the magnet and cool it to superconducting temperatures. Some of these cyclotrons are being built for medical therapy. \nRelated technologies.\nThe spiraling of electrons in a cylindrical vacuum chamber within a transverse magnetic field is also employed in the magnetron, a device for producing high frequency radio waves (microwaves). In the magnetron, electrons are bent into a circular path by a magnetic field, and their motion is used to excite resonant cavities, producing electromagnetic radiation.\nA betatron uses the \"change\" in the magnetic field to accelerate electrons in a circular path. While static magnetic fields cannot provide acceleration, as the force always acts perpendicularly to the direction of particle motion, changing fields can be used to induce an electromotive force in the same manner as in a transformer. The betatron was developed in 1940, although the idea had been proposed substantially earlier.\nA synchrotron is another type of particle accelerator that uses magnets to bend particles into a circular trajectory. Unlike in a cyclotron, the particle path in a synchrotron has a fixed radius. Particles in a synchrotron pass accelerating stations at increasing frequency as they get faster. To compensate for this frequency increase, both the frequency of the applied accelerating electric field and the magnetic field must be increased in tandem, leading to the \"synchro\" portion of the name.\nIn fiction.\nThe United States Department of War famously asked for dailies of the \"Superman\" comic strip to be pulled in April 1945 for having Superman bombarded with the radiation from a cyclotron.\nIn the 1984 film \"Ghostbusters,\" a miniature cyclotron forms part of the proton pack used for catching ghosts.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44590", "revid": "50630054", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44590", "title": "Radius of gyration", "text": "Distance from center of mass to axis of rotation\nThe radius of gyration or gyradius of a body about the axis of rotation is defined as the radial distance to a point which would have a moment of inertia the same as the body's actual distribution of mass, if the total mass of the body were concentrated there. The radius of gyration has dimensions of distance [L] or [M0LT0] and the SI unit is the metre (m).\nFormulation.\nMathematically the radius of gyration is the root mean square distance of the object's parts from either its center of mass or a given axis, depending on the relevant application. It is actually the perpendicular distance from point mass to the axis of rotation. One can represent a trajectory of a moving point as a body. Then radius of gyration can be used to characterize the typical distance travelled by this point.\nSuppose a body consists of formula_1 particles each of mass formula_2. Let formula_3 be their perpendicular distances from the axis of rotation. Then, the moment of inertia formula_4 of the body about the axis of rotation is\nformula_5\n \nIf all the masses are the same (formula_2), then the moment of inertia is formula_7.\nSince formula_8 (formula_9 being the total mass of the body), \nformula_10\nFrom the above equations, we have \nformula_11\nRadius of gyration is the root mean square distance of particles from axis formula \nformula_12\nTherefore, the radius of gyration of a body about a given axis may also be defined as the root mean square distance of the various particles of the body from the axis of rotation. It is also known as a measure of the way in which the mass of a rotating rigid body is distributed about its axis of rotation.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n IUPAP definition\nRadius of gyration (in polymer science)(formula_13, unit: nm or SI unit: m): For a macromolecule composed of formula_1 mass elements, of masses formula_15, formula_16=1,2,\u2026,formula_1, located at fixed distances formula_18 from the centre of mass, the radius of gyration is the square-root of the mass average of formula_19 over all mass elements, i.e.,\nformula_20\nNote: The mass elements are usually taken as the masses of the skeletal groups constituting the macromolecule, e.g., \u2013CH2\u2013 in poly(methylene).\nApplications in structural engineering.\nIn structural engineering, the two-dimensional radius of gyration is used to describe the distribution of cross sectional area in a column around its centroidal axis with the mass of the body. The radius of gyration is given by the following formula:\nformula_21\nWhere formula_4 is the second moment of area and formula_23 is the total cross-sectional area.\nThe gyration radius is useful in estimating the stiffness of a column. If the principal moments of the two-dimensional gyration tensor are not equal, the column will tend to buckle around the axis with the smaller principal moment. For example, a column with an elliptical cross-section will tend to buckle in the direction of the smaller semiaxis.\nIn engineering, where continuous bodies of matter are generally the objects of study, the radius of gyration is usually calculated as an integral.\nApplications in mechanics.\nThe radius of gyration about a given axis (formula_24) can be calculated in terms of the mass moment of inertia formula_25 around that axis, and the total mass \"m\";\nformula_26\nformula_25 is a scalar, and is not the moment of inertia tensor.\nMolecular applications.\nIn polymer physics, the radius of gyration is used to describe the dimensions of a polymer chain. The radius of gyration of an individual homopolymer with degree of polymerization N at a given time is defined as: \nformula_28\nwhere formula_29 is the mean position of the monomers.\nAs detailed below, the radius of gyration is also proportional to the root mean square distance between the monomers:\nformula_30\nAs a third method, the radius of gyration can also be computed by summing the principal moments of the gyration tensor.\nSince the chain conformations of a polymer sample are quasi infinite in number and constantly change over time, the \"radius of gyration\" discussed in polymer physics must usually be understood as a mean over all polymer molecules of the sample and over time. That is, the radius of gyration which is measured as an \"average\" over time or ensemble:\nformula_31\nwhere the angular brackets formula_32 denote the ensemble average.\nAn entropically governed polymer chain (i.e. in so called theta conditions) follows a random walk in three dimensions. The radius of gyration for this case is given by\nformula_33\nNote that although formula_34 represents the contour length of the polymer, formula_35 is strongly dependent of polymer stiffness and can vary over orders of magnitude. formula_36 is reduced accordingly.\nOne reason that the radius of gyration is an interesting property is that it can be determined experimentally with static light scattering as well as with small angle neutron- and x-ray scattering. This allows theoretical polymer physicists to check their models against reality.\nThe hydrodynamic radius is numerically similar, and can be measured with Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS).\nDerivation of identity.\nTo show that the two definitions of formula_37 are identical, \nwe first multiply out the summand in the first definition:\nformula_38\nCarrying out the summation over the last two terms and using the definition of formula_39 gives the formula\nformula_40\nOn the other hand, the second definition can be calculated in the same way as follows. \nformula_41\nThus, the two definitions are the same. \nThe last transformation uses the relationship \nformula_42\nApplications in geographical data analysis.\nIn data analysis, the radius of gyration is used to calculate many different statistics including the spread of geographical locations. These locations have recently been collected from social media users to investigate the typical mentions of a user. This can be useful for understanding how a certain group of users on social media use the platform.\nformula_43\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44591", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44591", "title": "Portland, Maine", "text": "Most populous city in Maine, United States\nPortland is the most populous city in the U.S. state of Maine. Its population was 68,408 at the 2020 census. The Greater Portland metropolitan area has a population of approximately 550,000 people, the most populous metropolitan area in Maine. It is the county seat of Cumberland County. Historically tied to commercial shipping, the marine economy, and light industry, Portland's economy in the 21st century relies mostly on the service sector. The Port of Portland is the second-largest tonnage seaport in the New England area as of 2019.\nFirst settled in the early 1600s as part of the Massachusetts Bay Colony, the city endured multiple attacks during colonial conflicts before emerging as a key port in New England. It was formally founded in 1786 and named after the English Isle of Portland. In turn, the city of Portland, Oregon, was named after Portland, Maine. The city seal depicts a phoenix rising from ashes, a reference to Portland's recovery from four devastating fires. Notable landmarks include the historic Old Port district, known for its cobblestone streets and preserved warehouses; Victoria Mansion, an ornate Italianate home reflecting the city's prosperity during the pre-Civil War era; and the Portland Museum of Art, the largest and oldest public art institution in the state. The Greater Portland area has emerged as an important center for the creative economy, which is also bringing gentrification.\nHistory.\nThe original Algonquin-speaking Eastern Abenaki residents called the Portland peninsula Machigonne (\"great neck\"). It is also called M\u0259k\u00edhkan\u0259k (\"at the fish hook\") in Penobscot.\nThe first European settler was Christopher Levett, an English naval captain granted in 1623 to found a settlement in Casco Bay. A member of the Council for New England and agent for Ferdinando Gorges, Levett built a stone house where he left a company of ten men, then returned to England to write a book about his voyage to bolster support for the settlement. Ultimately, the settlement was a failure and the fate of Levett's colonists is unknown. The explorer sailed from England to the Massachusetts Bay Colony to meet John Winthrop in 1630, but never returned to Maine. Fort Levett in the harbor is named for him.\nThe peninsula was settled in 1632 as a fishing and trading village named Casco. When the Massachusetts Bay Colony took over Casco Bay in 1658, the town's name changed again to Falmouth. In 1676, the village was destroyed by the Abenaki during King Philip's War. It was rebuilt. During King William's War, a raiding party of French and their native allies attacked and largely destroyed it again in the Battle of Fort Loyal (1690).\nOn October 18, 1775, Falmouth was burned in the Revolution by the Royal Navy under command of Captain Henry Mowat. Following the war, a section of Falmouth called The Neck developed as a commercial port and began to grow rapidly as a shipping center. In 1786, the citizens of Falmouth formed a separate town in Falmouth Neck and named it Portland, after the Isle of Portland off the coast of Dorset, England. The word \"Portland\" is derived from the Old English word \"Portlanda\", which means \"land surrounding a harbor\".\nPortland's economy was greatly stressed by the Embargo Act of 1807 (prohibition of trade with the British), which ended in 1809, and the War of 1812, which ended in 1815. In 1820, Maine was established as a state with Portland as its capital. In 1832, the capital was moved north and east to Augusta. In 1851, Maine led the nation by passing the first state law prohibiting the sale of alcohol except for \"medicinal, mechanical or manufacturing purposes.\" The law subsequently became known as the Maine law, as eighteen other states quickly followed. The Portland Rum Riot occurred on June 2, 1855.\nIn 1853, upon completion of the Grand Trunk Railway to Montreal, Portland became the primary ice-free winter seaport for Canadian exports. The Portland Company, located on Fore Street, manufactured more than six hundred 19th-century steam locomotives, as well as engines for trains and boats, fire engines and other railroad transportation equipment. The Portland Company was, for a time, the city's largest employer and many of its employees were immigrants from Canada, Ireland and Italy. Portland became a 20th-century rail hub as five additional rail lines merged into Portland Terminal Company in 1911. These rail lines also facilitated movement of returning Canadian troops from the First World War in 1919. Following nationalization of the Grand Trunk system in 1923, Canadian export traffic was diverted from Portland to Halifax, resulting in marked local economic decline. Icebreakers later enabled ships to reach Montreal in winter, drastically reducing Portland's role as a winter port for Canada.\nOn June 26, 1863, a Confederate raiding party led by Captain Charles Read entered the harbor at Portland leading to the Battle of Portland Harbor, one of the northernmost battles of the Civil War. The 1866 Great Fire of Portland, Maine, on July 4, 1866, ignited during the Independence Day celebration, destroyed most of the commercial buildings in the city, half the churches and hundreds of homes. More than 10,000 people were left homeless.\nBy act of the Maine Legislature in 1899, Portland annexed the city of Deering, despite a vote by Deering residents rejecting the motion, thereby greatly increasing the size of the city and opening areas for development beyond the peninsula.\nIn 1967, the city began the controversial razing of Franklin Street to construct a limited-access highway to improve access in and out of the city for non-residents. The reconstruction of the street demolished 130 homes and businesses and caused an unknown number of families to be relocated or displaced. The construction of The Maine Mall, an indoor shopping center established in South Portland in 1971, economically depressed downtown Portland. The trend reversed when tourists and new businesses started revitalizing the old seaport, a part of which is known locally as the Old Port.\nSince the 1990s, the historically industrial Bayside neighborhood has seen rapid development, including attracting a Whole Foods Market and Trader Joe's grocery stores, as well as Baxter Academy for Technology and Science, a charter school. Other developing neighborhoods include the India Street neighborhood, near the Ocean Gateway, and Munjoy Hill, where many modern condominiums have been built. The Maine College of Art has been a revitalizing force downtown, attracting students from around the country. The historic Porteous Building on Congress Street was restored by the college. Universities operating in the city are expanding. The University of Southern Maine is improving its Portland campus with a 580-bed dormitory, student center, and an arts center. The University of New England intends to move its medical school from its Biddeford campus to its Portland campus. Northeastern University's Roux Institute plans to build on the former B&amp;M Baked Beans factory campus in East Deering.\nPortland is known as a walkable city, offering many opportunities for walking tours which feature its maritime and architectural history.\nGeography.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and is water. Portland is situated on a peninsula in Casco Bay on the Gulf of Maine and the Atlantic Ocean.\nPortland borders South Portland, Westbrook and Falmouth.\nClimate.\nPortland has a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Dfb\", closely bordering on \"Dfa\"), with cold, snowy, and often prolonged winters, and warm to hot, yet relatively short summers. The monthly average high temperature ranges from roughly in January to around in July. Daily high temperatures reach or exceed on only four days per year on average, while cold-season lows of or below are reached on 10 nights per year on average. The area can be affected by severe nor'easters during winter, with high winds and snowfall totals often measuring over a foot. Annual liquid precipitation (rain) averages and is plentiful year-round, but with a slightly drier summer. Annual frozen precipitation (snow) averages in the city. However, this number can fluctuate seasonally from as little as 30 inches to as much as 150 inches, depending on a multitude of factors. In Southern Maine, snowstorms can be intense from November through early April, while warm-season thunderstorms are somewhat less frequent than in the Midwestern, Mid-Atlantic, and Southeastern U.S. (although their frequency has increased in recent years). Direct strikes by hurricanes or tropical storms are rare, partially due to the normally cooler Atlantic waters off the Maine coast (which usually weaken tropical systems), but primarily because most tropical systems approaching or reaching 40 degrees North latitude recurve (due to the Coriolis force) and track east out to sea well south of the Portland area. Extreme temperatures range from on February 16, 1943, to on July 4, 1911, and August 2, 1975. The hardiness zones are 5b and 6a.\nSea-level rise.\nPortland is becoming increasingly affected by global warming and the rise of sea levels. The coast is one of the fastest-warming saltwater bodies, and is predicted to see an increase to about 10\u201317 inches by 2030, in comparison to the levels in 2000. This is a major threat to the residents and ocean life around the area. In 2022, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration issued a report that showed sea level in Portland could rise by six inches by 2050, two feet by 2060 and two to six feet by 2100.\nIn January 2024, Portland experienced a record-high tide of . Combined with heavy rainfall and strong winds, it caused severe flooding.\nNeighborhoods.\nPortland is organized into neighborhoods generally recognized by residents, but they have no legal or political authority. In many cases, city signs identify neighborhoods or intersections (which are often called corners). Most city neighborhoods have a local association which usually maintains ongoing relations of varying degrees with the city government on issues affecting the neighborhood.\nOn March 8, 1899, Portland annexed the neighboring city of Deering. Deering neighborhoods now comprise the northern and eastern sections of the city before the merger. Portland's Deering High School was formerly the public high school for Deering.\nPortland's neighborhoods include the Arts District, Bayside, Bradley's Corner, Cliff Island, Cushing's Island, Deering Center, Deering Highlands, Downtown, East Deering, East Bayside, East End, Eastern Cemetery, Great Diamond Island, Highlands, Kennedy Park, Libbytown, Little Diamond Island, Lunt's Corner, Morrill's Corner, Munjoy Hill, Nason's Corner, North Deering, Oakdale, the Old Port, Parkside, Peaks Island, Riverton Park, Rosemont, Stroudwater, West End, and Woodfords Corner.\nFrom the early 2000s onward, many of Portland's neighborhoods have faced gentrification, causing many local residents to be \"priced out\" of their neighborhoods. In 2015, the \"Portland Press Herald\" published a series of articles documenting the \"super-tight apartment market\" and the trauma caused by evictions and steep jumps in monthly rent. Also in that year, city landlords raised rents by an average of 17.4%, which was the second-largest jump in the country.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 66,194 people, 30,725 households, and 13,324 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 33,836 housing units at an average density of . By the 2020 census, its population was 68,408. In 2000, according to the U.S. Census Bureau, Portland's immediate metropolitan area ranked 147th in the nation in 2000 with a population of 243,537, while the Portland/South Portland/Biddeford metropolitan area included 487,568 total inhabitants. This has increased to an estimated 513,102 inhabitants (and the largest metro area in Northern New England) as of 2007[ [update]]. Much of this increase in population has been due to growth in the city's southern and western suburbs.\nRace and ethnicity.\nRace and ethnicity composition of Portland, Maine\nIn 2010, the racial and ethnic makeup of the city was 85.0% White (83.6% non-Hispanic White alone), down from 96.6% in 1990, 7.1% African American, 0.5% Native American, 3.5% Asian, 1.2% from other races, and 2.7% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 3.0% of the population. 40.7% of the population had a bachelor's degree or higher. In 2020, the racial and ethnic makeup of the city remained predominantly non-Hispanic white.\nHouseholds and income.\nPortland has experienced significant housing affordability challenges since the early 2000s. From the early 2000s onward, many of Portland's neighborhoods have faced gentrification, causing many local residents to be \"priced out\" of their neighborhoods. In 2015, city landlords raised rents by an average of 17.4%, which was the second-largest jump in the country. According to U.S. census data, Portland had 33,836 housing units at an average density of 1,587.8 per square mile (613.1/km2) as of the 2010 census, with homeownership rates at approximately 45%.\nIn November 2020, Portland voters approved the \"Green New Deal\" referendum, which included inclusionary zoning requirements mandating that developments of 10 or more units include 25% affordable housing units. Voters also approved a rent control ordinance that initially froze rents and subsequently limited annual rent increases. In 2022, voters further strengthened tenant protections by reducing allowable rent increases to 70% of the Consumer Price Index and limiting security deposits.\nPortland has also responded to Maine's 2022 statewide housing law LD 2003, which requires municipalities to allow increased housing density. In December 2023, the city council voted to allow up to four units on residential lots and eliminated parking requirements for these uses. The city has set a goal to build 256 new housing units per year from 2017 through 2027 and is currently on track to exceed this target. Since 2010, the city has approved approximately 6,400 housing units, though completion of approved projects has lagged.\nIn 2010, there were 30,725 households, of which 20.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 29.7% were married couples living together, 10.1% had a female householder with no husband present, 3.6% had a male householder with no wife present, and 56.6% were non-families. 40.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.07 and the average family size was 2.88.\nThe median age in the city was 36.7 years. 17.1% of residents were under the age of 18; 11.4% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 33.1% were from 25 to 44; 25.9% were from 45 to 64; and 12.6% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 48.8% male and 51.2% female.\nIn 2000, the median income for a household in the city was $35,650, and the median income for a family was $48,763. Males had a median income of $31,828 versus $27,173 for females. The per capita income for the city was $22,698. About 9.7% of families and 14.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 12.5% of those under age 18 and 11.9% of those age 65 or over. According to the 2023 American Community Survey's 1 year estimates, its per capita income increased to $55,571. The median household income was $83,399 and roughly 8.7% of the population lived at or below the poverty line.\nEconomy.\nPortland has become Maine's economic capital because the city has Maine's largest port, largest population, and is close to Boston (105 miles to the southwest). Over the years, the local economy has shifted from fishing, manufacturing, and agriculture towards a more service-based economy. Most national bank institutions and other related financial organizations, such as Bank of America and Key Bank, base their Maine operations in Portland. Unum, Covetrus, TruChoice Federal Credit Union, M&amp;T Bank, ImmuCell Corp, and Pioneer Telephone have headquarters here, and Portland's neighboring cities of South Portland, Westbrook and Scarborough, provide homes for other corporations including IDEXX and WEX Inc. Between 1867 and 2021, Burnham &amp; Morrill Company, maker of B&amp;M Baked Beans, had its main plant in Portland (the B&amp;M Baked Beans factory).\nThe city's port is also undergoing a revival, and the first-ever container train departed from the new International Marine Terminal with fifteen containers of locally produced bottled tap water in early 2016.\nIn January 2020, Portland was announced to be the location of a new research institute that will focus on the application of artificial intelligence and machine learning. Northeastern University was selected by technology entrepreneur David Roux to lead the institute that will include programs that will allow graduate student research.\nPortland also has a large subsidized housing industry, with several large real estate companies in the business.\nArts and culture.\nPortland has a long history of prominence in the arts, peaking the first time in the early 19th century, when the city was \"a rival, and not a satellite of either Boston or New York.\" In that period, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow got his start as a poet and John Neal held a central position in leading American literature toward its great renaissance, having founded Maine's first literary periodical, \"The Yankee\", in 1828. Other notable literary or artistic figures who were contemporaries include Grenville Mellen, Nathaniel Parker Willis, Seba Smith, Elizabeth Oakes Smith, Benjamin Paul Akers, Charles Codman, Franklin Simmons, John Rollin Tilton, and Harrison Bird Brown. Since 2000, Portland has hosted a monthly First Friday Art Walk event which attracts more than 3,000 visitors.\nSites of interest.\nThe Arts District, centered on Congress Street, is home to the Portland Museum of Art, Portland Stage Company, Maine Historical Society &amp; Museum, Portland Public Library, Maine College of Art, SPACE Gallery, Children's Museum of Maine, Merrill Auditorium, the Kotzschmar Memorial Organ, and Portland Symphony Orchestra, as well as many smaller art galleries and studios.\nBaxter Boulevard around Back Cove, Deering Oaks Park, the Eastern Promenade, Western Promenade, Lincoln Park and Riverton Park are all historical parks within the city. Other parks and natural spaces include Payson Park, Post Office Park, Baxter Woods, Evergreen Cemetery, Western Cemetery and the Fore River Sanctuary.\nThompson's Point, in the Libbytown neighborhood, has been a focus of renovation and redevelopment since the 2010s. The location hosts a concert venue, ice rink, hotels, restaurants, wineries, and breweries.\nNotable buildings.\nThe spire of the Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception has been a notable feature of the Portland skyline since its completion in 1854. In 1859, Ammi B. Young designed the Marine Hospital, the first of three local works by Supervising Architects of the U.S. Treasury Department. Although the city lost to redevelopment its 1867 Greek Revival post office, which was designed by Alfred B. Mullett of white Vermont marble and featured a Corinthian portico, Portland retains his 1868 United States Custom House on Fore Street.\nFranklin Towers is a 16-story residential tower. Between 1969 and 2023, at , it was Maine's tallest residential building. It was surpassed by 201 Federal Street, which is taller.\nDuring the building boom of the 1980s, several new buildings rose on the peninsula, including the 1983 Charles Shipman Payson Building by Henry N. Cobb of Pei, Cobb, Freed &amp; Partners at the Portland Museum of Art complex (a component of which is the 1801 McLellan-Sweat Mansion), and the Back Bay Tower, a fifteen-story residential building completed in 1990.\n477 Congress Street (known locally as the Time and Temperature Building) is situated near Monument Square in the Arts District and is a major landmark: the 14-story building features a large electronic sign on its roof that flashes time and temperature data, as well as parking-ban information in the winter. The building is home to several radio stations. The Press Herald Building, at 390 Congress Street, is strategically located across Congress Street from Portland City Hall and was built in 1923. It was expanded in 1948 for use as the newspaper's headquarters.\nThe Westin Portland Harborview, completed in 1927, is a prominent hotel located downtown on High Street. Photographer Todd Webb lived in Portland during his later years and took many pictures of the city. Some of Webb's pictures can be found at the Evans Gallery.\nMedia.\nThe city is home to one daily newspaper, \"The Portland Press Herald/Maine Sunday Telegram\", founded in 1862. \"The Press Herald\" is published Monday through Saturday and \"The Maine Sunday Telegram\" is published on Sundays. Both are published by MaineToday Media Inc., which also operates an entertainment website, \"MaineToday.com\" and owns papers in Augusta, Waterville, and Bath.\nOther publications include \"The Portland Forecaster\", a weekly newspaper; \"The Bollard\", a monthly alternative magazine formerly known as \"Mainer\"; \"The West End News\", \"The Munjoy Hill Observer\", \"The Baysider\", \"The Waterfront\", \"Portland Magazine\", and \"The Companion\". Portland is also the home office of \"The Exception Magazine\", an online newspaper which covers Maine.\nThe Portland broadcast media market is the largest one in Maine for both radio and television. Radio stations located in Portland include WFNK (Classic Hits), WJJB (Sports), WTHT (Country), WBQW (Classical), WHXR (Rock), WHOM (Adult Contemporary), WJBQ (Top 40), WCLZ (Adult Album Alternative), WBLM (Classic Rock), WYNZ (1960s\u20131970s Hits), and WCYY (Modern Rock). WMPG is a local non-commercial radio station run by community members and the University of Southern Maine. The Maine Public Broadcasting Network's (MPBN) radio news operations are based in Portland.\nTelevision stations include WCSH 6 (NBC), WMTW 8 (ABC), WGME 13 (CBS), WPFO 23 (Fox), WIPL 35 (ION), and WPXT 51 (The CW; MyNetworkTV on DT3). There is no PBS member station licensed to the city of Portland, but the market is served by MPBN outlets WCBB (channel 10) in Augusta and WMEA-TV (channel 26) in Biddeford.\nHistorical newspapers.\nNewspapers formerly published in Portland include \"The Pleasure Boat\", \"Eastern Argus, Evening Express,\" \"Casco Bay Weekly\",\"The Portland Daily Sun\" and \"The Portland Phoenix\".\nTraditions.\nValentine's Day Phantom.\nIn 1976, a group of unknown individuals started the tradition of the Valentine's Day Phantom by plastering the city with hearts on Valentine's Day. In 1986, the U.S. Coast Guard almost intercepted a boat filled with Valentine's Day Phantom's after it nearly hit a Casco Bay Ferry. The boat made it to Fort Gorges and unfurled a heart banner. The banner appeared on the uninhabited island fort again in 2017. The heart flag appeared on the flag pole at Central Fire Station in 2021. One leader of the effort, Kevin Farnham, was publicly identified in 2023, when he died. His family revealed Farnham's involvement but said he was not the founder. The Farnham family established a charitable foundation called Be A Kevin to help keep the tradition alive.\nFirst Friday Art Walk.\nIn 2000, the First Friday Art Walk was started by gallery owners in the Arts District who opened from 5 to 8 p.m. on the first Friday of each month. By 2012, the event had become so popular that gallery owners feared the event was becoming too much like a festival with street performers and vendors.\nFood and beverage.\nNumber of restaurants.\nDowntown Portland, including the Arts District and the Old Port, has a high concentration of eating and drinking establishments, with many more to be found throughout the rest of the peninsula, outlying neighborhoods, and neighboring communities. The city is also home to numerous food trucks and food carts which park on the city streets and at festivals, events, and breweries. Most operate in the summer; a few operate year-round.\nNotable restaurants include Fore Street, Duckfat, Becky's Diner, and The Great Lost Bear.\nFood recognition.\nPortland has developed a national reputation for the quality of its restaurants, eateries, and food culture. The city has been visited by many food shows, including Rachael Ray's Food Network show \"$40 a Day\", the Travel Channel's \"Man v. Food\", and \"\". Bon Appetit named Portland the Restaurant City of the Year in 2018.\nBeverages.\nPortland is home to numerous juice bars, coffee shops, coffee roasteries, tea houses, distilleries, microbreweries and brewpubs.\nBrewers include the D. L. Geary Brewing Company, Gritty McDuff's Brewing Company, Shipyard Brewing Company, and Allagash Brewing Company. Portland's spirits industry has also grown in recent years.\nThe city is known for its pure tap water. The water comes from Sebago Lake. It is piped to Portland by the Portland Water District. Sebago Lake is one of fifty surface-water supplies among 13,000 in the country that the Environmental Protection Agency says do not need filtration.\nFarmers markets.\nThe Portland Farmers' Market takes place Wednesdays in Monument Square, Saturdays in Deering Oaks Park (from early May to the end of November), and Saturdays at The Maine Girls Academy (from early December to the end of April).\nVegetarian food.\nThe city has the state's most vegan and vegetarian restaurants. Vegetarian-friendly restaurants number more than 200 in 2020, according to the \"Maine Sunday Telegram\". Celebrity chef Toni Fiore first filmed the PBS cooking show \"Totally Vegetarian\" in 2002 at the cable access station in Portland. The \"Portland Press Herald\" has featured a vegan column by Avery Yale Kamila in its F\"ood &amp; Dining\" section since 2009. In 2011, the Portland Public Schools added a daily vegetarian cold lunch to its school menu choices. In 2019, the district changed to a daily hot vegan school meal option.\nFood festivals.\nPortland hosts a number of food and beverage festivals, including:\nFood history.\nSince 1768, the Portland Farmers Market has been in operation. It was first established in the Town Hall that \"served 136 families on the peninsula.\"\nPortland is where national Prohibition started. Portland mayor and temperance leader Neal Dow led Maine to ban alcohol sales in 1851. The law led to the Portland Rum Riot in 1855. In 1845, \"The Pleasure Boat\" was the earliest vegetarian publication in Maine.\nCanned corn was developed in Portland by the N. Winslow company. By 1852 the Winslow's Patent Hermetically Sealed Green Corn was a commercial success and the company became a world leader in the canning industry. An historic B&amp;M Baked Beans canning plant built in 1913 operated on the waterfront until 2021 when it closed and production moved to the midwest. By late 2022, B&amp;M customers were reporting that the baked beans were undercooked, crunchy, and tasted different. Customers speculated that the beans were no longer being baked. Some customers were hoarding B&amp;M bean cans produced at the Portland plant.\nIn the early 20th century, a Little Italy neighborhood developed around India Street. The city's Amato's Italian delicatessen on India Street is reported to be the birthplace of the Maine Italian sandwich, called \"an Italian\" by locals, which Amato's first served in 1902. The Village Restaurant, an Italian restaurant in the city's East End, was in operation for 71 years, from 1936 to 2007. In 1949, Miccuci's Grocery Co., an Italian grocery store, opened on India Street and remains in business.\nIn the 1970s and 1980s, The Hollow Reed was a notable vegetarian restaurant on Fore Street cited for its influence on the city's restaurant culture. In 1979, The Great Lost Bear opened on Forest Avenue and was recognized for its large selection of draft craft beers. In 1982 DiMillo's on the Water opened in a former car ferry docked at Portland's Long Wharf. In 1988, the Gritty McDuff's brewpub was founded on Fore Street and is considered the first brewpub to open in Maine since Prohibition ended. In 1989, Marcy's Diner opened on Free Street, and in 2015 it made international headlines following a spat between the then-cook-owner and a patron over the latter's screaming child.\nIn 1991, Becky's Diner opened on Commercial Street, after it got an exception to the city's zoning laws prohibiting non-fishery businesses on the waterfront, and has attracted famous patrons including Taylor Swift and president Bill Clinton. In 2007, the Green Elephant opened on Congress Street and received critical attention for the vegetarian menu.\nIn 2024, ZU Bakery, located in the West End, won the James Beard award for Outstanding Bakery, and Atsuko Fujimoto, owner of Norimoto Bakery in Deering Center, won the James Beard award for Outstanding Pastry Chef or Baker.\nSports.\nPortland teams.\nThe city is home to four minor league teams. The Portland Sea Dogs, the Double-A farm team of the Boston Red Sox, play at Hadlock Field. The Maine Celtics, the NBA G League affiliate of the Boston Celtics, play at the Portland Exposition Building. The Maine Mariners, ECHL affiliates of the Boston Bruins, play at Cross Insurance Arena. A USL League One soccer team was granted to Portland in 2023. The team, called Portland Hearts of Pine, began play in 2025.\nThe city is also home to Portland Rugby Football Club, the oldest continually active sports team in the city, founded in 1969. The team competes in Division II of the New England Rugby Football Union. Other pro and semi-pro sports teams in the city include the Portland Lumberjacks, a bowling team competing in the PBA League, the Maine Cats, an Australian rules football team competing in the United States Australian Football League, and Portland Rising, a women's ultimate team competing in the Premier Ultimate League. In 2024, \"Sports Business Journal\" ranked Portland as the best minor league sports market in America.\nFormer sports teams.\nPreviously, Portland was home of several minor league ice hockey teams: the Maine Mariners (AHL) from 1977 to 1992 and the Portland Pirates (AHL) from 1993 to 2016. The Mariners were three-time Calder Cup winners, winning it in 1978, 1979 and 1984, while the Pirates would win the Calder Cup in 1995. The Mariners originally moved from Portland to Utica, New York, in 1987, but the AHL granted an expansion team to Portland that assumed the Mariners' name and logo. The second Mariners moved to Providence, Rhode Island, in 1992 to become the Providence Bruins. The Pirates came to Portland from Baltimore, where they were known as the Baltimore Skipjacks, and moved to Springfield, Massachusetts in 2016 to become the Springfield Thunderbirds.\nGPS Portland Phoenix men's soccer teams played in USL League Two from 2009 until 2020.\nThe Maine Mammoths of the National Arena League played in 2018 and were the first indoor football team to call Portland home. The team suspended operations after one season while it negotiated with local ownership groups, but was ultimately dissolved.\nSports facilities.\nThe Portland Sports Complex, located off of Park and Brighton Avenues, near I-295 and Deering Oaks park, houses several of the city's stadiums and arenas, including:\nCross Insurance Arena has 6,733 permanent seats following renovation in 2014.\nThe Portland area has eleven professional golf courses, 124 tennis courts, and 95 playgrounds. There are also over of nature trails.\nPortland hosts the Maine Marathon each October.\nBayside Bowl was expanded in 2017 to 20 lanes, including a rooftop deck. It hosted the 2017 PBA League and Elias Cup.\nMemorial Stadium is the home of the Deering High School sports teams and is located behind the school.\nParks and recreation.\nThe city of Portland includes more than 700 acres of open space and public parks, the most well-known of which are the Eastern Promenade, Western Promenade and Deering Oaks. The city and surrounding communities are linked by 70 miles of trails, both urban and wooded, maintained by the nonprofit Portland Trails. The Portland Parks Conservancy, which was established in 2019, is a nonprofit organization that raises money to support Portland's park system. In 2021, the Portland Parks Conservancy funded the establishment of the Portland Youth Corp. The Portland Youth Corp performs work in Portland's parks and residents between the ages of 14 and 16 can apply to participate in the paid program.\nOrganic land care.\nThe city requires organic land care techniques be used on both public and private property. In 2018, the Portland City Council banned the use of synthetic pesticides. In 2020, the city received a $10,000 grant from Hannaford, Stonyfield Farm, and Osborn Organics to pay for soil tests and other start up costs of transitioning the heavily used Fox Field in Kennedy Park to an organic maintenance plan.\nHistoric parks.\nHistoric parks include:\nParks with trails.\nNotable trails and parks with multiple trails include:\nParks with water features.\nParks with splash pads, pools and beaches include:\nGovernment.\nThe city has adopted a council-manager style government that is detailed in the city charter. The citizens of Portland are represented by a nine-member city council which makes policy, passes ordinances, approves appropriations, appoints the city manager and oversees the municipal government. The city council of nine members is elected by the citizens of Portland. The city has five voting districts, with each district electing a city councilor to represent their neighborhood interests for a three-year term. There are also four members of the city council who are elected at-large. The four at-large members are elected through Proportional ranked-choice voting.\nFrom 1923 until 2011, city councilors chose one of themselves each year to serve as Mayor of Portland, a primarily ceremonial position. On November 2, 2010, Portland voters narrowly approved a measure that allowed them to elect the mayor. On November 8, 2011, former State Senator and candidate for U.S. Congress Michael F. Brennan was elected as mayor. On December 5, 2011, he was sworn in as the first citizen-elected mayor in 88 years (see Portland, Maine mayoral election, 2011). The office of mayor is a four-year position that earns a salary of 150% of the city's median income. The current mayor is Mark Dion, who narrowly defeated city councilor Andrew Zarro after 5 ranked choice rounds in the November 2023 election.\nA city manager is appointed by the city council. The city manager oversees the daily operations of the city government, appoints the heads of city departments, and prepares annual budgets. The city manager directs all city agencies and departments, and is responsible for the executing laws and policies passed by the city council. The current city manager is Danielle West.\nAside from the main city council, there is also an elected school board for the Portland Public School system. The school board is made up in the same manner of the city council, with five district members, four at-large members and one chairman. There are also three students from the local high schools elected to serve on the board. There are many other boards and committees such as the Planning Committee, Board of Appeals, and Harbor Commission, etc. These committees and boards have limited power in their respective areas of expertise. Members of boards and committees are appointed by city council members.\nOn November 5, 2013, Portland voters overwhelmingly approved an ordinance to legalize the possession and private use of cannabis for adults, making the city the first municipality in the Eastern United States to do so.\nJames E. Craig was chief of the Portland Police Department from 2009 to 2011. He would later go on to become the chief of the Cincinnati Police Department and Detroit Police Department.\nIn the U.S. House of Representatives, Portland is included in Maine's 1st congressional district and is currently represented by Democrat Chellie M. Pingree.\nVoter registration\nEducation.\nPortland has a long history of public and private education. The private Portland Academy was founded in 1794. Portland High School, a public school, opened in 1821. The oldest portion of the current Portland High School was built in 1862-1863. The Maine College of Art was established in 1882. Waynflete was established in 1898. Portland University opened in 1921. Portland Junior College opened in 1933, and it became the University of Maine Portland in 1957. Portland University merged with Portland Junior College in 1961. In 1970, the schools merged with the Gorham State Teachers College in Gorham to become the University of Southern Maine.\nColleges and universities.\nCollege expansions underway in 2022 at the University of Southern Maine to add a 580-bed dorm, at the University of New England to move the medical school from Biddeford into a new $93 million building on the Portland campus, and at the Northeastern University Roux Institute to build a campus on the site of the former B&amp;M Baked Beans factory have the potential, within two decades, to bring the total college and university students in the city to 15,000, which would be similar to the percentage of students in Boston.\nInfrastructure.\nFire department.\nThe Portland Fire Department (PFD) provides fire protection and emergency medical services to the city of Portland 24/7, 365. Established on March 29, 1768, the PFD is made up of over 230 paid, professional firefighters and operates out of seven fire stations, located throughout the city, in addition to those staffed by \"on-call\" firefighters on Peaks Island, Great Diamond Island, Cushing Island and Cliff Island. The Portland Fire Department also operates an Airport Division Station at 1001 Westbrook St., at the Portland International Jetport, and a Marine Division Station, located at 54 Commercial St.\nPolice.\nThe Portland Police Department is the largest municipal police department in the State of Maine.\nHospitals.\nMaine Medical Center is the state's only Level I trauma center and is the largest hospital in Maine.\nMercy Hospital, a faith-based institution, is the fourth largest in the state. It completed the first phase of its new campus along the Fore River in 2008.\nThe formerly-independent Brighton Medical Center (once known as the Osteopathic Hospital) is now owned by Maine Medical Center and is operated as a minor care center under the names Brighton First Care and New England Rehab. In 2010, Maine Medical Center's Hannaford Center for Safety, Innovation, and Simulation opened at the Brighton campus. The former Portland General Hospital is now home to the Barron Center nursing facility.\nWastewater management.\nOne wastewater management project is named the Bedford Street Sewer Separation, with its goal to \"improve the water quality and health of Back Cove by reducing the amount of combined sewer overflows (CSO) that overflow during heavy rain events through the use of sewer separation and water treatment devices.\"\nEast End Treatment Plant, established in 1979, is located near Tukey's Bridge.\nTransportation.\nRoads.\nPortland is accessible from I-95 (the Maine Turnpike), I-295, and US\u00a01. U.S. Route 302, a major travel route and scenic highway between Maine and Vermont, has its eastern terminus in Portland. State Routes include SR\u00a09, SR\u00a022, SR\u00a025, SR\u00a026, SR\u00a077, and SR\u00a0100. SR\u00a025 Business goes through southwestern Portland.\nIntercity buses and trains.\nAmtrak's \"Downeaster\" service offers five daily trains connecting the city's station with eight towns and cities to the south, ending at Boston's North Station. Trains also serve to Freeport and Brunswick to the north.\nConcord Coach Lines bus service connects Portland to 14 other communities in Maine as well as to Boston's South Station and Logan Airport. Both the \"Downeaster\" and the Concord Coach Lines depart from Portland Transportation Center on Thompsons Point Road, in the Libbytown neighborhood.\nLocal bus service.\nLocal bus transit is provided by Greater Portland Metro with connections to Biddeford Saco Old Orchard Beach Transit.\nAirports.\nCommercial air service is available at the Portland International Jetport (PWM), located in Stroudwater, west of the city's downtown district. American, Southwest, JetBlue, Breeze Airways, Sun Country, Delta, and United Airlines service the airport. Direct flights are available to Atlanta, Baltimore, Charlotte, Chicago, Detroit, Denver, Minneapolis, Orlando, Philadelphia, New York, Newark, Raleigh-Durham, Sarasota, and Washington, D.C.\nWater transportation.\nThe Port of Portland is the second-largest cruise and passenger destination in the state (next to Bar Harbor) and is served by the Ocean Gateway International Marine Passenger Terminal. Ferry service is available year-round to many destinations in Casco Bay. From 2006 to 2009, Bay Ferries operated a high speed ferry called \"The Cat\" featuring a five-hour trip to Yarmouth, Nova Scotia, for summer passengers and cars. In years past the Scotia Prince Cruises trip took eleven hours. A proposal to replace the defunct Nova Scotia ferry service was rejected in 2013 by the province. From May 15, 2014, until October 2015, the cruise ship ferry Nova Star made daily trips to Yarmouth, Nova Scotia. Due to poor passenger numbers and financial problems, Nova Scotia selected Bay Ferries, the prior operator of \"The Cat\", to operate the service starting in 2016, citing the company's experience and industry relationships. Nova Star officials pledged a smooth transition to the new operator. The Nova Star was later ordered seized by federal marshals for nonpayment of bills.\nBay Ferries announced on March 24, 2016, the charter of the former Hawaii Superferry boat \"HST-2\" from the US Navy for the Portland-Yarmouth service for two years. Bay Ferries signed a ten-year deal with Nova Scotia to run the ferry route, which will take about five and a half hours each way. They stated that the boat would be renamed \"The Cat\" and that service would begin around June 15, after refitting in South Carolina. There is still a dispute as to whether the ferry will be permitted to carry trucks, desired by Nova Scotia businesses but opposed by the City of Portland.\nThe Casco Bay Lines operate several passenger ferries with dozens of trips every day year-round to the major populated islands of Casco Bay. The service to Peaks Island also provides an auto ferry for most of its schedule.\nSister cities.\nPortland's sister cities are:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44592", "revid": "41195652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44592", "title": "National parks of England and Wales", "text": ""}
{"id": "44593", "revid": "5718152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44593", "title": "Rib", "text": "Long bone in vertebrates that protects vital respiratory and cardiovascular organs\nIn vertebrate anatomy, ribs () are the long curved bones which form the rib cage, part of the axial skeleton. In most tetrapods, ribs surround the thoracic cavity, enabling the lungs to expand and thus facilitate breathing by expanding the thoracic cavity. They serve to protect the lungs, heart, and other vital organs of the thorax. In some animals, especially snakes, ribs may provide support and protection for the entire body.\nHuman anatomy.\nRib details.\nHuman ribs are flat bones that form part of the rib cage to help protect internal organs. Humans usually have 24 ribs, in 12 pairs. 1 in 500 people have an extra rib known as a cervical rib. People may have a cervical rib on the right, left or both sides. All are attached at the back to the thoracic vertebrae and are numbered from 1 to 12 according to the vertebrae to which they attach. The first rib is attached to thoracic vertebra 1 (T1). At the front of the body, most of the ribs are joined by costal cartilage to the sternum. Ribs connect to vertebrae at the costovertebral joints.\nThe parts of a rib includes the head, neck, body (or \"shaft\"), tubercle, and angle. \nThe head of the rib lies next to a vertebra. The ribs connect to the vertebrae with two costovertebral joints, one on the head and one on the neck. The head of the rib has a superior and an inferior articulating region, separated by a crest. These articulate with the superior and inferior costal facets on the connecting vertebrae. The crest gives attachment to the intra-articulate ligament that joins the rib to the vertebra of the same number, at the intervertebral disc. Another ligament, the radiate ligament joins the head of the rib to both the body of the upper vertebra and to the body of the lower vertebra. The smaller middle part of the ligament connects to the intervertebral disc. This plane joint is known as the articulation of the head of the rib.\nThe other costovertebral joint is that between the tubercle on the neck and the transverse process of the corresponding thoracic vertebra, known as the costotransverse joint. The superior costotransverse ligament attaches from the non-articular facet of the tubercle to the transverse process of the vertebra.\nThe neck of the rib is a flattened part that extends laterally from the head. The neck is about 3\u00a0cm long. Its anterior surface is flat and smooth, whilst its posterior is perforated by numerous foramina and its surface rough, to give attachment to the ligament of the neck. Its upper border presents a rough crest (\"crista colli costae\") for the attachment of the anterior costotransverse ligament; its lower border is rounded. \nA tubercle of rib on the posterior surface of the neck of the rib, has two facets (surfaces) one articulating and one non-articulating. The articular facet, is small and oval and is the lower and more medial of the two, and connects to the transverse costal facet on the thoracic vertebra of the same rib number. The transverse costal facet is on the end of the transverse process of the lower of the two vertebrae to which the head is connected. The non-articular portion is a rough elevation and affords attachment to the ligament of the tubercle. The tubercle is much more prominent in the upper ribs than in the lower ribs.\nRib cage.\nThe first seven sets of ribs, known as \"true ribs\", are attached to the sternum by the costal cartilages. The first rib is unique and easier to distinguish than other ribs. It is a short, flat, C-shaped bone, and attaches to the manubrium. The vertebral attachment can be found just below the neck at the first thoracic vertebra, and the majority of this bone can be found above the level of the clavicle. Ribs 2 through 7 then become longer and less curved as they progress downwards. The following five sets are known as \"false ribs\", three of these sharing a common cartilaginous connection to the sternum, while the last two (eleventh and twelfth ribs) are termed floating ribs. They are attached to the vertebrae only, and not to the sternum or cartilage coming off of the sternum. \nIn general, human ribs increase in length from ribs 1 through 7 and decrease in length again through rib 12. Along with this change in size, the ribs become progressively oblique (slanted) from ribs 1 through 9, then less slanted through rib 12. \nThe rib cage is separated from the lower abdomen by the thoracic diaphragm which controls breathing. When the diaphragm contracts, the thoracic cavity is expanded, reducing intra-thoracic pressure and drawing air into the lungs. This happens through one of two actions (or a mix of the two): when the lower ribs the diaphragm connects to are stabilized by muscles and the central tendon is mobile, when the muscle contracts the central tendon is drawn down, compressing the cavity underneath and expanding the thoracic cavity downward. When the central tendon is stabilized and the lower ribs are mobile, a contraction of the diaphragm elevates the ribs, which works in conjunction with other muscles to expand the thoracic indent upward.\nDevelopment.\nEarly in the developing embryo, somites form and soon subdivide into three mesodermal components \u2013 the myotome, dermatome, and the sclerotome. The vertebrae and ribs develop from the sclerotomes.\nDuring the fourth week (fertilization age) \"costal processes\" have formed on the vertebral bodies. These processes are small, lateral protrusions of mesenchyme that develop in association with the vertebral arches. During the fifth week the costal processes on the thoracic vertebrae become longer to form the ribs. In the sixth week, the costovertebral joints begin to develop and separate the ribs from the vertebrae. The first seven pairs of ribs, the true ribs join at the front to the sternal bars. By the fetal stage the sternal bars have completely fused.\nThe ribs begin as cartilage that later ossifies \u2013 a process called endochondral ossification. Primary ossification centers are located near the angle of each rib, and ossification continues in the direction away from the head and neck. During adolescence secondary ossification centers are formed in the tubercles and heads of the ribs.\nOther animals.\nIn jawed fish, there are often two sets of ribs attached to the vertebral column. One set, the dorsal ribs, are found in the dividing septum between the upper and lower parts of the main muscle segments, projecting roughly sideways from the vertebral column. The second set, the ventral ribs arise from the vertebral column just below the dorsal ribs, and enclose the lower body, often joining at the tips. Not all species possess both types of rib, with the dorsal ribs being most commonly absent. Sharks, for example, have no ventral ribs, and only very short dorsal ribs. In some teleosts, there may be additional rib-like bones within the muscle mass.\nTetrapods, however, only ever have a single set of ribs which are probably homologous with the dorsal ribs of fishes. In the earlier choanates, every vertebra bore a pair of ribs, although those on the thoracic vertebrae are typically the longest. The sacral ribs were stout and short, since they formed part of the pelvis, connecting the backbone to the hip bones.\nIn most true tetrapods, many of these early ribs have been lost, and in living amphibians and reptiles, there is great variation in rib structure and number. For example, turtles have only eight pairs of ribs, which are developed into a bony or cartilaginous carapace and plastron, while snakes have numerous ribs running along the full length of their trunk. Frogs typically have no ribs, aside from a sacral pair, which form part of the pelvis.\nIn birds, ribs are present as distinct bones only on the thoracic region, although small fused ribs are present on the cervical vertebrae. The thoracic ribs of birds possess a wide projection to the rear; this uncinate process is an attachment for the shoulder muscles. \nUsually dogs have 26 ribs.\nMammals usually also only have distinct ribs on the thoracic vertebra, although fixed cervical ribs are also present in monotremes. In therian mammals, the cervical and lumbar ribs are found only as tiny remnants fused to the vertebrae, where they are referred to as transverse processes. In general, the structure and number of the true ribs in humans is similar to that in other mammals. Unlike reptiles, caudal ribs are never found in mammals.\nRibs as food.\nRibs as food are widely used from many animals. The ribs are the less meaty part of the meat chop and they are often cooked as part of a slab; five or more is known as a \"rack\", as in a rack of lamb. Short ribs are ribs of beef either served singly or several as a \"plate\". A rib steak from beef is a popular choice used in many cuisines. Pork ribs, including spare ribs are popular in European and Asian cuisine.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44594", "revid": "16528233", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44594", "title": "Sea butterfly", "text": "Suborder of molluscs\nThe Thecosomata (collective/plural: \"thecosomes\", meaning \"case/shell-body\"), or sea butterflies, are a taxonomic suborder of small, pelagic, free-swimming sea snails known as holoplanktonic opisthobranch gastropod mollusks, in the order Pteropoda (also included within the informal group Opisthobranchia). Most pteropods have some form of calcified shell, although it is often very light, even translucent.\nThe sea butterflies include some of the world's most abundant gastropod species; as their large numbers are an essential part of the ocean food chain, they are a significant contributor to the oceanic carbon cycle. \nMorphology.\nUnlike other sea snails, or even land snails, sea butterflies float and swim freely through the ocean, traveling along with the currents. This has led to a number of evolutionary adaptations in their bodies, including complete or near-complete loss of the shell and the gill in several families. Their gastropodal foot has also taken the form of two wing-like lobes, or \"parapodia\", which propel the animal through the sea by slow flapping movements.\nMost thecosomes have some form of calcified shell, although often very light.\nThey are rather difficult to see, since their shell, if present, is mostly transparent, fragile, and usually tiny (less than 1\u00a0cm in length). Although their shell may be so fine as to be transparent, it is nevertheless calcareous, and an important part of the oceanic calcium cycle.\nTheir shells are bilaterally symmetric and can vary widely in shape, ranging from coiled or needle-like to triangular or globular.\nThe shell is present in all life cycle stages of the Cavolinioidea (euthecosomata). In the Cymbulioidea (pseudothecosomata), adult Peraclididae also bear shells; the Cymbuliidae shed their larval shells and develop a cartilaginous \"pseudoconch\" in adulthood. Only the Desmopteridae lack any rigid covering when mature.\nBehavior and distribution.\nSwimming kinematics.\nMolluscan pteropods develop their feet into a pair of wing-like parapodia in the growing phase. These 'wings' are highly flexible, as the orientation of the muscles is different, and they have a hydrostatic skeleton filled with a pressurized fluid. Thus, the high bending-angle supports the parapodia to diminish the drag forces generated by the classic \"clap-and-fling\" maneuver; additionally, it aids in carrying the extra weight of a shell and ascending the water column for the diel vertical migration.\nThe power-stroke for \"L. helicina\" starts with a sharp rotation of it is body accompanied by an increase in swimming speed; it then rotates its shell in the opposite direction to initiate the recovery-stroke and swims upward, with a speed less than the power phase. There is a drop in overall speed between power and recovery strokes, which develop a sawtooth trajectory in the sagittal plane. The hyper-pitch of the round shell of \"L. helicina\" diminishes the rotational drag and the moment of inertia; the extreme shell rotation also assists in raising the wingtips at the end of each stroke to create a figure-eight pattern, common for flying insects. In contrast, flying insects and shell-less pteropods encounter higher resistance forces that limit the body rotation. \nSea butterflies range from the tropics to the poles.\nThey are \"holoplanktonic\"\u2014they spend all their lives floating amongst plankton, rather than remaining planktonic during their larval stage. Thus, thecosomans are most common in the top of the ocean\u2014in terms of diversity, species richness, and abundance\u2014and become scarcer with increased depth.\nOccasionally, thecosomans swarm in large numbers, and can sometimes be found washed ashore in flotsam, especially along the coastline of eastern Australia.\nDiurnal vertical migration.\nThecosomata beat their wing-like parapodia to \"fly\" through the water.\nWhen descending to deeper water, they hold their wings up.\nThey migrate vertically from day to night, so the community structure changes on a 24\u00a0hour cycle; during the day many organisms take refuge at water depths in excess of 100\u00a0m.\nFeeding.\nLittle is documented of the dietary habits or behaviour of sea butterflies, yet they are known to have a peculiar way of feeding. Being generally herbivorous, and mostly passive plankton-feeders, they live their lives according to the currents and find food by floating ventral-side up; some may more actively forage, at times. They feed secreting a fine mucus web to capture the plankton and organic particles suspended in water columns. Measuring up to 5\u00a0cm wide\u2014many times larger than their own bodies. If disturbed, they simply abandon the web and flap slowly away.\nEach day, they embark on a regular diel vertical migration through the water column in their pursuit of planktonic prey. At night, they forage at the surface and return to deeper waters by the morning.\nFossil record.\nGeologically-speaking, Thecosomata is a rather young group, being known from the Late Paleocene of the Cenozoic Era.\nThe group is known within the fossil record from shells of those groups within the clade that mineralized. These carbonate shells are a major contributor to the oceanic carbon cycle, making up as much as 12% of global carbonate flux. However, the low stability of their aragonitic shells means that few end up being preserved within sediments as viable fossils; rather, they are mostly deposited in shallow, tropical seas.\nImportance in the food chain.\nThese creatures, which range from lentil- to orange-sized, are eaten by various marine species, including a wide variety of fish that are, in turn, consumed by penguins and polar bears. The sea butterflies form the sole food source of their relatives, the Gymnosomata. They are also consumed by sea birds, whales, and commercially important fish. However, if sea butterflies are consumed in large quantities fish can get \"black gut\", which makes them unsellable.\nTaxonomy.\nAlong with its sister group, the sea angels (Gymnosomata), the sea butterflies (Thecosomata) are included in the order Pteropoda.\nThe validity of the pteropod order is not universally accepted; it fell out of favour for a number of years, but recent molecular evidence suggests that the taxon should be revived. \nAlthough most Thecosomata have some form of calcified shell, mature Gymnosomata have none.\nPonder &amp; Lindberg.\nOrder Thecosomata \nBouchet &amp; Rocroi.\nIn the new taxonomy of Bouchet &amp; Rocroi (2005) Thecosomata is treated differently :\nClade Thecosomata : \nBouchet &amp; Rocroi (2005) move the family Limacinidae into the superfamily Cavolinioidea, making redundant the superfamily Limacinoidea erected for it in Ponder &amp; Lindberg's taxonomy. The families Creseidae and Cuvierinidae are demoted to subfamilies of Cavoliniidae (Creseinae and Cuvierininae). The infraorder Pseudothecosomata becomes the superfamily Cymbulioidea. The family Peraclididae is included in the superfamily Cymbulioidea as the family Peraclidae, making the superfamily Peraclidoidea redundant.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44595", "revid": "29238288", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44595", "title": "Actors and actresses", "text": ""}
{"id": "44596", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44596", "title": "Positronium", "text": "Bound state of an electron and positron\nPositronium (Ps) is a system consisting of an electron and its anti-particle, a positron, bound together into an exotic atom, specifically an onium. Unlike hydrogen, the system has no protons. The system is unstable: the two particles annihilate each other to predominantly produce two or three gamma-rays, depending on the relative spin states. The energy levels of the two particles are similar to that of the hydrogen atom (which is a bound state of a proton and an electron). However, because of the reduced mass, the frequencies of the spectral lines are less than half of those for the corresponding hydrogen lines.\nStates.\nThe mass of positronium is 1.022\u00a0MeV, which is twice the electron mass minus the binding energy of a few eV. The lowest energy orbital state of positronium is 1S, and like with hydrogen, it has a hyperfine structure arising from the relative orientations of the spins of the electron and the positron.\nThe \"singlet\" state, , with antiparallel spins (\"S\"\u00a0=\u00a00, \"Ms\"\u00a0=\u00a00) is known as \"para\"-positronium (\"p\"-Ps). It has a mean lifetime of and decays preferentially into two gamma rays with energy of each (in the center-of-mass frame). \"Para\"-positronium can decay into any even number of photons (2, 4, 6, ...), but the probability quickly decreases with the number: the branching ratio for decay into 4 photons is .\n\"Para-\"positronium lifetime in vacuum is approximately\nformula_1\nThe \"triplet\" states, 3S1, with parallel spins (\"S\"\u00a0=\u00a01, \"Ms\"\u00a0=\u00a0\u22121, 0, 1) are known as \"ortho\"-positronium (\"o\"-Ps), and have an energy that is approximately 0.001 eV higher than the singlet. These states have a mean lifetime of , and the leading decay is three gammas. Other modes of decay are negligible; for instance, the five-photons mode has branching ratio of \u2248.\n\"Ortho\"-positronium lifetime in vacuum can be calculated approximately as:\nformula_2\nHowever, more accurate calculations with corrections to O(\u03b12) yield a value of \u22121 for the decay rate, corresponding to a lifetime of .\nPositronium in the 2S state is metastable having a lifetime of against annihilation. The positronium created in such an excited state will quickly cascade down to the ground state, where annihilation will occur more quickly.\nMeasurements.\nMeasurements of these lifetimes and energy levels have been used in precision tests of quantum electrodynamics, confirming quantum electrodynamics (QED) predictions to high precision.\nAnnihilation can proceed via a number of channels, each producing gamma rays with total energy of (sum of the electron and positron mass-energy), usually 2 or 3, with up to 5 gamma ray photons recorded from a single annihilation.\nThe annihilation into a neutrino\u2013antineutrino pair is also possible, but the probability is predicted to be negligible. The branching ratio for \"o\"-Ps decay for this channel is (electron neutrino\u2013antineutrino pair) and (for other flavour) in predictions based on the Standard Model, but it can be increased by non-standard neutrino properties, like relatively high magnetic moment. The experimental upper limits on branching ratio for this decay (as well as for a decay into any \"invisible\" particles) are &lt; for \"p\"-Ps and &lt; for \"o\"-Ps.\nEnergy levels.\nWhile precise calculation of positronium energy levels uses the Bethe\u2013Salpeter equation or the Breit equation, the similarity between positronium and hydrogen allows a rough estimate. In this approximation, the energy levels are different because of a different effective mass, \"\u03bc\", in the energy equation (see electron energy levels for a derivation):\nformula_3\nwhere:\nThus, for positronium, its reduced mass only differs from the electron by a factor of 2. This causes the energy levels to also roughly be half of what they are for the hydrogen atom.\nSo finally, the energy levels of positronium are given by\nformula_5\nThe lowest energy level of positronium (\"n\" = 1) is . The next level is . The negative sign is a convention that implies a bound state. Positronium can also be considered by a particular form of the two-body Dirac equation; two particles with a Coulomb interaction can be exactly separated in the (relativistic) center-of-momentum frame and the resulting ground-state energy has been obtained very accurately using finite element methods of Janine Shertzer. Their results lead to the discovery of anomalous states.\nThe Dirac equation whose Hamiltonian comprises two Dirac particles and a static Coulomb potential is not relativistically invariant. But if one adds the (or \"\u03b1\"2\"n\", where \u03b1 is the fine-structure constant) terms, where \"n\" \n 1,2..., then the result is relativistically invariant. Only the leading term is included. The \"\u03b1\"2 contribution is the Breit term; workers rarely go to \"\u03b1\"4 because at \"\u03b1\"3 one has the Lamb shift, which requires quantum electrodynamics.\nFormation and decay in materials.\nAfter a radioactive atom in a material undergoes a \u03b2+ decay (positron emission), the resulting high-energy positron slows down by colliding with atoms, and eventually annihilates with one of the many electrons in the material. It may however first form positronium before the annihilation event. The understanding of this process is of some importance in positron emission tomography. Approximately:\nHistory.\nThe Croatian physicist Stjepan Mohorovi\u010di\u0107 predicted the existence of positronium in a 1934 article published in \"Astronomische Nachrichten\", in which he called it the \"electrum\". Other sources incorrectly credit Carl Anderson as having predicted its existence in 1932 while at Caltech. It was experimentally discovered by Martin Deutsch at MIT in 1951 and became known as positronium. Many subsequent experiments have precisely measured its properties and verified predictions of quantum electrodynamics. \nA discrepancy known as the ortho-positronium lifetime puzzle persisted for some time, but was resolved with further calculations and measurements. Measurements were in error because of the lifetime measurement of unthermalised positronium, which was produced at only a small rate. This had yielded lifetimes that were too long. Also calculations using relativistic quantum electrodynamics are difficult, so they had been done to only the first order. Corrections that involved higher orders were then calculated in a non-relativistic quantum electrodynamics.\nIn 2024, the AEgIS collaboration at CERN was the first to cool positronium by laser light, leaving it available for experimental use. The substance was brought to using laser cooling.\nExotic compounds.\nMolecular bonding was predicted for positronium. Molecules of positronium hydride (PsH) can be made. Positronium can also form a cyanide and can form bonds with halogens or lithium.\nThe first observation of di-positronium () molecules\u2014molecules consisting of two positronium atoms\u2014was reported on 12 September 2007 by David Cassidy and Allen Mills from University of California, Riverside.\nUnlike muonium, positronium does not have a nucleus analogue, because the electron and the positron have equal masses. Consequently, while muonium tends to behave like a light isotope of hydrogen, positronium shows large differences in size, polarisability, and binding energy from hydrogen.\nNatural occurrence.\nThe events in the early universe leading to baryon asymmetry predate the formation of atoms (including exotic varieties such as positronium) by around a third of a million years, so no positronium atoms occurred then.\nLikewise, the naturally occurring positrons in the present day result from high-energy interactions such as in cosmic ray\u2013atmosphere interactions, and so are too hot (thermally energetic) to form electrical bonds before annihilation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44597", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44597", "title": "National parks of Scotland", "text": "Area of landscape in Scotland\nThe national parks of Scotland () are managed areas of outstanding landscape where some forms of development are restricted to preserve the landscape and natural environment. At present, Scotland has two national parks: Loch Lomond and The Trossachs National Park, created in 2002, and the Cairngorms National Park, created in 2003.\nUnlike the national parks of many other countries, the national parks of Scotland are not areas of uninhabited land owned by the state. The majority of the land is in the ownership of private landowners (including conservation bodies such as the National Trust for Scotland), and people continue to live and work in the parks. Although the landscapes often appear \"wild\" in character, the land is not wilderness, as it has been worked by humans for thousands of years. Like their English and Welsh counterparts the national parks of Scotland are effectively \"managed landscapes\", and are classified as IUCN Category V Protected Landscapes because of this. National parks are only one of a number of designations used to protect and conserve the landscape and natural environment of Scotland. Public access to all land in Scotland is governed by the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003, which grants the public the freedom to roam on most land (and water) for activities such as walking, camping, cycling, canoeing, swimming and climbing; this right applies to land regardless of ownership or whether or not it is in a national park, providing it is exercised responsibly (as defined by the Scottish Outdoor Access Code).\nHistory.\nThe concept of national parks was first proposed in the United States in the 1860s, where national parks were established to protect wilderness areas such as Yosemite. Scottish-born John Muir was early advocate for the preservation of wilderness in the United States, and is acknowledged as a leading figure in the formation of national parks in the US, as well as the conservation movement at large. Many other countries have since gone on to form national parks on the basis of setting aside areas of wilderness. Scotland however, lacks any such areas, as thousands of years of human activity have altered the landscape. Human settlement and activity, including agriculture, historical deforestation, overgrazing by sheep and deer, and extensive 20th century afforestation with introduced tree species (particularly conifers) have resulted in landscapes which are semi-natural.\nNonetheless, the idea that areas of wild or remote character should be designated to protect the environment and encourage public access grew in popularity throughout the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. In 1931 a commission headed by Christopher Addison proposed the creation of a national park in the Cairngorms, alongside proposals for parks in England and Wales. Following the Second World War, the Labour government passed the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949, which led to the creation of 10 national parks in England and Wales between 1951 and 1957. No parks were created in Scotland, however a committee, chaired by Sir Douglas Ramsay, was established to consider the issue of national parks in Scotland. The report, published in 1945, proposed national parks in five areas: Loch Lomond &amp; the Trossachs, the Cairngorms, Glen Coe-Ben Nevis-Black Mount, Wester Ross and Glen Strathfarrar-Glen Affric-Glen Cannich. The government designated these areas as \"National Park Direction Areas\", giving powers for planning decisions taken by local authorities to be reviewed by central government, however the areas were not given full national park status. In 1981 the direction areas were replaced by national scenic areas, of which there are now 40. Although the national scenic area designation provided a degree of additional protection via the planning process, there are no bodies equivalent to a national park authority, and whilst local authorities can produce a management strategy for each one, only the three national scenic areas within Dumfries and Galloway have current management strategies.\nA 1974 report by the Countryside Commission for Scotland (CCS) entitled \"A Park System for Scotland\" did not explicitly recommend that national parks be established in Scotland, noting only that the issue would \u201cno doubt continue to be debated\u201d. A further CCS report into protection of the landscape of Scotland, \"The Mountain Areas of Scotland - Conservation and Management\", was published in 1990. It recommended that four areas were under such pressure that they ought to be designated as national parks, each with an independent planning board, in order to retain their heritage value. The four areas identified were similar to those proposed by the Ramsay Committee: Loch Lomond &amp; the Trossachs, the Cairngorms, Glen Coe-Ben Nevis-Black Mount and Wester Ross, although Wester Ross was not considered to require a dedicated planning body.\nDespite this long history of recommendations that national parks be established in Scotland, no action was taken until the establishment of the Scottish Parliament in 1999. The two current parks were designated as such under the National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000, which was one of the first pieces of legislation to be passed by the Parliament. Since the original creation of the first two national parks, no further parks have been created, although the Cairngorms National Park was extended in 2010 to include the highland portion of Perthshire.\nProposals for additional parks.\nIn June 2005, the Scottish Executive announced their intention to create Scotland's first coastal and marine national park. Five possible locations for this were considered, however no marine park has been established as of 2023.\nIn 2011 the Scottish Government rejected a proposal to create a national park on the Isle of Harris. In 2013 the Scottish Campaign for National Parks proposed the seven areas listed below as suitable for national park status, however no further parks were subsequently designated.\nThe power sharing arrangement agreed between the Scottish National Party and the Scottish Greens following the 2021 Scottish Parliament election committed the government to designate at least one additional national park by 2026. Areas that wish to be consider for national park status have been invited to submit applications between October 2023 and February 2024. As of October 2023, councils and local groups from the following areas are considering applications:\nIn July 2024 the Scottish government announced that Galloway was to be designated as the country's third national park.\nOrganisation.\nEach national park in Scotland is administered by a national park authority. Under the National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000, national parks in Scotland have four aims:\nThe first two of these aims are identical to those included in the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949 legislation that governs national parks in England and Wales, however the Scottish national parks have two additional aims (3 and 4 above). The general purpose of the national park authority, as defined in the National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000, is to ensure that these aims are \"collectively achieved ...in a coordinated way\". Although the four aims have equal status, in accordance with the Sandford Principle, the first aim (conservation and enhancement of the natural and cultural heritage) is to be given greater weight when it appears to the park authority that there is irreconcilable conflict with the other aims.\nA key function of the authority relates to planning permission: in this respect the two current Scottish parks differ. The Loch Lomond and The Trossachs National Park is a full planning authority, exercising powers that would otherwise be exercised by the local authority, whilst the Cairngorms National Park has the power to \"call in\" planning decisions from the local authority where they are considered to conflict with the aims of the park. National park authorities are also required to take the responsibility for managing access to the countryside that elsewhere falls to local authorities.\nAside from the planning and access function, national parks authorities have considerable flexibility as to how the four aims are achieved. They can, for example, acquire land, make byelaws and management agreements, provide grants, offer advice, and undertake or commission research.\nThe national park authority is run by a board, consisting of members elected by the community living with the park, members from the local authorities with areas in the park, and members appointed by the Scottish government. The Cairngorms National Park board has 19 members, whilst the Loch Lomond and The Trossachs National Park board has 17 members (see below).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44598", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44598", "title": "List of national parks of Ireland", "text": ""}
{"id": "44599", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44599", "title": "Chalcedony", "text": "Microcrystalline varieties of silica\nChalcedony ( or ) is a cryptocrystalline form of silica, composed of very fine intergrowths of quartz and moganite. These are both silica minerals, but they differ in that quartz has a trigonal crystal structure, while moganite is monoclinic. Chalcedony's standard chemical structure (based on the chemical composition of quartz) is SiO2 (silicon dioxide).\nChalcedony has a waxy luster, and may be semitransparent or translucent. It can assume a wide range of colors, but those most commonly seen are white to gray, grayish-blue or a shade of brown ranging from pale to nearly black. The color of chalcedony sold commercially is often enhanced by dyeing or heating.\nThe name \"chalcedony\" comes from the Latin (alternatively spelled ) and is probably derived from the town of Chalcedon in Asia Minor. The name appears in Pliny the Elder's as a term for a translucent kind of jaspis. Another reference to a gem by the name of () is found in the Book of Revelation (21:19); however, it is a \"hapax legomenon\", found nowhere else in the Bible, so it is hard to tell whether the precious gem mentioned in Revelation is the same as the mineral known by this name today. The term \"plasma\" is sometimes used to refer to green translucent chalcedony.\nVarieties.\nChalcedony occurs in a wide range of varieties. Many semi-precious gemstones are in fact forms of chalcedony. The more notable varieties of chalcedony are as follows:\nAgate.\nAgate is a fibrous, banded variety of chalcedony that occurs in a variety of colors and patterns. Iris agate shows exceptional iridescence when light (especially pinpointed light) is shone through the stone. Landscape agate is chalcedony with a number of different mineral impurities making the stone resemble landscapes.\nCarnelian.\nCarnelian (also spelled cornelian) is a clear-to-translucent reddish-brown variety of chalcedony. Its hue may vary from a pale orange to an intense almost-black coloration. Similar to carnelian is sard, which is brown rather than red.\nChrysoprase.\nChrysoprase (also spelled chrysophrase) is a green variety of chalcedony, which has been colored by nickel oxide. (The darker varieties of chrysoprase are also referred to as prase. However, the term prase is also used to describe green quartz and to a certain extent is a color-descriptor, rather than a rigorously defined mineral variety.)\nBlue-colored chalcedony is sometimes referred to as \"blue chrysoprase\" if the color is sufficiently rich, though it derives its color from the presence of copper and is largely unrelated to nickel-bearing chrysoprase.\nFire agate.\nFire agate is a variety of chalcedony with inclusions of goethite or limonite causing an iridescent effect. It can display a wide range of iridescent colors including red, orange, yellow, green, blue, and purple. \nHeliotrope.\nHeliotrope is a green variety of chalcedony, containing red inclusions of iron oxide that resemble drops of blood, giving heliotrope its alternative name of bloodstone. In a similar variety known as plasma, the spots are yellow instead.\nMoss agate.\nMoss agate contains green filament-like inclusions, giving it the superficial appearance of moss or blue cheese. There is also tree agate which is similar to moss agate except it is solid white with green filaments whereas moss agate usually has a transparent background, so the \"moss\" appears in 3D. It is not a true form of agate, as it lacks agate's defining feature of concentric banding.\nChrome chalcedony.\nChrome chalcedony is a green variety of chalcedony, which is colored by chromium compounds. It is also known as \"mtorolite\" when found in Zimbabwe and \"chiquitanita\" when found in Bolivia.\nOnyx.\nOnyx is a variant of agate with black and white banding. Similarly, agate with brown, orange, red and white banding is known as sardonyx.\nChalcedony ice-blue.\nIn Greenland, white to greyish chalcedony is known from volcanic strata of the Paleocene, in the Disko-Nuussuaq area (West Greenland) and from the Scoresby Sound area (East Greenland). A light blue variety of chalcedony is known from Illorsuit, formed in the volcanic rocks along the southern coast of the island. Because of its bluish, ice-like colour, it has the local name chalcedony \"ice-blue\".\nHistory.\nChalcedony was used in tool making as early as c. 32,000 BP in Central Australia where archaeological studies at sites in the Cleland Hills uncovered flakes from stone brought in from quarries many kilometres away. Pre-contact uses described in the twentieth century included ceremonial stone knives.\nChalcedony was used for green and yellow color in prehistoric cave paintings, for example at the Bhimbetka rock shelters. The chalcedony was ground to powder form then mixed with water and animal fat or tree resin or gum.\nIn the Bronze Age chalcedony was in use in the Mediterranean region; for example, on Minoan Crete at the Palace of Knossos, chalcedony seals have been recovered dating to circa 1800 BC. People living along the Central Asian trade routes used various forms of chalcedony, including carnelian, to carve intaglios, ring bezels (the upper faceted portion of a gem projecting from the ring setting), and beads that show strong Greco-Roman influence.\nFine examples of first century objects made from chalcedony, possibly Kushan, were found in recent years at Tillya-tepe in north-western Afghanistan. Hot wax would not stick to it so it was often used to make seal impressions.\nThe term \"chalcedony\" is derived from the name of the ancient Greek town Chalkedon in Asia Minor, in modern English usually spelled Chalcedon, today the Kad\u0131k\u00f6y district of Istanbul.\nAccording to tradition, at least three varieties of chalcedony were used in the Jewish High Priest's Breastplate. (Jewish tradition states that Moses' brother Aaron wore the Breastplate, with inscribed gems representing the twelve tribes of Israel.) The Breastplate supposedly included \"jasper\", \"chrysoprase\" and \"sardonyx\", and there is some debate as to whether other \"agates\" were also used.\nIn the 19th century, Idar-Oberstein, Germany, became the world's largest chalcedony processing center, working mostly on agates. Most of these agates were from Latin America, in particular Brazil. Originally the agate carving industry around Idar and Oberstein was driven by local deposits that were mined in the 15th century. Several factors contributed to the re-emergence of Idar-Oberstein as agate center of the world: ships brought agate nodules back as ballast, thus providing extremely cheap transport. In addition, cheap labor and a superior knowledge of chemistry allowed them to dye the agates in any color with processes that were kept secret. Each mill in Idar-Oberstein had four or five grindstones. These were of red sandstone, obtained from Zweibr\u00fccken; and two men ordinarily worked together at the same stone.\nGeochemistry.\nStructure.\nChalcedony was once thought to be a fibrous variety of cryptocrystalline quartz. More recently however, it has been shown to also contain a monoclinic polymorph of quartz, known as moganite. The fraction, by mass, of moganite within a typical chalcedony sample may vary from less than 5% to over 20%. The existence of moganite was once regarded as dubious, but it is now officially recognised by the International Mineralogical Association.\nSolubility.\nChalcedony is more soluble than quartz under low-temperature conditions, despite the two minerals being chemically identical. Possible reasons include the existence of the moganite component, defects caused by Brazil twinning, and small crystal size.\nSolubility of quartz and chalcedony in pure water.\nThis table gives equilibrium concentrations of total dissolved silicon as calculated by \"PHREEQC\" (PH REdox EQuilibrium (in C language, USGS)) using the llnl.dat database.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44600", "revid": "49032930", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44600", "title": "Carnelian", "text": "Yellow-red chalcedony variety\nCarnelian (also spelled cornelian) is a brownish-red mineral commonly used as a semiprecious stone. Similar to carnelian is sard, which is generally harder and darker; the difference is not rigidly defined, and the two names are often used interchangeably. Both carnelian and sard are varieties of the silica mineral chalcedony colored by impurities of iron oxide. The color can vary greatly, ranging from pale orange to an intense almost-black coloration. Significant localities include Yanacodo, Peru and Ratnapura, Sri Lanka. It has been found in Indonesia, Brazil, India, Iran, Russia (Siberia), and Germany.\nHistory.\nThe red variety of chalcedony has been known to be used as beads since the Early Neolithic in Bulgaria. The first faceted (with constant 16+16=32 facets on each side of the bead) carnelian beads are described from the Varna Chalcolithic necropolis (middle of the 5th millennium BC). The bow drill was used to drill holes into carnelian in Mehrgarh in the 4th\u20135th millennium BC.\nCarnelian was recovered from Bronze Age Minoan layers at Knossos on Crete in a form that demonstrated its use in decorative arts; this use dates to approximately 1800 BC. Carnelian was used widely during Roman times to make engraved gems for signet or seal rings for imprinting a seal with wax on correspondence or other important documents, as hot wax does not stick to carnelian. Sard was used for Assyrian cylinder seals, Egyptian and Phoenician scarabs, and early Greek and Etruscan gems. The Hebrew \"odem\" (also translated as \"sardius\"), was the first stone in the High Priest's breastplate, a red stone, probably sard but perhaps red jasper. In Revelation 4:3, the One seated on the heavenly throne seen in the vision of John the Apostle is said to \"look like jasper and (\"sardius\" transliterated).\" And likewise it is in Revelation 21:20 as one of the precious stones in the foundations of the wall of the heavenly city.\nThere is a Neo-Assyrian seal made of carnelian in the Western Asiatic Seals collection of the British Museum that shows Ishtar-Gula as a star goddess. She is holding a ring of royal authority and is seated on a throne. She is shown with the spade of Marduk (his symbol), Sibbiti (seven) gods, the stylus of Nabu and a worshiper. An 8th century BC carnelian seal from the collection of the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford shows Ishtar-Gula with her dog facing the spade of Marduk and his red dragon.\nEtymology.\nAlthough now the more common term, \"carnelian\" is a 16th-century corruption of the 14th-century word \"cornelian\" (and its associated orthographies corneline and cornalyn). Cornelian, cognate with similar words in several Romance languages, comes from the Mediaeval Latin , itself derived from the Latin word ', the cornel cherry, whose translucent red fruits resemble the stone. The \"Oxford English Dictionary\" calls \"carnelian\" a perversion of \"cornelian,\" by subsequent analogy with the Latin word ' (\"flesh\"). According to Pliny the Elder, sard derived its name from the city of Sardis in Lydia from which it came, and according to others, may ultimately be related to the Persian word \"\" (\"sered\", \"yellowish-red\"). Another possible derivation is from the Greek \"\u03c3\u03ac\u03c1\u03be\" (\"sarx\", \"flesh\"); compare the surer etymology of \"onyx\", which comes from Greek \"\u1f44\u03bd\u03c5\u03be\" (\"onyx\", \"claw, fingernail\"), presumably because onyx with flesh-colored and white bands can resemble a fingernail.\nDistinction between carnelian and sard.\nThe names carnelian and sard are often used interchangeably, but they can also be used to describe distinct subvarieties. The general differences are as follows:\nAll of these properties vary across a continuum, so the boundary between carnelian and sard is inherently blurry.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "44603", "revid": "4894133", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44603", "title": "Calcite", "text": "Calcium carbonate mineral\nCalcite is a carbonate mineral and the most stable polymorph of calcium carbonate (CaCO3). It is a very common mineral, particularly as a component of limestone. Calcite defines hardness 3 on the Mohs scale of mineral hardness, based on scratch hardness comparison. Large calcite crystals are used in optical equipment, and limestone composed mostly of calcite has numerous uses.\nOther polymorphs of calcium carbonate are the minerals aragonite and vaterite. Aragonite will change to calcite over timescales of days or less at temperatures exceeding 300\u00a0\u00b0C, and vaterite is even less stable.\nEtymology.\nCalcite is derived from the German , a term from the 19th century that came from the Latin word for lime, (genitive ) with the suffix \"-ite\" used to name minerals. It is thus a doublet of the word \"chalk\".\nWhen applied by archaeologists and stone trade professionals, the term alabaster is used not just as in geology and mineralogy, where it is reserved for a variety of gypsum; but also for a similar-looking, translucent variety of fine-grained banded deposit of calcite.\nUnit cell and Miller indices.\nIn publications, two different sets of Miller indices are used to describe directions in hexagonal and rhombohedral crystals, including calcite crystals: three Miller indices \"h, k, l\" in the formula_1 directions, or four Bravais\u2013Miller indices \"h, k, i, l\" in the formula_2 directions, where formula_3 is redundant but useful in visualizing permutation symmetries.\nTo add to the complications, there are also two definitions of unit cell for calcite. One, an older \"morphological\" unit cell, was inferred by measuring angles between faces of crystals, typically with a goniometer, and looking for the smallest numbers that fit. Later, a \"structural\" unit cell was determined using X-ray crystallography. The morphological unit cell is rhombohedral, having approximate dimensions \"a\" \n 10 \u00c5 and \"c\" \n 8.5 \u00c5, while the structural unit cell is hexagonal (i.e. a rhombic prism), having approximate dimensions \"a\" \n 5 \u00c5 and \"c\" \n 17 \u00c5. For the same orientation, \"c\" must be multiplied by 4 to convert from morphological to structural units. As an example, calcite cleavage is given as \"perfect on {1 0 1 1}\" in morphological coordinates and \"perfect on {1 0 1 4}\" in structural units. In formula_4 indices, these are {1 0 1} and {1 0 4}, respectively. Twinning, cleavage and crystal forms are often given in morphological units.\nProperties.\nThe diagnostic properties of calcite include a defining Mohs hardness of 3, a specific gravity of 2.71 and, in crystalline varieties, a vitreous luster. Color is white or none, though shades of gray, red, orange, yellow, green, blue, violet, brown, or even black can occur when the mineral is charged with impurities.\nCrystal habits.\nCalcite has numerous habits, representing combinations of over 1000 crystallographic forms. Most common are scalenohedra, with faces in the hexagonal {2 1 1} directions (morphological unit cell) or {2 1 4} directions (structural unit cell); and rhombohedral, with faces in the {1 0 1} or {1 0 4} directions (the most common cleavage plane). Habits include acute to obtuse rhombohedra, tabular habits, prisms, or various scalenohedra. Calcite exhibits several twinning types that add to the observed habits. It may occur as fibrous, granular, lamellar, or compact. A fibrous, efflorescent habit is known as \"lublinite\". Cleavage is usually in three directions parallel to the rhombohedron form. Its fracture is conchoidal, but difficult to obtain.\nScalenohedral faces are chiral and come in pairs with mirror-image symmetry; their growth can be influenced by interaction with chiral biomolecules such as L- and D-amino acids. Rhombohedral faces are not chiral.\nOptical.\nCalcite is transparent to opaque and may occasionally show phosphorescence or fluorescence. A transparent variety called \"Iceland spar\" is used for optical purposes. Acute scalenohedral crystals are sometimes referred to as \"dogtooth spar\" while the rhombohedral form is sometimes referred to as \"nailhead spar\". The rhombohedral form may also have been the \"sunstone\" whose use by Viking navigators is mentioned in the Icelandic Sagas.\nSingle calcite crystals display an optical property called birefringence (double refraction). This strong birefringence causes objects viewed through a clear piece of calcite to appear doubled. The birefringent effect (using calcite) was first described by the Danish scientist Rasmus Bartholin in 1669. At a wavelength of about 590\u00a0nm, calcite has ordinary and extraordinary refractive indices of 1.658 and 1.486, respectively. Between 190 and 1700\u00a0nm, the ordinary refractive index varies roughly between 1.9 and 1.5, while the extraordinary refractive index varies between 1.6 and 1.4.\nThermoluminescence.\nCalcite has thermoluminescent properties mainly due to the presence of divalent manganese () impurities. An experiment was conducted by adding activators such as ions of Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, Ag, Pb, and Bi to the calcite samples to observe whether they emitted heat or light. The results showed that adding ions (, , , , , , , , ) did not react. However, a reaction occurred when both manganese and lead ions were present in calcite. By changing the temperature and observing the glow curve peaks, it was found that and acted as activators in the calcite lattice, but was much less efficient than .\nMeasuring mineral thermoluminescence experiments usually use x-rays or gamma-rays to activate the sample and record the changes in glowing curves at a temperature of 700\u20137500\u00a0K. Mineral thermoluminescence can form various glow curves of crystals under different conditions, such as temperature changes, because impurity ions or other crystal defects present in minerals supply luminescence centers and trapping levels. Observing these curve changes also can help infer geological correlation and age determination.\nChemical.\nCalcite, like most carbonates, dissolves in acids by the following reaction\nThe carbon dioxide released by this reaction produces a characteristic effervescence when a calcite sample is treated with an acid.\nDue to its acidity, carbon dioxide has a slight solubilizing effect on calcite. The overall reaction is\nIf the amount of dissolved carbon dioxide drops, the reaction reverses to precipitate calcite. As a result, calcite can be either dissolved by groundwater or precipitated by groundwater, depending on such factors as the water temperature, pH, and dissolved ion concentrations. When conditions are right for precipitation, calcite forms mineral coatings that cement rock grains together and can fill fractures. When conditions are right for dissolution, the removal of calcite can dramatically increase the porosity and permeability of the rock, and if it continues for a long period of time, may result in the formation of caves. Continued dissolution of calcium carbonate-rich formations can lead to the expansion and eventual collapse of cave systems, resulting in various forms of karst topography.\nCalcite exhibits an unusual characteristic called retrograde solubility: it is less soluble in water as the temperature increases. Calcite is also more soluble at higher pressures.\nPure calcite has the composition . However, the calcite in limestone often contains a few percent of magnesium. Calcite in limestone is divided into low-magnesium and high-magnesium calcite, with the dividing line placed at a composition of 4% magnesium. High-magnesium calcite retains the calcite mineral structure, which is distinct from that of dolomite, . Calcite can also contain small quantities of iron and manganese. Manganese may be responsible for the fluorescence of impure calcite, as may traces of organic compounds.\nDistribution.\nCalcite is found all over the world, and its leading global distribution is as follows:\nUnited States.\nCalcite is found in many different areas in the United States. One of the best examples is the Calcite Quarry in Michigan. The Calcite Quarry is the largest carbonate mine in the world and has been in use for more than 85 years. Large quantities of calcite can be mined from these sizeable open pit mines.\nCanada.\nCalcite can also be found throughout Canada, such as in Thorold Quarry and Madawaska Mine, Ontario, Canada.\nMexico.\nAbundant calcite is mined in the Santa Eulalia mining district, Chihuahua, Mexico.\nIceland.\nLarge quantities of calcite in Iceland are concentrated in the Helgustadir mine. The mine was once the primary mining location of \"Iceland spar.\" However, it currently serves as a nature reserve, and calcite mining will not be allowed.\nEngland.\nCalcite is found in parts of England, such as Alston Moor, Egremont, and Frizington, Cumbria.\nGermany.\nSt. Andreasberg, Harz Mountains, and Freiberg, Saxony can find calcite.\nUse and applications.\nAncient Egyptians carved many items out of calcite, relating it to their goddess Bast, whose name contributed to the term alabaster because of the close association. Many other cultures have used the material for similar carved objects and applications.\nA transparent variety of calcite known as Iceland spar may have been used by Vikings for navigating on cloudy days. A very pure crystal of calcite can split a beam of sunlight into dual images, as the polarized light deviates slightly from the main beam. By observing the sky through the crystal and then rotating it so that the two images are of equal brightness, the rings of polarized light that surround the sun can be seen even under overcast skies. Identifying the sun's location would give seafarers a reference point for navigating on their lengthy sea voyages.\nIn World War II, high-grade optical calcite was used for gun sights, specifically in bomb sights and anti-aircraft weaponry. It was used as a polarizer (in Nicol prisms) before the invention of Polaroid plates and still finds use in optical instruments. Also, experiments have been conducted to use calcite for a cloak of invisibility.\nMicrobiologically precipitated calcite has a wide range of applications, such as soil remediation, soil stabilization and concrete repair. It also can be used for tailings management and is designed to promote sustainable development in the mining industry.\nCalcite can help synthesize precipitated calcium carbonate (PCC) (mainly used in the paper industry) and increase carbonation. Furthermore, due to its particular crystal habit, such as rhombohedron, hexagonal prism, etc., it promotes the production of PCC with specific shapes and particle sizes.\nCalcite, obtained from an 80\u00a0kg sample of Carrara marble, is used as the IAEA-603 isotopic standard in mass spectrometry for the calibration of \u03b418O and \u03b413C.\nCalcite can be formed naturally or synthesized. However, artificial calcite is the preferred material to be used as a scaffold in bone tissue engineering due to its controllable and repeatable properties.\nCalcite can be used to alleviate water pollution caused by the excessive growth of cyanobacteria. Lakes and rivers can lead to cyanobacteria blooms due to eutrophication, which pollutes water resources. Phosphorus (P) is the leading cause of excessive growth of cyanobacteria. As an active capping material, calcite can help reduce P release from sediments into the water, thus inhibiting cyanobacteria overgrowth.\nIn traditional Chinese medicine, calcite, also known as calcitum, is believed to have cooling properties and is used to counteract \"shanghuo\", or \"heatiness\".\nNatural occurrence.\nCalcite is a common constituent of sedimentary rocks, limestone in particular, much of which is formed from the shells of dead marine organisms. Approximately 10% of sedimentary rock is limestone. It is the primary mineral in metamorphic marble. It also occurs in deposits from hot springs as a vein mineral; in caverns as stalactites and stalagmites; and in volcanic or mantle-derived rocks such as carbonatites, kimberlites, or rarely in peridotites.\nCacti contain Ca-oxalate biominerals. Their death releases these biominerals into the environment, which subsequently transform to calcite via a monohydrocalcite intermediate, sequestering carbon.\nCalcite is often the primary constituent of the shells of marine organisms, such as plankton (such as coccoliths and planktic foraminifera), the hard parts of red algae, some sponges, brachiopods, echinoderms, some serpulids, most bryozoa, and parts of the shells of some bivalves (such as oysters and rudists). Calcite is found in spectacular form in the Snowy River Cave of New Mexico as mentioned above, where microorganisms are credited with natural formations. Trilobites, which became extinct a quarter billion years ago, had unique compound eyes that used clear calcite crystals to form the lenses. It also forms a substantial part of birds' eggshells, and the \u03b413C of the diet is reflected in the \u03b413C of the calcite of the shell.\nThe largest documented single crystal of calcite originated from Iceland, measured and and weighed about 250 tons. Classic samples have been produced at Madawaska Mine, near Bancroft, Ontario.\nBedding parallel veins of fibrous calcite, often referred to in quarrying parlance as \"beef\", occur in dark organic rich mudstones and shales, these veins are formed by increasing fluid pressure during diagenesis.\nFormation processes.\nCalcite formation can proceed by several pathways, from the classical terrace ledge kink model to the crystallization of poorly ordered precursor phases like amorphous calcium carbonate (ACC) via an Ostwald ripening process, or via the agglomeration of nanocrystals.\nThe crystallization of ACC can occur in two stages. First, the ACC nanoparticles rapidly dehydrate and crystallize to form individual particles of vaterite. Second, the vaterite transforms to calcite via a dissolution and reprecipitation mechanism, with the reaction rate controlled by the surface area of a calcite crystal. The second stage of the reaction is approximately 10 times slower.\nHowever, crystallization of calcite has been observed to be dependent on the starting pH and concentration of magnesium in solution. A neutral starting pH during mixing promotes the direct transformation of ACC into calcite without a vaterite intermediate. But when ACC forms in a solution with a basic initial pH, the transformation to calcite occurs via metastable vaterite, following the pathway outlined above. Magnesium has a noteworthy effect on both the stability of ACC and its transformation to crystalline CaCO3, resulting in the formation of calcite directly from ACC, as this ion destabilizes the structure of vaterite.\nEpitaxial overgrowths of calcite precipitated on weathered cleavage surfaces have morphologies that vary with the type of weathering the substrate experienced: growth on physically weathered surfaces has a shingled morphology due to Volmer-Weber growth, growth on chemically weathered surfaces has characteristics of Stranski-Krastanov growth, and growth on pristine cleavage surfaces has characteristics of Frank - van der Merwe growth. These differences are apparently due to the influence of surface roughness on layer coalescence dynamics.\nCalcite may form in the subsurface in response to microorganism activity, such as sulfate-dependent anaerobic oxidation of methane, where methane is oxidized and sulfate is reduced, leading to precipitation of calcite and pyrite from the produced bicarbonate and sulfide. These processes can be traced by the specific carbon isotope composition of the calcites, which are extremely depleted in the 13C isotope, by as much as \u2212125 per mil PDB (\u03b413C).\nIn Earth history.\nCalcite seas existed in Earth's history when the primary inorganic precipitate of calcium carbonate in marine waters was low-magnesium calcite (lmc), as opposed to the aragonite and high-magnesium calcite (hmc) precipitated today. Calcite seas alternated with aragonite seas over the Phanerozoic, being most prominent in the Ordovician and Jurassic periods. Lineages evolved to use whichever morph of calcium carbonate was favourable in the ocean at the time they became mineralised, and retained this mineralogy for the remainder of their evolutionary history. Petrographic evidence for these calcite sea conditions consists of calcitic ooids, lmc cements, hardgrounds, and rapid early seafloor aragonite dissolution. The evolution of marine organisms with calcium carbonate shells may have been affected by the calcite and aragonite sea cycle.\nCalcite is one of the minerals that has been shown to catalyze an important biological reaction, the formose reaction, and may have had a role in the origin of life. Interaction of its chiral surfaces (see Form) with aspartic acid molecules results in a slight bias in chirality; this is one possible mechanism for the origin of homochirality in living cells.\nClimate change.\nClimate change is exacerbating ocean acidification, possibly leading to lower natural calcite production. The oceans absorb large amounts of from fossil fuel emissions into the air. The total amount of artificial absorbed by the oceans is calculated to be 118 \u00b1 19 Gt C. If a large amount of dissolves in the sea, it will cause the acidity of the seawater to increase, thereby affecting the pH value of the ocean. Calcifying organisms in the sea, such as molluscs foraminifera, crustaceans, echinoderms and corals, are susceptible to pH changes. Meanwhile, these calcifying organisms are also an essential source of calcite. As ocean acidification causes pH to drop, carbonate ion concentrations will decline, potentially reducing natural calcite production.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44605", "revid": "4637213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44605", "title": "Ars Magica", "text": "Tabletop fantasy role-playing game\nArs Magica is a role-playing game set in 'Mythic Europe' \u2013 a historically grounded version of Europe and the Levant around AD 1200, with the added conceit that conceptions of the world prevalent in folklore and institutions of the High Middle Ages are factual reality (a situation known informally as the \"medieval paradigm\"). The players' involvement revolves around an organization of magi and their allies and foes both mundane and supernatural. The game was originally developed by Jonathan Tweet and Mark Rein-Hagen, with its first edition published in 1987.\nThe current edition (the game's fifth) was written by David Chart, and published in 2004 by Atlas Games, who continue to develop new material for it.\n\"Ars Magica\" was one of the first examples of a troupe system. Early editions recommended that the players collaborate to create the campaign world and story with:\nThe Story Guide scheme has been de-emphasised in recent editions; in the fifth edition it is relegated to an optional play style described at the back of the book. Alternatively a troupe may select one player as the primary story guide responsible for the overall plot, and one or more secondary story guides who run peripheral sessions and/or stories.\nTo enhance the 'authenticity' of the historical setting, the game uses medieval Latin for a number of key terms, including its Hermetic Magic system.\nHistory.\nThe first two editions were published by Lion Rampant Games, with several modules published by Atlas Games. In 1991, Lion Rampant merged with White Wolf Magazine to form White Wolf Game Studio.\nWhite Wolf published several adventure modules for the game before adding its third Edition rulebook, co-authored by Rein-Hagen with Ken Cliffe. This revision greatly expanded the settings and peripheral rules while leaving the core system intact. White Wolf then released at least a dozen supplements for Third Edition, including the addition of Divine and Infernal mechanics, rules for shamanic magic, beginning the Tribunal series and completing the 'Four Seasons' tetralogy of stories begun by Lion Rampant.\nIn 1994, publishing rights for the game were sold to Wizards of the Coast, who brought in Jonathan Tweet and started development on a fourth edition. The company published one supplement for the upcoming edition while republishing two supplements for the older edition. Development fell behind schedule, and on December 5, 1995, Wizards of the Coast announced they would leave the tabletop role-playing business altogether, although this turned out to be a temporary departure.\nThe next year the rights were sold to Atlas Games, who published the fourth edition developed by Tweet and Jeff Tidball. The core book was nominated for the Origins Award in 1996 for Best Roleplaying Game. Continuing to develop the line, Tidwell added several new stories, continued to expand peripheral material and released an extensive line of Tribunal books.\nAtlas then assigned David Chart as line developer and released a fifth edition in 2004. This release made extensive changes to the system, especially the mechanics for combat, experience, and character creation. Many players felt that the alterations to the combat system were long overdue, especially the rules for armour, which in previous editions made wearers much more likely to die in combat. This edition won the Origins Award for \"Best Role Playing Game of 2004\".\nSince 2014, the fourth edition has been distributed for free at \"Warehouse 23\" fronted by Steve Jackson Games.\nMany characteristics of the Storyteller system developed by White Wolf can be traced to \"Ars Magica\" and the fact that the Storyteller system was developed by one of \"Ars Magica\"'s co-authors; White Wolf's \"\" was envisioned as \"Ars Magica in the Modern World\", and many of the changes in the third edition of \"ArM\" were to make the game-worlds more compatible.\nOn January 12, 2024, Atlas Games announced that, \"Ars Magica\" 5th Edition Definitive, was in production and would be crowdfunded later in the year.\nSetting.\nThe setting, Mythic Europe, is primarily based on Europe of the 12th and 13th centuries; the geography is the same, and the mundane (non-magical) politics are practically identical. However, in \"Ars Magica\" the \"Medieval paradigm\" \u2013 the way the world was described or understood in that time period \u2013 is the literal truth. In this setting, Faeries actually do steal lost children, Demons cause disease and crop failure, Angels help the righteous, and dragons and other Magical creatures are real (though perhaps forgotten or hidden). In the third edition, to tie the game into the \"World of Darkness\" line, this was reality \"because\" of the beliefs; other editions distance themselves from this interpretation, simply taking place in a world where those beliefs happen to be true.\nPlayer characters typically alternate between the role of a magus (plural \"magi\"; female maga/magae), and a companion (\"Consors\"). Companions are select skilled non-magi who help wizards conduct their affairs (as magi tend to be distanced from \"mundanes\" due to the effects of their magical \"Gift\"). Additionally, there are a number of Grogs (usually skilled peasants, often bodyguards or watchmen) who can be controlled by any player. (As of the third edition, Grogs are also a viable player 'class'; the fifth edition has added an entire supplement dedicated to 'fleshing out' Grogs.) The wizards generally gather in specialized strongholds called covenants, which are often built in places of power. A covenant is typically a 'home base' where the magi are in charge (though they may travel Mythic Europe for reasons of politics, resources, study or even leisure). Some consider the covenant to be the central character of the game, and the official rules encourage troupes to develop the covenant along those lines.\nThe Order of Hermes.\nStandard player-character magi belong to the Order of Hermes, a society of magically \"Gifted\" humans which was inspired in 767 A.D. by the witch Trianoma and magus Bonisagus after the latter developed a breakthrough in communicating and manipulating magic (termed 'Hermetic Magic' for its roots in both the Greek deity Hermes, upon which the ancient Roman Cult of Mercury was based, and the works of the legendary figure Hermes Trismegistus).\nWhile magicians at this time were scattered, rarely social and highly distrustful of each other as a rule, two factors strongly favored mutual co-operation. One was Trianoma's political vision of an organization that would unite the Gifted for their mutual benefit. The other was Bonisagus' second breakthrough, the \"Parma Magica\" (loosely translated as \"magic shield\"): a highly efficient and easily taught personal ritual which could allow these disparate individuals and traditions to meet on common ground with some assurance of safety. Over subsequent centuries, with very few exceptions, magi who quit or refuse to join the Order have been hunted down and destroyed, giving the Order a definite monopoly over magical resources within its 'jurisdiction'.\nWhile each of the Order's twelve Houses maintains a distinct baseline or tradition in pursuing and transmitting knowledge and power, the Order is also divided into \"Tribunals\", each defined by a geographic region of Mythic Europe. Each Tribunal holds a gathering of its magi once every seven years; attendance is not mandatory, though it is essential for certain procedures (e.g. those who have completed their apprenticeships are formally presented for official membership; the \"Qu\u00e6sitores\" judge the types of disputes deemed beyond simple inter- or intra-covenant resolution). Once every 33 years, each Tribunal sends a representative to the Grand Tribunal at the site of the Order's founding in the Black Forest.\nThe Tribunals loosely correspond to groupings or portions of modern-day nations; each has a distinct cultural and historical flavor which is expanded in the \"Tribunals of Hermes\" series. For example, the Roman Tribunal is a densely populated area with a shortage of magical resources, offering highly politicized plot-lines (both within and without the Order itself); Novgorod features vast areas of harsh wilderness, where pagan tribal warfare and magical beasts are significantly more common than elsewhere.\nAs with any system of borders not contingent on clear demarcation such as a river or wall, the territory of each Tribunal is rarely defined with precision; this is partially illustrated (via the fifth edition \"Covenants\" book) with the 'Tribunal Border' characteristic, which situates a covenant in a location that could place it in more than one Tribunal (depending on political favors, conflicts over resources, and so on). Such ambiguity can exist even with \"clear\" borders such as rivers or mountain ranges, since incorporating supernatural aid or power into the structure (and perhaps the constituency or lifestyle of its inhabitants) can allow them to thrive even in the middle of either such feature.\nRealms of Power.\nThe overarching premise of the \"Ars Magica\" setting is that the \"mundane\" world of ordinary, physical existence is a place where four great supernatural forces have varying degrees of influence and presence.\nAdditionally, a \"Realm of Reason\" appeared in the third edition. This was associated with skepticism and empirical observation, and its \"rational aura\" challenged most supernatural effects. Many fans of the game consider this to be paradoxical and inconsistent, since applying reason and rationality to the world of \"Ars Magica\" should really lead to the conclusion that magic does exist and fairies are real, etc., and yet the \"True Reason\" promoted by this fifth realm posited the contrary, and thus resembled a delusional (yet effective) state of mind rather than a rational one. The realm of Reason had additional counter-intuitive effects \u2013 for example, imposing penalties on wizard's magic use when in prominent mundane libraries, despite the predominant portrayal of Hermetic Magic as a scholarly pursuit.\nReason proved an unwelcome addition to the game; neither the fourth nor fifth edition have included this 'Realm', and all references to it have been stricken from the canonical setting.\nSystem.\nDie-rolling conventions.\nThere are eight Characteristics: Intelligence, Perception, Strength, Stamina, Presence, Communication, Dexterity and Quickness. Each one is generally rated from \u22125 to +5 for humans and a Characteristic of 0 is considered 'average'. To perform a typical action, one of the Characteristics is added to a relevant Ability, and a d10 is rolled. The total of Characteristic + Ability + die roll is compared to a target difficulty or Ease Factor; the action succeeds if the rolled total is greater than or equal to the target number.\nIf the action is routine or trivial and nothing in particular is at stake, the roll is read as 1\u201310 and simply added to the total (this is called a \"Simple roll\"). If there is an opportunity for \"exceptional\" success or failure, the die is read as 0\u20139 and is called a \"Stress\" roll. For Stress rolls, results of \"1\" and \"0\" have special significance. A '1' is rerolled and the result doubled (consecutive \"1\"s redouble the eventual \"non-1\", with consecutive '1's each redoubling the result again). A roll of '0' is also re-rolled (more than once in cases of especially hazardous activity) as a Botch roll. If any botch die \"also\" comes up '0', the action has been botched: failed in some disastrous way. Otherwise, the roll merely equals zero, and the character is assumed to have been unsuccessful at whatever they were trying to accomplish.\nMagic system.\nThe centerpiece of \"Ars Magica\" is the system of Hermetic Magic devised by Bonisagus. It consists of 15 Arts, divided into 5 Techniques and 10 Forms. This is sometimes called a \"Verb/Noun\" system: the Technique is the verb (what effect the magic has), and the Form is the noun (the entity, object or substance that is affected or brought forth). These 'verb-noun' combinations can be used to cast both Formulaic spells (which are recorded in texts, are learned through study and mastered through experience, and have known, fixed effects) and Spontaneous spells (which a caster improvises with no prior knowledge other than the Arts themselves, giving the potential results greater flexibility but lower potency). Every apprentice (with a few Ex Miscellanea exceptions) is \"opened\" in all 15 Arts before fully joining the Order; each Art begins with a Score of 0 and a mage may usually only increase one of them during a season (see below).\nEach Technique is named by a first-person singular present tense indicative Latin verb:\nEach Form is named by a singular accusative Latin noun:\nA mage's skill when casting a spell is the sum of their scores in the appropriate technique and form.\nSome spells involve more than one Technique, and/or more than one Form at once; each Art used in addition to the basic pair is called a \"requisite\". All relevant Art Scores are compared: the caster's lowest Technique and lowest Form are used, reflecting the limiting of the caster's magical knowledge.\nRegardless of how high one's Art Scores may rise, there are outer boundaries to the application of Hermetic Magic (whether Formulaic, Spontaneous or even Ritual). Bonisagus's theory outlines a set of inherent Limits, similar in concept to the laws of physics; the two central, 'Greater' Limits are:\nThere are also eleven 'Lesser Limits' (addressing more specific 'blind spots' such as aging, creation, time and the soul) which are generally thought either to derive from the two Greater Limits, or to be flaws in Hermetic Theory which may eventually be 'corrected'.\nAdditional statistics for every spell (which have been redefined in nearly every new edition of the game) are Target (what or whom the spell is directed at), Range (how far the Target may be from the caster), and Duration.\nFor reasons of balance, some spells require the expenditure of \"vis\" \u2013 magical essence in physical form \u2013 which all magi and covenants tend to make a point of hoarding and/or trading. No \"Creo\" effect, for example, can be permanent unless vis is consumed during the casting.\nSome Formulaic Magic is so effective that it can \"only\" be achieved with vis and an elaborate, time-consuming ritual (hence, Ritual Spells). This automatically applies to any spell of a greater Level than 50, any spell with a Duration of 'Year', and any non-Imaginem spell with a range of 'Sight'.\nCharacter development.\nAll characters (magi, companions and grogs alike) improve their Abilities by applying experience which can be earned through \"Exposure\", \"Practice\", \"Training\" or \"Study\". Magic, however, is stressed as a multifaceted discipline with a greater variety of avenues for improvement. Magi are expected to spend months at a time with books and/or laboratory equipment: inventing new spells (or learning or modifying existing ones), strengthening their Arts, enchanting items, and so forth. \"Ars Magica\" includes rules for magical research within the game's standard 'advancement' timescale of 3-month seasons.\nThese seasonal activities generally concern either study of a text or laboratory activity. Although participating in adventures, missions and other endeavors outside of seasonal activity gives characters \"Story Experience\", the most substantial progress (and the \"raison d'etre\" of many in the Order) is nearly always from the seasonal activities of magi. Hence, time in an \"Ars Magica\" campaign may pass much faster than in other RPGs (if, for example, all player-characters are engaged in seasonal activity, standard \"roleplaying sessions\" are unnecessary for that period) but is also more 'accounted for' (since regular and exact periods of activity give highly defined benefits). To accommodate this, many magi prolong their lives with unique (to each individual) longevity formulas (generally called \"longevity potions\", though the form one takes is not always a potion); this only \"delays\" the aging process, however; beyond a certain point one's longevity formula will have no effect at all and must be reformulated (preferably with increased knowledge of the appropriate Arts and/or greater quantities of \"vis\"). The increased longevity has led to a prevalent attitude among members of the Order that Companions in general (and Grogs almost invariably) will come and go \u2013 perhaps killed in action, occasionally living long enough to retire \u2013 while the Magi carry on. Magi \"may\" concoct longevity formulas for non-magi, but this is a rare consideration, less effective than devising one's own personal formula, and is an expensive prospect in time and resources in any case.\nStudy is primarily achieved with texts, each designed to enhance an Ability, Art or specific Spell(s). A respectable covenant inevitably requires either a respectable library or sufficient commodities to exchange for the use of other libraries, since the dominant form of Hermetic Magic is a scholarly pursuit. Magi who are able to write useful books or teach well can use these as commodities, trading with other magi for books or training (though the Code of Hermes places limits on what its members may sell to 'mundanes').\nLab Projects concern projects to enhance one's repertoire of spells or magical artifacts. All projects have a level of effect to which the character compares their 'Lab Total': Intelligence + Magic Theory ability + sum of a Form and Technique + other bonuses (which may be from local Aura, quality and specialization of lab, assistants, special knowledge, sympathetic connections from items, and in some circumstances an additional Ability). Some merely require a Lab Total to match the Level of Effect; more extensive endeavors simply add up each Lab Total in 'points' until twice the Level of Effect are accumulated.\nThe following Lab Projects are the most commonly pursued:\nReception.\nStewart Wieck reviewed \"Ars Magica\" for \"White Wolf\" #11, rating it 10 out of 10 overall, and stated that \"I really don't think I can praise 'Ars Magica' highly enough. This is simply one of those games that you must get.\"\nIn the December 1988 edition of \"Dragon\" (Issue 140), Ken Rolston was effusive in his praise, calling \"Ars Magica\" \"a distinctive, original, and intriguing treatment of magic for fantasy role-playing games... earnest, colorful, and meticulous in its development of a magic system with a plausible, coherent rationale. Its attempts to integrate this magic into a historical context are persuasive, and the game master notes and staging tips are wonderfully perceptive.\" Rolston concluded, \"This is the most interesting and original fantasy role-playing system and setting I've seen in a long time.\"\nSix months later, Rolston revisited \"Ars Magica\" for a more in-depth review in the July 1989 edition of \"Dragon\". Rolston noted that \"the quality of writing, editing, and presentation is first-class\", and he admired the \"storyguide\" system of role-playing: \"This emphasis on the dramatic and narrative elements of role-playing produces some distinctive and thought-provoking perspectives on commonly accepted conventions of role-playing gaming.\" Although Rolston gave good marks for the game mechanics, character creation system and combat rules, he was especially drawn to the magic, which he said \"has elegant tone and atmosphere.\" He also liked the quasi-historical medieval setting. He concluded with strong recommendation: \"The \"Ars Magica\" game features an original and exciting game system, a coherent and satisfying treatment of magic, a convenient and imaginative exploitation of a historical medieval setting, and an explicit and appealing presentation of a role-playing style that emphasizes the common development of the setting, narrative, and PC-group activity over the personal expression of the individual PC.\"\nIn the March 1989 edition of \"Games International\" (Issue #3), Paul Mason believed that this game \"truly encourages joint creativity.\" He also admired the game mechanics based around single rolls of a ten-sided die, although he found the rules added some unnecessary complications. He suggested that \"combat was the weakest part of the game\", finding the game mechanics were too \"war-gamey\". But he called the magic system \"the centrepiece of the game.\" He concluded by giving this game an above-average rating of 4 out of 5, saying, \"If you're looking for a new game to take you away from mechanics and 20th century rationalizations, back into the lands of mystery and enchantment, then this is it.\"\nIn the October\u2013November 1989 edition of \"Space Gamer\" (Vol. II, Issue 2), J.M. Caparula commented that \"In the end, \"Ars Magica\" is a superb roleplaying game, one that furthers the gaming art in a positive direction.\"\nIn the February\u2013March 1990 edition of \"Games International\" (Issue 13), Dave Morris applauded the change in the second edition from four types of dice rolls \u2014 something he had initially complained about in the first edition \u2014 to only two types of dice rolls. He also admired the re-organization of the magic system, and pointed out that rather than a sample scenario often found in other RPGs, \"Ars Magic\" offered a sample setting. Morris called this \"a more productive inclusion in the main book than a scenario.\" He concluded by giving the second edition an excellent rating of 9 out of 10, saying, \"it's worth buying for the ideas and the imaginative vision of its authors, even if you don't plan to play it.\"\nStewart Wieck reviewed the revised edition of \"Ars Magica\" in \"White Wolf\" #19 (Feb./March 1990), rating it a 5 out of 5 and stated that \"The only other fantasy game which so thoroughly takes advantage of the art of role-playing is \"Pendragon\" by Chaosium. \"Ars Magica\" owes something to \"Pendragon\", but the unique setting and beautiful magic system of \"Ars Magica\" truly sets it apart from all the rest.\"\nIn his 1990 book \"The Complete Guide to Role-Playing Games\", game critic Rick Swan liked the extensive magic system, but thought \"The game's biggest flaw is its combat system, which is far too complicated for an RPG that downplays physical encounters.\" Swan concluded by giving the game a rating of 3.5 out of 4, saying, \"Though the magic rules are fascinating, they're probably too sophisticated for newcomers. But for experienced players, \"Ars Magica\" is one terrific product; this is wizardly role-playing at its finest.\"\nMatthew Gabbert reviewed \"Ars Magica\" third edition in \"White Wolf\" #39 (1994), rating it a 5 out of 5 and stated that \"One thing that pleases me about the new edition is that it doesn't make all the previous sourcebooks obsolete. Your investment in older \"Ars Magica\" products hasn't been wasted. If you've never tried the system, this edition is a wonderful way to start.\"\nIn a 1996 reader poll conducted by \"Arcane\" magazine to determine the 50 most popular roleplaying games of all time, \"Ars Magica\" was ranked 19th. Editor Paul Pettengale commented: \"This is a fantasy game for the thinking player \u2013 although there's plenty of scope for action, too. A first success for Jonathan Tweet and Mark Rein-Hagen, who both went on to even bigger things, \"Ars Magica\" includes one of the most flexible, highly-regarded magic systems in the roleplaying hobby. The game, which places heavy emphasis on storytelling, is extremely popular with fans who have followed its troubled history through four different publishers. With Atlas just about to produce a new edition, those fans are currently feeling suitably optimistic.\"\nAndrew Rilstone reviewed \"Ars Magica\" fourth edition for \"Arcane\" magazine, rating it a 9 out of 10 overall, and stated that \"Literate, cerebral, thoughtful, intelligent, with its roots firmly planted in medieval history and philosophy. If the subject matter interests you, then Ars Magica could be the basis of the most in-depth campaign you've ever played. A classic reborn.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44606", "revid": "39625006", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44606", "title": "Casu martzu", "text": "Traditional Sardinian cheese\n (; lit.\u2009'rotten cheese') is a Sardinian sheep milk cheese that contains live fly maggots.\nThe larvae of the cheese fly (\"Piophila casei\") are deliberately introduced to pecorino cheese, where their digestive action produces an advanced level of fermentation, including a breakdown of the cheese's fats. The cheese's texture softens, and a liquid called \"l\u00e0grima\" ('teardrop') may seep out. \nIt is possible that the larvae could survive in the intestine, causing enteric pseudomyiasis, which can manifest as nausea, vomiting and gastrointestinal upset; however, no cases have been linked to the cheese. Additionally, these larvae can carry harmful microorganisms that may lead to infections. Due to these risks, Italian authorities have banned the sale of this cheese, deeming it dangerous. Consequently, it is also prohibited across the European Union, as EU food safety regulations mandate that only food safe for consumption can be sold.\nVariations of this cheese also exist in Corsica, France, where it is called \"casgiu merzu\"; it is especially produced in some Southern Corsican villages such as Sart\u00e8ne.\nFermentation.\n\"Casu martzu\" is created by leaving whole pecorino cheeses outside with part of the rind removed to allow the cheese fly \"Piophila casei\" to lay eggs in the cheese. When the eggs hatch, the larvae begin to eat through the cheese. The acid from the maggots' digestive system breaks down the cheese's fats, making the texture of the cheese very soft. By the time it is ready for consumption, a typical \"casu martzu\" will contain thousands of maggots. Pecorino is most desirable if made from milk collected towards the end of June, due to the effects of the reproductive cycle of sheep on their lactation, and local fermentation traditions associate higher quality \"casu martzu\" with exposure to a warm \"sirocco\" wind, which is thought to additionally soften the cheese to encourage further maggot activity. The overall fermentation process takes a total of three months.\nConsumption.\n\"Casu martzu\" is considered by Sardinian aficionados to be unsafe to eat if the maggots in the cheese have died. Allowances are made for cheese that has been refrigerated, which also quickly kills the maggots. Some people prefer not to ingest the maggots. They might place the cheese in a sealed paper bag, starving the maggots of oxygen. Modern preservation techniques have expanded the cheese's shelf life to several years, where it would previously be unobtainable outside of late summer and early autumn.\nWhen the cheese has fermented enough, it is often cut into thin strips and spread on moistened Sardinian flatbread (\"pane carasau\"), to be served with a strong red wine such as cannonau. The flavor is described as \"intense\", with Mediterranean, pastoral, and spicy notes. The aftertaste is strong enough to remain for hours after a single serving. Because the larvae in the cheese can launch themselves distances up to when disturbed, diners hold their hands above the sandwich to prevent the maggots from leaping.\nHealth concerns.\nIt is possible for the larvae to survive the stomach acid and remain in the intestine, leading to a condition called pseudomyiasis. There have been documented cases of pseudomyiasis with \"P. casei\", although a report by CNN claims no such cases have been linked to \"casu marzu\". The larvae may also carry harmful microorganisms that could cause infections.\nA cooperation between sheep farmers and researchers at the University of Sassari developed a hygienic method of production in 2005, aiming to allow the legal selling of the cheese.\nThe Guinness World Records listed \"casu martzu\" as the world's \"most dangerous cheese\" in 2009, citing the risk that live larvae can survive digestion and provoke vomiting, abdominal pain, and bloody diarrhea.\nHistory and legal status.\nAn Italian journalist for \"CNN\" described \"casu martzu\"'s cultural status as \"revered\", and the unique cheesemaking process combined with the strong, rare taste of the dish are described as icons of the traditional Sardinian pastoral lifestyle. Local gastronome Giovanni Fancello traced the history of Sardinian cuisine to the island's time as a province of the Roman Empire, arguing that \"we have always eaten worms, Pliny the Elder and Aristotle talked about it... It's part of our history. We are the sons of this food.\" \"Casu martzu\" is traditionally believed to be an aphrodisiac by Sardinians and the shepherding, milking, and fermentation necessary for the dish feature heavily in the island's superstition and mysticism.\nThe Italian government challenged the sale of \"casu martzu\" as early as 1962, when it was prohibited under laws against the sale of infested food. Because of European Union food hygiene-health regulations, the cheese has been outlawed, and offenders face heavy fines. Despite this the laws are sometimes not enforced, and some Sardinians organized themselves in order to make \"casu martzu\" available on the black market, where it may be sold for double the price of an ordinary block of pecorino cheese. As of 2019, the illegal production of this cheese was estimated at per year, worth between \u20ac2\u20133 million.\nAttempts have been made to circumvent the Italian and EU ban by having \"casu martzu\" declared a traditional food. The traditional way of making the cheese is explained by an official paper of the Sardinian government.\n\"Casu martzu\" is among several cheeses that are not legal in the United States.\nOther regional variations.\nOutside of Sardinia, similar milk cheeses are also produced in the French island of Corsica, as a local variation of the Sardinian cheese produced in some Southern villages and known as or , as well as in a number of Italian regions.\nSeveral other regional varieties of cheese with fly larvae are produced in the rest of Europe. For example, goat-milk cheese is left to the open air until \"P. casei\" eggs are naturally laid in the cheese. Then it is aged in white wine, with grapes and honey, preventing the larvae from emerging, giving the cheese a strong flavour. In addition, other regions in Europe have traditional cheeses that rely on live arthropods for ageing and flavouring, such as the German and French , both of which rely on cheese mites. An early printed reference to Stilton cheese points to a similar production technique. Daniel Defoe in his 1724 work \"A Tour thro' the Whole Island of Great Britain\" notes: \"We pass'd Stilton, a town famous for cheese, which is call'd our English Parmesan, and is brought to table with the mites or maggots round it, so thick, that they bring a spoon with them for you to eat the mites with, as you do the cheese.\"\nAccording to Rabbi Chaim Simons of the Orthodox Union, kosher \"casu martzu\" can be produced provided that all ingredients are kosher, the rennet comes from a kosher animal slaughtered in accordance with the laws of shechita, and that the cheese is \"gevinat Yisrael\" (made under Jewish supervision).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44607", "revid": "21203279", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44607", "title": "History of British newspapers", "text": "Dates to the 17th century\nThe history of British newspapers begins in the 17th century with the emergence of regular publications covering news and gossip. The relaxation of government censorship in the late 17th century led to a rise in publications, which in turn led to an increase in regulation throughout the 18th century. \"The Times\" began publication in 1785 and became the leading newspaper of the early 19th century, before the lifting of taxes on newspapers and technological innovations led to a boom in newspaper publishing in the late 19th century. Mass education and increasing affluence led to new papers such as the \"Daily Mail\" emerging at the end of the 19th century, aimed at lower middle-class readers.\nIn the early 20th century, the British press was dominated by a few wealthy press barons. Many papers published more popular stories, including sports and other features, in an attempt to boost circulation. In 1969 Rupert Murdoch bought and relaunched \"The Sun\" as a tabloid and soon added pictures of topless models on Page 3. Within a few years the Sun was the UK's most popular newspaper.\nIn the 1980s national newspapers began to move out of Fleet Street, the traditional home of the British national press since the 18th century. By the early 21st century newspaper circulation began to decline.\nIn the early 2010s many British newspapers were implicated in a major phone hacking scandal which led to the closure of the \"News of the World\" after 168 years of publication and the Leveson Inquiry into press standards.\n17th century.\nDuring the 17th century there were many kinds of news publications that told both the news and rumours, such as pamphlets, posters and ballads. Even when news periodicals emerged, many of these co-existed with them. A news periodical differs from these mainly because of its periodicity. The definition for 17th century newsbooks and newspapers is that they are published at least once a week. Johann Carolus' \"Relation aller F\u00fcrnemmen und gedenckw\u00fcrdigen Historien\", published in Strassburg in 1605, is usually regarded as the first news periodical.\nAt the beginning of the 17th century, the right to print was strictly controlled in England. This was probably the reason why the first newspaper in the English language was printed in Rome by Joris Veseler around 1620. This followed the style established by Veseler's earlier Dutch paper \"Courante uyt Italien, Duytslandt, &amp;c.\" However, when the English started printing their own papers in London, they reverted to the pamphlet format used by contemporary books. The publication of these newsbooks was suspended between 1632 and 1638 by order of the Star Chamber. After they resumed publication, the era of these newsbooks lasted until the publication of the \"Oxford Gazette\" in 1665.\nThe control over printing relaxed greatly after the abolition of the Star Chamber in 1641. The English Civil War escalated the demand for news. News pamphlets or books reported the war, often supporting one side or the other. A number of publications arose after the Restoration, including \"The London Gazette\" (first published on 18 November 1665 as the \"Oxford Gazette\"), the first official journal of record and the newspaper of the Crown. Publication was controlled under the Licensing Act 1662, but the act's lapses from 1679 to 1685 and from 1695 onwards encouraged a number of new titles.\n\"Mercurius Caledonius\" founded in Edinburgh in 1660, was Scotland's first but short-lived newspaper. Only 12 editions were published during 1660 and 1661.\n18th century.\nThere were twelve London newspapers and 24 provincial papers by the 1720s. The \"Daily Courant\" (11 March 1702\u20131703) was the first successful daily newspaper in London. In 1695 the \"Postboy\" had been started as a daily paper (actually the first in London), but only four numbers appeared. The \"Public Advertiser\" was started by Henry Woodfall in the 18th century.\nThe first English journalist to achieve national importance was Daniel Defoe. On 19 February 1704, whilst still in Newgate Prison for a political offence, he began his weekly, \"The Review\", which was eventually printed three times a week and was a forerunner of \"The Tatler\" (started by Richard Steele in 1709) and \"The Spectator\" (started by Steele and Joseph Addison in 1711). Defoe's \"Review\" came to an end in 1713. Between 1716 and 1720 he published a monthly newspaper with old style title, \"Mercurius Politicus.\" \"The Examiner\" started in 1710 as the chief Conservative political mouthpiece, which enjoyed as its most influential contributor, Jonathan Swift. Swift had control of the journal for 33 issues between November 1710 and June 1711, but once he became dean of St. Patrick's Cathedral in Dublin, he gave up regular journalistic work.\nIn 1702 Edward Lloyd, the virtual founder of the famous \"Lloyd's\" of commerce, started a thrice a week newspaper, \"Lloyd's News\", which had but a brief existence in its initial form, but was the precursor of the modern \"Lloyd's List\". The 76th issue of the original paper contained a paragraph mentioning the House of Lords, for which the publisher was told he would have to pay a fine. He preferred to discontinue his publication instead. In 1726 he in part revived it, under the title of \"Lloyd's List\", published at first weekly, it would later become a daily.\nThe \"Edinburgh Courant\" was published out of Edinburgh, Midlothian, Scotland. Its first issue was dated 14-19 Feb 1705 and was sold for a penny. It was one of the country's first regional papers, second only to the Norwich Post (1701). The paper was produced twice weekly for five years, then continued as the \"Scots Courant\" until April 1720. Later that same year, the \"Edinburgh Evening Courant\" began publication, and it survived until the \"Evening News\" came into existence in 1873.\nThe increasing popularity and influence of newspapers was problematic to the government of the day. The first bill in parliament advocating a tax on newspapers was proposed in 1711. The duty eventually imposed in 1712 was a halfpenny on papers of half a sheet or less and a penny on newspapers that ranged from half a sheet to a single sheet in size. Jonathan Swift expressed in his \"Journal to Stella\" on 7 August 1712, doubt in the ability of \"The Spectator\" to hold out against the tax. This doubt was proved justified in December 1712 by its discontinuance. However, some of the existing journals continued production and their numbers soon increased. Part of this increase was attributed to corruption and political connections of its owners. Later, toward the middle of the same century, the provisions and the penalties of the Stamp Act were made more stringent, yet the number of newspapers continued to rise. In 1753 the total number of copies of newspapers sold yearly in Britain amounted to 7,411,757. In 1760 it had risen to 9,464,790 and in 1767 to 11,300,980. In 1776 the number of newspapers published in London alone had increased to 53.\n\"The News Letter\" is one of Northern Ireland's main daily newspapers, published Monday to Saturday. It is the oldest English-language general daily newspaper still in publication in the world, having first been printed in 1737. Originally published three times weekly, it became daily in 1855.\nThe 18th century saw the gradual development of the purely political journal side by side with those papers which were primarily devoted to news, domestic and foreign, and commerce. It was left to Steele and Addison to develop the social side of journalism in their respective papers. In 1761 the \"North Briton\" came out and it was largely a result of its publisher, John Wilkes, and his campaign for increased freedom of the press that, in 1772 the right to publish parliamentary reports was established.\n\"The Observer\", first published on 4 December 1791, was the world's first Sunday newspaper.\n19th century.\nAccording to Andrew Marr, four major transitions in the Victorian era created modern British journalism. The stamp tax on every paper sold was removed, enabling newspapers to become profitable by selling advertising. Secondly. new industrial technology enabled news to flow in over telegraph wires, and new highspeed presses did overnight printing of hundreds of thousands of copies for distribution by the new railway system to the entire nation. Next the educational system was enlarged from a small elite so that most people could now read a newspaper and study the ads. And finally Victorians developed mass democracy that made public opinion relevant to the formation of public policy.\nBy the early 19th century, there were 52 London papers and over 100 other titles. As stamp, paper and other duties were progressively reduced from the 1830s onwards (all duties on newspapers were gone by 1855) there was a massive growth in overall circulation as major events and improved communications developed the public's need for information. \"The Daily Universal Register\" began life in 1785 and was later to become known as \"The Times\" from 1788. This was the most significant newspaper of the first half of the 19th century, but from around 1860 there were a number of more strongly competitive titles, each differentiated by its political biases and interests.\nTaxes removed.\nIn 1802 and 1815 the tax on newspapers was increased to three pence and then four pence. Unable or unwilling to pay this fee, between 1831 and 1835 hundreds of untaxed newspapers made their appearance. The political tone of most of them was fiercely revolutionary. Their publishers were prosecuted but this failed to discourage untaxed newspapers. It was chiefly Milner Gibson and Richard Cobden who advocated the case in parliament to first reduce in 1836 and, in 1855, totally repeal the tax on newspapers. The development of the press was greatly assisted by the gradual abolition of the taxes on periodicals as well as by the introduction of a cheap postal system. Both of these developments made the newspaper more affordable to a greater percentage of the population. The burden of the newspaper tax on publishers was heavy, resulting in 29,400,000 tax stamps being issued in 1820. In 1828 the proprietor of \"The Times\" had to pay the state more than \u00a368,000 in taxes. After the reduction of the stamp tax in 1836 from four pence to one penny, the annual circulation of English newspapers rose from 39,000,000 to 122,000,000 by 1854.\nDirectories.\nA number of press directories listing newspapers and periodicals were published in the 19th century, including Mitchell's Press Directories, May's handbooks and guides, Deacon's Newspaper Handbook and the Handy Newspaper List.\nMajor papers.\n\"The Courier\" is a newspaper published by D. C. Thomson &amp; Co. in Dundee, Scotland. It had five daily editions for Dundee, Fife, Perth and Angus. It was established in 1801 as the \"Dundee Courier &amp; Argus\". Like most papers the entire front page was devoted to classified advertisements; \"The Courier\" was unusual in maintaining this format until 1992, before adopting the headline-news format.\n\"Seren Gomer\" was a Welsh language periodical founded in 1814 by the clergyman and writer Joseph Harris (Gomer), the first Welsh-language newspaper.\nThe \"Manchester Guardian\" was founded in Manchester in 1821 by a group of non-conformist businessmen. Its most famous editor, Charles Prestwich Scott, made the \"Manchester Guardian\" into a world-famous newspaper in the 1890s. It is now called \"The Guardian\" and published in London. \n\"The Scotsman\" was launched in 1817 as a liberal weekly newspaper by lawyer William Ritchie and customs official Charles Maclaren in response to the \"unblushing subservience\" of competing newspapers to the Edinburgh establishment. The paper was pledged to \"impartiality, firmness and independence\". Its modern editorial line is firmly anti-independence. After the abolition of newspaper stamp tax in Scotland in 1855, \"The Scotsman\" was relaunched as a daily newspaper priced at 1d and a circulation of 6,000 copies.\nThe Chartist \"Northern Star\", first published on 26 May 1838, was a pioneer of popular journalism but was very closely linked to the fortunes of the movement and was out of business by 1852. At the same time there was the establishment of more specialised periodicals and the first cheap newspaper in the \"Daily Telegraph and Courier\" (1855), later to be known simply as the \"Daily Telegraph\". \n\"The Daily Telegraph\" was first published on 29 June 1855 and was owned by Arthur Sleigh, who transferred it to Joseph Levy the following year. Levy produced it as the first penny newspaper in London. His son, Edward Lawson soon became editor, a post he held until 1885. \"The Daily Telegraph\" became the organ of the middle class and could claim the largest circulation in the world in 1890. It held a consistent Liberal Party allegiance until opposing Gladstone's foreign policy in 1878 when it turned Unionist.\n\"The Illustrated London News\", founded in 1842, was the world's first illustrated weekly newspaper. Mason Jackson, its art editor for thirty years, published in 1885 \"The Pictorial Press\", a history of illustrated newspapers. \"The Illustrated London News\" was published weekly until 1971 when it became monthly; bimonthly from 1989; and then quarterly before publication ceased.\nThe \"Western Mail\" was founded in Cardiff in 1869 by John Crichton-Stuart, 3rd Marquess of Bute as a penny daily paper. It describes itself as \"the national newspaper of Wales\" (originally \"the national newspaper of Wales and Monmouthshire\"), although it has a very limited circulation in North Wales.\nGolden Age 1860 to 1910.\nFrom 1860 until around 1910 was a 'golden age' of newspaper publication, with technical advances in printing and communication combined with a professionalisation of journalism and the prominence of new owners. Newspapers became more partisan and there was the rise of new or yellow journalism (see William Thomas Stead). Socialist and labour newspapers also proliferated and in 1912 the \"Daily Herald\" was launched as the first daily newspaper of the trade union and labour movement.\nThe \"Daily Mail\" was first published in 1896 by Lord Northcliffe. It became Britain's second biggest-selling daily newspaper, outsold only by \"The Sun\". The \"Daily Mail\" was Britain's first daily newspaper aimed at the newly literate \"lower-middle class market resulting from mass education, combining a low retail price with plenty of competitions, prizes and promotional gimmicks\", and the first British paper to sell a million copies a day. It was, from the outset, a newspaper for women, being the first to provide features especially for them, and is the only British newspaper whose readership is more than 50% female, at 53%.\nStyle.\nWith literacy rising sharply, the rapidly growing demand for news led to changes in the physical size, visual appeal, heavy use of war reporting, brisk writing style, and an omnipresent emphasis on speedy reporting thanks to the telegraph. Critics noted how London was echoing the emerging New York style of journalism. The new news writing style first spread to the provincial press through the \"Midland Daily Telegraph\" around 1900.\nNewspapers increasingly made their profit from selling advertising. In the 1850s and 1860s the ads appealed to the increasingly affluent middle-class that sought out a variety of new products. The advertisements announced new health remedies as well as fresh foods and beverages. The latest London fashions were featured in the regional press. The availability of repeated advertising permitted manufacturers to develop nationally known brand names that had a much stronger appeal than generic products.\n20th century.\nAfter the war, the major newspapers engaged in a large-scale circulation race. The political parties, which long had sponsored their own papers, could not keep up, and one after another their outlets were sold or closed down. Sales in the millions depended on popular stories, with a strong human interesting theme, as well as detailed sports reports with the latest scores. Serious news was a niche market and added very little to the circulation base. The niche was dominated by \"The Times\" and, to a lesser extent, \"The Daily Telegraph.\" Consolidation was rampant, as local dailies were bought up and added to chains based in London. James Curran and Jean Seaton report: \n after the death of Lord Northcliffe in 1922, four men, Lords Beaverbrook (1879-1964), Rothermere (1868-1940), Camrose (1879-1954) and Kemsley (1883-1968)\u2013became the dominant figures in the inter-war press. In 1937, for instance, they owned nearly one in every two national and local daily papers sold in Britain, as well as one in every three Sunday papers that were sold. The combined circulation of all their newspapers amounted to over thirteen million.\n\"The Times\" was long the most influential prestige newspaper, although far from having the largest circulation. It gave far more attention to serious political and cultural news. In 1922, John Jacob Astor (1886-1971), son of the 1st Viscount Astor (1849-1919), bought \"The Times\" from the Northcliffe estate. The paper advocated appeasement of Hitler's demands. Its editor Geoffrey Dawson was closely allied with Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain, and pushed hard for the Munich Agreement in 1938. Candid news reports by Norman Ebbutt from Berlin that warned of warmongering were rewritten in London to support the appeasement policy. In March 1939, however, it reversed course and called for urgent war preparations.\nMost of the \"press barons\" who owned and closely supervised major newspapers were empire builders focused on making money and extending their audience. A few tried to exploit their captive audiences to help shape British politics, but they were largely unsuccessful. The large papers were all mildly conservative but none were organs of the Conservative Party. The Liberals lost nearly all their media and Labour had one small captive outlet, The \"Daily Herald\". The largely lower-middle-class readership wanted entertainment not political guidance. In 1931 Conservative former prime minister Stanley Baldwin denounced the media barons who had become his enemies by repeated Kipling's words: \"What proprietorship of these papers is aiming at is power, and power without responsibility\u2014the prerogative of the harlot throughout the ages.\" Lord Beaverbrook owned the best-selling \"Daily Express\" as well as London's \"Evening Standard\" and the \"Sunday Express\". It was alleged that he played favourites, giving publicity to politicians he supported, and largely ignoring his enemies. Beaverbrook vehemently denied the allegations. Beaverbrook in 1929 launched a new political party to promote free trade within the British Empire. His Empire Free Trade Crusade had little success; Beaverbrook quickly lost interest, and the new party soon vanished.\nDevelopments.\nBy the 1930s, over two-thirds of the population read a newspaper every day, with \"almost everyone\" taking one on Sundays.\nThe \"Morning Star\" was founded in 1930 as the \"Daily Worker\", organ of the Communist Party of Great Britain (CPGB). is a left-wing British daily tabloid newspaper with a focus on social and trade union issues. \nA 1938 \"Report on the British Press\" (from the think tank Political and Economic Planning) expressed concerns that \"a dangerous tendency has recently been manifesting itself by which entertainment ceases to be ancillary to news and either supersedes it or absorbs it; many people welcome a newspaper that under the guise of presenting news, enables them to escape from the grimness of actual events and the effort of thought by opening the backdoor of triviality and sex appeal. Such readers are left ill-informed and unable to participate intelligently in political debate.\" The report also contained worries about the fact that \"general accuracy of the Press is comparatively low by scientific or administrative standards,\" and about early press intrusion causing \"considerable public indignation against sections of the press.\" They closed by advising \"the formation of a Press Tribunal to address complaints, and a Press Institute to provide continuous scientific study of the Press.\"\nThe first Royal Commission on the Press recommended in 1949 that a General Council of the Press should be formed to govern the behaviour of the print media. In response to a threat of statutory regulation, the voluntary General Council of the Press was formed in 1953, funded by newspaper proprietors. Membership was initially restricted to newspaper editors but was reformed as the Press Council in 1962, with 20 per cent lay members. The council had a non-binding regulatory framework with the stated aim of maintaining high standards of ethics in journalism. In 1980 the National Union of Journalists withdrew from membership. In 1991, the Press Council was replaced by the Press Complaints Commission.\nWhen he relaunched the flagging \"Sun\" newspaper in tabloid format on 17 November 1969, Rupert Murdoch began publishing photographs of clothed glamour models on its third page. \"Page 3\" photographs over the following year were often provocative, but did not feature nudity. On 17 November 1970, editor Larry Lamb celebrated the tabloid's first anniversary by publishing a photograph of a model in the nude sitting in a field with one of her breasts visible from the side. The \"Sun\" gradually began to feature Page Three girls in more overtly topless poses. Although these photographs caused controversy at the time, and led to the \"Sun\" being banned from some public libraries, they are partly credited with the increased circulation that established the \"Sun\" as one of the most popular newspapers in the United Kingdom by the mid-1970s. In an effort to compete with the \"Sun\", the \"Daily Mirror\" and \"Daily Star\" tabloids also began publishing images of topless women. The Mirror stopped featuring topless models in the 1980s, deeming the photographs demeaning to women.\nThe \"Scottish Daily News\" was a left-of-centre daily newspaper published in Glasgow between 5 May and 8 November 1975. It was hailed as Britain's first worker-controlled, mass-circulation daily, formed as a workers' cooperative by 500 of the 1,846 journalists, photographers, engineers, and print workers who were made redundant in April 1974 by Beaverbrook Newspapers when the \"Scottish Daily Express\" closed its printing operations in Scotland and moved to Manchester.\nThe Wapping dispute was a significant turning point in the history of the trade union movement and of UK industrial relations. It started on 24 January 1986 when some 6,000 newspaper workers went on strike after protracted negotiation with their employers, News International (parent of Times Newspapers and News Group Newspapers, and chaired by Rupert Murdoch). News International had built and clandestinely equipped a new printing plant for all its titles in the London district of Wapping, and when the print unions announced a strike it activated this new plant with the assistance of the Electrical, Electronic, Telecommunications and Plumbing Union (EETPU). Despite the widespread use of the offset litho printing process elsewhere, the Murdoch papers in common with the rest of Fleet Street continued to be produced by the hot-metal and labour-intensive Linotype method, rather than being composed electronically. Eddy Shah's Messenger group, in a long-running and bitter dispute at Warrington had benefited from the Thatcher government's trade union legislation to allow employers to de-recognise unions, enabling the company to use an alternative workforce and new technology in newspaper production. He launched \"Today\" on Tuesday 4 March 1986, as a middle-market tabloid, a rival to the long-established \"Daily Mail\" and \"Daily Express\". It pioneered computer photosetting and full-colour offset printing at a time when national newspapers were still using Linotype machines and letterpress. Established national newspapers converted to electronic production and colour printing. \"Today\" ceased publication on 17 November 1995, the first long-running national newspaper title to close since the \"Daily Sketch\" in 1971.\nBy 1988, nearly all the national newspapers had abandoned Fleet Street to relocate in the Docklands, and had begun to change their printing practices to those being employed by News International. Even though the last major British news office, Reuters, left in 2005, the term \"Fleet Street\" continues to be used as a metonym for the British national press.\n\"The Independent\" was first published on 7 October 1986. The paper was created at a time of fundamental change and attracted staff from the two Murdoch broadsheets who had chosen not to move to the new headquarters in Wapping. Launched with the advertising slogan \"It is. Are you?\", and challenging \"The Guardian\" for centre-left readers, and \"The Times\" as a newspaper of record, it reached a circulation of over 400,000 in 1989. Competing in a moribund market, \"The Independent\" sparked a general freshening of newspaper design as well as a price war.\n\"The European\", billed as \"Europe's first national newspaper\", was a weekly newspaper founded by Robert Maxwell. It lasted from 11 May 1990 until December 1998. The circulation peaked at 180,000, over half of which was British. The Barclay brothers bought the newspaper in 1992, investing an estimated $110 million and in 1996 transforming it into a high-end tabloid format oriented at the business community edited by Andrew Neil.\nBy the 1980s Robert Maxwell's various companies owned the \"Daily Mirror\", the \"Sunday Mirror\", the Scottish \"Daily Record\" and \"Sunday Mail\" and several other newspapers. Maxwell was litigious against those who would speak or write against him. The satirical magazine \"Private Eye\" lampooned him as \"Cap'n Bob\" and the \"bouncing Czech\", the latter nickname having originally been devised by Prime Minister Harold Wilson (under whom Maxwell was an MP). Maxwell took out several libel actions against \"Private Eye\". Maxwell's untimely death triggered a flood of instability with banks frantically calling in their massive loans, and his publishing empire collapsed. It emerged that, without adequate prior authorisation, Maxwell had used hundreds of millions of pounds from his companies' pension funds to shore up the shares of the Mirror Group, to save his companies from bankruptcy.\n21st century.\nIn 2005, the UK-based online newspaper PinkNews was established. It is targeted towards the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender community (LGBT) in the UK and worldwide.\nThe phone hacking scandal.\nThe News International phone hacking scandal is an ongoing controversy involving the \"News of the World\" and other British newspapers published by News International, a subsidiary of Murdoch's News Corporation. Employees of the newspaper were convicted of engaging in phone hacking, police bribery, and exercising improper influence in the pursuit of publishing stories. Advertiser boycotts contributed to the closure of the \"News of the World\" on 10 July 2011, ending 168 years of publication.\nThe Leveson Inquiry was a judicial public inquiry into the British press; a series of public hearings were held throughout 2011 and 2012. The Inquiry published the \"Leveson Report\" in November 2012, which reviewed the general culture and ethics of the British media, and made recommendations for a new, The independent, body to replace the existing Press Complaints Commission, which would be recognised by the state through new laws.\nDeclining circulation.\nDuring the early 21st century, newspaper circulation dropped rapidly. The sector's advertising revenues fell 15% during 2015 alone, with estimates of a further 20% drop over the course of 2016. ESI ceased print of \"The Independent\" that year- the newspaper having suffered a 94% drop in sales from its peak in the 1980s. The decline of the newspaper industry has been linked to the rise of internet usage in Britain.\nIn 2017, European Broadcasting Union research found that people in the United Kingdom trusted the written press least of any European country, by a considerable margin. Within the United Kingdom the written press was trusted less than television and the radio.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44608", "revid": "7234158", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44608", "title": "Sarah Bernhardt", "text": "French stage actress (1844\u20131923)\nSarah Bernhardt (; born Henriette-Rosine Bernard; 22 October 1844 \u2013 26 March 1923) was a French stage actress who starred in some of the most popular French plays of the late 19th and early 20th centuries, including by Alexandre Dumas \"fils\", \"Ruy Blas\" by Victor Hugo, \"F\u00e9dora\" and \"La Tosca\" by Victorien Sardou, and \"L'Aiglon\" by Edmond Rostand. She played female and male roles, including Shakespeare's Hamlet. Rostand called her \"the queen of the pose and the princess of the gesture\", and Hugo praised her \"golden voice\". She made several theatrical tours worldwide and was one of the early prominent actresses to make sound recordings and act in motion pictures.\nShe is also linked with the success of artist Alphonse Mucha, whose work she helped to publicize. Mucha became one of the more sought-after artists of this period for his Art Nouveau style.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nHenriette-Rosine Bernard was born at 5 rue de L'\u00c9cole-de-M\u00e9decine in the Latin Quarter of Paris on 22 October 1844. She was the daughter of Judith Bernard (also known as Julie and in France as Youle), a Dutch Jewish courtesan with a wealthy or upper-class clientele. The name of her father was not recorded for a long time, but he is known now to have been an attorney in Le Havre. Bernhardt later wrote that her father's family paid for her education, insisted she be baptized as a Catholic, and left a large sum to be paid when she came of age. Her mother traveled frequently, and saw little of her daughter. She placed Bernhardt with a nurse in Brittany, then in a cottage in the Paris suburb of Neuilly-sur-Seine.\nWhen Bernhardt was seven, her mother sent her to a boarding school for young ladies in the Paris suburb of Auteuil, paid with funds from her father's family. There, she acted in her first theatrical performance in the play \"Clothilde\", where she held the Queen of the Fairies role and performed her first of many dramatic death scenes. While in the boarding school, her mother rose to the top of Parisian courtesans, consorting with politicians, bankers, generals, and writers. Her patrons and friends included Charles de Morny, Duke of Morny, the half-brother of Emperor Napoleon III and President of the French legislature.\nAt the age of 10, with the sponsorship of Morny, Bernhardt was admitted to Grandchamp, an exclusive Augustine convent school near Versailles. At the convent, she performed the part of the Archangel Raphael in a story based on the Book of Tobit. She declared her intention to become a nun but did not always follow convent rules; she was accused of sacrilege when she arranged a Christian burial, with a procession and ceremony, for her pet lizard. She received her first communion as a Roman Catholic in 1856 and was fervently religious after that. However, she never forgot her Jewish heritage. When asked years later by a reporter if she were a Christian, she replied: \"No, I'm a Roman Catholic and a member of the great Jewish race. I'm waiting until Christians become better.\" That contrasted her answer, \"No, never. I'm an atheist\" to an earlier question by composer and compatriot Charles Gounod if she ever prayed. Regardless, she accepted the last rites shortly before her death.\nIn 1857, Bernhardt learned that her father had died overseas. Her mother summoned a family council, including Morny, to decide what to do with her. Morny proposed that Bernhardt should become an actress. This idea horrified Bernhardt, as she had never been inside a theatre. Morny arranged for her to attend her first theatre performance at the Com\u00e9die-Fran\u00e7aise in a party which included her mother, Morny, and his friend Alexandre Dumas \"p\u00e8re\". The play they attended was \"Britannicus\", by Jean Racine, followed by the classical comedy \"Amphitryon\" by Plautus. The play's emotion so moved Bernhardt that she began to sob loudly, disturbing the rest of the audience. Morny and others in their party were angry at her. They left, but Dumas comforted her and later told Morny that he believed she was destined for the stage. After the performance, Dumas called her \"my little star\".\nMorny used his influence with the composer Daniel Auber, the head of the Paris Conservatory, to arrange for Bernhardt to audition. She began preparing, as she described it in her memoirs, \"with that vivid exaggeration with which I embrace any new enterprise.\" Dumas coached her. The jury comprised Auber and five leading actors and actresses from the Com\u00e9die-Fran\u00e7aise. She was supposed to recite verses from Racine, but no one had told her that she needed someone to give her cues as she recited. Bernhardt told the jury she would instead recite the fable of the Two Pigeons by La Fontaine. The jurors were skeptical, but the enthusiasm and pathos of her recitation won them over, and she was invited to become a student.\nDebut and departure from the Com\u00e9die-Fran\u00e7aise (1862\u20131864).\nBernhardt studied acting at the Conservatory from January 1860 until 1862 under two prominent actors of the Com\u00e9die-Fran\u00e7aise, Joseph-Isidore Samson and Jean-Baptiste Provost. She wrote in her memoirs that Provost taught her diction and grand gestures, and Samson taught her the power of simplicity. For the stage, she changed her name from \"Bernard\" to \"Bernhardt\". While studying, she also received her first marriage proposal, from a wealthy businessman who offered her 500,000 francs. He wept when she refused. Bernhardt wrote that she was \"confused, sorry, and delighted\u2014because he loved me the way people love in plays at the theater.\"\nBefore the first examination for her tragedy class, she tried to straighten her abundance of frizzy hair, which made it even more uncontrollable, and came down with a bad cold, which made her voice so nasal that she hardly recognised it. Furthermore, the parts assigned for her performance were classical and required carefully stylised emotions, but she preferred romanticism and fully and naturally expressing her emotions. The teachers ranked her 14th in tragedy and second in comedy. Once again, Morny came to her rescue. He put in a good word for her with the National Minister of the Arts, Camille Doucet. Doucet recommended her to Edouard Thierry, the chief administrator of the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre Fran\u00e7ais, who offered Bernhardt a place as a \"pensionnaire\" at the theater, at a minimum salary.\nBernhardt made her debut with the company on 31 August 1862 in the title role of Racine's \"Iphig\u00e9nie\". Her premiere was not a success. She experienced stage fright and rushed her lines. Some audience members made fun of her thin figure. When the performance ended, Provost was waiting in the wings, and she asked his forgiveness. He told her, \"I can forgive you, and you'll eventually forgive yourself, but Racine in his grave never will.\" Francisque Sarcey, the influential theater critic of \"L'Opinion Nationale\" and \"Le Temps\", wrote: \"she carries herself well and pronounces with perfect precision. That is all that can be said about her at the moment.\"\nBernhardt did not remain long with the Com\u00e9die-Fran\u00e7aise. She played Henriette in Moli\u00e8re's \"Les Femmes Savantes\" and Hippolyte in \"L'\u00c9tourdi\", and the title role in Scribe's \"Val\u00e9rie\", but did not impress the critics, or the other members of the company, who had resented her rapid rise. The weeks passed, but she was given no further roles. Her hot temper also got her into trouble; when a theater doorkeeper addressed her as \"Little Bernhardt\", she broke her umbrella over his head. She apologised profusely, and when the doorkeeper retired 20 years later, she bought a cottage for him in Normandy. At a ceremony honoring the birthday of Moli\u00e8re on 15 January 1863, Bernhardt invited her younger sister, Regina, to accompany her. Regina accidentally stood on the train of the gown of a leading actress of the company, Za\u00efre-Nathalie Martel (1816\u20131885), known as Madame Nathalie. Madame Nathalie pushed Regina off the gown, causing her to strike a stone column and gash her forehead. Regina and Madame Nathalie began shouting at one another, and Bernhardt stepped forward and slapped Madame Nathalie on the cheek. The older actress fell onto another actor. Thierry asked that Bernhardt apologise to Madame Nathalie. Bernhardt refused to do so until Madame Nathalie apologised to Regina. Bernhardt had already been scheduled for a new role with the theater, and had begun rehearsals. Madame Nathalie demanded that Bernhardt be dropped from the role unless she apologised. Because neither yielded, and Madame Nathalie was a senior member of the company, Thierry was forced to ask Bernhardt to leave.\nThe Gymnase and Brussels (1864\u20131866).\nHer family could not understand her departure from the theater; it was inconceivable to them that anyone would walk away from the most prestigious theatre in Paris at age 18. Instead, she went to a popular theatre, the Gymnase, where she became an understudy to two of the leading actresses. She almost immediately caused another offstage scandal, when she was invited to recite poetry at a reception at the Tuileries Palace hosted by Napoleon III and the Empress Eugenie, along with other actors of the Gymnase. She chose to recite two romantic poems by Victor Hugo, unaware that Hugo was a bitter critic of the emperor. Following the first poem, the emperor and empress rose and walked out, followed by the court and the other guests. Her next role at the Gymnase, as a foolish Russian princess, was entirely unsuited for her; her mother told her that her performance was \"ridiculous\". She decided abruptly to quit the theater to travel, and like her mother, to take on lovers. She went briefly to Spain, then, at the suggestion of Alexandre Dumas, to Belgium.\nShe carried to Brussels letters of introduction from Dumas, and was admitted to the highest levels of society. According to some later accounts, she attended a masked ball in Brussels where she met the Belgian aristocrat Henri, Hereditary Prince de Ligne, and had an affair with him. Other accounts say that they met in Paris, where the Prince came often to attend the theater. The affair was cut short when she learned that her mother had had a heart attack. She returned to Paris, where she found that her mother was better, but that she was pregnant from her affair with the Prince. She did not notify the Prince. Her mother did not want the fatherless child born under her roof, so she moved to a small apartment on rue Duphot, and on 22 December 1864, the 20-year-old actress gave birth to her only child, Maurice Bernhardt.\nSome accounts say that Prince Henri had not forgotten her. According to these versions, he learned her address from the theatre, arrived in Paris, and moved into the apartment with Bernhardt. After a month, he returned to Brussels and told his family that he wanted to marry the actress. The family of the Prince sent his uncle, General de Ligne, to break up the romance, threatening to disinherit him if he married Bernhardt. According to other accounts, the Prince denied any responsibility for the child. She later called the affair \"her abiding wound\", but she never discussed Maurice's parentage with anyone. When asked who his father was, she sometimes answered, \"I could never make up my mind whether his father was Gambetta, Victor Hugo, or General Boulanger.\" Many years later, in January 1885, when Bernhardt was famous, the Prince allegedly came to Paris and offered to formally recognise Maurice as his son, but Maurice politely declined, explaining he was entirely satisfied to be the son of Sarah Bernhardt. (While the story is in character for Maurice, note that the Prince died in 1871 when Maurice was 6.)\nThe Od\u00e9on (1866\u20131872).\nTo support herself after the birth of Maurice, Bernhardt played minor roles and understudies at the Porte Saint-Martin theatre, a popular melodrama theatre. In early 1866, she obtained a reading with Felix Duquesnel, director of the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de L'Od\u00e9on (Od\u00e9on) on the Left Bank. Duquesnel described the reading years later, saying, \"I had before me a creature who was marvelous gifted, intelligent to the point of genius, with enormous energy under an appearance frail and delicate, and a savage will.\" The co-director of the theatre for finance, Charles de Chilly, wanted to reject her as unreliable and too thin, but Duquesnel was enchanted; he hired her for the theater at a modest salary of 150 francs a month, which he paid out of his own pocket. The Od\u00e9on was second in prestige only to the Com\u00e9die-Fran\u00e7aise, and unlike that very traditional theatre, specialised in more modern productions. The Od\u00e9on was popular with the students of the Left Bank. Her first performances with the theatre were not successful. She was cast in highly stylised and frivolous 18th-century comedies, whereas her strong point on stage was her complete sincerity. Her thin figure also made her look ridiculous in the ornate costumes. Dumas, her strongest supporter, commented after one performance, \"she has the head of a virgin and the body of a broomstick.\" Soon, however, with different plays and more experience, her performances improved; she was praised for her performance of Cordelia in \"King Lear\". In June 1867, she played two roles in \"Athalie\" by Jean Racine; the part of a young woman and a young boy, Zacharie, the first of many male parts she played in her career. The influential critic Sarcey wrote \"she charmed her audience like a little Orpheus.\"\nHer breakthrough performance was in the 1868 revival of \"Kean\" by Alexandre Dumas, in which she played the female lead part of Anna Danby. The play was interrupted in the beginning by disturbances in the audience by young spectators who called out, \"Down with Dumas! Give us Hugo!\". Bernhardt addressed the audience directly: \"Friends, you wish to defend the cause of justice. Are you doing it by making Monsieur Dumas responsible for the banishment of Monsieur Hugo?\". With this the audience laughed and applauded and fell silent. At the final curtain, she received an enormous ovation, and Dumas hurried backstage to congratulate her. When she exited the theatre, a crowd had gathered at the stage door and tossed flowers at her. Her salary was immediately raised to 250 francs a month.\nHer next success was her performance in Fran\u00e7ois Copp\u00e9e's \"Le Passant\", which premiered at the Od\u00e9on on 14 January 1868, playing the part of the boy troubadour, Zanetto, in a romantic renaissance tale. Critic Th\u00e9ophile Gautier described the \"delicate and tender charm\" of her performance. It played for 150 performances, plus a command performance at the Tuileries Palace for Napoleon III and his court. Afterwards, the emperor sent her a brooch with his initials written in diamonds.\nIn her memoirs, she wrote of her time at the Od\u00e9on: \"It was the theatre that I loved the most, and that I only left with regret. We all loved each other. Everyone was gay. The theatre was a like a continuation of school. All the young came there...I remember my few months at the Com\u00e9die-Fran\u00e7aise. That little world was stiff, gossipy, jealous. I remember my few months at the Gymnase. There they talked only about dresses and hats, and chattered about a hundred things that had nothing to do with art. At the Od\u00e9on, I was happy. We thought only of putting on plays. We rehearsed mornings, afternoons, all the time. I adored that.\" Bernhardt lived with her longtime friend and assistant Madame Gu\u00e9rard and her son in a small cottage in the suburb of Auteuil, and drove herself to the theatre in a small carriage. She developed a close friendship with the writer George Sand, and performed in two plays that she authored. She received celebrities in her dressing room, including Gustave Flaubert and Leon Gambetta. In 1869, as she became more prosperous, she moved to a larger seven-room apartment at 16 rue Auber in the center of Paris. Her mother began to visit her for the first time in years, and her grandmother, a strict Orthodox Jew, moved into the apartment to take care of Maurice. Bernhardt added a maid and a cook to her household, as well as the beginning of a collection of animals; she had one or two dogs with her at all times, and two turtles moved freely around the apartment.\nIn 1868, a fire completely destroyed her apartment, along with all of her belongings. She had neglected to purchase insurance. The brooch presented to her by the emperor and her pearls melted, as did the tiara presented by one of her lovers, Khalid Bey. She found the diamonds in the ashes, and the managers of the Od\u00e9on organised a benefit performance. The most famous soprano of the time, Adelina Patti, performed for free. In addition, the grandmother of her father donated 120,000 francs. Bernhardt was able to buy an even larger residence, with two salons and a large dining room, at 4 rue de Rome.\nWartime service at the Od\u00e9on (1870\u20131871).\nThe outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War abruptly interrupted her theatrical career. The news of the defeat of the French Army, the surrender of Napoleon III at Sedan, and the proclamation of the Third French Republic on 4 September 1870 was followed by a siege of Paris by the Prussian Army. Paris was cut off from news and from its food supply, and the theatres were closed. Bernhardt took charge of converting the Od\u00e9on into a hospital for soldiers wounded in the battles outside the city. She organised the placement of 32 beds in the lobby and the foyers, brought in her personal chef to prepare soup for the patients, and persuaded her wealthy friends and admirers to donate supplies for the hospital. Besides organising the hospital, she worked as a nurse, assisting the chief surgeon with amputations and operations. When the coal supply of the city ran out, Bernhardt used old scenery, benches, and stage props for fuel to heat the theater. In early January 1871, after 16 weeks of the siege, the Germans began to bombard the city with long-range cannons. The patients had to be moved to the cellar, and before long, the hospital was forced to close. Bernhardt arranged for serious cases to be transferred to another military hospital, and she rented an apartment on rue de Provence to house the remaining 20 patients. By the end of the siege, Bernhardt's hospital had cared for more than 150 wounded soldiers, including a young undergraduate from the \u00c9cole Polytechnique, Ferdinand Foch, who later commanded the Allied armies in the First World War.\nThe French government signed an armistice on 19 January 1871, and Bernhardt learned that her son and family had been moved to Hamburg. She went to the new chief executive of the French Republic, Adolphe Thiers, and obtained a pass to go to Germany to return them. When she returned to Paris several weeks later, the city was under the rule of the Paris Commune. She moved again, taking her family to Saint-Germain-en-Laye. She later returned to her apartment on the rue de Rome in May, after the Commune was defeated by the French Army.\n\"Ruy Blas\" and return to the Com\u00e9die-Fran\u00e7aise (1872\u20131878).\nThe Tuileries Palace, city hall of Paris, and many other public buildings had been burned by the Commune or damaged in the fighting, but the Od\u00e9on was still intact. Charles-Marie Chilly, the co-director of the Od\u00e9on, came to her apartment, where Bernhardt received him reclining on a sofa. He announced that the theaters would reopen in October 1871, and he asked her to play the lead in a new play, \"Jean-Marie\" by Andr\u00e9 Theuriet. Bernhardt replied that she was finished with the theatre and was going to move to Brittany and start a farm. Chilly, who knew Bernhardt's moods well, told her that he understood and accepted her decision, and would give the role to Jane Essler, a rival actress. According to Chilly, Bernhardt immediately jumped up from the sofa and asked when the rehearsals would begin.\n\"Jean-Marie\", about a young Breton woman forced by her father to marry an old man she did not love, was another critical and popular success for Bernhardt. The critic Sarcey wrote \"She has the sovereign grace, the penetrating charm, the I don't know what. She is a natural artist, an incomparable artist.\" The directors of the Od\u00e9on next decided to stage \"Ruy Blas\", a play written by Victor Hugo in 1838, with Bernhardt playing the role of the Queen of Spain. Hugo attended all the rehearsals. At first, Bernhardt pretended to be indifferent to him, but he gradually won her over and she became a fervent admirer. The play premiered on 16 January 1872. The opening night was attended by the Prince of Wales and by Hugo; after the performance, Hugo approached Bernhardt, dropped to one knee, and kissed her hand.\n\"Ruy Blas\" played to packed houses. A few months after it opened, Bernhardt received an invitation from Emile Perrin, Director of the Com\u00e9die-Fran\u00e7aise, asking if she would return, and offering her 12,000 francs a year, compared with less than 10,000 at the Od\u00e9on. Bernhardt asked Chilly if he would match the offer, but he refused. Always pressed by her growing expenses and growing household to earn more money, she announced her departure from the Od\u00e9on when she finished the run of \"Ruy Blas\". Chilly responded with a lawsuit, and she was forced to pay 6,000 francs of damages. After the 100th performance of \"Ruy Blas\", Hugo gave a dinner for Bernhardt and her friends, toasting \"His adorable Queen and her Golden Voice.\"\nShe formally returned to the Com\u00e9die-Francaise on 1 October 1872, and quickly took on some of the more famous and demanding roles in French theatre. She played Junie in \"Britannicus\" by Jean Racine, the male role of Cherubin in \"The Marriage of Figaro\" by Pierre Beaumarchais, and the lead in Voltaire's five-act tragedy Za\u00efre. In 1873, with just 74 hours to learn the lines and practice the part, she played the lead in Racine's \"Ph\u00e8dre\", playing opposite the celebrated tragedian, Jean Mounet-Sully, who soon became her lover. The leading French critic Sarcey wrote \"This is nature itself served by marvelous intelligence, by a soul of fire, by the most melodious voice that ever enchanted human ears. This woman plays with her heart, with her entrails.\" \"Ph\u00e8dre\" became her most famous classical role, performed over the years around the world, often for audiences who knew little or no French; she made them understand by her voice and gestures.\nIn 1877, she had another success as Do\u00f1a Sol in \"Hernani\", a tragedy written 47 years earlier by Victor Hugo. Her lover in the play was her lover off-stage, as well, Mounet-Sully. Hugo was in the audience. The next day, he sent her a note: \"Madame, you were great and charming; you moved me, me the old warrior, and, at a certain moment when the public, touched and enchanted by you, applauded, I wept. The tear which you caused me to shed is yours. I place it at your feet.\" The note was accompanied by a tear-shaped pearl on a gold bracelet.\nShe maintained a highly theatrical lifestyle in her house on the rue de Rome. She kept a satin-lined coffin in her bedroom, and occasionally slept in it or lay in it to study her roles, though, contrary to the popular stories, she never took it with her on her travels. She cared for her younger sister who was ill with tuberculosis, and allowed her to sleep in her own bed while she slept in the coffin. She posed in it for photographs, adding to the legends she created about herself.\nBernhardt repaired her old relationships with the other members of the Com\u00e9die Fran\u00e7aise; she participated in a benefit for Madame Nathalie, the actress she had once slapped. However, she was frequently in conflict with Perrin, the director of the theatre. In 1878, during the Paris Universal Exposition, she took a flight over Paris with balloonist Pierre Giffard and painter Georges Clairin, in a balloon decorated with the name of her current character, \"Do\u00f1a Sol\". An unexpected storm carried the balloon far outside of Paris to a small town. When she returned by train to the city, Perrin was furious; he fined Bernhardt a thousand francs, citing a theatre rule which required actors to request permission before they left Paris. Bernhardt refused to pay, and threatened to resign from the Com\u00e9die. Perrin recognised that he could not afford to let her go. Perrin and the Minister of Fine Arts arranged a compromise; she withdrew her resignation, and in return was raised to a \"societaire\", the highest rank of the theater.\nTriumph in London and departure from the Com\u00e9die-Fran\u00e7aise (1879\u20131880).\nBernhardt was earning a substantial amount at the theatre, but her expenses were even greater. By this time she had eight servants, and she built her first house, an imposing mansion on rue Fortuny, not far from the Parc Monceau. She looked for additional ways to earn money. In June 1879, while the theatre of the Com\u00e9die-Fran\u00e7aise in Paris was being remodeled, Perrin took the company on tour to London. Shortly before the tour began, a British theatre impresario named Edward Jarrett traveled to Paris and proposed that she give private performances in the homes of wealthy Londoners; the fee she would receive for each performance was greater than her monthly salary with the Com\u00e9die. When Perrin read in the press about the private performances, he was furious. Furthermore, the Gaiety Theatre in London demanded that Bernhardt star in the opening performance, contrary to the traditions of Com\u00e9die-Fran\u00e7aise, where roles were assigned by seniority, and the idea of stardom was scorned. When Perrin protested, saying that Bernhardt was only 10th or 11th in seniority, the Gaiety manager threatened to cancel the performance; Perrin had to give in. He scheduled Bernhardt to perform one act of \"Ph\u00e8dre\" on the opening night, between two traditional French comedies, \"Le Misanthrope\" and \"Les Pr\u00e9cieuses\".\nOn 4 June 1879, just before the opening curtain of her premiere in \"Ph\u00e8dre,\" she suffered an attack of stage fright. She wrote later that she also pitched her voice too high, and was unable to lower it. Nonetheless, the performance was a triumph. Though a majority of the audience could not understand Racine's classical French, she captivated them with her voice and gestures; one member of the audience, Sir George Arthur, wrote that \"she set every nerve and fibre in their bodies throbbing and held them spellbound.\" In addition to her performances of \"Za\u00efre\", \"Ph\u00e8dre\", \"Hernani\", and other plays with her troupe, she gave the private recitals in the homes of British aristocrats arranged by Jarrett, who also arranged an exhibition of her sculptures and paintings in Piccadilly, which was attended by both the Prince of Wales and Prime Minister Gladstone. While in London, she added to her personal menagerie of animals. In London, she purchased three dogs, a parrot, and a monkey, and made a side trip to Liverpool, where she purchased a cheetah, a parrot, and a wolfhound and received a gift of six chameleons, which she kept in her rented house on Chester Square, and then took back to Paris.\nBack in Paris, she was increasingly discontented with Perrin and the management of the Com\u00e9die-Fran\u00e7aise. He insisted that she perform the lead in the play \"L'Aventuri\u00e8re\" by Emile Augier, a play which she thought was mediocre. When she rehearsed the play without enthusiasm, and frequently forgot her lines, she was criticised by the playwright. She responded \"I know I'm bad, but not as bad as your lines.\" The play went ahead, but was a failure. She wrote immediately to Perrin \"You forced me to play when I was not ready...what I foresaw came to pass...this is my first failure at the Com\u00e9die and my last.\" She sent a resignation letter to Perrin, made copies, and sent them to the major newspapers. Perrin sued her for breach of contract; the court ordered her to pay 100,000 francs plus interest, and she lost her accrued pension of 43,000 francs. She did not settle the debt until 1900. Later, however, when the Com\u00e9die-Fran\u00e7aise theatre was nearly destroyed by fire, she allowed her old troupe to use her own theatre.\n\"La Dame aux cam\u00e9lias\" and first American tour (1880\u20131881).\nIn April 1880, as soon as he learned Bernhardt had resigned from the Com\u00e9die-Fran\u00e7aise, the impresario Edward Jarrett hurried to Paris and proposed that she make a theatrical tour of England and then the United States. She could select her repertoire and the cast. She would receive 5,000 francs per performance, 15% of any earnings over 15,000 francs, plus all of her expenses, and an account in her name for 100,000 francs, the amount she owed to the Com\u00e9die-Fran\u00e7aise. She accepted immediately.\nNow on her own, Bernhardt first assembled and tried her new troupe at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de la Ga\u00eet\u00e9-Lyrique in Paris. She performed for the first time , by Alexandre Dumas \"fils\". She did not create the role; the play had first been performed by Eug\u00e9nie Dochein in 1852, but it quickly became her most performed and most famous role. She played the role more than a thousand times, and acted regularly and successfully in it until the end of her life. Audiences were often in tears during her famous death scene at the end.\nShe could not perform \"La Dame aux Cam\u00e9lias\" on a London stage because of British censorship laws; instead, she put on four of her proven successes, including \"Hernani\" and \"Ph\u00e8dre\", plus four new roles, including \"Adrienne Lecouvreur\" by Eug\u00e8ne Scribe and the drawing-room comedy \"Frou-frou\" by Meilhac-Hal\u00e9vy, both of which were highly successful on the London stage. In six of the eight plays in her repertoire, she died dramatically in the final act. When she returned to Paris from London, the Com\u00e9die-Fran\u00e7aise asked her to come back, but she refused their offer, explaining that she was making far more money on her own. Instead, she took her new company and new plays on tour to Brussels and Copenhagen, and then on a tour of French provincial cities.\nShe and her troupe departed from Le Havre for America on 15 October 1880, arriving in New York on 27 October. On 8 November in New York City, she performed Scribe's \"Adrienne Lecouvreur\" at Booth's Theatre before an audience which had paid a top price of a stunning $40 &amp;lpar;&amp;dollar;\u00a0in &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt;) for a ticket. Few in the audience understood French, but it was not necessary; her gestures and voice captivated the audience, and she received a thunderous ovation. She thanked the audience with her distinctive curtain call; she did not bow, but stood perfectly still, with her hands clasped under her chin, or with her palms on her cheeks, and then suddenly stretched them out to the audience. After her first performance in New York, she made 27 curtain calls. Although she was welcomed by theatre-goers, she was entirely ignored by New York high society, who considered her personal life scandalous.\nBernhardt's first American tour carried her to 157 performances in 51 cities. She travelled on a special train with her own luxurious palace car, which carried her two maids, two cooks, a waiter, her ma\u00eetre d'h\u00f4tel, and her personal assistant, Madame Gu\u00e9rard. It also carried an actor named \u00c9douard Angelo, whom she had selected to serve as her leading man, and, according to most accounts, her lover during the tour. From New York, she made a side trip to Menlo Park, where she met Thomas Edison, who made a brief recording of her reciting a verse from \"Ph\u00e8dre,\" which has not survived. She crisscrossed the United States and Canada from Montreal and Toronto to Saint Louis and New Orleans, usually performing each evening, and departing immediately after the performance. She gave countless press interviews, and in Boston posed for photos on the back of a dead whale. She was condemned as immoral by the Bishop of Montreal and by the Methodist press, which only increased ticket sales. She performed \"Ph\u00e8dre\" six times and \"La Dame Aux Cam\u00e9lias\" 65 times (which Jarrett had renamed \"Camille\" to make it easier for Americans to pronounce, despite the fact that no character in the play has that name). On 3 May 1881, she gave her final performance of \"Cam\u00e9lias\" in New York. Throughout her life, she always insisted on being paid in cash. When Bernhardt returned to France, she brought with her a chest filled with $194,000 in gold coins. She described the result of her trip to her friends: \"I crossed the oceans, carrying my dream of art in myself, and the genius of my nation triumphed. I planted the French verb in the heart of a foreign literature, and it is that of which I am most proud.\"\nReturn to Paris, European tour, \"F\u00e9dora\" to \"Theodora\" (1881\u20131886).\nNo crowd greeted Bernhardt when she returned to Paris on 5 May 1881, and theatre managers offered no new roles; the Paris press ignored her tour, and much of the Paris theatre world resented her leaving the most prestigious national theatre to earn a fortune abroad. When no new plays or offers appeared, she went to London for a successful three-week run at the Gaiety Theater. This London tour included the first British performance of \"La Dame aux Camelias\" at the Shaftesbury Theatre; her friend, the prince of Wales, persuaded Queen Victoria to authorise the performance. Many years later, she gave a private performance of the play for the queen while she was on holiday in Nice. When she returned to Paris, Bernhardt contrived to make a surprise performance at the annual 14 July patriotic spectacle at the Paris Opera, which was attended by the President of France, and a houseful of dignitaries and celebrities. She recited the \"Marseillaise\", dressed in a white robe with a tricolor banner, and at the end dramatically waved the French flag. The audience gave her a standing ovation, showered her with flowers, and demanded that she recite the song two more times.\nWith her place in the French theatre world restored, Bernhardt negotiated a contract to perform at the Vaudeville Theatre in Paris for 1500 francs per performance as well as 25 percent of the net profit. She also announced that she would not be available to begin until 1882. She departed on a tour of theatres in the French provinces and then to Italy, Greece, Hungary, Switzerland, Belgium, Holland, Spain, Austria, and Russia. In Kyiv and Odessa, she encountered anti-Semitic crowds who threw stones at her; pogroms were being conducted, forcing the Jewish population to leave. However, in Moscow and St. Petersburg, she performed before Czar Alexander III, who broke court protocol and bowed to her. During her tour, she gave performances for King Alfonso XII of Spain, and the Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria. The only European country where she refused to play was Germany, due to the German annexation of French territory after the 1870\u201371 Franco-Prussian War. Just before the tour began, she met Jacques Damala, who went with her as leading man and then, for eight months, became her first and only husband. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhen she returned to Paris, she was offered a new role in \"F\u00e9dora\", a melodrama written for her by Victorien Sardou. It opened on 12 December 1882, with her husband Damala as the male lead, and received good reviews. English novelist Maurice Baring, who wrote a biography of Bernhardt, wrote \"a secret atmosphere emanated from her, an aroma, an attraction, which was at once exotic and cerebral...She literally hypnotised her audience.\" Another journalist wrote \"She is incomparable...The extreme love, the extreme agony, the extreme suffering.\" However, the abrupt end of her marriage shortly after the premiere put her back into financial distress. She had leased and refurbished a theatre, the Ambigu, specifically to give her husband leading roles, and made her 18-year-old son Maurice, who had no business experience, the manager. \"F\u00e9dora\" ran for just 50 performances and lost 400,000 francs. She was forced to give up the Ambigu, and then, in February 1883, to sell her jewellery, her carriages, and her horses at an auction.\nWhen Damala left, she took on a new leading man and lover, the poet and playwright Jean Richepin, who accompanied her on a quick tour of European cities to help pay off her debts. She renewed her relationship with the Prince of Wales, the future King Edward VII. When they returned to Paris, Bernhardt leased the theatre of Porte Saint-Martin and starred in \"Nana-Sahib\", a new play by Richepin, a costume drama about love in British India in 1857. The play and Richepin's acting were poor, and it quickly closed. Richepin then wrote an adaptation of \"Macbeth\" in French, with Bernhardt as Lady Macbeth, but it was also a failure. The only person who praised the play was Oscar Wilde, who was then living in Paris. He wrote a play, \"Salom\u00e9\", and Bernhardt planned to originate the title role in London, but British censors banned the play and she never performed it.\nBernhardt then performed a new play by Sardou, \"Theodora\" (1884), a melodrama set in sixth-century Byzantine Empire. Sardou wrote a nonhistoric but dramatic new death scene for Bernhardt; in his version, the empress Theodora was publicly strangled, whereas the historical empress died of cancer. Bernhardt travelled to Ravenna, Italy, to study and sketch the costumes seen in Byzantine mosaic murals, and had them reproduced for her own costumes. The play opened on 26 December 1884 and ran for 300 performances in Paris and 100 in London, and it was a financial success. She was able to pay off most of her debts, and bought a lion cub, which she named Justinian, for her home menagerie. She also renewed her love affair with her former lead actor, Philippe Garnier.\nWorld tours (1886\u20131892).\n\"Theodora\" was followed by two failures. In 1885, in homage to Victor Hugo, who had died a few months earlier, she staged one of his older plays, \"Marion de Lorme\", written in 1831, but the play was outdated and her role did not give her a chance to show her talents. She next put on \"Hamlet\", with her lover Philippe Garnier in the leading role and Bernhardt in the relatively minor role of Ophelia. The critics and audiences were not impressed, and the play was unsuccessful. Bernhardt had built up large expenses, which included a 10,000 francs a month allowance paid to her son Maurice, a passionate gambler. Bernhardt was forced to sell her chalet in Sainte-Addresse and her mansion on rue Fortuny, and part of her collection of animals. Her impresario, Edouard Jarrett, immediately proposed she make another world tour, this time to Brazil, Argentina, Uruguay, Chile, Peru, Panama, Cuba, and Mexico, then on to Texas, New York City, England, Ireland, and Scotland. She was on tour for 15 months, from early 1886 until late 1887. On the eve of departure, she told a French reporter: \"I passionately love this life of adventures. I detest knowing in advance what they are going to serve at my dinner, and I detest a hundred thousand times more knowing what will happen to me, for better or worse. I adore the unexpected.\"\nIn every city she visited, she was feted and cheered by audiences. The actors Edouard Angelo and Philippe Garnier were her leading men. Emperor Pedro II of Brazil attended all of her performances in Rio de Janeiro and presented her with a gold bracelet with diamonds, which was almost immediately stolen from her hotel. The two leading actors both fell ill with yellow fever, and her long-time manager, Edward Jarrett, died of a heart attack. Bernhardt was undaunted, however, and went crocodile hunting at Guayaquil, and bought more animals for her menagerie. Her performances in every city were sold out, and by the end of the tour, she had earned more than 1 million francs. The tour allowed her to purchase her final home, which she filled with her paintings, plants, souvenirs, and animals.\nFrom then on, whenever she ran short of money (which generally happened every three or four years), she went on tour, performing both her classics and new plays. In 1888, she toured Italy, Egypt, Turkey, Sweden, Norway, and Russia. She returned to Paris in early 1889 with an enormous owl given to her by the Grand Duke Alexei Alexandrovich, the brother of the Czar. Her 1891\u201392 tour was her most extensive, including much of Europe, Russia, North and South America, Australia, New Zealand, Hawaii, and Samoa. Her personal luggage consisted of 45 costume crates for her 15 different productions, and 75 crates for her off-stage clothing, including her 250 pairs of shoes. She carried a trunk for her perfumes, cosmetics and makeup, and another for her sheets and tablecloths and her five pillows. After the tour, she brought back a trunk filled with 3,500,000 francs, but she also suffered a painful injury to her knee when she leaped off the parapet of the Castello Sant' Angelo in \"La Tosca\". The mattress on which she was supposed to land was misplaced, and she landed on the boards.\n\"La Tosca\" to \"Cleopatra\" (1887\u20131893).\nWhen Bernhardt returned from her 1886\u201387 tour, she received a new invitation to return to the Com\u00e9die-Fran\u00e7aise. The theatre management was willing to forget the conflict of her two previous periods there, and offered a payment of 150,000 francs a year. The money appealed to her, and she began negotiations. However, the senior members of the company protested the high salary offered, and conservative defenders of the more traditional theatre also complained; one anti-Bernhardt critic, Albert Delpit of \"Le Gaulois\", wrote \"Madame Sarah Bernhardt is forty-three; she can no longer be useful to the Com\u00e9die. Moreover, what roles could she have? I can only imagine that she could play mothers...\" Bernhardt was deeply offended and immediately broke off negotiations. She turned once again to Sardou, who had written a new play for her, \"La Tosca\", which featured a prolonged and extremely dramatic death scene at the end. The play was staged at the Porte Saint-Martin Theatre, opening on 24 November 1887. It was extremely popular, and critically acclaimed. Bernhardt played the role for 29 consecutive sold-out performances. The success of the play allowed Bernhardt to buy a new pet lion for her household menagerie. She named him Scarpia, after the villain of \"La Tosca\". The play inspired Giacomo Puccini to write one of his more famous operas, \"Tosca\" (1900).\nFollowing this success, she acted in several revivals and classics, and many French writers offered her new plays. In 1887, she acted in a stage version of the controversial drama \"Th\u00e9r\u00e8se Raquin\" by Emile Zola. Zola had previously been attacked due to the book's confronting content. Asked why she chose this play, she declared to reporters, \"My true country is the free air, and my vocation is art without constraints.\" The play was unsuccessful; it ran for just 38 performances. She then performed another traditional melodrama, \"Francillon\" by Alexandre Dumas \"fils\" in 1888. A short drama she wrote herself, \"L'Aveu\", disappointed both critics and the audience and lasted only 12 performances. She had considerably more success with \"Jeanne d'Arc\" by the poet Jules Barbier, in which the 45-year-old actress played Joan of Arc, a 19-year-old martyr. Barbier had previously written the librettos for some of the more famous French operas of the period, including \"Faust\" by Charles Gounod and \"The Tales of Hoffmann\" by Jacques Offenbach. Her next success was another melodrama by Sardou and Moreau, \"Cleopatra\", which allowed her to wear elaborate costumes and finished with a memorable death scene. For this scene, she kept two live garter snakes, which played the role of the poisonous asp which bites Cleopatra. For realism, she painted the palms of her hands red, though they could hardly be seen from the audience. \"I shall see them,\" she explained. \"If I catch sight of my hand, it will be the hand of Cleopatra.\"\nBernhardt's violent portrayal of Cleopatra led to the theatrical story of a matron in the audience exclaiming to her companion \"How unlike, how very unlike, the home life of our own dear Queen!\" However, the \"Pall Mall Gazette\" of 28 December 1906 attributed the reaction as being to a performance of Shakespeare's \"Anthony and Cleopatra\" starring Lillie Langtry, not Bernhardt, \"some fifteen years ago,\" which would also have been around 1891.\nTh\u00e9\u00e2tre de la Renaissance (1893\u20131899).\nBernhardt made a two-year world tour (1891\u20131893) to replenish her finances. Upon returning to Paris, she paid 700,000 francs for the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de la Renaissance, and from 1893 until 1899, was its artistic director and lead actress. She managed every aspect of the theatre, from the finances to the lighting, sets, and costumes, as well as appearing in eight performances a week. She imposed a rule that women in the audience, no matter how wealthy or famous, had to take off their hats during performances, so the rest of the audience could see, and eliminated the prompter's box from the stage, declaring that actors should know their lines. She abolished in her theatre the common practice of hiring \"claqueurs\" in the audience to applaud stars. She used the new technology of lithography to produce vivid color posters, and in 1894, she hired Czech artist Alphonse Mucha to design the first of a series of posters for her play \"Gismonda\". He continued to make posters of her for six years.\nIn five years, Bernhardt produced nine plays, three of which were financially successful. The first was a revival of her performance as Ph\u00e9dre, which she took on tour around the world. In 1898, she had another success, in the play \"Lorenzaccio\", playing the male lead role in a Renaissance revenge drama written in 1834 by Alfred de Musset, but never before actually staged. As her biographer Cornelia Otis Skinner wrote, she did not try to be overly masculine when she performed male roles: \"Her male impersonations had the sexless grace of the voices of choirboys, or the not quite real pathos of Pierrot.\" Anatole France wrote of her performance in \"Lorenzaccio\": \"She formed out of her own self a young man melancholic, full of poetry and of truth.\" This was followed by another successful melodrama by Sardou, \"Gismonda\", one of Bernhardt's few plays not finishing with a dramatic death scene. Her co-star was Lucien Guitry, who also acted as her leading man until the end of her career. Besides Guitry, she shared the stage with \u00c9douard de Max, her leading man in 20 productions, and Constant Coquelin, who frequently toured with her.\nIn April 1895, she played the lead role in a romantic and poetic fantasy, \"Princess Lointaine\", by little-known 27-year-old poet Edmond Rostand. It was not a monetary success and lost 200,000 francs, but it began a long theatrical relationship between Bernhardt and Rostand. Rostand went on to write \"Cyrano de Bergerac\" and became one of the most popular French playwrights of the period.\nIn 1898, she performed the female lead in the controversial play \"La Ville Morte\" by the Italian poet and playwright Gabriele D'Annunzio; the play was fiercely attacked by critics because of its theme of incest between brother and sister. Along with \u00c9mile Zola and Victorien Sardou, Bernhardt became an outspoken defender of Alfred Dreyfus, a Jewish army officer falsely accused of betraying France. The issue divided Parisian society; a conservative newspaper ran the headline, \"Sarah Bernhardt has joined the Jews against the Army\", and Bernhardt's own son Maurice condemned Dreyfus; he refused to speak to her for a year.\nAt the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de la Renaissance, Bernhardt staged and performed in several modern plays, but she was not a follower of the more natural school of acting that was coming into fashion at the end of the 19th century, preferring a more dramatic expression of emotions. \"In the theatre,\" she declared, \"the natural is good, but the sublime is even better.\"\nTh\u00e9\u00e2tre Sarah Bernhardt (1899\u20131900).\nDespite her successes, her debts continued to mount, reaching two million gold francs by the end of 1898. Bernhardt was forced to give up the Renaissance, and was preparing to go on another world tour when she learned that a much larger Paris theater, the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre des Nations on Place du Ch\u00e2telet, was for lease. The theatre had 1,700 seats, twice the size of the Renaissance, enabling her to pay off the cost of performances more quickly; it had an enormous stage and backstage, allowing her to present several different plays a week; and because it was designed as a concert hall, it had excellent acoustics. On 1 January 1899, she signed a 25-year lease with the City of Paris, though she was already 55 years old.\nShe renamed it the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre Sarah Bernhardt, and began to renovate it to suit her needs. The fa\u00e7ade was lit by 5,700 electric bulbs, 17 arc lights, and 11 projectors. She completely redecorated the interior, replacing the red plush and gilt with yellow velvet, brocade, and white woodwork. The lobby was decorated with life-sized portraits of her in her more famous roles, painted by Mucha, Louise Abb\u00e9ma, and Georges Clairin. Her dressing room was a five-room suite, which, after the success of her Napoleonic play \"L'Aiglon\", was decorated in Empire Style, featuring a marble fireplace with a fire Bernhardt kept burning year round, a huge bathtub that was filled with the flowers she received after each performance, and a dining room fitting 12 people, where she entertained guests after the final curtain.\nBernhardt opened the theatre on 21 January 1899 with a revival of Sardou's \"La Tosca\", which she had first performed in 1887. This was followed by revivals of her other major successes, including \"Ph\u00e9dre\", \"Theodora\", \"Gismonda\", and \"La Dame aux Cam\u00e9lias\", plus Octave Feuillet's \"Dalila\", Gaston de Wailly's \"Patron B\u00e9nic\", and Rostand's \"La Samaritaine,\" a poetic retelling of the story of the Samaritan woman at the well from the Gospel of John. On 20 May, she premiered one of her more famous roles, playing the titular character of \"Hamlet\" in a prose adaptation which she had commissioned from Eug\u00e8ne Morand and Marcel Schwob. She played Hamlet in a manner which was direct, natural, and very feminine. Her performance received largely positive reviews in Paris, but mixed reviews in London. The British critic Max Beerbohm wrote \"the only compliment one can conscientiously pay her is that her Hamlet was, from first to last, a truly \"grand dame\".\"\nIn 1900, Bernhardt presented \"L'Aiglon\", a new play by Rostand. She played the Duc de Reichstadt, the son of Napoleon Bonaparte, imprisoned by his unloving mother and family until his melancholy death in the Sch\u00f6nbrunn Palace in Vienna. \"L'Aiglon\" was a verse drama, six acts long. The 56-year-old actress studied the walk and posture of young cavalry officers and had her hair cut short to impersonate the young Duke. The Duke's stage mother, Marie-Louise of Austria, was played by Maria Legault, an actress 14 years younger than Bernhardt. The play ended with a memorable death scene; according to one critic, she died \"as dying angels would die if they were allowed to.\" The play was extremely successful; it was especially popular with visitors to the 1900 Paris International Exposition, and ran for nearly a year, with standing-room places selling for as much as 600 gold francs. The play inspired the creation of Bernhardt souvenirs, including statuettes, medallions, fans, perfumes, postcards of her in the role, uniforms and cardboard swords for children, and pastries and cakes; the famed chef Escoffier added Peach Aiglon with Chantilly cream to his repertoire of desserts.\nBernhardt continued to employ Mucha to design her posters and expanded his work to include theatrical sets, programs, costumes, and jewellery props. His posters became icons of the Art Nouveau style. To earn more money, Bernhardt set aside a certain number of printed posters of each play to sell to collectors.\nFarewell tours (1901\u20131913).\nAfter her season in Paris, Bernhardt performed \"L'Aiglon\" in London and then made her sixth tour to the United States. On this tour, she travelled with Constant Coquelin, then the most popular leading man in France. Bernhardt played the secondary role of Roxanne to his Cyrano de Bergerac, a role which he had premiered, and he co-starred with her as Flambeau in \"L'Aiglon\" and as the first grave-digger in \"Hamlet\".\nShe also changed, for the first time, her resolution not to perform in Germany or the \"occupied territories\" of Alsace and Lorraine. In 1902, at the invitation of the French ministry of culture, she took part in the first cultural exchange between Germany and France since the 1870 war. She performed \"L'Aiglon\" 14 times in Germany; Kaiser William II of Germany attended two performances and hosted a dinner in her honour in Potsdam.\nDuring her German tour, she began to suffer agonising pain in her right knee, probably connected with a fall she had suffered on stage during her tour in South America. She was forced to reduce her movements in \"L'Aiglon\". A German doctor recommended that she halt the tour immediately and have surgery, followed by six months of complete immobilisation of her leg. Bernhardt promised to see a doctor when she returned to Paris, but continued the tour.\nIn 1903, she had another unsuccessful role playing another masculine character in \"Werther\", a gloomy adaptation of the story by German writer Johann Wolfgang von Goethe. However, she quickly came back with another hit, \"La Sorci\u00e8re\" by Sardou. She played a Moorish sorceress in love with a Christian Spaniard, leading to her persecution by the church. This story of tolerance, coming soon after the Dreyfus affair, was financially successful, with Bernhardt often giving both a matinee and evening performance.\nFrom 1904 to 1906, she appeared in a wide range of parts, including in \"Francesca di Rimini\" by Francis Marion Crawford, the role of Fanny in \"Sapho\" by Alphonse Daudet, the magician Circe in a play by Charles Richet, the part of Marie Antoinette in the historic drama \"Varennes\" by Lavedan and Len\u00f4tre, the part of the prince-poet Landry in a version of \"Sleeping Beauty\" by Richepin and Henri Cain, and a new version of the play \"Pell\u00e9as and M\u00e9lisande\" by symbolist poet Maurice Maeterlinck, in which she played the male role of Pell\u00e9as with the British actress Mrs Patrick Campbell as Melissande. She also starred in a new version of \"Adrienne Lecouvreur\", which she wrote, different from the earlier version which had been written for her by Scribe. During this time, she wrote a drama, \"Un Coeur d'Homme\", in which she had no part, which was performed at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre des Arts, but lasted only three performances. She also taught acting briefly at the Conservatory, but found the system there too rigid and traditional. Instead, she took aspiring actresses and actors into her company, trained them, and used them as unpaid extras and bit players.\nBernhardt made her first American Farewell Tour in 1905\u20131906, the first of four farewell tours she made to the US, Canada, and Latin America, with her new managers, the Shubert brothers. She attracted controversy and press attention when, during her 1905 visit to Montreal, the Roman Catholic bishop encouraged his followers to throw eggs at Bernhardt, because she portrayed prostitutes as sympathetic characters. The US portion of the tour was complicated due to the Shuberts' competition with the powerful syndicate of theatre owners which controlled nearly all the major theatres and opera houses in the United States. The syndicate did not allow outside producers to use their stages. As a result, in Texas and Kansas City, Bernhardt and her company performed under an enormous circus tent, seating 4,500 spectators, and in skating rinks in Atlanta, Savannah, Tampa, and other cities. Her private train took her to Knoxville, Dallas, Denver, Tampa, Chattanooga, and Salt Lake City, then on to the West Coast of the United States.\nHer appearance in Denver was at the Elitch Theatre for one day and she did a matinee of \"La Sorci\u00e8re\" and an evening performance of \"Le Dame aux Cam\u00e9lias\". In her biography, Mary Elitch Long tells the story of Bernhardt visiting the lion's den at her zoo and beginning to stroke the head of a lioness. While the lioness sat calmly, Bernhardt asked Mary the name of the lion. When Mary said she hadn't been named yet, Bernhardt turned to the lioness and said, \"You are Sarah Bernhardt.\"\nShe could not play in San Francisco because of the recent 1906 San Francisco earthquake, but she performed across the bay in the Hearst Greek Theatre at the University of California at Berkeley, and gave a recital, titled \"A Christmas Night during the Terror\", for inmates at San Quentin penitentiary.\nHer tour continued into South America, where it was marred by a more serious event: at the conclusion of \"La Tosca\" in Rio de Janeiro, she leaped, as always, from the wall of the fortress to plunge to her death in the Tiber. This time, however, the mattress on which she was supposed to land had been positioned incorrectly. She landed on her right knee, which had already been damaged in earlier tours. She fainted and was taken from the theatre on a stretcher, but refused to be treated in a local hospital. She later sailed by ship from Rio to New York. When she arrived, her leg had swollen, and she was immobilised in her hotel for 15 days before returning to France.\nIn 1906\u20131907, the French government finally awarded Bernhardt the Legion d'Honneur, but only in her role as a theatre director, not as an actress. However, the award at that time required a review of the recipients' moral standards, and Bernhardt's behavior was still considered scandalous. Bernhardt ignored the snub and continued to play both inoffensive and controversial characters. In November 1906, she starred in \"La Vierge d'Avila, ou La Courtisane de Dieu\", by Catulle Mend\u00e8s, playing Saint Theresa, followed on 27 January 1907 by \"Les Bouffons\", by Miguel Zamocois, in which she played a young and amorous medieval lord. In 1909, she again played the 19-year-old Joan of Arc in \"Le Proc\u00e8s de Jeanne d'Arc\" by \u00c9mile Moreau. French newspapers encouraged schoolchildren to view her personification of French patriotism.\nDespite the injury to her leg, she continued to go on tour every summer, when her own theatre in Paris was closed. In June 1908, she made a 20-day tour of Britain and Ireland, performing in 16 different cities. In 1908\u20131909, she toured Russia and Poland. Her second American farewell tour (her eighth tour in America) began in late 1910. She took along a new leading man, the Dutch-born Lou Tellegen, a very handsome actor who had served as a model for the sculpture \"Eternal Springtime\" by Auguste Rodin, and who became her co-star for the next two years, as well as her escort to all events, functions, and parties. He was not a particularly good actor, and had a strong Dutch accent, but he was successful in roles such as Hippolyte in \"Ph\u00e8dre\", where he could take off his shirt and show off his physique. In New York, she created yet another scandal when she appeared in the role of Judas Iscariot in \"Judas\" by the American playwright John Wesley De Kay. It was performed in New York's Globe Theater for only one night in December 1910 before it was banned by local authorities. It was also banned in Boston and Philadelphia. The tour took her from Boston to Jacksonville, through Mississippi, Arkansas, Tennessee, Kentucky, West Virginia, and Pennsylvania, to Canada and Minnesota, usually one new city and one performance every day.\nIn April 1912, Bernhardt presented a new production in her theatre, \"Les Amours de la reine \u00c9lisabeth\", a romantic costume drama by \u00c9mile Moreau about Queen Elizabeth's romances with Robert Dudley and Robert Devereux. It was lavish and expensive, but was a monetary failure, lasting only 12 performances. Fortunately for Bernhardt, she was able to pay off her debt with the money she received from the American producer Adolph Zukor for a film version of the play. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;\nShe departed on her third farewell tour of the United States in 1913\u20131914, when she was 69. Her leg had not yet fully healed, and she was unable to perform an entire play, only selected acts. She also separated from her co-star and lover of the time, Lou Tellegen. When the tour ended, he remained in the United States, where he briefly became a silent movie star, and she returned to France in May 1913.\nAmputation of leg and wartime performances (1914\u20131918).\nIn December 1913, Bernhardt performed another success with the drama \"Jeanne Dor\u00e9\". On 16 March, she was made a Chevalier of the L\u00e9gion d'honneur. Despite her successes, she was still short of money. She had made her son Maurice the director of her new theatre, and permitted him to use the receipts of the theatre to pay his gambling debts, eventually forcing her to pawn some of her jewels to pay her bills.\nIn 1914, she went as usual to her holiday home on Belle-\u00cele with her family and close friends. There, she received the news of the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand, and the beginning of the First World War. She hurried back to Paris, which was threatened by an approaching German army. In September, Bernhardt was asked by the Minister of War to move to a safer place. She departed for a villa on the Bay of Arcachon, where her physician discovered that gangrene had developed on her leg, still injured from her 1906 performance in Rio de Janeiro. She was transported to Bordeaux, where on 22 February 1915, a surgeon amputated her leg almost to the hip. She refused the idea of an artificial leg, crutches, or a wheelchair, and instead was usually carried in a palanquin she designed, supported by two long shafts and carried by two men. She had the chair decorated in the Louis XV style, with white sides and gilded trim.\nShe returned to Paris on 15 October, and, despite the loss of her leg, continued to go on stage at her theatre; scenes were arranged so she could be seated, or supported by a prop with her leg hidden. She took part in a patriotic \"scenic poem\" by Eug\u00e8ne Morand, \"Les Cath\u00e9drales\", playing the part of Strasbourg Cathedral; first, while seated, she recited a poem; then she hoisted herself on her one leg, leaned against the arm of the chair, and declared \"Weep, weep, Germany! The German eagle has fallen into the Rhine!\"\nBernhardt joined a troupe of famous French actors and traveled to the Battle of Verdun and the Battle of the Argonne, where she performed for soldiers who were just returned or about to go into battle. Propped on pillows in an armchair, she recited her patriotic speech at Strasbourg Cathedral. Another actress present at the event, Beatrix Dussanne, described her performance: \"The miracle again took place; Sarah, old, mutilated, once more illuminated a crowd by the rays of her genius. This fragile creature, ill, wounded and an immobile, could still, through the magic of the spoken word, re-instill heroism in those soldiers weary from battle.\"\nShe returned to Paris in 1916 and made two short films on patriotic themes, one based on the story of Joan of Arc, the other called \"Mothers of France\". Then she embarked on her final American farewell tour. Despite the threat of German submarines, she crossed the Atlantic and toured the United States, performing in major cities including New York and San Francisco. Bernhardt was diagnosed with uremia, and had to have an emergency kidney operation. She recuperated in Long Beach, California, for several months, writing short stories and novellas for publication in French magazines. In 1918, she returned to New York and boarded a ship to France, landing in Bordeaux on 11 November 1918, the day that the armistice was signed ending the First World War.\nFinal years (1919\u20131923).\nIn 1920, she resumed acting in her theatre, usually performing single acts of classics such as Racine's \"Athel\u00e9e\", which did not require much movement. For her curtain calls, she stood, balancing on one leg and gesturing with one arm. She also starred in a new play, \"Daniel\", written by her grandson-in-law, playwright Louis Verneuil. She played the male lead role, but appeared in just two acts. She took the play and other famous scenes from her repertory on a European tour and then for her last tour of England, where she gave a special command performance for Queen Mary, followed by a tour of the British provinces.\nIn 1921, Bernhardt made her last tour of the French provinces, lecturing about theatre and reciting the poetry of Rostand. Later that year, she produced a new play by Rostand, \"La Gloire\", and another play by Verneuil, \"R\u00e9gine Arnaud\" in 1922. She continued to entertain guests at her home. One such guest, French author Colette, described being served coffee by Bernhardt: \"The delicate and withered hand offering the brimming cup, the flowery azure of the eyes, so young still in their network of fine lines, the questioning and mocking coquetry of the tilted head, and that indescribable desire to charm, to charm still, to charm right up to the gates of death itself.\"\nIn 1922, she began rehearsing a new play by Sacha Guitry, called \"Un Sujet de Roman.\" On the night of the dress rehearsal, she collapsed, going into a coma for an hour, then awakened with the words, \"when do I go on?\" She recuperated for several months, with her condition improving; she began preparing for a new role as Cleopatra in \"Rodogune\" by Corneille, and agreed to make a new film by Sasha Guitry called \"La Voyante\", for a payment of 10,000 francs a day. She was too weak to travel, so a room in her house on Boulevard Pereire was set up as a film studio, with scenery, lights, and cameras. However, on 21 March 1923, she collapsed again, and never recovered. She died from uremia on the evening of 26 March 1923. Newspaper reports stated she died \"peacefully, without suffering, in the arms of her son\". At her request, her Funeral Mass was celebrated at the church of Saint-Fran\u00e7ois-de-Sales, which she attended when she was in Paris. The following day, 30,000 people attended her funeral to pay their respects, and an enormous crowd followed her casket from the Church of Saint-Francoise-de-Sales to Pere Lachaise Cemetery, pausing for a moment of silence outside her theatre. The inscription on her tombstone is the name \"Bernhardt\".\nMotion pictures.\nBernhardt was one of the early actresses to star in moving pictures. The first projected film was shown by the Lumi\u00e8re brothers at the Grand Caf\u00e9 in Paris on 28 December 1895. In 1900, the cameraman who had shot the first films for the Lumi\u00e8re brothers, Cl\u00e9ment Maurice, approached Bernhardt and asked her to make a film out of a scene from her stage production of \"Hamlet\". The scene was Prince Hamlet's duel with Laertes, with Bernhardt in the role of Hamlet. Maurice made a phonograph recording at the same time, so the film could be accompanied by sound. The sound of the clashing wooden prop swords was not loud and realistic enough, so Maurice had a stage hand bang pieces of metal together in sync with the sword fight. Maurice's finished two-minute film, \"Le Duel d'Hamlet\", was presented to the public at the 1900 Paris Universal Exposition from 14 April to 12 November 1900 in Paul Decauville's program, Phono-Cin\u00e9ma-Th\u00e9\u00e2tre. This program contained short films of many other famous French theatre stars of the day. The sound quality on the wax cylinders and the synchronization were very poor, so the system never became a commercial success. Nonetheless, her film is cited as one of the early examples of a sound film.\nEight years later, in 1908, Bernhardt made a second motion picture, \"La Tosca\". This was produced by Le Film d'Art and directed by Andr\u00e9 Calmettes from the play by Victorien Sardou. The film has been lost. Her next film, with her co-star and lover Lou Tellegen, was \"La Dame aux Camelias\", called \"Camille\". When she performed on this film, Bernhardt changed both the fashion in which she performed, significantly accelerating the speed of her gestural action. The film was a success in the United States, and in France, the young French artist and later screenwriter Jean Cocteau wrote \"What actress can play a lover better than she does in this film? No one!\" Bernhardt received $30,000 for her performance.\nShortly afterwards, she made another film of a scene from her play \"Adrienne Lecouvreur\" with Tellegen, in the role of Maurice de Saxe. Then, in 1912, the pioneer American producer Adolph Zukor came to London and filmed her performing scenes from her stage play \"Queen Elizabeth\" with her lover Tellegen, with Bernhardt in the role of Lord Essex. To make the film more appealing, Zukor had the film print hand-tinted, making it one of the early color films. \"The Loves of Queen Elizabeth\" premiered at the Lyceum Theater in New York City on 12 July 1912, and was a financial success; Zukor invested $18,000 in the film and earned $80,000, enabling him to found the Famous Players Film Company, which later became Paramount Pictures. The use of the visual arts\u2013specifically famous c.19 painting\u2013to frame scenes and elaborate narrative action is significant in the work.\nBernhardt was also the subject and star of two documentaries, including \"Sarah Bernhardt \u00e0 Belle-Isle\" (1915), a film about her daily life at home. This was one of the early films by a celebrity inviting us into the home, and it is again significant for the use it makes of contemporary art references in the mis-en-scene of the film. She also made \"Jeanne Dor\u00e9\" in 1916. This was produced by Eclipse and directed by Louis Mercanton and Ren\u00e9 Hervil from the play by Tristan Bernard. In 1917 she made a film called \"Mothers of France\" (\"M\u00e8res Fran\u00e7aises\"). Produced by Eclipse it was directed by Louis Mercanton and Ren\u00e9 Hervil with a screenplay by Jean Richepin. As Victoria Duckett explains in her book \"Seeing Sarah Bernhardt: Performance and Silent Film\", this film was a propaganda film shot on the front line with the intent to urge America to join the War.\nIn the weeks before her death in 1923, she was preparing to make \"La Voyante\", another motion picture from her own home, directed by Sacha Guitry. She told journalists \"They're paying me ten thousand francs a day, and plan to film for seven days. Make the calculation. These are American rates, and I don't have to cross the Atlantic! At those rates, I'm ready to appear in any films they make.\" However, she died just before the filming began.\nPainting and sculpture.\nBernhardt began painting while she was at the Com\u00e9die-Fran\u00e7aise; because she rarely performed more than twice a week, she wanted a new activity to fill her time. Her paintings were mostly landscapes and seascapes, with many painted at Belle-\u00cele. Her painting teachers were close and lifelong friends Georges Clairin and Louise Abb\u00e9ma. She exhibited a 2-m-tall canvas, \"The Young Woman and Death\", at the 1878 Paris Salon.\nHer passion for sculpture was more serious. Her sculpture teacher was Mathieu-Meusnier, an academic sculptor who specialised in public monuments and sentimental storytelling pieces. She quickly picked up the techniques; she exhibited and sold a high-relief plaque of the death of Ophelia and, for the architect Charles Garnier, she created the allegorical figure of \"Song\" for the group \"Music\" on the fa\u00e7ade of the Opera House of Monte Carlo. She also exhibited a group of figures, called \"Apr\u00e8s la Temp\u00eate\" (\"After the Storm\"), at the 1876 Paris Salon, receiving an honourable mention. Bernhardt sold the original work, the molds, and signed plaster miniatures, earning more than 10,000 francs. The original is now displayed in the National Museum of Women in the Arts in Washington, D.C. Fifty works by Bernhardt have been documented, of which 25 are known to still exist. Several of her works were also shown in the 1893 Columbia Exposition in Chicago and at the 1900 Exposition Universelle. While on tour in New York, she hosted a private viewing of her paintings and sculptures for 500 guests. In 1880, she made an Art Nouveau decorative bronze inkwell, a self-portrait with bat wings and a fish tail, possibly inspired by her 1874 performance in Le Sphinx. She set up a studio at 11 boulevard de Clichy in Montmartre, where she frequently entertained her guests dressed in her sculptor's outfit, including white satin blouse and white silk trousers. Rodin dismissed her sculptures as \"old-fashioned tripe\", and she was attacked in the press for pursuing an activity inappropriate for an actress. She was defended by \u00c9mile Zola, who wrote \"How droll! Not content with finding her thin, or declaring her mad, they want to regulate her daily activities...Let a law be passed immediately to prevent the accumulation of talent!\"\n\"The Art of the Theatre\".\nIn her final years, Bernhardt wrote a textbook on the art of acting. She wrote whenever she had time, usually between productions, and when she was on vacation at Belle-\u00cele. After her death, the writer Marcel Berger, her close friend, found the unfinished manuscript among her belongings in her house on boulevard Pereire. He edited the book, and it was published as \"L'Art du Th\u00e9\u00e2tre\" in 1923. An English translation was published in 1925.\nShe paid particular attention to the use of the voice, \"the instrument the most necessary to the dramatic artist.\" It was the element, she wrote, which connected the artist with the audience. \"The voice must have all the harmonies...serious, plaintive, vibrant and metallic.\" For a voice to be fully complete, she wrote \"It is necessary that it be very slightly nasal. An artist who has a dry voice can never touch the public.\" She also stressed the importance for artists to train their breathing for long passages. She suggested that an actress should be able to recite the following passage from \"Ph\u00e9dre\" in a single breath:\nH\u00e9las! ils se voyaient avec pleine licence,\nLe ciel de leurs soupirs approuvait l'innocence;\nIls suivaient sans remords leur penchant amoureux;\nTous les jours se levaient clairs et sereins pour eux! \nShe noted that \"the art of our art is not to have it noticed by the public...We must create an atmosphere by our sincerity, so that public, gasping, distracted, should not regain its equilibrium and free will until the fall of the curtain. That which is called the work, in our art, should only be the search for the truth.\"\nShe also insisted that artists should express their emotions clearly without words, using \"their eye, their hand, the position of the chest, the tilting of the head...The exterior form of the art is often the entire art; at least, it is that which strikes the audience the most effectively.\" She encouraged actors to \"Work, overexcite your emotional expression, become accustomed to varying your psychological states and translating them...The diction, the way of standing, the look, the gesture are predominant in the development of the career of an artist.\"\nShe explained why she liked to perform male roles: \"The roles of men are in general more intellectual than the roles of women...Only the role of Ph\u00e9dre gives me the charm of digging into a heart that is truly anguished...Always, in the theatre, the parts played by the men are the best parts. And yet theatre is the sole art where women can sometimes be superior to men.\"\nMemory and improvisation.\nBernhardt had a remarkable ability to memorise a role quickly. She recounted in \"L'Art du Th\u00e9\u00e2tre\" that \"I only have to read a role two or three times and I know it completely; but the day that I stop playing the piece the role escapes me entirely...My memory can't contain several parts at the same time, and it's impossible for me to recite off-hand a tirade from \"Ph\u00e8dre\" or \"Hamlet\". And yet I can remember the smallest events from my childhood.\" She also suffered, particularly early in her career, bouts of memory loss and stage fright. Once, she was seriously ill before a performance of \"L'Etrang\u00e8re\" at the Gaiety Theatre in London, and the doctor gave her a dose of painkiller, either opium or morphine. During the performance, she went on stage, but could not remember what she was supposed to say. She turned to another actress, and announced, \"If I made you come here, Madame, it is because I wanted to instruct you in what I want done...I have thought about it, and I do not want to tell you today\", then walked offstage. The other actors, astonished, quickly improvised an ending to the scene. After a brief rest, her memory came back, and Bernhardt went back on stage, and completed the play.\nDuring another performance on her world tour, a backstage door was opened during a performance of \"Ph\u00e8dre\", and a cold wind blew across the stage as Bernhardt was reciting. Without interrupting her speech, she added \"If someone doesn't close that door I will catch pneumonia.\" The door was closed, and no one in the audience seemed to notice the addition.\nCritical appraisals.\nFrench drama critics praised Bernhardt's performances; Francisque Sarcey, an influential Paris critic, wrote of her 1871 performance in \"Marie\", \"She has a sovereign grace, a penetrating charm, and I don't know what. She is a natural and an incomparable artist.\" Reviewing her performance of \"Ruy Blas\" in 1872, the critic Th\u00e9odore de Banville wrote that Bernhardt \"declaimed like a bluebird sings, like the wind sighs, like the water murmurs.\" Of the same performance, Sarcey wrote: \"She added the music of her voice to the music of the verse. She sang, yes, sang with her melodious voice...\"\nVictor Hugo was a fervent admirer of Bernhardt, praising her \"golden voice\". Describing her performance in his play, \"Ruy Blas\" in 1872, he wrote in his \"Carnets\", \"It is the first time this play has really been played! She is better than an actress, she is a woman. She is adorable; she is better than beautiful, she has the harmonious movements and looks of irresistible seduction.\"\nHer 1882 performance of \"F\u00e9dora\" was described by the English novelist Maurice Baring: \"A secret atmosphere emanated from her, an aroma, an attraction which was at once exotic and cerebral...She literally hypnotized the audience\", and played \"with such tigerish passion and feline seduction which, whether it be good or bad art, nobody has been able to match since.\"\nIn 1884, Sigmund Freud saw Bernhardt perform \"Theodora\", writing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"I cannot say much for the play, but this Sarah, how she played! From the moment I heard her first lines, pronounced in her vibrant and adorable voice, I had the feeling I had known her for years. None of the lines that she spoke could surprise me; I believed immediately everything that she said. The smallest centimeter of this character was alive and enchanted you. And then, there was the manner she had to flatter, to implore, to embrace. Her incredible positions, the manner in which she keeps silent, but each of her limbs and each of her movements play the role for her! Strange creature! It is easy for me to imagine that she has no need to be any different on the street than she is on the stage!\"\nShe also had her critics, particularly in her later years among the new generation of playwrights who advocated a more naturalistic style of acting. George Bernard Shaw wrote of the \"childishly egotistical character of her acting, which is not the art of making you think more highly or feel more deeply but the art of making you admire her, pity her, champion her, weep with her, laugh at her jokes, follow her fortunes breathlessly and applaud her wildly when the curtain falls...It is the art of fooling you.\" Ivan Turgenev wrote: \"All she has is a marvelous voice. The rest is cold, false, and affected; the worst kind of repulsive chic Parisienne!\" Russian dramatist Anton Chekhov, then a young medical student, was paying for his studies by writing reviews for a Moscow newspaper. He stated that \"We are far from admiring the talent of Sarah Bernhardt. She is a woman who is very intelligent and knows how to produce an effect, who has immense taste, who understands the human heart, but she wanted too much to astonish and overwhelm her audience.\" He wrote that in her roles, \"enchantment is smothered in artifice.\"\nSarah Bernhardt's performances were seen and appraised by many of the leading literary and cultural figures of the late 19th century. Mark Twain wrote \"There are five kinds of actresses. Bad actresses, fair actresses, good actresses, great actresses, and then there is Sarah Bernhardt.\" Oscar Wilde called her \"the Incomparable One\", scattered lilies in her path, and wrote a play in French, \"Salom\u00e9\", especially for her; it was banned by British censors before it could be performed. Shortly before he died, Wilde wrote: \"The three women I have most admired in my life are Sarah Bernhardt, Lily Langtry, and Queen Victoria. I would have married any one of them with pleasure.\"\nAfter seeing a performance by Bernhardt in 1903, the British actress Ellen Terry wrote \"How marvelous Sarah Bernhardt was! She had the transparence of an azalea with even more delicacy, the lightness of a cloud with less thickness. Smoke from a burning paper describes her more nearly.\"\nBritish author D.H. Lawrence saw Bernhardt perform \"La Dame aux Camelias\" in 1908. Afterward, he wrote to a friend:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Sarah was wonderful and terrible. Oh, to see her, and to hear her, a wild creature, a gazelle with a beautiful panther's fascination and fury, laughing in musical French, screaming with true panther cry, sobbing and sighing like a deer sobs, wounded to the death...She is not pretty, her voice is not sweet, but there is the incarnation of wild emotion that we share with all living things...\"\nPersonal life.\nPaternity, date of birth, ancestry, name.\nThe identity of Bernhardt's father is not known for certain. Her original birth certificate was destroyed when the Paris Commune burned the Hotel de Ville and city archives in May 1871. In her autobiography, \"Ma Double Vie\", she describes meeting her father several times, and writes that his family provided funding for her education, and left a sum of 100,000 francs for her when she came of age. She said he frequently travelled overseas, and that when she was still a child, he died in Pisa \"in unexplained circumstances which remain mysterious.\" In February 1914, she presented a reconstituted birth certificate, which stated that her legitimate father was one \u00c9douard Bernhardt. On 21 May 1856, when she was baptised, she was registered as the daughter of \"Edouard Bernhardt residing in Le Havre and Judith Van Hard, residing in Paris.\"\nA more recent biography by H\u00e9l\u00e8ne Tierchant (2009) suggests her father may have been a young man named De Morel, whose family members were notable shipowners and merchants in Le Havre. According to Bernhardt's autobiography, her grandmother and uncle in Le Havre provided financial support for her education when she was young, took part in family councils about her future, and later gave her money when her apartment in Paris was destroyed by fire.\nHer date of birth is also uncertain due to the destruction of her birth certificate. She usually gave her birthday as 23 October 1844, and celebrated it on that day. However, the reconstituted birth certificate she presented in 1914 gave the date as 25 October. Other sources give the date 22 October, or either 22 or 23 October.\nBernhardt's mother Judith, or Julie, was born in the early 1820s. She was one of six children, five daughters and one son, of a Dutch-Jewish itinerant eyeglass merchant, Moritz Baruch Bernardt, and a German laundress, Sara Hirsch (later known as Janetta Hartog or Jeanne Hard). Judith's mother died in 1829, and five weeks later, her father remarried. His new wife did not get along with the children from his earlier marriage. Judith and two of her sisters, Henriette and Rosine, left home, moved to London briefly, and then settled in Le Havre, on the French coast. Henriette married a local in Le Havre, but Julie and Rosine became courtesans, and Julie took the new, more French name of Youle and the more aristocratic-sounding last name of Van Hard. In April 1843, she gave birth to twin girls to a \"father unknown.\" Both girls died in the hospice in Le Havre a month later. The following year, Youle was pregnant again, this time with Sarah. She moved to Paris, to 5 rue de l'\u00c9cole-de-M\u00e9decine, where in October 1844, Sarah was born.\nLovers and friends.\nEarly in Bernhardt's career, she had an affair with a Belgian nobleman, Charles-Joseph Eug\u00e8ne Henri Georges Lamoral de Ligne (1837\u20131914), eldest son of Eug\u00e8ne, 8th Prince of Ligne, with whom she bore her only child, Maurice Bernhardt (1864\u20131928). Maurice did not become an actor, but worked for most of his life as a manager and agent for various theatres and performers, frequently managing his mother's career in her later years, but rarely with great success. Maurice and his family were usually financially dependent, in full or in part, on his mother until her death. Maurice married a Polish princess, Maria Jablonowska, of the House of Jablonowski, with whom he had two daughters: Simone, who married Edgar Gross, son of a wealthy Philadelphia soap manufacturer; and Lysiana, who married the playwright Louis Verneuil.\nFrom 1864 to 1866, after Bernhardt left the Com\u00e9die-Fran\u00e7aise, and after Maurice was born, she frequently had trouble finding roles. She often worked as a courtesan, taking wealthy and influential lovers. The French police of the Second Empire kept files on high-level courtesans, including Bernhardt; her file recorded the wide variety of names and titles of her patrons; they included Alexandre Aguado, the son of Spanish banker and Marquis Alejandro Mar\u00eda Aguado; the industrialist Robert de Brimont; the banker Jacques Stern; and the wealthy Louis-Roger de Cahuzac. The list also included Khalil Bey, the Ambassador of the Ottoman Empire to the Second Empire, best known today as the man who commissioned Gustave Courbet to paint \"L'Origine du monde\", a detailed painting of a woman's anatomy that was banned until 1995, but now on display at the Mus\u00e9e d'Orsay. Bernhardt received from him a diadem of pearls and diamonds. She also had affairs with many of her leading men, and with other men more directly useful to her career, including Ars\u00e8ne Houssaye, director of the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre-Lyrique, and the editors of several major newspapers. Many of her early lovers continued to be her friends after the affairs ended.\nDuring her time at the Od\u00e9on, she continued to see her old lovers, as well as new ones including French marshals Fran\u00e7ois-Certain Canrobert and Achille Bazaine, the latter a commander of the French army in the Crimean War and in Mexico; and Prince Napoleon, son of Joseph Bonaparte and cousin of French Emperor Louis-Napoleon. She also had a two-year-long affair with Charles Haas, son of a banker and one of the more celebrated Paris dandies in the Empire, the model for the character of Swann in the novels by Marcel Proust. Indeed, Swann even references her by name in \"Remembrance of Things Past\". Sarah Bernhardt is probably one of the actresses after whom Proust modelled Berma, a character present in several volumes of \"Remembrance of Things Past\".\nBernhardt took as lovers many of the male leads of her plays, including Mounet-Sully and Lou Tellegen. She possibly had an affair with the Prince of Wales, the future Edward VII, who frequently attended her London and Paris performances and once, as a prank, played the part of a cadaver in one of her plays. When he was King, he travelled on the royal yacht to visit her at her summer home on Belle-\u00cele.\nHer last serious love affair was with the Dutch-born actor Lou Tellegen, 37 years her junior, who became her co-star during her second American farewell tour (and eighth American tour) in 1910. He was a very handsome actor who had served as a model for sculpture \"Eternal Springtime\" by Auguste Rodin. He had little acting experience, but Bernhardt signed him as a leading man just before she departed on the tour, assigned him a compartment in her private railway car, and took him as her escort to all events, functions, and parties. He was not a particularly good actor, and had a strong Dutch accent, but he was successful in roles, such as Hippolyte in \"Phedre\", where he could take off his shirt. At the end of the American tour, they had a dispute, he remained in the United States, and she returned to France. At first, he had a successful career in the United States and married operatic soprano and film actress Geraldine Farrar, but when they split up his career plummeted. He committed suicide in 1934.\nBernhardt's broad circle of friends included the writers Victor Hugo, Alexandre Dumas, his son Alexandre Dumas \"fils\", \u00c9mile Zola, and the artist Gustave Dor\u00e9. She was friends with Hideyo Noguchi, famed bacteriologist, who she met during her operation with Dr. Emanuel Libman in NYC. Her close friends included the painters Georges Clairin and Louise Abb\u00e9ma, a French impressionist painter, some nine years her junior. This relationship was so close, the two women were rumoured to be lovers. In 1990, a painting by Abb\u00e9ma, depicting the two on a boat ride on the lake in the bois de Boulogne, was donated to the Com\u00e9die-Fran\u00e7aise. The accompanying letter stated that the painting was \"Peint par Louise Abb\u00e9ma, le jour anniversaire de leur liaison amoureuse\" (translated: \"Painted by Louise Abb\u00e9ma on the anniversary of their love affair\"). Clairin and Abb\u00e9ma spent their holidays with Bernhardt and her family at her summer residence at Belle-\u00cele, and remained close with Bernhardt until her death.\nMarriage with Jacques Damala.\nIn 1882, in Paris, Bernhardt met a Greek diplomat, Aristide Damala (known in France by his stage name Jacques Damala), who was 11 years her junior, and notorious for his romantic affairs. Bernhardt's biographer described him as \"handsome as Adonis, insolent, vain, and altogether despicable.\" His affairs with married women had already led to one suicide and two divorces, and the French government had asked him to leave Paris, transferring him to the Greek Embassy in St. Petersburg. She already had a lover at the time, Philippe Garnier, her leading man, but when she met Damala, she fell in love with him, and insisted that her tour be modified to include a stop in St. Petersburg. Garnier politely stepped aside and let her go to St. Petersburg without him. Arriving in St. Petersburg, Bernhardt invited Damala to give up his diplomatic post to become an actor in her company, as well as her lover, and before long, they decided to marry. During a break in the tour, they were married on 4 April 1882 in London. She told her friends that she married because marriage was the only thing she had never experienced. Upon returning to Paris, she found a minor role for Damala in \"La Dame aux Cam\u00e9lias\" and a leading role in another play without her, \"Les M\u00e8res Ennemies\" by Catulle Mend\u00e8s. Critics dismissed him as handsome, but without noticeable talent. Damala began taking large quantities of morphine, and following Bernhardt's great success in \"Fedora\", Damala took every opportunity to criticise and humiliate her. She later discovered that he was using the money she gave him to buy presents for other women. In early December 1882, when she confronted him, he declared that he was going to North Africa to join the Foreign Legion, and disappeared.\nIn early 1889, Damala reappeared at Bernhardt's door haggard, ill, and penniless. Bernhardt instantly forgave him, and offered him the role of Armand Duval in a new production of \"La Dame aux Cam\u00e9lias\" at the Vari\u00e9t\u00e9s. They performed together from 18 May until 30 June. He looked exhausted and old, confused his diction, and forgot his lines. The critic for \"Le Rappel\" wrote: \"Where is, alas, the handsome Armand Duval who was presented to us for the first time a few years ago at the Ga\u00eet\u00e9?\" The critic Francisque Sarcey wrote simply, \"he makes us feel sick.\" When his contract ended, he was able to get another contract as an actor at a different theater, and continued to harass Bernhardt. He attended one of her performances sitting in the first row, and made faces at her. Her current lover, Philippe Garnier, saw him and beat him. Later, he entered her house and ravaged the furniture. Bernhardt was a Roman Catholic, and did not want to divorce him. He continued to act, sometimes with success, particularly in a play by Georges Ohnet, \"Le Ma\u00eetre des Forges,\" in 1883. However, his morphine addiction continued to worsen. In August 1889, Bernhardt learned that he had taken an overdose of morphine in Marseille. She hurried to his bedside and nursed him until he died on 18 August 1889, at the age of 34. He was buried in Athens. Bernhardt sent a bust she had made of him to be placed on his tomb, and when she toured in the Balkans, always made a detour to visit his grave. Until the end of her life, she continued to sign official documents as \"Sarah Bernhardt, widow of Damala\".\nBelle-\u00cele.\nAfter her 1886\u201387 tour, Bernhardt recuperated on Belle-\u00cele, a small island off the coast of Brittany, south of the Quiberon peninsula. She purchased a ruined 17th-century fortress, located at the end of the island and approached by a drawbridge, and turned it into her holiday retreat. From 1886 to 1922, she spent nearly every summer, the season when her theatre was closed, on Belle-\u00cele. She built bungalows for her son Maurice and her grandchildren, and bungalows with studios for her close friends, the painters Georges Clairin and Louise Abb\u00e9ma. She also brought her large collection of animals, including several dogs, two horses, a donkey, a hawk given to her by the Russian Grand Duke Alexis, an Andean wildcat, and a boa constrictor she had brought back from her tour of South America. She entertained many visitors at Belle-\u00cele, including King Edward VII, who stopped by the island on a cruise aboard the royal yacht. Always wrapped in white scarves, she played tennis (under house rules that required that she be the winner) and cards, read plays, and created sculptures and ornaments in her studio. When the fishermen of the island suffered a bad season, she organised a benefit performance with leading actors to raise funds for them. She gradually enlarged the estate, purchasing a neighboring hotel and all the land with a view of the property, but in 1922, as her health declined, she abruptly sold it and never returned. During the Second World War, the Germans occupied the island, and in October 1944, before leaving the island, they dynamited most of the compound. All that remains is the original old fort, and a seat cut into the rock where Bernhardt awaited the boat that took her to the mainland.\nVegetarianism.\nBernhardt was described as a strict vegetarian (what would later be termed vegan), as she avoided dairy, eggs and meat. Her diet consisted of cereal, fruit, nuts and vegetables. In 1913, \"The Literary Digest\" reported that she became vegetarian to lose weight and regain her figure. However, a 1923 biography of Bernhardt noted that she consumed fish and in her older years favoured Gruy\u00e8re or Pont-l'\u00c9v\u00eaque cheese.\nLegacy.\nMexican actress Virginia F\u00e1bregas (1871\u20131950) was nicknamed \"The Mexican Sarah Bernhardt.\"\nAfter Bernhardt's death, her theatre was managed by her son Maurice until his death in 1928. It kept its name until the occupation of Paris by the Germans in World War II, when, because of Bernhardt's Jewish ancestry, the name was changed to Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de la Cit\u00e9. The name was changed back to the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre Sarah-Bernhardt in 1947, then in 1957 became the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre des Nations. In 1968, it was renamed the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de la Ville, which is the name it has today.\nIn 1876, Bernhardt constructed a large townhouse at 35 rue Fortuny in the 17th arrondissement, not far from Parc Monceau, for her family, servants, and animals. In 1885, when her debts mounted, she sold the house. Once her fortune was replenished by her tours abroad, she bought an even larger house at 56 avenue Pereire in the 17th arrondissement, where she died in 1923. The house was demolished in the 1960s and replaced by a modern apartment building. A plaque on the fa\u00e7ade commemorates Bernhardt's earlier residence.\nIn 1960, Bernhardt was inducted into the Hollywood Walk of Fame with a motion pictures star located at 1751 Vine Street. To date, she is the earliest born person on the Walk (born in 1844), followed by Thomas Edison and Siegmund Lubin.\nIn 2018, Roundabout Theatre Company produced Theresa Rebeck's play \"Bernhardt/Hamlet\". In the play, Rebeck explores the controversy surrounding Bernhardt's decision to play Hamlet. The play opened on Broadway in September at the American Airlines Theater for a limited run. It starred Janet McTeer as Bernhardt and it was directed by Moritz von Stuelpnagel. McTeer received a Tony Award nomination for portraying Bernhardt.\nThe New Women's Movement in Brazil.\nThe new women's movement that took place in late nineteenth century and early twentieth century Brazil, was a movement built around a woman's ability to gain access to public spaces in Brazil. Among middle-class women, new opportunities and possibilities opened up for women allowing them professional positions in the workforce. Some women also found the acting profession to afford them freedom and independence. The theatre offered women an environment relatively free of social constraints. The profession of an actress held a controversial opinion within society. On one hand, high society embraced women who appeared in plays or opera representing a high culture. While on the other hand, female performers could suffer public scrutiny and gossip for leading unconventional lives.\n\"The Eternal Feminine\" was published http:// in Brazil six months before the first visiting of Sarah Bernhardt. \"The Eternal Feminine\" discussed advances of middle class and elite women in Brazil, citing expanding educational opportunities, acknowledging that women were capable of entering many new professions and industries that had previously been restricted to primarily men. \"The Eternal Feminine\" stated that \"The bello sexo\", as journalists so often called women, may move into new occupations, but their beauty, elegance, and eternal femininity needed to remain in place.\"\nBernhardt's performances in Brazil had lasting effects in the sense that they encouraged new notions of possibilities for women in a patriarchal and traditional society and in theatre. Bernhardt made use of an array of tropes assigned to women to create a public personality that afforded her freedom, independence, and immense popularity at home and abroad.\" Even her famous cross-dressing roles such as Hamlet intervened in the tension between the traditional woman and the New Woman. Bernhardt's ability to own her own theatre also speaks to the ways in which she embodies a new form of women.\nThe article \"Sarah Bernhardt's Knee\" read:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"In an era of debate about gender norms, Bernhardt's star image presented a similar fantasy scenario that fulfilled a need on the part of her public for unity, resolution, and reassurance. To her more socially conservative fans, Bernhardt appeased fears concerning the threat of the New Woman and the demise of female seduction as an everyday pleasure. She transcended the perceived conflict between the independent New Woman and the s\u00e9ductrice...[S]he was a living example of Marguerite Durand's contention that a woman need not lose her femininity to compete in a man's world.\"\nSee: \nArt:\nTheater:\nTV and films:\nBooks (fiction):\n Comics:\n Other:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44610", "revid": "1383976", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44610", "title": "Dave Mattacks", "text": "English drummer\nDavid James Mattacks (born 13 March 1948) is an English rock and folk drummer, best known for his work with British folk rock band Fairport Convention.\nFairport Convention.\nHe replaced Martin Lamble, who had died on 12 May 1969 in a road accident on the M1 motorway, as the drummer for Fairport Convention. Mattacks left Fairport Convention in early 1972 to join The Albion Country Band. Meanwhile, he had also contributed to numerous studio recordings such as the Morris On project, Nick Drake's \"Bryter Layter\", Steve Ashley's \"Stroll On\" sessions, Steeleye Span's debut album \"Hark! The Village Wait\", John Martyn's \"Solid Air\" and Harvey Andrews' album \"Writer of Songs\". He returned to Fairport Convention in order to help complete the 1973 album \"Rosie\" with a revamped line up of the band.\nMattacks also played on \"Nine\" (1974) but left halfway through the making of the follow-up \"Rising for the Moon\", following an altercation with engineer Glyn Johns. Some of Mattacks' most notable participation in studio recordings in the late 1970s are the work on art rock studio albums by Brian Eno (\"Before and After Science\") and 801's \"Listen Now\", as well as several Ashley Hutchings-related folk rock projects (The Compleat Dancing Master, Son of Morris On etc.).\nWhen Fairport Convention re-formed in 1985 after a six-year absence, Mattacks was recruited as drummer. He had already been playing with them again during annual reunions at the fledgling Cropredy Festival. Mattacks remained with Fairport until 1997. He has rejoined them on occasion, such as at Cropredy in 2019, to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the release of \"Liege &amp; Lief\".\nMattacks returned to Fairport Convention on a part-time basis in 2023 following Gerry Conway's retirement.\nOther works.\nHe began as a trainee piano-tuner before taking up the drums. He played with several jazz bands before joining Fairport Convention. \nMattacks has also worked both as a session musician and as a performing artist. Apart from playing the drums, he is also a proficient keyboard player and occasionally played the bass guitar on studio recordings.\nHe also established himself as a touring drummer for Richard Thompson, playing on several of Thompson's studio albums.\nPersonal life.\nMattacks was born in Edgware, Middlesex, England.\nIn 1998, he moved to Marblehead, Massachusetts, United States, where he is a sought-after studio musician, record producer, and member of the band Super Genius, while still touring regularly with various acts in the United Kingdom, Europe and Australia.\nOther collaborations.\nHas recorded with.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHas toured and recorded with.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44611", "revid": "724850", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44611", "title": "Brillat-Savarin cheese", "text": "French soft cheese\nBrillat-Savarin () is a soft-ripened triple cream cow's milk cheese with at least 72% fat in dry matter (roughly 40% overall). It has a natural, bloomy rind. It was created c. 1890 as \"Excelsior\" or (\"Gourmets' delight\") by the Dubuc family, near Forges-les-Eaux in Seine-Maritime. Brillat-Savarin is produced all year round, mainly in Normandy, and also in Burgundy.\nFather and son cheesemakers Pierre and Henri Androu\u00ebt renamed it in the 1930s, as an homage to the 18th-century French gourmet and political figure Jean Anthelme Brillat-Savarin. It comes in wheels approximately 4\u00a0cm thick, and is matured for one to two weeks in dry cellar. It is also available as a fresh cheese (\"non affin\u00e9\") that resembles rich cream cheese.\nIt is a triple cream soft-ripened cheese that is luscious, creamy and faintly sour.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44613", "revid": "18421420", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44613", "title": "Thomas F. Bayard", "text": "American lawyer, politician and diplomat (1828\u20131898)\nThomas Francis Bayard (October 29, 1828 \u2013 September 28, 1898) was an American lawyer, politician and diplomat from Wilmington, Delaware. A Democrat, he served three terms as the United States Senator from Delaware and made three unsuccessful bids for the Democratic nomination for President of the United States. In 1885, President Grover Cleveland appointed him Secretary of State. After four years in private life, he returned to the diplomatic arena as Ambassador to Great Britain.\nBorn in Delaware to a prominent family, Bayard learned politics from his father James A. Bayard Jr., who also served in the Senate. In 1869, the Delaware legislature elected Bayard to the Senate upon his father's retirement. A Peace Democrat during the Civil War, Bayard spent his early years in the Senate in opposition to Republican policies, especially the Reconstruction of the defeated Confederate states. His conservatism extended to financial matters as he became known as a staunch supporter of the gold standard and an opponent of greenbacks and silver coinage which he believed would cause inflation. Bayard's conservative politics made him popular in the Southern United States and with financial interests in the Eastern United States, but never popular enough to obtain the Democratic nomination for president which he attempted to win in 1876, 1880 and 1884.\nIn 1885, President Cleveland appointed Bayard Secretary of State. Bayard worked with Cleveland to promote American trade in the Pacific while avoiding the acquisition of colonies at a time when many Americans clamored for them. He sought increased cooperation with the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, working to resolve disputes over fishing and seal-hunting rights in the waters around the Canada\u2013United States border. As ambassador, Bayard continued to strive for Anglo-American friendship. This brought him into conflict with his successor at the State Department Richard Olney, when Olney and Cleveland demanded more aggressive diplomatic overtures than Bayard wished in the Venezuelan crisis of 1895. His term at the American embassy ended in 1897 and he died the following year.\nEarly life and family.\nBayard was born in Wilmington, Delaware, in 1828, the second son of James A. Bayard Jr. and Anne \"n\u00e9e\" Francis. The Bayard family was prominent in Delaware, as Bayard's father would be elected to the United States Senate in 1851. Among Bayard's ancestors were his grandfather James A. Bayard, also a U.S. senator; and great-grandfather Richard Bassett, who served as U.S senator from and governor of Delaware. Several other relatives served in high office, including Bayard's uncle Richard H. Bayard, another Delaware senator; and his great-great-granduncle Nicholas Bayard, who was mayor of New York City. On his mother's side, Bayard descended from Philadelphia lawyer and financier Tench Francis Jr. Bayard was educated in private academies in Wilmington and then in Flushing, New York, when his father moved to New York City for business reasons. Bayard remained in New York when his father returned to Delaware in 1843, and he worked as a clerk in the mercantile firm of his brother-in-law August Schermerhorn.\nIn 1846, his father secured him a job in a banking firm in Philadelphia, and he worked there for the next two years. Bayard was unsatisfied with his progress at the firm and returned to Wilmington to read law at his father's office. Bayard was admitted to the bar in 1851, the year that his father was elected to the U.S. Senate. Thomas took on greater responsibilities in the family law office and rose quickly in the legal profession. In 1853, after the election of Democratic President Franklin Pierce, Bayard was appointed United States Attorney for Delaware. He spent only a year in the position before moving to Philadelphia to open a law practice with his friend William Shippen, a partnership that lasted until Shippen's death in 1858. While in Philadelphia, Bayard met Louise Lee, whom he married in October 1856. The marriage produced twelve children.\nCivil War and Reconstruction.\nBayard's return to Wilmington in 1858 brought greater involvement in the political scene. James Bayard was a delegate to the 1860 Democratic National Convention, and Thomas attended with him. The elder Bayard supported Robert M. T. Hunter of Virginia for the nomination. When the convention deadlocked and the Southern Democrats split from the main party, James Bayard adhered to the regular Democrats, but told Thomas that he thought the nominee, Stephen A. Douglas of Illinois, was untrustworthy. The subsequent election of Republican Abraham Lincoln and secession of the seven states of the Deep South led both Bayards to fear for the future of the Union, and the elder Bayard to propose a convention of all the states to resolve their differences. In the meantime, as four more Southern states seceded, James Bayard encouraged his son to help organize an independent militia unit, the Delaware Guard; Thomas Bayard was commissioned as its First Lieutenant.\nIn 1860, Delaware occupied an unusual position in the free state-slave state divide; nominally a slave state, Delaware's slave population had been in steep decline for decades and represented just 1.6% of the state's people. Opinion on secession was mixed in Delaware, but the Bayards were Peace Democrats and leaned to the Southern perspective. They blamed the war on abolitionist Republicans and believed that secession, while unwise, should not be suppressed with military force. Thomas Bayard spoke at a public meeting in Dover in June 1861, saying that \"with this secession, or revolution, or rebellion, or by whatever name it may be called, the State of Delaware has naught to do.\" Even after the Civil War's first battles erupted in Virginia, Bayard continued to hope for peace. By early 1862, the Delaware Guard came under suspicion of Southern sympathies, and Major General Henry du Pont, commander of the state militia, ordered it disarmed. When Bayard refused to comply, he was briefly arrested before being released on parole. Bayard's father was reelected to the Senate in 1862, but resigned shortly thereafter in protest of the new oath of office, which demanded that Senators swear they had never borne arms against the United States nor given aid and encouragement to its enemies.\nBayard and his father continued in private law practice through the war. Both were pleased with the Democrats' peace platform in 1864, but disappointed in the choice of nominee, Major General George B. McClellan, a War Democrat. In 1866, Thomas Bayard successfully represented four South Carolinians in \"habeas corpus\" cases against the military. The following year, Senator George R. Riddle died and the legislature elected James Bayard to fill the remainder of the term, which ended in 1869. Bayard became more politically active, speaking at a public meeting in September 1867 against constitutional proposals for ending racial discrimination in voting rights. The following year, he condemned the impeachment proceedings against President Andrew Johnson, who had succeeded to the presidency in 1865 after Lincoln's assassination and had threatened the Republican Congress's plans for Reconstruction of the Southern states. Both Bayards attended the 1868 Democratic National Convention and, although they were unenthusiastic about the nominee, Horatio Seymour, supported the unsuccessful ticket that year.\nUnited States Senator.\nReaction to Reconstruction.\nBayard's father retired from the Senate when his term ended in 1869, and the legislature elected his son to the seat with little opposition. Bayard entered a Senate in which his fellow Democrats were greatly outnumbered by Republicans; the new president, Ulysses S. Grant, was also a Republican. In the Reconstruction Era, Bayard took up the cause of the defeated South, speaking against the continued military rule of the conquered states and advocating a return to civilian (and conservative) government. He protested the requirement that readmitted Southern states ratify the Fourteenth Amendment, which guaranteed equal protection of the laws to all Americans. Bayard also inveighed against the continued presence of federal troops in the South. He spoke against each of the three Enforcement Acts, which increased the federal government's power to protect black Southerners' civil and political rights in the face of rising violence by the Ku Klux Klan and other groups.\nAlthough his protests were to little effect, Bayard continued to voice opposition to the majority party's plans for reconstructing the South. In 1871, he was named to a joint committee sent by Congress to investigate conditions in the South. The committee, like the Congress, had a Republican majority, and their report detailed many of the Klan's outrages against the newly freed slaves. Bayard dissented, questioning the veracity of the witnesses' testimony and stating that there were few incidents of lawlessness and that the South was generally at peace. The majority disagreed, and their findings were the basis for the Third Enforcement Act later that year.\nAs more Democrats returned to the Senate, and as Republican goals shifted elsewhere, Bayard's ideas gained some traction, but were still largely in vain. In 1873, the Senate passed a resolution he introduced that demanded that Grant disclose how much government money was being expended in enforcing Reconstruction laws in the South, and to whom it was paid; the President ignored the resolution. The next year, Bayard opposed a Republican bill authorizing federal supervision of the upcoming election in Louisiana, attacking the Republican administration there as corrupt; he was unsuccessful, and the election was supervised by federal troops. He spoke forcefully against the proposed Civil Rights Act of 1875, which was to be the last such act for nearly a century. Again, he was unsuccessful and the bill, which guaranteed equal treatment in public accommodations regardless of race, passed Congress and became law. Although ultimately unsuccessful, Bayard's actions endeared him to his conservative constituents, and he was elected to another six-year term in 1874.\nSpecie resumption.\nFrom the start of his congressional career, Bayard was an advocate of hard money, i.e., a dollar backed by gold. During the Civil War, Congress had authorized a new form of currency, redeemable not in specie (gold or silver coin) but in 6% government bonds. These United States Notes, popularly known as \"greenbacks,\" had helped to finance the war when the government's gold supply did not keep pace with the expanding costs of maintaining the armies. When the crisis had passed, many in Congress (including Bayard) wanted to return the nation's currency to a gold standard as soon as possible. The process of retiring the greenbacks had already begun when Bayard was elected, but stopped when many Senators and Representatives thought the fiscal contraction too severe, and likely to be harmful to the economy. In 1869, Congress passed the Public Credit Act of 1869, which required that the government pay its bond holders in gold, not greenbacks. Bayard thought the bill not strong enough, since it did not require removing greenbacks from circulation, and he voted against it.\nIn 1873, a business depression (known as the Panic of 1873), increased the pressure for retaining greenbacks, as some in Congress believed that inflating the currency would ease the economic problems. Grant's Treasury Secretary, William Adams Richardson, reissued $26 million of the redeemed greenbacks, reversing the administration's previous policy of removing them from circulation. This ignited a four-month debate in the Senate over whether and when the government should return to backing all of its currency with gold\u2014including the remaining greenbacks. The majority, including Bayard, favored resumption, but in wording the resolution that passed the Senate, Republican John Sherman of Ohio left vague the exact timing; Bayard feared it would be put off indefinitely. The Sherman bill also proposed to remove greenbacks from circulation by exchanging them for bonds payable in gold; in response, Bayard proposed an amendment limiting the amount of debt the government could incur. When the amendment was rejected, Bayard voted against the bill (known as the Specie Payment Resumption Act), believing that it was likely to cause inflation.\nElection of 1876.\nBayard's popularity with his party had grown during his time in the Senate, and by 1875 he was seen as a contender for the presidency. His advocacy of hard money had won him friends in some of the Northern cities, and his stance against Reconstruction made him popular throughout the South. Competing for those same factions of the Democratic party was New York governor Samuel J. Tilden, who had gained national fame for fighting the political corruption of William M. Tweed's Tammany Hall machine in New York City. Other contenders included Governor Thomas A. Hendricks of Indiana and Major General Winfield Scott Hancock. Tilden's wealth and national renown helped gather delegates to his cause, and in June 1876, he entered the convention with 404\u00bd votes; Bayard placed fifth with 33. Tilden was nominated on the second ballot. Displeased with the result, Bayard nonetheless supported the Democratic nominee against Governor Rutherford B. Hayes of Ohio, the Republican candidate, speaking to large crowds in cities across the North and Midwest.\nOn election day, the vote was close, but appeared to favor a Tilden victory. Three days later, Tilden looked to have won 184 electoral votes, one short of a majority, while Hayes appeared to have 166 votes, with the votes of Florida, Louisiana, and South Carolina still in doubt. Each party sent their people to observe the vote in the disputed states. Abram Hewitt, chairman of the Democratic National Committee, asked Bayard to travel to Louisiana along with several others, but Bayard refused to go. The counts of the disputed ballots were inconclusive, with each state producing two sets of returns, one signed by Democratic officials, the other by Republicans, each claiming victory for their man. There was debate about which person or house of Congress was authorized to decide between the competing slates of electors, with the Republican Senate and the Democratic House each claiming priority. By January 1877, with the question still unresolved, Congress and President Grant agreed to submit the matter to a bipartisan Electoral Commission, which would be authorized to determine the fate of the disputed electoral votes. Bayard supported the idea, and visited Tilden in New York to convince him that it was the only alternative to stalemate and possible renewed civil war. The bill passed, with Bayard's vote, and provided for a commission of five representatives, five senators, and five Supreme Court justices.\nTo ensure partisan balance, there would be seven Democrats and seven Republicans; the fifteenth member was to be a Supreme Court justice chosen by the other four on the commission (themselves two Republicans and two Democrats). Justice David Davis, an independent respected by both parties, was expected to be their choice. Bayard was among the seven Democrats chosen. Davis upset the careful planning by accepting election to the Senate by the state of Illinois and refusing to serve on the commission. The remaining Supreme Court justices were all Republicans and, with the addition of Justice Joseph P. Bradley to the place intended for Davis, the commission had an 8\u20137 Republican majority. The commission met and considered all of the disputed ballots, awarding each to Hayes by an 8\u20137 party-line vote. Bayard and his fellow Democrats were outraged, and the Democratic majority in the House threatened to filibuster to prevent the results from being accepted. As the March 4 inauguration day approached, leaders of both parties met at Wormley's Hotel in Washington to negotiate a compromise. Republicans promised that, in exchange for Democratic acquiescence in the committee's decision, Hayes would order federal troops to withdraw from the South and accept the election of Democratic governments in the remaining \"unredeemed\" states there. The Democrats agreed and the filibuster ended. Tilden later blamed Bayard, among others, for his role in creating the Electoral Commission, but Bayard defended his position, believing that the only alternative to the result was civil war.\nGold standard.\nIn 1873, Congress had passed a Coinage Act that regulated which coins were legal tender. The list of legal coins duplicated that of the previous coinage act, leaving off only the silver dollar and three smaller coins. The rationale in the Treasury report accompanying the draft bill was that to mint a gold dollar and a silver dollar with different intrinsic values was problematic; as the silver dollar did not circulate and the gold did, it made sense to drop the unused coin. The bill passed easily, with Bayard's support, but quickly thereafter became unpopular. Opponents of the bill would later call this omission the \"Crime of '73,\" and would mean it literally, circulating tales of bribery of Congressmen by foreign agents.\nOver the next few years, pressure to reintroduce silver coinage grew, and cut across party lines. In 1877, Republican Senator Stanley Matthews of Ohio introduced a resolution to pay the national debt in silver instead of gold. Bayard joined several Republicans in speaking and voting against the measure, calling it \"folly,\" but it passed the Senate 42 to 20. Meanwhile, Democrat Richard P. Bland of Missouri furthered the silver cause from the House, proposing a free silver bill that would require the United States to buy as much silver as miners could sell the government and strike it into coins, a system that would increase the money supply and aid debtors.\nIn short, silver miners would sell the government metal worth fifty to seventy cents, and receive back a silver dollar. William B. Allison, a pro-silver Republican from Iowa, offered an amendment in the Senate requiring the purchase of two to four million dollars per month of silver, but not allowing private deposit of silver at the mints. Thus, the seignorage, or difference between the face value of the coin and the worth of the metal contained within it accrued to the government's credit, not private citizens. Bayard saw the whole effort as the path to inflation and economic ruin. Again, he spoke against the bill, but like the Matthews resolution, the Bland\u2013Allison Act passed both houses of Congress in 1878. President Hayes shared Bayard's fear of inflation, and vetoed the bill, but Congress mustered the two-thirds vote necessary to overturn the veto, and it became law.\nClashes with Hayes.\nThe elections of 1878 returned control of both houses of Congress to the Democrats for the first time since before the Civil War. The new Democratic majority passed an army appropriation bill in 1879 with a rider that repealed the Enforcement Acts. Those Acts, passed during Reconstruction, made it a crime to prevent someone from voting because of his race and allowed the use of federal troops to supervise elections. Bayard supported the effort, which passed both houses and sent to the President. Hayes was determined to preserve the law to protect black voters, and he vetoed the appropriation. Bayard spoke in favor of the bill, believing the time had come to end the military's involvement in Southern politics. The Democrats did not have enough votes to override the veto, but they passed a new bill with the same rider. Hayes vetoed this as well, and the process was repeated three times more. Finally, Hayes signed an appropriation without the rider, but Congress refused to pass another bill to fund federal marshals, who were vital to the enforcement of the Force Acts. The election laws remained in effect, but the funds to enforce them were cut off.\nBayard also clashed with Hayes on the issue of Chinese immigration. In 1868, the Senate had ratified the Burlingame Treaty with China, allowing an unrestricted flow of Chinese immigrants into the country. Bayard criticized the treaty because it treated Americans and the Chinese as equal races, when he believed the latter was inferior. As the economy soured after the Panic of 1873, Chinese immigrants were blamed for depressing workmen's wages. During the Great Railroad Strike of 1877, anti-Chinese riots broke out in San Francisco, and a third party, the Workingman's Party, was formed with an emphasis on stopping Chinese immigration. Bayard favored some restriction on Chinese immigration and voted in favor of a Chinese Exclusion Act in 1879, which passed both houses that year. Hayes vetoed the bill, believing that the United States should not abrogate treaties without negotiation. The veto drew praise among some New England Republicans, but was bitterly denounced in the West. After the veto, Assistant Secretary of State Frederick W. Seward suggested that both countries work together to reduce immigration. Congress passed a new law to that effect, the Chinese Exclusion Act, in 1882. Bayard supported this new act, which became law with President Chester A. Arthur's signature that year.\nElection of 1880.\nAs the election of 1880 drew near, Bayard was again regarded as a likely candidate. Hayes had pledged himself to a one-term presidency, which meant the Republicans would not have the advantage of incumbency. On the Democratic side, Tilden was regarded as the natural choice, as many Democrats were still convinced he had been robbed of the office in 1876. Tilden's supporters saw Bayard as a rival, and sought to smear him by suggesting he had colluded with Republicans to defeat Tilden in 1876. Meanwhile, in the House, Tilden supporter Clarkson Nott Potter of New York began an investigation into the 1876 election, hoping that evidence of Republican malfeasance would harm that party's candidate in 1880. In fact, the Potter committee's investigation had the opposite effect, uncovering telegrams from Tilden's nephew, William Tilden Pelton, that offered bribes to Southern Republicans in the disputed states to help Tilden claim their votes. The telegrams doomed Tilden's hopes for the nomination, and boosted Bayard's chance among the erstwhile Tilden supporters.\nAs Tilden's star began to fade, many Democrats looked to Bayard. He remained popular in the Eastern cities for his conservatism and hard money beliefs, but many in the South, including Senator Augustus Hill Garland of Arkansas, advised Bayard to embrace silver to help halt the defections of Southern and Western Democrats to the new Greenback Party. Bayard declined to do so. He was also reluctant to strike a deal with John Kelly of New York, whose Tammany faction of the Democratic party was currently at odds with the Tilden machine there. After the party rift caused the defeat of the Democratic governor in New York's 1879 election, many Tilden adherents began to think their candidate could not win his home state, and drifted to Bayard, among others. Tilden's supporters attempted to weaken Bayard in February 1880 by publishing the speech he gave in Dover in 1861, in which he said that the United States should acquiesce in Southern secession. At the same time, Bayard's uncompromising stance on the money question pushed some Democrats to support Major General Winfield Scott Hancock, who had not been identified with either extreme in the gold-silver debate and had a military record that appealed to Northerners.\nLeading up to the convention in Cincinnati, Tilden remained ambiguous about his intentions. George Gray, Delaware's attorney general, placed Bayard's name in nomination, calling the senator \"a veteran, covered in scars of many a hard-fought battle, where the principles of constitutional liberty have been at stake\u00a0... Bayard is a statesman who will need no introduction to the American people.\" When the convention took its first ballot on June 23, Bayard placed second with 153\u00bd votes, trailing only Hancock, who had 171. On the second ballot, the delegates broke for Hancock, and he was nominated. The Southern delegates, whom Bayard thought would be most loyal to him, were among the first to desert him. The convention nominated William Hayden English of Indiana, a Bayard supporter and hard-money man, for vice president, and then closed. Bayard's supporters were disappointed, but he supported the ticket as usual, in the interest of party unity. Hancock and English fought to a near-draw in the popular vote, but lost the electoral vote to James A. Garfield and Chester A. Arthur by 214 to 155.\nBudget surplus and civil service reform.\nThe Delaware legislature re-elected Bayard to the Senate for a third term in 1881 without serious opposition. The Senate in the 47th Congress was evenly divided between Republicans and Democrats, with the new vice president, Arthur, holding the tie-breaking vote. After spending the special session of March 1881 in an intra-Republican Party fight over the confirmation of Garfield's cabinet nominees, the Senate went into recess until October. By that time, Garfield had been assassinated and Arthur was president. When the Senate reconvened, the Democrats held the majority briefly, and Bayard was elected president pro tempore on October 10; Republicans regained the majority three days later as Republican latecomers arrived and were sworn in, and David Davis took over the office.\nAmong the issues confronting the Senate was the surplus of government funds. With high revenue held over from wartime taxes, the federal government had collected more than it spent since 1866; by 1882 the surplus reached $145 million. Opinions varied on how to balance the budget; the Democrats wished to lower tariffs, in order to reduce revenues and the cost of imported goods, while Republicans believed that high tariffs ensured high wages in manufacturing and mining. They preferred the government spend more on internal improvements and pensions for Civil War soldiers while reducing excise taxes. Bayard did not oppose some veterans' pensions, but worried that pensions would require continued high tariffs, which he opposed. He supported the movement for a commission to examine the tariff and suggest improvements, but opposed the resulting Tariff of 1883, which reduced tariffs by an average of 1.47%. Congressional Republicans also sought to deplete the surplus through a Rivers and Harbors Act that increased spending on internal improvements; Bayard opposed the bill and was gratified when Arthur vetoed it against his own party's wishes.\nBayard and Arthur also agreed on the need for civil service reform. Garfield's assassination by a deranged office seeker amplified the public demand for civil service reform. Leaders of both parties, including Bayard, realized that they could attract the votes of reformers by turning against the spoils system and, by 1882, a bipartisan effort began in favor of reform. In 1880, Democratic Senator George H. Pendleton of Ohio introduced legislation that required selection of civil servants based on merit as determined by an examination, but the bill did not pass. After the 1882 congressional elections, in which Democrats campaigned successfully on the reform issue, the Pendleton bill was proposed again, and again Bayard supported it, saying that \"the offices of this Government are created\u00a0... for the public service and not for the private use of incumbents.\" The Senate approved the bill 38\u20135 and the House soon concurred by a vote of 155\u201347. Arthur signed the Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act into law on January\u00a016, 1883.\nElection of 1884.\nDespite his rebukes at the Democratic national conventions in 1876 and 1880, Bayard was again considered among the leading candidates for the nomination in 1884. Tilden again was ambiguous about his willingness to run, but by 1883 New York's new governor, Grover Cleveland, began to surpass Tilden as a likely candidate. After Tilden definitively bowed out in June 1884, many of his former supporters began to flock to Bayard. Many Democrats were concerned with Cleveland's ability to carry his home state after he, like Tilden before him, became embroiled in a feud with the Tammany Hall wing of the party. At the same time, the Tammany Democrats became more friendly to Bayard.\nBy the time the Democrats had assembled in Chicago on July 8, 1884, to begin their convention, the Republicans had already picked their nominee: James G. Blaine of Maine. Blaine's nomination turned many reform-minded Republicans (known as Mugwumps) away from their party. Bayard and Cleveland, seen as honest politicians, were the Democrats most favored by the renegade Republican faction. Bayard was optimistic at the start of the convention, but the results of the first ballot ran heavily against him: 170 votes to Cleveland's 392. The reason was the same as in 1880: as Representative Robert S. Stevens of New York said, \"I believe if he were President his Administration would be one in which every American citizen would take pride. I believe he is a patriot, but it would be a suicidal attempt to nominate him. His [1861] Dover speech would be sent into every household in the North.\" The voting the next day demonstrated the point, as Cleveland was nominated on the second ballot.\nThe resulting campaign between Cleveland and Blaine focused more on scandal and mudslinging than the issues of the day. In the end, Cleveland eked out a narrow victory. Carrying New York was crucial for the Democrat; a shift of just 550 votes in that state would have given the election to Blaine. Instead, Cleveland carried his home state and a Democrat was elected president for the first time since 1856.\nSecretary of State.\nCleveland recognized Bayard's status in the party hierarchy by offering him the top spot in his cabinet, Secretary of State. Bayard did not think himself an expert in foreign affairs and enjoyed the sixteen years he had spent in the Senate; even so, he accepted the post and joined the administration. Washington journalist Benjamin Perley Poore described Bayard's personality and habits at that time:Mr. Bayard has no appreciation of humor or fondness for political intrigue, and department drudgery would be intolerable to him were it not for his passionate fondness for out-door exercise. A bold horseman, an untiring pedestrian, and enthusiastic angler, and a good swimmer, he preserves his health, and gives close attention to the affairs of his Department.\nSamoa and Hawaii.\nAmong the first foreign policy challenges Bayard and Cleveland faced was that concerning American influence in the Samoan Islands. The United States, Great Britain, and Germany all had treaties with the Samoan government that guaranteed their right to trade and establish naval bases there. In the 1880s, German chancellor Otto von Bismarck began to increase German influence in Samoa, and attempted to replace the Samoan king, Malietoa Laupepa, with Tamasese Titimaea, a claimant to the throne who favored German suzerainty. Bayard and Cleveland opposed any change that would undermine Samoan independence, as did the British government. Bayard filed a note of protest with the German government, and the three powers agreed to meet for a conference in Washington in June 1887, but they failed to achieve any agreement.\nShortly thereafter, Tamasese's unpopularity led another claimant, Mata'afa Iosefo, to start a rebellion that led to the Samoan Civil War. When Tamasese's German guards were killed, Bismarck considered it an attack on Germany, and sent warships to Samoa. Cleveland dispatched three American warships, , , and , in response, and a British warship joined them. As the threat of war grew, Bismarck backed down and agreed to another conference in 1889; two weeks later, a hurricane struck the harbor and all of the German and American warships were damaged or sunk. As tempers cooled, the parties met in conference in Berlin. By that time, Cleveland had been defeated for re-election and James G. Blaine took Bayard's place as Secretary of State. The three powers agreed to a tripartite protectorate of Samoa with Malietoa Laupepa restored as king; that situation prevailed until 1899, when renewed civil war led to a second convention partitioning the islands between Germany and the United States.\nIn the Kingdom of Hawaii, Bayard and Cleveland pursued a similar goal of maintaining the Hawaiian kingdom's independence while expanding access for American trade. As a Senator, Bayard had voted for free trade with Hawaii, but the treaty was allowed to lapse in 1884. As Secretary of State the following year, Bayard hoped to again have free trade with Hawaii, and also endorsed the idea of establishing an American naval base there, although he preferred Midway Atoll to the eventual location, Pearl Harbor. A treaty to that effect passed the Senate in 1887 by a 43\u201311 vote. As in Samoa, the administration sought to curb foreign influence, encouraging the Hawaiian government to reject a loan from Britain that would have required pledging future government revenues toward its repayment.\nRelations with Britain.\nDespite their agreement on Samoa, much of Bayard's term of office was taken up in settling disputes with the United Kingdom. The largest of these concerned the Canadian fisheries off the Atlantic coasts of Canada and Newfoundland. The rights of American fishermen in Canadian waters had been disputed since American independence, but the most recent disagreement stemmed from Congress's decision in 1885 to abrogate part of the 1871 treaty that governed the situation. Under that treaty, American fishermen had the right to fish in Canadian waters; in return, fishermen from Canada and Newfoundland had the right to export fish to the United States duty-free. Protectionists in Congress thought the arrangement hurt American fisherman, and convinced their colleagues to repeal it. In response, Canadian authorities fell back on an interpretation of the earlier Treaty of 1818, and began to seize American vessels. In 1887, the lame duck 49th Congress then passed the Fisheries Retaliation Act, which empowered the president to bar Canadian ships from American ports if he thought Canadians were treating American fishermen \"unjustly;\" Cleveland signed the bill, but did not enforce it and hoped he and Bayard would be able to find a diplomatic solution to the escalating trade war.\nBritain agreed to negotiate, and a six-member commission convened in Washington in June 1887. Bayard led the American delegation, joined by James Burrill Angell, president of the University of Michigan, and William LeBaron Putnam, a Maine lawyer and international law scholar. Joseph Chamberlain, a leading statesman in the British Parliament, led their delegation, which also included Lionel Sackville-West, the British ambassador to the United States, and Charles Tupper, a future Prime Minister of Canada. By February 1888, the commission agreed on a new treaty, which would create a mixed commission to determine which bays were open to American fishermen. Americans could purchase provisions and bait in Canada if they purchased a license, but if Canadian fisherman were allowed to sell their catch in the United States duty-free, then the Americans' licenses to fish in Canada would be free. Bayard believed that the treaty, \"if observed honorably and honestly, will prevent future friction\u00a0... between the two nations.\" The Senate, controlled by Republicans, disagreed, and rejected the treaty by a 27\u201330 vote. Aware of the risk that the treaty might be rejected, Bayard and Chamberlain agreed on a two-year working agreement, allowing Americans to continue their fishing in Canadian waters by paying a fee. This arrangement was renewed every two years until 1912, when a permanent solution was found.\nA similar dispute with Britain arose in the Pacific, over the rights of Canadians to hunt seals in waters off the Pribilof Islands, a part of Alaska. While only Americans had the right to take seals on the islands, the right to hunt in the waters around them was less well-defined, and Americans believed foreign sealers were depleting the herd too quickly by hunting off-shore. Bayard and Cleveland believed the waters around the islands to be exclusively American, but when Cleveland ordered the seizure of Canadian ships there, Bayard tried to convince him to search for a diplomatic solution instead. The situation remained unresolved when the administration left office in 1889, and remained so until the North Pacific Fur Seal Convention of 1911.\nRelations with Britain were also impaired when Sackville-West intervened in the 1888 election. A Republican, posing as a British immigrant to the United States, asked Sackville-West whether voting for Cleveland or his Republican opponent, Benjamin Harrison, would best serve British interests. Sackville-West wrote that Cleveland was better for Britain; Republicans published the letter in October 1888, hoping to diminish Cleveland's popularity among Irish-Americans. Cleveland's cabinet discussed the matter and instructed Bayard to inform the ambassador his services would no longer be required in Washington. Bayard attempted to limit the electoral damage, and gave a speech in Baltimore condemning Republicans for scheming to portray Cleveland as a British tool. Cleveland was defeated for re-election the following month in a close election.\nReturn to private life.\nBayard's term as Secretary of State ended in March 1889 after Cleveland's defeat, and he returned to Wilmington to resume his law practice. He lived in \"very comfortable circumstances\" there, with a fortune estimated at $300,000, although his income from the law practice was modest. His wife having died in 1886, Bayard remarried in 1889 to Mary Willing Clymer, the granddaughter and namesake of the Philadelphia socialite Mary Willing Clymer. Bayard remained involved with Democratic politics and stayed informed on foreign affairs. When Cleveland was re-elected in 1892, many assumed Bayard would resume his position in the cabinet. Instead, Cleveland selected Judge Walter Q. Gresham of Indiana for the State Department and appointed Bayard Ambassador to Great Britain, the first American envoy to Britain to hold that rank (his predecessors had been envoys). Bayard accepted the appointment, which the Senate quickly confirmed.\nAmbassador to Great Britain.\nOn June 12, 1893, Lord Rosebery, the British Foreign Secretary, received Bayard in London. Bayard began his tenure as ambassador with an \"instinctive feeling of friendship for England,\" and a desire for peace and cooperation between the two nations. That desire was quickly impaired when Cleveland took the side of Venezuela when that nation insisted on taking a boundary dispute between it and British Guiana to international arbitration. The exact boundary had been in dispute for decades, but Britain had consistently denied any arbitration except over a small portion of the line; Venezuela wished the entire boundary included in any arbitration.\nBayard spent mid-1894 in the United States conferring with Gresham. The tension in the Venezuelan boundary dispute continued to escalate, while British disagreements with Nicaragua also threatened to involve the United States. Britain had once ruled the Caribbean coast of Nicaragua (the Mosquito Coast) but had abandoned it in 1860. Nicaragua had annexed the area while guaranteeing the inhabitants (the Miskito people) a degree of autonomy. When Nicaragua expanded their control of the area in 1894, the Miskito chief, Robert Henry Clarence, protested with the support of the British ambassador. Bayard agreed with Cleveland and Gresham that the British were not attempting to reestablish their colony, but Nicaraguans (and many Anglophobic Americans) saw a more sinister motive, including a possible British-controlled canal through Nicaragua. Returning to England, Bayard met with the new Foreign Secretary, Lord Kimberley, to emphasize Nicaragua's right to govern the area.\nThe tension over Nicaragua soon abated, but the May 1895 death of Secretary Gresham, who like Bayard had favored cooperation with the British, led to increased disagreement over the Venezuela issue. Cleveland appointed Richard Olney to take over the State Department, and Olney soon proved more confrontational than his predecessor. Olney's opinion, soon adopted by Cleveland, was that the Monroe Doctrine not only prohibited new European colonies, but also declared an American national interest in any matter of substance within the hemisphere. Olney drafted a long dispatch on the history of the problem, declaring that \"to-day the United States is practically sovereign on this continent, and its fiat is law upon the subjects to which it confines its interposition\u00a0...\" Bayard delivered the note to the British Prime Minister (Lord Salisbury, who was also serving as Foreign Secretary) on August 7, 1895.\nOlney's note was met with vehement disagreement and delay, but when tempers cooled, the British agreed to arbitration later that year. Bayard disagreed with the bellicose tone of the message, which he attributed to an effort to satisfy Anglophobia among \"Radical Republicans and the foolish Irishmen.\" Olney, for his part, thought Bayard soft-pedaled the note and asked Cleveland to remove Bayard from office, which Cleveland declined. The House of Representatives agreed with Olney, and passed a resolution of censure against Bayard in December 1895. Britain and Venezuela formally agreed to arbitration in February 1897, one month before the Cleveland administration came to an end. The panel's final judgement, delivered in 1899, awarded Britain almost all of the disputed territory.\nDeath and legacy.\nBayard remained in London until the arrival of his successor, John Hay, in April 1897. That same year, he was elected to the American Philosophical Society. He returned to Wilmington that May and visited ex-President Cleveland at his home in Princeton the following month, remaining friendly with him despite their differences on the Venezuela question. Bayard's health had begun to decline in England, and he was often ill after his return to the United States. He died on September 28, 1898, while visiting his daughter Mabel Bayard Warren in Dedham, Massachusetts. Bayard was buried in the Old Swedes Episcopal Church Cemetery at Wilmington. He was survived by his second wife and seven of his twelve children, including Thomas F. Bayard Jr., who would serve in the United States Senate from 1922 to 1929.\nThirteen years after his death, the 1911 \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" said of Bayard that \"his tall dignified person, unfailing courtesy, and polished, if somewhat deliberate, eloquence made him a man of mark in all the best circles. He was considered indeed by many Americans to have become too partial to English ways; and, for the expression of some criticisms regarded as unfavorable to his own countrymen, the House of Representatives went so far as to pass\u00a0... a vote of censure on him. The value of Bayard's diplomacy was, however, fully recognized in the United Kingdom where he worthily upheld the traditions of a famous line of American ministers.\" In 1929, the Dictionary of American Biography described Bayard, as a Senator, as being \"remembered rather for his opposition to Republican policies\u00a0... than for constructive legislation of the successful solution of great problems\", and said that he had \"the convictions of an earlier day\u00a0... and was never inclined, either politically or socially, to seek popularity with the country at large.\" Charles C. Tansill, a conservative historian, found much to praise in Bayard; he published a volume on Bayard's diplomatic career in 1940 and another about his congressional career in 1946, the only full-length biographies to appear since Bayard's death. Later historians took a dimmer view of Bayard's diplomatic career; in a 1989 book, Henry E. Mattox numbered Bayard among the Gilded Age foreign service officers who were \"demonstrably incompetent.\"\nIn 1924, Mount Bayard, a mountain in southeast Alaska was named in his honor.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBooks\nArticles\nNewspaper"}
{"id": "44614", "revid": "9092818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44614", "title": "Austro-Hungarian Empire", "text": ""}
{"id": "44616", "revid": "45417033", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44616", "title": "British sitcom", "text": "British television situation comedy\nA British sitcom or a Britcom is a situational comedy programme produced for British television.\nBritish sitcoms have predominantly been recorded on studio sets, while some include an element of location filming. Live audiences and multi-cameras were first used in the US by Desi Arnaz and Lucille Ball for their American show \"I Love Lucy\" in 1951 and the system was adopted in the UK. Several are made almost entirely on location (for example, \"Last of the Summer Wine\") and shown to a studio audience prior to final post-production to record genuine laughter. In contrast to the American team writing system, Ray Galton and Alan Simpson's huge successes were of such quality that they became the paradigm for British sitcom writing.\nBy the time the television set had become a common part of home furnishing, sitcoms were significant expressions of everyday life and were often a window on the times of enormous social changes in the British class system and its conflicts and prejudices. The period from 1970 to 1979 in particular is often considered the 'Golden Age' of British sitcom, with \"Fawlty Towers\" (1975 and 1979) being \"the British sitcom by which all other British sitcoms must be judged\". Since the turn of the century however, many are filmed on a single-camera set-up or entirely on location, with no studio screening or laugh track, such as \"The Royle Family\" (1998\u20132000, 2006\u20132012), and \"PhoneShop\" (2009\u20132013).\nA subset of British comedy consciously avoids traditional situation comedy themes, storylines, and home settings to focus on more unusual topics or narrative methods. \"Blackadder\" (1983\u20131989) and \"Yes Minister\" (1980\u20131988, 2013) moved what is often a domestic or workplace genre into the corridors of power. A later development was the mockumentary genre exemplified by series such as \"The Office\" (2001\u20132003), which also heralded the modern trend of the single-camera sitcom dispensing with live audiences.\nA 2004 poll by the BBC, ITV, and Channel 4 in the 12-episode documentary series \"Britain's Best Sitcom\", produced a list topped by traditional sitcoms with \"Only Fools and Horses\" holding the first place, and included favourites such as David Croft's \"Dad's Army\", \"Are You Being Served?\", and \"Hi-de-Hi!\". It was not until \"The Royle Family\" (1998\u20132000) in place 19 that a show without a live studio audience was featured.\nBritish Christmas TV programming has a long-standing tradition of heavily featuring comedy and sitcoms in the schedules, often with episodes that capture holiday spirit, and sometimes emotional moments. In her review in \"The Guardian\" of the 2024 \"Gavin &amp; Stacey\" grand finale Rachel Aroesti states \"...our greatest sitcoms tend to bow out at their peak, but the festive revival traditionally comes to the rescue, extending the lifespans of iconic shows such as \"The Royle Family\" and \"Only Fools and Horses\" by a decade or more. If there\u2019s still any doubt, \"Gavin &amp; Stacey\" (which ostensibly concluded in 2024) belongs firmly in the same modern classic category.\" The 2024 \"Gavin &amp; Stacey\" Christmas Day special, serving as the grand finale, peaked the ratings and further solidifies Britcom's legacy as a staple of British festive television.\nOn a suggestion to Miranda Hart by sitcom writer Abigail Wilson, who collaborated with comedy actors Dawn French (\"The Vicar of Dibley\" 1994\u20132000) and Jennifer Saunders (\"Absolutely Fabulous\" 1992\u20131995), the 2009 \"Miranda\" series staged a highly successful comeback for the 'old school' 20th century concept of sitcoms with live audiences and multiple cameras.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As a race, the British have one peculiarity that sets them apart from the rest of mankind: that extraordinary sense of humour; their ability to laugh at others, to laugh at the sublime \"and\" the ridiculous, to laugh at disaster and triumph, to be indifferent to the subject of the joke but to seek and find humour in everything..\u2014\u200a\nFrom the late 1950s to the late 1980s situation comedy proved to be one of the richest sources of public discourse on class in British life. Writing for the British Film Institute in 2003, Phil Wickham, film and TV critic and author of several books about British TV, concludes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Sitcoms have had an important influence on British life in the last 40 years. They have made us think about ourselves by making us laugh at our own absurdity. Good sitcoms are a kind of virtual reality - they reflect the rhythms of everyday life, the pain of the human condition and, of course, the joy of laughter.\nEarly years.\nBeginnings.\nThe origins of British TV sitcoms trace back to radio comedies of the 1940s and 1950s like \"Hancock's Half Hour\", which aired on BBC Radio in 1954, British TV sitcoms were initially inspired by American comedy formats, but they quickly developed their own style that highlighted dry wit, social satire, and the nuances of British life. Early shows of the 1950s often featured archetypal British characters such as the staff and pupils in \"Whack-O!\" and the various facets portrayed in \"Hancock's Half Hour\", and set the stage for what would become the British TV sitcom genre. They were set in post World War II working-class or domestic environments, highlighting issues of class, family dynamics, and British culture, while \"The Army Game\", ITV's first sitcom, parodied the life of army conscripts during the last years of the National Service which ended in 1963.\n\"Pinwright's Progress\".\nWritten by Rodney Hobson, \"Pinwright's Progress\" (1946\u20131947) was the world's first regular half-hour televised sitcom. Broadcast live in black and white by the BBC from Alexandra Palace, it was about J. Pinwright, the proprietor of a small shop. Storylines involved his hated rival and his staff, who only added to his problems by attempting to be helpful. The series featured an ensemble cast including James Hayter as J. Pinwright, Clarence Wright as Aubrey, Daphne Maddox as Miss Peasbody, Doris Palmer as Mrs Sigsbee, and Leonard Sharp as Ralph. Further roles included Benita Lydal as Mrs Rackstraw, Charles Irwin as a salesman, and Jill Christie as Pinwright's daughter. and produced and directed by John Glyn-Jones. The script editor was Ted Kavanagh, who during the World War II years also wrote the BBC Radio comedy series \"It's That Man Again\" (\"ITMA\" ), which according to Foster and Furst was \"entirely new, breaking away from the conventions of both radio and music hall comedy\".\n\"Hancock's Half Hour\".\nTransferred to television in 1956 after 48 episodes on BBC radio which began in 1954, \"Hancock's Half Hour\" (1956\u20131961) by Galton and Simpson was the first modern TV sitcom. Whilst moving away from audio variety towards character development, the radio series had been influential in the development of TV situation comedy. The radio series continued to be produced alongside the TV version. Tony Hancock played a fictionalised version of himself, a loser whose plans and aspirations are continually ruined by bad luck. Its only other regular cast member was the more worldly sidekick played by Sid James, later of \"Carry On\" fame and \"Bless This House\" . Other occasional participants included John Le Mesurier (\"Dad's Army\"), Kenneth Williams, and Patricia Hayes. Hancock's biographer John Fisher dates the first use of the term 'situation comedy' in British broadcasting to a BBC memo dated 31 March 1953 from radio comedy producer Peter Eton, suggesting the format as the ideal vehicle for Hancock's comedic style. According to Phil Wickham, writing for the Britiah Film Institute, \"Hancock's persona of the pompous loser out of his depth in an uncomprehending society still informs many programmes today\". The final BBC series of this show was broadcast under the shorter title \"Hancock\". In 1963, Hancock changed his writers and moved to ITV for a further 13-episode series also named \"Hancock\". The series, though relatively well received, has been described as \"clearly not up to the standard of [Hancock's] BBC work\".\n\"Whack-O!\".\nStars Jimmy Edwards in the lead role as Professor James Edwards, \"Whack-O!\" and was written by Frank Muir and Denis Norden. The series is about the drunken, gambling, devious, cane-swishing headmaster who tyrannised staff and children at the fictitious Chiselbury public school \"for the sons of Gentlefolk\". From 1956 to 1960 and 1971\u20131972, it ran for 60 episodes over 8 series. The first six episodes were subtitled \"Six of the Best\", alluding to the frequent and traditional punishment of disobedient pupils in the UK by caning which was the butt of many jokes. The BBC sums up this aspect of \"Whack-O!\" with: \"Watching the series now is a little painful in one respect \u2013 we're too sensitive to find canings amusing \u2013 but it's right on the money in other ways, mainly because finding over-privileged kids vile hasn't gone out of fashion.\"\nOnly six of the original black-and-white episodes are known to exist. The series was revived in colour with updated scripts in 1971\u201372, slightly retitled \"Whacko!\" and with less emphasis on the caning. Other members of the cast included Arthur Howard (series 1\u20137),\nJulian Orchard (series 8),\nKenneth Cope,\nNorman Bird,\nJohn Stirling,\nPeter Glaze,\nEdwin Apps (series 1\u20137),\nPeter Greene (series 8),\nDavid Langford,\nKeith Smith,\nBrian Rawlinson,\nGordon Phillot, Harold Bennett (\"Are You Being Served?\"), (series 8),\nFrank Raymond,\nGary Warren (series 8), and\nGreg Smith (series 8). A feature film, \"Bottoms Up\", was made in 1960.\n\"The Army Game\".\nPeter Eton's series of \"The Army Game\" (1957\u20131961) was probably British television's most successful sitcom of this period and ran for 154 episodes. Many of its stars went on to become household names. The original cast consisted of William Hartnell, Michael Medwin, Geoffrey Sumner, Alfie Bass, Charles Hawtrey, Bernard Bresslaw and Norman Rossington. The cast of \"The Army Game\" would change over the years with actors such as Geoffrey Palmer, Bill Fraser, Ted Lune, Frank Williams, Harry Fowler and Dick Emery appearing in subsequent series. \"The Army Game\" follows the exploits of Hut 29, a fictional dysfunctional group of conscripted National Service soldiers during the post-war years. Writers included creator Sid Colin, Larry Stephens, Maurice Wiltshire, Lew Schwarz, John Jowett, John Antrobus, John Foley, Marty Feldman, Barry Took, David Climie, David Cumming, Derek Collyer, Brad Ashton, John Junkin, Talbot Rothwell, Sidney Nelson, Stan Mars, Bob Perkins and Alan MacKinnon. At least three episodes are uncredited. In June 1959, a short \"The Army Game\" scene was performed by Michael Medwin, Alfie Bass, Norman Rossington, Bill Fraser and Ted Lune at the Royal Variety Performance in front of Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother. This was the last Royal Variety Performance that was not televised. This successful series inspired a film spin-off, \"I Only Arsked!\" (1958), and in 1958, just a year after the series debuted, the first \"Carry On\" film, the very similar \"Carry On Sergeant\", was released, also featuring Hawtrey, Rossington and Hartnell.\nThe 1960s.\nTwo channel TV.\nITV sitcoms began with the channel's launch in 1957 and throughout the 1960s helped shape British comedy with varied and often experimental styles. In the 1960s, the BBC produced a then-rare workplace comedy with \"The Rag Trade\" (1961\u20131963, 1977\u20131978) written by Ronald Wolfe and Ronald Chesney. The success of the series was due partly to the strength of the female ensemble playing the workforce, who included Sheila Hancock, Barbara Windsor and Esma Cannon. It also made the earliest of Richard Waring's domestic comedies, \"Marriage Lines\" (1961\u20131966), starring Richard Briers (later to star in \"The Good Life\") and Prunella Scales (who went on to star in \"Fawlty Towers\"), and \"Not in Front of the Children\" (1967\u201370), starring Wendy Craig.\nWomen were usually only cast in secondary roles in this period, though several series with Craig in the lead were an exception. Sitcoms developed by Carla Lane, the first successful female writer in the form, began with \"The Liver Birds\" (1969\u20131979, 1996), initially in collaboration with others.\nAnother change, with \"Steptoe and Son\" (1962\u201365, 1970\u201374) and \"The Likely Lads\" (1964\u20131966), producers began to cast actors, rather than the comedians around whom earlier series like \"Whack-O!\", with Jimmy Edwards, or \"Hancock's Half Hour\", had been built.\n\"Bootsie and Snudge\".\nAs a spin-off sequel to \"The Army Game\" and also starring Bill Fraser and Alfie Bass, \"Bootsie and Snudge\", (1960\u20131963, 1974) was written by a large team over its 104 episodes. Writers for the 1960\u201363 episodes included Marty Feldman, Barry Took, John Antrobus, Ray Rigby, David Cumming, Derek Collyer, James Kelly, Peter Lambda, Tom Espie, Jack Rosenthal, Harry Driver, and Doug Eden. The 1974 series was written by David Climie, Ronnie Cass and Lew Schwarz. The series established the reputation of actor Clive Dunn, leading to his role as Corporal Jones in \"Dad's Army\".\n\"Marriage Lines\".\nRunning for 43 episodes over 5 series (1963\u20131966), first titled \"The Marriage Lines\", \"Marriage Lines\" was written by Richard Waring and directed and produced by Robin Nash and Graeme Muir. The traditional domestic comedy about a young couple learning to cope with married life reflected social attitudes of the times, and provided its lead stars Richard Briers (\"The Good Life\", \"Ever Decreasing Circles\") and Prunella Scales (\"Fawlty Towers\") with a significant boost to their careers. The supporting cast included Edward de Souza, Ronald Hines and Christine Finn.\n\"Steptoe and Son\".\nWith its cast of only two regular characters played by Harry H. Corbett and Wilfrid Brambell, airing 1962\u201365 and 1970\u201374, \"Steptoe and Son\" was a Galton and Simpson creation and ran for 57 episodes over 8 series. Producers included Duncan Wood, John Howard Davies, Graeme Muir, and Douglas Argent. In 2000, the show was ranked number 44 on the 100 Greatest British Television Programmes compiled by the British Film Institute. In a 2001 Channel 4 poll Albert was ranked 39th on their list of the 100 Greatest TV Characters, The series was derived from a one-off Galton and Simpson comic play, \"The Offer\", shown on their BBC series Comedy Playhouse in 1962. It is regularly repeated and gave rise to four feature films.\n\"Till Death Us Do Part\".\nWritten by Johnny Speight and broadcast 1965\u20131968 and 1972\u20131975 by the BBC for 54 episodes, \"Till Death Us Do Part\" featured Warren Mitchell as Alf Garnett and was an instant hit. Created by Johnny Speight, \"Till Death Us Do Part\" centred on the East End Garnett family, led by patriarch Alf Garnett (Warren Mitchell), a reactionary white working-class man who holds racist and anti-socialist views. His long-suffering wife Else was played by Dandy Nichols, and his daughter Rita (Una Stubbs) and her husband Mike Rawlins (Anthony Booth) is a socialist 'layabout' from Liverpool who frequently locks horns with Garnett. The show captured a key feature of Britain in the 1960s \u2014 the public perception that the generation gap was widening and addressed racial and political issues that had been becoming increasingly prevalent in British society. It became an instant hit because, although a comedy, it dealt with aspects of working-class life comparatively realistically and in the context of its time. It was criticised for its bad language by Mary Whitehouse a campaigner against social liberalism and the mainstream British media. Controversially, the show was one of the earliest mainstream programmes to feature the expletive \"bloody\" and was one of many perceived by Whitehouse as an example of the BBC's \"moral laxity\". Although in 2000, the show was ranked number 88 on the 100 Greatest British Television Programmes list compiled by the British Film Institute, due to changing attitudes in political correctness, it is seldom repeated.\n\"Dad's Army\".\nBased on a World War II theme, \"Dad's Army\" (1968\u20131977) in 80 episodes by Jimmy Perry and David Croft, was a gentle mockery of Britain's 'finest hour' and the Home Guard. One of the most enduring British sitcoms, its ensemble cast starred Arthur Lowe and John Le Mesurier, together with Clive Dunn, John Laurie, Ian Lavender, Arnold Ridley, Bill Pertwee, and James Beck (until his death). The interaction between Lowe's character Captain Mainwaring and Le Mesurier's Sgt Wilson was described by \"The Times\" as \"a memorable part of one of television's most popular shows\", During its original television run on BBC1, the show was nominated for multiple British Academy Television Awards, including \"Best Situation Comedy\" in 1973, 1974 and 1975, although only won \"Best Light Entertainment Production Team\" in 1971. In 2000, the show was voted 13th in a British Film Institute poll of industry professionals of the 100 Greatest British Television Programmes. In 2004, championed by Phill Jupitus, it came fourth in the BBC poll to find Britain's Best Sitcom. As of 2022 it is one of British television's most regularly repeated sitcoms.\n\"All Gas and Gaiters\".\nBringing the first light-hearted satirical look at the church, during 1966\u20131971 \"All Gas and Gaiters\" paved the way for \"Bless Me, Father\" (1978\u20131981) with Arthur Lowe, and farcical ecclesiastical comedies such as \"Father Ted\" and \"The Vicar of Dibley\" in the 1990s. Starring Derek Nimmo with Robertson Hare, William Mervyn, John Barron, Joan Sanderson (\"Please Sir!\", \"Fawlty Towers\"), and Ernest Clark, it was written by husband-and-wife team Pauline Devaney and Edwin Apps and directed by John Howard Davies and Stuart Allen. The successful series, which after an initial controversy became a favourite of Britain's clergy, was followed by two spin-offs also starring Nimmo: \"Oh, Brother!\" (1968\u20131970), 19 episodes written by David Climie and Austin Steele, with supporting roles by Sir Felix Aylmer, Patrick McAlinney and Derek Francis, and its sequel \"Oh, Father!\" (1973) with Felix Aylmer, Laurence Naismith, Pearl Hackney and David Kelly, also written by Climie and Steele. \"All Gas and Gaiters\" was produced by Stuart Allen, John Howard Davies, and Robin Nash, and the music was provided by Stanley Myers.\n\"Me Mammy\".\nWith Milo O'Shea, and Yootha Joyce (\"Man About the House\", \"George and Mildred\") in the lead roles, \"Me Mammy\" was written by Hugh Leonard, produced by James Gilbert and Sydney Lotterby for the BBC and aired 1968\u20131971 for 21 episodes over 3 series. Bunjy Kennefick, played by O'Shea, is an Irish mother's boy living in London. He is a top executive of a company and lives a bachelor lifestyle. However, his old-fashioned Catholic mother often puts a stop to his plans, many of them involving his girlfriend Miss Argyll, played by Joyce.\nThe 1970s.\nThe Golden Era.\nThe 1970s is often regarded as the golden era of British sitcom. Following the Galton and Alan Simpson traditional sitcom format of an ensemble or a central character with a small supporting regular cast, the characters are constantly trapped in work or domestic situations from which there is no way out. Well-remembered series include John Cleese and Connie Booth's farcical \"Fawlty Towers\" (1975, 1979) often cited as the greatest sitcom of all time. John Esmonde and Bob Larbey's self-sufficiency comedy \"The Good Life\" (1975\u201378) and \"To the Manor Born\" by Peter Spence and Christopher Bond were also highly successful. \"Whatever Happened to the Likely Lads?\" (1973\u201374), a sequel to \"The Likely Lads\" set five years later, won a BAFTA Television Award for Best Situation Comedy. while its writers, Dick Clement and Ian La Frenais, provided Ronnie Barker with his most significant sitcom vehicle, \"Porridge\" (1974\u201377). Barker also starred (along with David Jason) in \"Open All Hours\" (1973, 1976\u201385), written by Roy Clarke, whose \"Last of the Summer Wine\" began in 1973 and ended in 2010, becoming the world's longest running sitcom. The decade also saw the broadcast of \"It Ain't Half Hot Mum\" (1974\u201381), which has been criticised for the \"stereotypes of its handful of Indian supporting characters as alternately servile, foolish, lazy or devious\".\nThe commercial station ITV had successes with \"Rising Damp\" (1974\u201378, sometimes called the best of all ITV sitcoms), \"Man About the House\" (1973\u201376) and \"George and Mildred\" (1976\u201379). \"Rising Damp\" star Leonard Rossiter also played the lead role in the BBC's \"The Fall and Rise of Reginald Perrin\" (1976\u201379). The decline in cinema attendance meant that many of these series were turned into cinema films; the first film version of \"On the Buses\" (1969\u201373) was the biggest hit at the British box office in 1971. According to Jeff Evans, \"On the Buses\" was a \"cheerfully vulgar comedy\" in which \"leering and innuendo dominate[d].\" Some of the network's other ratings successes from this era included \"Love Thy Neighbour\" (1972\u201376) and \"Mind Your Language\" (1977\u201379, 1986), which attempted to find humour in racial or ethnic conflict and misunderstandings, but were increasingly criticised over time for \"obvious racial name-calling... recurring with distressing regularity\" and \"offer[ing] only the crudest caricatures\".\nIncreasing relaxation in regard to the discussion of sex allowed farce and camp humour to become a familiar form in the 1970s and were used in series like \"Are You Being Served?\", and comedian Frankie Howerd's \"Up Pompeii!\", which ran for 16 episodes (1969\u201370, 1975, 1991) and starred several female stalwarts from the \"Carry On\" film series, including Barbara Windsor, Wendy Richard and Valerie Leon. A feature of the show which inspired three films was Howerd's frequent breaking of the fourth wall.\nOther controversial topics for comedy included series written by Richard Waring and Wendy Craig. \"...And Mother Makes Three\" (1971\u201373), and its sequel \"...And Mother Makes Five\" (1974\u201376), starred Craig (who also co-wrote) as a widowed mother who eventually remarries a divorced single father. \"My Wife Next Door\" (1972), created by Brian Clemens, concerned a divorced couple who accidentally moved next door to each other, \"Miss Jones and Son\" (1977\u201378) was about a single mother, and \"Rings on Their Fingers\" (1978\u201380) was about a young, unmarried couple.\n\"On the Buses\".\nAnother creation by Ronald Chesney and Ronald Wolfe is \"On the Buses\", starring Reg Varney and Bob Grant in an ensemble cast with Anna Karen, Doris Hare, and Stephen Lewis (\"Oh, Doctor Beeching!\", \"Last of the Summer Wine\"). Running 1969\u20131973 for 74 episodes over 7 series, it was initially rejected by the BBC, who did not see much comedy potential in a bus depot as a setting. It was then commissioned by Frank Muir, then at London Weekend Television who said it was \"rather at the baked beans end of my menu\". Despite poor critical reception, it gained an audience of up to 20 million. It has been described as cliche-ridden, stereotypical, occasionally racist and totally sexist by today's standards, with Varney's and Grant's characters both lecherous womanisers and ethnic minorities used inappropriately for humour. As David Stubbs wrote for \"The Guardian\" in 2008, Grant and Varney were playing \"two conspicuously middle-aged men\" (Varney was in his 50s when the series began) pursuing \"an endless array of improbably available 'dolly birds' \". The series was made into three films, \"On the Buses\" (1971), \"Mutiny on the Buses\" (1972), and \"Holiday on the Buses\" (1973).\n\"Bless This House\".\nStarring Sid James of \"Carry On\" and \"Hancock's Half Hour\" fame as the father, with Diana Coupland as the mother, and Sally Geeson (also several \"Carry On\" films), and Robin Stewart as their teenage children, \"Bless This House\" is about a fairly typical, but somewhat slightly dysfunctional middle-class 1970s nuclear family. The comedy was was created by Vince Powell and Harry Driver as a vehicle for James, but mainly written by others including Dave Freeman and Carla Lane. Running on ITV from 1971 to 1976 in 65 half-hour episodes over 10 series, it marked a departure from James' characteristic bawdy slapstick and famous 'dirty laugh'. The series ended abruptly in 1976, when, just four days after the broadcast of the final episode, James died after collapsing on stage. Ironically, James had told Coupland, \"It's such fun and so successful, we'll still be working on \"Bless This House\" till one of us kicks the bucket.\"\n\"Bless This House\" came in 67th place in the BBC's 2004 100 Best British Sitcoms poll.\n\"Clochemerle\".\nIn 1972 the lavish French farce in English based on the 1934 novel of the same name by Gabriel Chevallier, \"Clochemerle\" was adapted into 9 episodes by Galton and Simpson for the BBC. It was a stark contrast to the dark comedy of their \"Steptoe and Son\" and \"Hancock's Half Hour\". Filmed on location in Colombier-le-Vieux, in the department of Ard\u00e8che, it starred Roy Dotrice, Wendy Hiller, Cyril Cusack, Kenneth Griffith, Cyd Hayman, Bernard Bresslaw, Hugh Griffith, Micheline Presle, Madeline Smith, Christian Roberts, Nigel Green, Wolfe Morris and Gordon Rollings, with narration by Peter Ustinov. The show was produced by Michael Mills as a co-production between the BBC and West Germany's Bavaria Film. Incidental music was arranged by Alan Roper and played by L'Harmonie Du Rhone Orchestra, Lyon, under the musical direction of Raymond Jarniat.\n\"My Wife Next Door\".\nCreated by Brian Clemens and written by Richard Waring, \"My Wife Next Door\" was shown on BBC1 in 1972 and ran for 13 episodes. The series concerns George Basset, played by John Alderton, and Suzie Basset, played by Hannah Gordon, who each try to start afresh after their divorce by moving to the country, only to find that they have moved into adjoining cottages. The music was by Dennis Wilson. In 1973, one episode won a British Academy Television Award for Best Situation Comedy. During a repeat run in January 1980, one episode gained 19.3 million viewers and was the second most-watched programme that week.\n\"Are You Being Served?\".\nSet in a fictional, traditional London department store, the show follows the antics of the staff of the retail ladies' and gentlemen's clothing departments . Known for its innuendo-laden humor, quirky characters, and catchphrases \"Are You Being Served?\" (1972\u201385) was one of the longest-running sitcoms of the era. It was created and written for the BBC by Jeremy Lloyd and David Croft and stars Frank Thornton, Mollie Sugden, Wendy Richard, Nicholas Smith, and John Inman, who of the original cast were to appear in all 69 episodes and the same five later featured in the sequel spin-off \"Grace &amp; Favour\"which aired in 1991\u20131992. Inman's camp characterisation of Mr. Humphries contributed greatly to the series' success. In 2004, it ranked 20th in \"Britain's Best Sitcom\". The series proved to be highly exportable, and is regularly repeated on BBC Two, Drama and Gold in the UK, PBS and BBC America in the United States, and BBC UKTV, Fox Classics and 9Gem in Australia, and Jones! in New Zealand; as of 2024 it is also streamed on Britbox, Apple TV, and in the US on BritBox Amazon Channel. The series was nominated for the 1977 Best Situation Comedy BAFTA TV Award but the 1977 \"Are You Being Served?\" feature film starring the main cast was not well received. A one-off episode with a new cast was broadcast in 2016.\n\"Man About the House\".\nConsidered daring at the time because it featured a man sharing a flat with two single women, the flat-share comedy \"Man About the House\" was created by Brian Cooke and Johnnie Mortimer. It starred Richard O'Sullivan, Paula Wilcox and Sally Thomsett, with Brian Murphy and Yootha Joyce as their landlord and landlady. 40 episodes were broadcast over six series on ITV, and ran from 1973 to 1976. The series is regularly repeated on ITV3. After the series ended in 1976, two successful spin-off series followed: \"George and Mildred\", in which the Ropers move to the suburbs, and \"Robin's Nest\", in which Robin gets married and opens a bistro. The 1977 \"Man About the House\" spin-off film which included guest stars Arthur Lowe, Bill Pertwee, Aimi MacDonald, and Spike Milligan (as himself), \"acquits itself better than most movie spin-offs from TV series.\" \"Man About the House\" placed 69th out of 100 in a 2003 BBC poll to find \"Britain's Best Sitcom\".\n\"Porridge\".\nBased on life in a UK prison, the \"Porridge\" sitcom by writers Dick Clement and Ian La Frenais provided Ronnie Barker (\"Open All Hours\"), in the role of a prison inmate, with his most significant sitcom vehicle, supported by Richard Beckinsale (\"Rising Damp\" 1974-1978). It ran from 1974 to 1977 on BBC1 for 22 episodes over three series. The series features two major supporting characters, both prison officers: Mr Mackay, played by Fulton Mackay, and Mr Barrowclough, played by Brian Wilde. The sitcom focused on two prison inmates, Norman Fletcher, played by Barker, and Lennie Godber, played by Beckinsale, who are serving time in a fictional British prison. \"Porridge\" was critically acclaimed and was ranked No. 35 on the 100 Greatest British Television Programmes compiled by the British Film Institute in 2000. In 2004, \"Porridge\" placed seventh in Britain's Best Sitcom. \"Porridge\" was appreciated by British prisoners. Erwin James, an ex-prisoner who wrote a column for \"The Guardian\", stated: \"What fans could never know, however, unless they had been subjected to a stint of Her Majesty's Pleasure, was that the conflict between Fletcher and Officer Mackay was about the most authentic depiction ever of the true relationship that exists between prisoners and prison officers in British jails up and down the country. I'm not sure how, but writers Dick Clement and Ian La Frenais grasped the notion that it is the minor victories against the naturally oppressive prison system that makes prison life bearable.\"\n\"Rising Damp\".\nThe ITV production of 28 episodes (1974\u201378) of \"Rising Damp\" written by Eric Chappell, is sometimes called the best of all ITV sitcoms. It starred Leonard Rossiter as Rigsby, a miserly, seedy, and ludicrously self-regarding landlord of a run-down Victorian townhouse who rents out his shabby bedsits to a variety of tenants: Ruth Jones, an unmarried woman approaching middle age, played by Frances de la Tour; Alan Moore, a medical student played by Richard Beckinsale; and Philip Smith, a cultured sales representative supposedly descended from African royalty, played by Don Warrington. Chappell defended Rigsby by saying \"[he]was not a racist or a bigot, but he was prejudiced and suspicious of strangers. But he accepted Philip and his only concern afterwards was that he didn't get a leg over Miss Jones.\" Warrington who was born in Trinidad, stated: \"There were certain aspects of it that were politically incorrect. On the other, you can see how it held up a mirror to the way we were living.\" The series won the 1978 BAFTA for Best Situation Comedy and was the highest-ranking ITV sitcom in the BBC's \"Britain's Best Sitcom\", coming in 27th overall. Frances de la Tour received an \"Evening Standard\" British Film Award in the category of \"Best Actress\" for her performance as Ruth Jones.\n\"Happy Ever After\".\nBroadcast 1974\u20131979 on BBC1 for 41 episodes over 5 series, starring Terry Scott and June Whitfield, with Beryl Cooke, \"Happy Ever After\" was written by John T. Chapman, Eric Merriman, Christopher Bond, John Kane and Jon Watkins. It was based on a \"Comedy Playhouse\" pilot called \"Happy Ever After\" which aired on 7 May 1974. Scott and Whitfield play the archetypal suburban sitcom marriage of a middle-class couple who find themselves alone when their grown-up daughters leave home. However, they are not alone for long as Aunt Lucy comes to live with them, along with her talking mynah bird. The show was followed with \"Terry and June\" (1979-1987), with Scott and Whitfield reprising their roles for a further 65 episodes in 9 series.\n\"The Good Life\".\n\"The Good Life\" (1975\u20131978), written by Bob Larbey and John Esmonde, aired on BBC1 for 30 episodes over four series and two specials. The final episode was recorded in the presence of Queen Elizabeth II to mark her Silver Jubilee; it was reputedly one of her favourite shows. Felicity Kendal and Richard Briers starred as Barbara and Tom Goode \u2013 a middle-class suburban couple who decide to quit the rat race and become self-sufficient, much to the consternation of their snooty but well-meaning neighbour Margo, played by Penelope Keith (\"To the Manor Born\"), and her down-to-earth husband Jerry, played by Paul Eddington (\"Yes Minister\"). The opening theme was composed by Burt Rhodes. In 2004, \"The Good Life\" came 9th in \"Britain's Best Sitcom\". After its success, the four main cast members were given their own \"vehicles\" commissioned by the then Head of Comedy and producer of \"The Good Life\", John Howard Davies. The series provided Felicity Kendal with her big break on television and significantly boosted her career on stage.\n\"Fawlty Towers\".\nDescribed in the BBC's profile of the show as \"the British sitcom by which all other British sitcoms must be judged\", \"Fawlty Towers\" (1975 and 1979) is eminently quotable; the repetition in the episode known as \"The Germans\" of 'don't mention the war' has become a catch phrase.\" In two series, only 12 half-hour episodes were made, because the writers, John Cleese and his then wife Connie Booth, felt that they could not continue to write comedy of the same quality. The series starred Cleese as Basil Fawlty, Prunella Scales as Sybil Fawlty, Connie Booth as Polly Sherman, and Andrew Sachs as Manuel. Supporting roles included Major Gowen, played by Ballard Berkeley, Chef Terry, played by Brian Hall, and Miss Gatsby and Miss Tibbs, played by Renee Roberts and Gilly Flower. Other well known guests from stage and screen, usually two or three for each episode, were featured in various episodes and among many others included Yvonne Gilan, Conrad Phillips, Bernard Cribbins, James Cossins, Allan Cuthbertson, Ann Way, Brenda Cowling, Joan Sanderson, Elspet Gray, Geoffrey Palmer, Derek Royle, Richard Davies, Ken Campbell, Una Stubbs, and John Quarmby. The show was produced by John Howard Davies and Douglas Argent, directed by Davies and Bob Spiers and the music was by Dennis Wilson. The show was ranked first on a list of the 100 Greatest British Television Programmes drawn up by the British Film Institute in 2000, and in 2019 it was named the greatest ever British TV sitcom by a panel of comedy experts compiled by the \"Radio Times\". Basil Fawlty has been listed by Channel 4 as the second greatest television character.\n\"George and Mildred\".\nThe spin-off from \"Man About the House\", starring Yootha Joyce and Brian Murphy, with Norman Eshley, Sheila Fearn, and child star Nicholas Bond-Owen, a domestic sitcom \"George and Mildred\" is focused on a clash of social class. Written by Brian Cooke and Johnnie Mortimer, it ran for 38 episodes and is regularly repeated on ITV3. Yootha Joyce died suddenly in August 1980, just before production of a sixth and final series.\n\"Open All Hours\".\nCreated and written by Roy Clarke for the BBC, \"Open All Hours\" ran for 26 episodes in four series (1976, 1981, 1982 and 1985) and starred Ronnie Barker and David Jason, with a regular supporting cast including Lynda Baron, Stephanie Cole, Barbara Flynn, Maggie Ollerenshaw, and Kathy Staff.\nThe programme, produced and directed by Sydney Lotterby and developed from a television pilot broadcast in Barker's comedy anthology series \"Seven of One\" (1973), centred around the antics of the eccentric and miserly owner of a traditional English corner shop. Barker took his idea for Arkwright's famous stutter from the 1950s writer and performer Glenn Melvyn. \"Open All Hours\" came 8th in the 2004 Britain's Best Sitcom poll. Although it ended in 1985, \"Open All Hours\" had been repeated over 3,000 times by 2021. The theme tune was composed by Joseph Ascher (1829\u20131869), arranged for a brass band and performed by Max Harris, who also wrote the incidental music. A sequel, \"Still Open All Hours\", with David Jason and many members of the original cast, began airing nearly 30 years later in 2013 and ran until 2019 for 41 episodes.\n\"Miss Jones and Son\".\nFirst broadcast on ITV in 1977 and running for 12 episodes, \"Miss Jones and Son\" (1977\u201378) was written by Richard Waring and produced and directed by Peter Frazer-Jones. It starred Paula Wilcox (\"Man About the House\"), Christopher Beeny, Charlotte Mitchell and Norman Bird. The series depicted the life of Elizabeth Jones, played by Wilcox, a young woman coming to terms with the responsibility of looking after her baby alone. Emotional support came in the form of next-door-neighbour and friend Geoffrey, played by Beeny. Difficulties included the reproaches of her parents, played by Mitchell and Bird, a difficult social life, and a reduced income. The theme song, \"Bright Idea\", was written by Roger Webb.\n\"Rings on Their Fingers\".\nAlso written by Richard Waring, \"Rings on Their Fingers\" (1978\u201380) ran from 1978 to 1980 for 20 episodes in 3 series and was and produced by Harold Snoad for the BBC. It concerns a young unmarried couple, Sandy Bennett, played by Diane Keen, and Oliver Pryde, played by Martin Jarvis. The cast also included Tim Barrett, Barbara Lott, Anna Dawson, John Kane and Royce Mills. Sandy wishes to marry whereas Oliver is happy to remain unmarried. During the first series they do marry and in the second series they adjust to married life. A proposed fourth series would have concerned Sandy becoming pregnant unexpectedly, and Sandy and Oliver adapting to parenthood, but the series was not re-commissioned.\n\"To the Manor Born\".\nCo-starring Penelope Keith as Audrey fforbes-Hamilton and Peter Bowles as Richard DeVere, \"To the Manor Born\" (1979\u20131981, 2007) was a 'feel-good' series following the leading characters' 'will-they-won't they' love story. Written by Peter Spence and Christopher Bond and produced and directed by Gareth Gwenlan, it was a sitcom with one of the largest audience ratings of the period. The final episode of series 1, which aired on 11 November 1979, was the most watched British television programme (excluding live events) of the 1970s, drawing 23.95 million viewers. The final episode in 1981 received 17.80 million viewers. The series has been repeated over 1,000 times. Major supporting roles were played by Angela Thorne as Audrey's friend Marjory and Daphne Heard as Mrs Polouvicka, Richard's mother. Other members of the cast included Alan David, John Rudling, Michael Bilton, Gerald Sim, Michael Cochrane, and Georgie Glen. The music was written by Ronnie Hazlehurst.\n\"Terry and June\".\nSpun off from \"Happy Ever After\" after it ended, Terry Scott and June Whitfield returned to star in the 65 episodes in the nine series of \"Terry and June\" (1979\u20131987). It was mostly written by John Kane. Chapman, one of the original writers, said that the original programme had run out of ideas and had to end. BBC Comedy, however, were unwilling to end a successful 'cozy' show, and so brought in fresh new writers; for legal reasons the programme title had to be changed, and, on 24 October 1979, \"Terry and June\" was born. It was similar to \"Happy Ever After\" without Aunt Lucy, but Terry and June's surname changed from Fletcher to Medford and the characters moved to Purley in London. Despite being seen as \"cosy\" and somewhat \"dated\" even upon its original broadcast, and lampooned by contemporaneous alternative comedy programmes, the show nevertheless attracted large viewing figures. The BBC became \"slightly embarrassed of their 'safe and cosy' sitcom but one which still commanded strong audience figures\" and allowed the show to peter out. In 2004, it came 73rd in \"Britain's Best Sitcom\", jointly with \"Happy Ever After\".\n\"Butterflies\".\nWritten by Carla Lane who had previously created the successful \"The Liver Birds\" sitcom, the \"Butterflies\" series which ran on BBC2 for 27 episodes plus 2 specials in from November 1978 to October 1983, is about the day-to-day life of a comfortable middle-class family treated in a bittersweet style. The show stars Wendy Craig (\"Not in Front of the Children\" (1967\u20131970), \"...And Mother Makes Three\" (1971\u20131973), and \"...And Mother Makes Five\" from 1974 to 1976), as Rita, a non-working wife in a mid-life crisis, with Geoffrey Palmer as her her dentist and amateur lepidopterist husband. The main theme is Rita's friendship with her secret confidant Leonard, a divorced businessman who wants an affair with her, played by Bruce Montague, and the coming of age of her two teenage sons, Adam played by Nicholas Lyndhurst (co-star of the BBC sitcom \"Only Fools and Horses\"), and Russell played by Andrew Hall. The show received a BAFTA nomination for Best Television Comedy Series in 1981.\n\"The Fall and Rise of Reginald Perrin\".\nThe classic BBC black comedy \"The Fall and Rise of Reginald Perrin\" (1976 to 1979) of 22 episodes in three series based on novels by David Nobbs stars Leonard Rossiter of \"Rising Damp\" fame (1974-1978), supported by a cast comprising Pauline Yates (\"Keep It in the Family\", 1980) as Elizabeth Perrin), John Barron as C.J., Sue Nicholls as Joan Greengross), John Horsley as Doc Morrissey, Trevor Adams as Tony Webster, Bruce Bould as David Harris-Jones, and Geoffrey Palmer (\"Butterflies\" (1978-1983), \"As Time Goes By\" (1992-2005), and \"Fawlty Towers\") as Jimmy. Nobbs adapted the screenplay for the first series from the first novel. The story concerns a middle-aged middle manager, Reginald \"Reggie\" Perrin who suffers a midlife crisis, tries to escape the pointlessness of his job and is driven to bizarre behaviour. The sitcom was a departure from the many middle-class suburban family life sitcoms of the era. The music was provided by Ronnie Hazlehurst, prolific composer of sitcom theme tunes. Despite being hugely popular it was only nominated for two BAFTA awards and won none, but received glowing reviews even decades later. It's popularity is evidenced by the follow-ons and the 2-series remake 30 years later. Simon Heffer writing in \"The Daily Telegraph\" in 2016 explains why: \"It [the BBC] took a problem common to the silent majority and explored it sensitively, but with brilliant humour. That was why Perrin was so popular in its day, and why if one watches the box set now, 40 years later, it transmits through wit something timelessly relevant\". A fourth series also by Nobbs, \"The Legacy of Reginald_Perrin\", made more than a decade after Leonard Rossiter's death, comprised all the central characters of the earlier series, but without Rossiter and Adams shows Reggie's legacy \u2013 a fortune left to friends and family, but with strange conditions. Running for two series through 2009 and 2010, a modern remake of the series titled simply \"Reggie Perrin\" was written by David Nobbs and Simon Nye starring Martin Clunes (\"Doc Martin\") in the BBC revival with Wendy Craig (\"Butterflies\" 1978\u20131983), Fay Ripley, Geoffrey Whitehead, Neil Stuke, and Lucy Liemann in supporting roles.\n\"Come Back Mrs. Noah\".\nThe sci-fi sitcom \"Come Back Mrs. Noah\", set in space in 2050, was broadcast on BBC1 from 17 July to 14 August 1978, with a pilot being aired on 13 December 1977, but it was not a success and ran for only six episodes. Although written by Jeremy Lloyd and David Croft, and featuring an all-star sitcom cast including Mollie Sugden (\"Are You Being Served?\"), Ian Lavender (\"Dad's Army\"), Gorden Kaye (Allo 'Allo!\"), Donald Hewlett (\"It Ain't Half Hot Mum\" and \"You Rang, M'Lord?\") and Michael Knowles (\"It Ain't Half Hot Mum\" and \"You Rang, M'Lord?\"), along with Vicki Michelle (Allo 'Allo!\") and Harold Bennett (\"Dad's Army\" and \"Are You Being Served?\"), some regarded it as one of the worst British sitcoms ever made. It has never been repeated. Writing in \"The British Comedy Guide\" on 27 June 2021, in his article \"Stranger Things: When sitcoms strain to be different\", citing in detail three examples including \"Come Back Mrs. Noah\", Graham McCann explains how a sitcom, even when written, produced and acted by a highly successful team, can go horribly wrong.\n\"Leave it to Charlie\".\nThe Granada Television sitcom \"Leave it to Charlie\", set in Bolton, Lancashire from the late 1970s to the early 1980s, was broadcast on ITV from 13 July 1978 to 25 March 1980. The series was a moderate success during its original run, with the series running for a total of 26 episodes over 4 series. The series was directed by Eric Prytherch, written by H.V. Kershaw and Barry Hill. The series started David Roper as Charlie Fisher, Peter Sallis as Arthur Simister and Alfred Simister, Gwen Cherrell as Alice Simister, Sally Kinghorn as Jennifer Padgett, Jean Heywood as Florence McGee, David Ross as Harry Hutchins and John Horsley as Desmond ffolliott.\n\"Yanks Go Home\".\nThe series \"Yanks Go Home\", another sitcom produced by Granada Television, centred around the interactions between American servicemen during World War II in Warrington, Lancashire, England. It was broadcast on ITV from 22 November 1976 to 19 September 1977. The series raised some mild controversy because the United States had recently just celebrated its bicentennial four months prior. The show failed to meet the network's expectations, most likely due to the concept which had already been touched upon in the sitcom Dad's Army in the episode My British Buddy. As a result the series only lasted for 13 episodes over two series and was cancelled afterwards. The series was directed by Eric Prytherch and Roger Cheveley. The series was written by H. V. Kershaw, John Stevenson, Anthony Couch, Michael Carter, Julian Roach and Stuart Damon. It started Stuart Damon as Cpl. Vince Rossi, Bruce Boa as Sgt. Gus Polaski, David Ross as Harry Duckworth, Meg Johnson as Phoebe Sankey, Harry Markham as Bert Pickup, Catherine Neilson as Doreen Sankey, Freddie Earlle as Cpl. Pasquale, Lionel Murton as Col. Irving, Alan MacNaughtan as Col. Ralph Kruger, Richard Oldfield as P.F.C. Burford Pucket, Norman Bird as Leonard Chambers, Jay Benedict as Pvt. Floyd Tutt, Peter Sallis as Randell Todd, Zulema Dene as Marjorie Mortimore and Frank Crompton as Corporal Hoskins.\nThe 1980s.\nThe alternatives' incursion.\nIn the 1980s, the emerging alternative comedians began to develop sitcoms, partly as a response to series such as \"Terry and June\" (1979\u201387), with their \"complacent gentility, outmoded social attitudes and bourgeois sensibilities\". With 'alternative' comedy now almost the mainstream, suburban family sitcoms were increasingly unfashionable by the end of the 1980s. The alternatives' incursion began with \"The Young Ones\" (1982\u201384), written by Rik Mayall, Ben Elton and others. To help make it stand out, the group opted to combine traditional sitcom style with violent slapstick, non-sequitur plot turns, and surrealism. These older styles were mixed with the working and lower-middle class attitudes of the growing 1980s alternative comedy boom. Mayall was also the star of \"The New Statesman\" (1987\u201392), a series created by Maurice Gran and Laurence Marks, whose biggest success, \"Birds of a Feather\" (1989\u201398, 2014\u201320), also deviated from British practice in being scripted by a team of writers.\nThe alternative comedy genre continued with \"Blackadder\" (1983\u201389), mainly written by Ben Elton and Richard Curtis and starring Rowan Atkinson, Tony Robinson, Tim McInnerny, Miranda Richardson, Stephen Fry and Hugh Laurie. Atkinson's Edmund Blackadder came at number three in the Channel 4 list of 100 greatest television characters. Other high-ratings mainstream, slice-of-life shows of the decade included \"Bread\" (1986\u20131991) written by Carla Lane, about a close-knit, working-class family in Liverpool. Running for 74 episodes, at its peak it attracted 21 million viewers. Another notable series was the Science fiction comedy \"Red Dwarf\" (1988\u2013), while \"'Allo 'Allo!\" another Croft and Lloyd creation is set in German occupied France during World War II.\n\"Yes Minister\".\nStarring Paul Eddington, with Nigel Hawthorne and Derek Fowlds in the supporting roles, \"Yes Minister\" which ran for 21 episodes on BBC2 (1980\u20131984), and its sequel \"Yes, Prime Minister\" (1986\u201388), which ran for 16 episodes, were political satires. Established Shakespearean actor Hawthorne picked up four BAFTA TV Awards for Best Light Entertainment Performance for his role. Created by Antony Jay and Jonathan Lynn, the series received several BAFTAs and in 2004 was voted sixth in the \"Britain's Best Sitcom\" poll. Writer Michael Dobbs said Jay and Lynn \"really got to the heart of so much of what goes on in Whitehall and Westminster\". As the series revolved around the inner workings of central government, most of the scenes take place privately in offices and exclusive members' clubs. Lynn said that \"there was not a single scene set in the House of Commons because government does not take place in the House of Commons. Some politics and much theatre takes place there. Government happens in private. As in all public performances, the real work is done in rehearsal, behind closed doors. Then the public and the House are shown what the government wishes them to see.\" Lynn and Jay explained: \"After we wrote the episode, we would show it to some secret sources, always including somebody who was an expert on the subject in question. They would usually give us extra information which, because it was true, was usually funnier than anything we might have thought up.\" In a 2004 BBC programme paying tribute to the series, it was revealed that Jay and Lynn had drawn on information provided by two insiders from the governments of Harold Wilson and James Callaghan, namely Marcia Falkender and Bernard Donoughue. The series was the favourite television programme of the then Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher. In 2012, Prime Minister David Cameron admitted that \"I can tell you, as prime minister, it is true to life.\"\n\"Hi-de-Hi!\".\nSet in 1959\u201360 in a fictional holiday camp, \"Hi-de-Hi!\" was filmed on location at the real Warner's Holiday Centre at Dovercourt Bay. It ran for 58 episodes in 9 series (1980\u20131988) on the BBC and is often repeated. It was co-written by Jimmy Perry, based on his experience as a Butlin's Redcoat, and director-producer David Croft. With its ensemble cast comprising Paul Shane, Simon Cadell, Ruth Madoc, Jeffrey Holland, Su Pollard, and David Griffin, the series gained large audiences and won a BAFTA for Best Comedy Series in 1984. In a 2008 poll on Channel 4, \"Hi-de-Hi!\" was voted the 35th most popular comedy catchphrase. According to comedy researcher Mark Lewisohn, \"Plots became somewhat outlandish during the latter episodes and by the time the BBC called it a day in 1988, it is arguable that the show had already outstayed its welcome by a good couple of years. All in all, though, this was a good British sitcom.\"\n\"Only Fools and Horses\".\nOne of the most successful British sitcoms of all time, \"Only Fools and Horses\" (1981\u20132003) starred David Jason as Derek \"Del Boy\" Trotter and Nicholas Lyndhurst as his younger brother Rodney. It began in 1981 and ran for 64 episodes, with specials, until 2003. It was the most durable of several series written by John Sullivan. The 1996 episode \"Time on Our Hands\" (originally billed as the last episode) holds the record for the highest UK audience for a sitcom episode, attracting 24.3 million viewers. A ratings success with viewers, the series received numerous awards, including recognition from BAFTA, the National Television Awards and the Royal Television Society, as well as winning individual accolades for Sullivan and Jason. It was voted Britain's Best Sitcom in a 2004 BBC poll. In a 2001 Channel 4 poll Del Boy was ranked fourth on their list of the 100 Greatest TV Characters. The series influenced British culture, contributing several words and phrases to the English language. It was named one of the top 20 cult television programmes of all time by TV critic Jeff Evans. Evans spoke of: \"[shows] such as \"Only Fools and Horses\", which gets tremendous viewing figures but does inspire conventions of fans who meet in pubs called the Nag's Head and wander round dressed as their favourite characters.\" The theme music was by Ronnie Hazlehurst (1981) and John Sullivan (1982\u20132003). \"Only Fools and Horses\" came top in a research and analysis by a team of scientists led by Dr Helen Pilcher, a molecular neurobiologist and stand-up comedian with a speciality in scientific humour.\n\"Last of the Summer Wine\".\nRunning on the BBC for 295 episodes over 31 series and four decades, \"Last of the Summer Wine\" (1973\u20132010) was entirely written by Roy Clarke (\"Keeping Up Appearances\", \"Open All Hours\" and \"Still Open All Hours\") and produced by Alan J. W. Bell, with music by Ronnie Hazelhurst. It is the longest-running comedy programme in Britain and the longest-running sitcom in the world. The family-friendly show was about the antics of a group of male pensioners looking for adventure, \"portraying the elderly in a positive and non-stereotypical light.\" The show was filmed largely in the small town of Holmfirth in Yorkshire, a location recommended by Barry Took, and surrounding countryside. and features Bill Owen, 186 episodes, Peter Sallis, 295 episodes, and Kathy Staff, 245 episodes, along with Thora Hird, 152 episodes (\"Bootsie and Snudge\"), Stephen Lewis, 135 episodes, (\"On the Buses\"), \nFrank Thornton, 135 episodes (\"Are You Being Served?\"), \nBrian Murphy, 73 episodes, (\"Man About the House\", \"George and Mildred\"), \nJosephine Tewson, 62 episodes, (\"Keeping Up Appearances\"), \nDora Bryan, 50 episodes, (\"Happily Ever After\"), \nJune Whitfield, 44 episodes, (\"Absolutely Fabulous\", \"Father, Dear Father\", \"Terry and June\"), \nTrevor Bannister, 25 episodes, (\"Are You Being Served?\"), and over the years included many other actors for a total cast of 459.\nIt later became the first comedy series to completely do away with studio sets and a live audience, moving all filming to Holmfirth. The episodes were then shown to preview audiences, whose laughter was recorded for a laugh track to avoid the use of canned laughter.\n\"Last of the Summer Wine\" was nominated numerous times for British television industry awards; it was proposed five times between 1973 and 1985 for the British Academy Film Awards, twice for the Best Situation Comedy Series award (in 1973 and 1979) and three times for the Best Comedy Series award (in 1982, 1983, and 1985). The show was also considered for the National Television Awards four times since 1999 (in 1999, 2000, 2003, and 2004), each time in the Most Popular Comedy Programme category. In 1999 the show won the National Television Award for Most Popular Comedy Programme. Repeated over 17,000 times, it is regularly broadcast on Gold, Yesterday, and Drama. It is also seen in more than 25 countries.\n\"Ever Decreasing Circles\".\nOn BBC1 for four series and one feature-length special, \"Ever Decreasing Circles\" (1984\u20131989) was made in a total of 27 episodes. It was written by John Esmonde and Bob Larbey, and it reunited them with Richard Briers, of their previous hit show \"The Good Life\". Sydney Lotterby directed 13 episodes and 14 episodes were produced by Harold Snoad. The show also featured guest appearances by Peter Blake, Ronnie Stevens, Victoria Burgoyne and Ray Winstone. Centred around Martin Bryce, the eccentric mover and shaker of his local community who feels threatened by the verve and aplomb of a new arrival in the village, played by Peter Egan. Its handling was much less brash than most sitcoms, and \"The Guardian\" described it as having \"a quiet, unacknowledged and deep-running despair to it that in retrospect seems quite daring\". Reappraising the series, Andy Dawson observed that \"\"Ever Decreasing Circles\" strayed far from the well-worn path that other Britcoms trudged along in the 70s and 80s. There was a very real darkness at the heart of it, with Martin existing in what was almost certainly a state of permanent mental anguish.\" The show was voted number 52 in the BBC's \"Britain's Best Sitcom\" poll in 2003. At its peak, it attracted television audiences of around 12 million.\n\"'Allo 'Allo!\".\nReminiscent of their 1970s sitcoms such as \"Are You Being Served?\", \"It Ain't Half Hot Mum\", and \"Dad's Army\", \"'Allo 'Allo!\" was another creation of the writer/producer team of David Croft and Jeremy Lloyd. Set in Nazi-occupied France and starring Gorden Kaye as Ren\u00e9, a caf\u00e9 owner, 85 episodes aired on BBC1 in nine series. Croft and Lloyd, who wrote the first six series (the rest were scripted by Lloyd and Paul Adam) devised the concept as a farcical parody of wartime dramas \"Secret Army\" (BBC, 1977-1979) and \"Enemy at the Door\" (ITV, 1978-80), from which many elements were directly taken including actors Richard Marner, Guy Siner, John D. Collins and Hilary Minster. Although it did not have the success of \"Dad's Army\", despite its sometimes tasteless gags and innuendo it gained respectable ratings, and was adapted to a long-running stage play and is frequently repeated. The series was successfully sold to Germany, possibly because its Nazis were depicted 'as harmlessly pervy and bumbling'.\n A special entitled \"The Return of 'Allo 'Allo!\" aired in 2007, featuring cast members reprising their original roles in a special story, with a documentary including highlights of episodes and interviews with the cast, production team and fans.\n\"The Mistress\".\nStarring Felicity Kendal (\"The Good Life\") and Jane Asher, \"The Mistress\" (1985\u20131987) aired on BBC2 for 12 episodes and was written by Carla Lane. Kendal played Maxine, a young florist having an affair with a married man, whose wife was played by Asher. The series was produced and directed by Gareth Gwenlan. Series 2 attempted to broaden its scope, serving as a more general comedy while still retaining the thread of the affair.\n\"Chelmsford 123\".\nRunning for only 13 episodes, \"Chelmsford 123\" (1988\u20131990), was a short-lived series set in Roman Britain about a young Roman general punished by the Emperor by being sent to govern cold, miserable Britannia, populated by hordes of drunken hooligans. Created and written by Jimmy Mulville and\nRory McGrath, and starring themselves with Philip Pope and Neil Pearson, it has fallen into relative obscurity. Both series are nevertheless available on All 4.\nThe 1990s.\nThe new Channel 4 began to have successful long-running situation comedies. \"Desmond's\" (1989\u201394) was the first British sitcom with a black cast set in the workplace, and \"Drop the Dead Donkey\" (1990\u201398) brought topicality to the form as it was recorded close to transmission. \"Oh, Doctor Beeching\" (1995\u20131997) was the last of many sitcoms by producer David Croft.\nSome of the biggest hits of the 1990s were \"Men Behaving Badly\", \"Game On\", \"2point4 Children\", \"I'm Alan Partridge\", \"Goodnight Sweetheart\", \"Bottom\", \"The Brittas Empire\", \"The Thin Blue Line\", \"Mr. Bean\" and \"One Foot in the Grave\".\n\"Jeeves and Wooster\".\nThe \"Jeeves\" stories by novelist P. G. Wodehouse were made into \"Jeeves and Wooster\" (1990\u20131993), a comedy-drama series in sitcom style. Twenty-three episodes in 4 series were adapted by Clive Exton for ITV, starring Stephen Fry and Hugh Laurie, already well known writers and double act stars of their own sketch comedy television series \"A Bit of Fry &amp; Laurie\". The productions were well received. The third series won a British Academy Television Award for Best Design for Eileen Diss. The final series won a British Academy Television Award for Best Graphics for Derek W. Hayes and was nominated for a British Academy Television Award for Best Drama Series; it also earned a British Academy Television Award for Best Original Television Music for Anne Dudley, and a British Academy Television Award for Best Costume Design for Dany Everett. In retrospect, Michael Brooke of BFI Screenonline called screenwriter Exton \"the series' real star\", saying his \"adaptations come surprisingly close to capturing the flavour of the originals\" by \"retaining many of Wodehouse's most inspired literary similes.\"\n\"Waiting for God\".\nWritten by Michael Aitkens, produced by Gareth Gwenlan, and directed by Gwenlan and Sue Bysh, \"Waiting for God\" (1990\u20131994) ran on BBC1 for 47 episodes over 5 series and was a major success. It starred Stephanie Cole as Diana Trent and Graham Crowden as Tom Ballard, two elderly but spirited residents of Bournemouth's fictional Bayview Retirement Home, who are determined not to grow old gracefully, and spend their time running rings around the home's oppressive management and their own families. With Janine Duvitski in the main supporting role and a regular cast including Andrew Tourell, Sandra Payne, Michael Bilton and Paddy Ward, much of the humour was derived from flying in the face of expectations about how the elderly ought to behave. The show became very successful, and came 37th in the 2004 poll to find \"Britain's Best Sitcom\". It is frequently repeated on the Drama and Gold channels.\n\"Keeping Up Appearances\".\nThe frequently repeated and highly successful series \"Keeping Up Appearances\" (1990\u20131995, 1997, 2008), was written by Roy Clarke. The show, which comprised five series and 44 episodes, including four Christmas specials, starred Patricia Routledge as the snobbish Hyacinth 'Bouquet' Bucket, Clive Swift, playing her husband, and Josephine Tewson, playing her neighbour, with Judy Cornwell, Mary Millar and Geoffrey Hughes as her working class relatives. The theme music was composed by Nick Ingman. It is the BBC's most exported television programme, having been sold nearly 1,000 times to overseas broadcasters. As of 2016 \"Keeping Up Appearances\" is the most-bought BBC and has outsold every other show to international broadcasters in the past 40 years. According to Roy Clarke : \"...the secret to her wide fan base is that everyone knows a Hyacinth\" In a 2004 BBC poll it placed 12th in Britain's Best Sitcom and in a 2001 Channel 4 poll, Hyacinth Bucket was ranked 52nd on their list of the 100 Greatest TV Characters. Production ended after Routledge decided to move on to other projects.\n\"Absolutely Fabulous\".\nWritten by Jennifer Saunders and starring herself and Joanna Lumley, with Julia Sawalha and June Whitfield in supporting roles, \"Absolutely Fabulous\" (1992\u20131995) was based on the \"French and Saunders\" sketch \"Modern Mother and Daughter\". It ran for 39 episodes with the first three series airing on BBC, followed a two-part special finale entitled \"The Last Shout\" in 1996. Saunders played Edina Monsoon, a heavy-drinking, drug-abusing PR agent who spends her time in a desperate attempt to stay young and \"hip\", and Lumley played fashion magazine director Patsy Stone, whose drug abuse and alcohol consumption far eclipsed Edina's. It returned for two more series and two one-hour specials from 2001 to 2004. In 1997, the pilot episode, \"Fashion\", was ranked #47 on \"TV Guide\"'s \"100 Greatest Episodes of All-Time\" list. A scene from the show was included in the \"TV's 100 Greatest Moments\" programme broadcast by Channel 4 in 1999. In 2000, the show was ranked 17th in the greatest British television show of all time by the BFI. In 2004 and 2007, the show was ranked 24th and 29th on \"TV Guide\"'s \"Top Cult Shows Ever\" list. In 2019, the series ranked 9th in \"Radio Times\"' top 20 British sitcoms. The series has a 96% rating on Rotten Tomatoes, and \"\", was released in 2016.\n\"If You See God, Tell Him\".\nThe BBC1 mini-series of \"If You See God, Tell Him\" (1993), broadcast in four 45-minute episodes written by Andrew Marshall and David Renwick, stars Richard Briers, Adrian Edmondson, Imelda Staunton and Martin Clunes. The humour concerns a man who bumps his head and starts believing he must do everything adverts tell him, with catastrophic results. \"The Independent\" wrote: \"It's not really a disaster but there's something decidedly uneven underfoot here, a feeling that this is the working model for a new type of comedy rather than the finished product. [...] while it's sustained with considerable energy by the actors and direction you have to doubt whether it really stands up for one episode, let alone four.\" Conversely, a retrospective review in \"The Guardian\" highlighted the series as \"a gem from an era when the BBC took its black comedy seriously\", praising both its dark content and humour, \"a Richard Briers sitcom that's the opposite of The Good Life.\" The series was only broadcast once and never repeated; according to \"The Guardian\", this was \"possibly because it was too much of a leap for fans of \"The Good Life\", but it has grown in cult status over the years.\"\n\"The Vicar of Dibley\".\nIn terms of ratings, \"The Vicar of Dibley\" (1994\u20132007) starring Dawn French, is among the most successful British programmes of the digital era. The main character, Geraldine Granger, was invented by Richard Curtis, but he and French extensively consulted Joy Carroll, one of the first female Anglican priests.\nThe series exploited the 1992 changes in the Church of England that permitted the ordination of women. The show included cameos from many actors and celebrities, many appearing as themselves, and including Sarah, Duchess of York, Hugh Bonneville, Mel Giedroyc, Richard Griffiths, Miranda Hart, Alistair McGowan, Geraldine McNulty, Philip Whitchurch, Nicholas Le Prevost, Brian Perkins and Roger Sloman, Pam Rhodes, Kylie Minogue, Rachel Hunter, Terry Wogan, Jeremy Paxman, Martyn Lewis, Darcey Bussell, Sean Bean, Richard Ayoade, Orla Brady, Fiona Bruce, Annette Crosbie, Johnny Depp, Ruth Jones, Hilary Kay, Damian Lewis, Maureen Lipman, Jennifer Saunders, Sting and his wife Trudie Styler, Stephen Tompkinson, Dervla Kirwan, and Emma Watson. Dibley received multiple British Comedy Awards, two International Emmys, and was a multiple British Academy Television Awards nominee. In 2004, it was placed third in a BBC poll to find \"Britain's Best Sitcom\". In addition to the twenty main episodes between 1994 and 2007, the series included numerous shorter charity specials, as well as 'lockdown' episodes produced during the 2020-2021 COVID-19 pandemic. The theme music was a setting of Psalm 23 composed by Howard Goodall as a serious piece of church choral music, and performed by the choir of Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford, with George Humphreys singing the solo. The conductor was Stephen Darlington.\n\"Hamish Macbeth\".\nThe 20 episode comedy drama series \"Hamish Macbeth\" (1995\u20131997), by Scottish screenwriter Daniel Boyle, was filmed mainly on location in the Scottish Highlands, in a departure from the convention that sitcoms are filmed in studio and accompanied by a laugh track. It was loosely adapted from the mystery novels by M. C. Beaton (Marion Chesney) by Daniel Boyle and starred Robert Carlyle as a police officer.\n\"Father Ted\".\nThe highly successful \"Father Ted\" (1995\u20131998) series created by Irish writers Graham Linehan and Arthur Mathews, produced by British Hat Trick Productions for Channel 4 aired over three series, including a Christmas special, for 25 episodes. Set on the fictional Craggy Island, off Ireland's west coast, it starred Dermot Morgan as Father Ted Crilly, Ardal O'Hanlon as Father Dougal McGuire and Frank Kelly as Father Jack Hackett. Exiled to the island by Bishop Leonard Brennan, played by Jim Norton, the priests live together in the parochial house with their housekeeper Mrs Doyle, played by Pauline McLynn. The show subverts parodies of low-brow humour as it portrays nuanced themes of loneliness, agnosticism, existentialism and purgatory experienced by its title character; this deeper meaning of the show has been much acclaimed. The series won several BAFTA awards, twice winning for Best Comedy Series. In a 2001 poll by Channel 4, Father Dougal was ranked fifth on a list of the 100 Greatest TV Characters. In 2019, \"Father Ted\" was named the second-greatest British sitcom (after \"Fawlty Towers\") by a panel of comedy experts for the \"Radio Times\".\n\"dinnerladies\".\nA winner of many awards, including \"Best New TV Comedy\" at the 1999 British Comedy Awards, and \"Best TV Comedy\" in 2000. Created, written and co-produced by Victoria Wood, who also starred as the main character, Brenda Furlong, \"dinnerladies\" is based on the lives and interactions of the employees of a works canteen and ran for a total of 16 episodes during 1998 and 2000. The permanent cast occasionally featured guest actors, including Joanne Froggatt, Tina Malone, Dora Bryan OBE, Lynda Baron, Elspet Gray, Janette Tough, Simon Williams, Kenny Doughty and Eric Sykes CBE,\nand Dame Thora Hird DBE. Involving only one set throughout its run (with the exception of quiz show and hospital sets which are both seen on a television screen in the last two episodes), \"dinnerladies\" was entirely filmed at the London BBC Television Centre in front of a live studio audience employing a multiple-camera setup. The theme music was composed by Victoria Wood.\n2000\u20132010.\nAt the turn of the Millennium, examples of the hyperreal approach pioneered by Galton and Simpson in some of their \"Hancock\" scripts was evident in Steve Coogan's 12-episode sitcom \"I'm Alan Partridge\" (1997\u20132002). Galton and Simpson's influence also found its way into \"The Office\", a mockumentary, \"Early Doors\", \"Gavin &amp; Stacey\" and many British dramedies.\nThe BBC began using their digital channels BBC Three and BBC Four to build a following for off-beat series including \"The Thick of It\" (2005\u20132012). Channel 4 had successes with \"Spaced\" (1999\u20132001), \"Black Books\" (2000\u20132004), \"Phoenix Nights\" (2001\u20132002), \"Peep Show\" (2003\u20132015), \"Green Wing\" (2004\u20132006), \"The IT Crowd\" (2006\u20132013) and \"The Inbetweeners\" (2008\u20132010). The late 2000s and early 2010s also saw a major resurgence in traditional-style sitcoms filmed in front of a studio audience and featuring a laughter track, such as \"Not Going Out\" (2006\u2013), written by Lee Mack, \"Miranda\" (2009\u20132015), \"Reggie Perrin\" (2009\u20132010), a remake of the 1970s series \"The Fall and Rise of Reginald Perrin\" and Irish sitcom \"Mrs Brown's Boys\" (2011\u2013). The most successful BBC sitcom of the time was \"My Family\" (2000\u20132011), which came 24th in the Britain's Best Sitcom poll in 2004 and was the most watched sitcom in the United Kingdom in 2008.\nOther notable sitcoms in the new millennium included \"Outnumbered\" (2007\u20132016), \"Two Pints of Lager and a Packet of Crisps\" (2001\u20132011), about a group of young people living in Runcorn, and \"The IT Crowd\" (2006\u20132013), about IT colleagues.\n\"The Royle Family\".\nCaroline Aherne and Craig Cash wrote the 25 episodes of \"The Royle Family\" (1998\u20132012) for the BBC. It centred on the lives of a television-fixated working-class family, the Royles, a stereotype of family life at the turn of the century, sharing elements of kitchen sink drama. \"The Royle Family\" was placed 31st in the BFI's 2000 list of the 100 greatest British television programmes. In a 2001 Channel 4 poll, Jim Royle, the misanthropic head of the household, was ranked 11th on their list of the 100 Greatest TV Characters. In a 2004 BBC poll to find \"Britain's Best Sitcom\", \"The Royle Family\" was placed 19th. The series also won several BAFTA awards.\n\"The Office\".\n\"The Office\" is a workplace mockumentary with 12 episodes plus a two-part Christmas special. Broadcast in two seasons from 2001 to 2003, it was created, written and directed by Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant. The series follows the day-to-day lives of office employees in the Slough branch of fictional Wernham Hogg paper company, centering on themes of social clumsiness, the trivialities of human behaviour, self-importance and conceit, frustration, desperation and fame. Gervais also starred in the series as the central character, David Brent. After a slow start it has since become one of the most successful of all British comedy exports. It has been sold to broadcasters in over 80 countries, including ABC1 in Australia, The Comedy Network in Canada, TVNZ in New Zealand, and the pan-Asian satellite channel Star World, based in Hong Kong. It was shown in the United States on BBC America from 2001 to 2016, and later on Cartoon Network's late night programming block Adult Swim from 2009 to 2011. In a 2021 BBC poll \"The Office\" came 9th out of 100 of the best shows of the 21st century.\n\"Doc Martin\".\nLike \"Hamish Macbeth\" in the 1990s, \"Doc Martin\" (2004\u20132022), is a dramedy series of 79 episodes through its 18 years. It stars Martin Clunes as Dr. Martin Ellingham, the general practitioner of a Cornish village, and Caroline Catz supported by a regular cast and many guests including Stephanie Cole (\"Waiting for God\", \"Open All Hours\"), and Dame Eileen Atkins. Created by Dominic Minghella and written and produced by Philippa Braithwaite, it was filmed on location in the village of Port Isaac, with most interior scenes shot in a converted local barn. In 2004, \"Doc Martin\" won the British Comedy Award for \"Best TV Comedy Drama\", having also been nominated as \"Best New TV Comedy\". The tenth (and final) series aired from 7 September 2022 to 26 October 2022; one last installment, a Christmas special that aired on 25 December 2022, was the programme's final episode.\n\"The Green Green Grass\".\nRunning for 32 episodes over four series and three Christmas specials \"The Green Green Grass\" (2005 and 2009) was a spin-off from \"Only Fools and Horses\", produced for the BBC and created and initially written by John Sullivan, who also wrote the theme music. It starred John Challis, Sue Holderness and Jack Doolan from \"Only Fools and Horses\". It also featured several guest stars including Paula Wilcox (\"Man About the House\"), American actor George Wendt and Dame June Whitfield (\"Happy Ever After\", \"Absolutely Fabulous\", \"Last of the Summer Wine\").\n\"Gavin &amp; Stacey\".\nJames Corden and Ruth Jones wrote the 20 episodes of \"Gavin &amp; Stacey\" produced by Baby Cow Productions (2007\u20132010) for BBC Cymru Wales over three series which were directed by Christine Gernonmover. It centres on two families, one in Billericay, Essex, and the other in Barry, South Wales. Mathew Horne and Joanna Page played Gavin and Stacey, and the writers played their best friends, Smithy and Nessa. Alison Steadman and Larry Lamb played Gavin's parents, Pam and Mick, Melanie Walters played Stacey's mother, Gwen, and Rob Brydon played her uncle, Bryn. Broadcast on Christmas Day 2009 and New Year's Day 2010, Christmas Day 2019, and Christmas Day 2024, episodes of the final series formed a significant part of the prime-time BBC seasonal programming. Acclaimed as both a hit and a breakthrough show for the BBC, it was the most nominated show in the 2007 British Comedy Awards. It won several awards, including the BAFTAs Audience Award, and the British Comedy Awards Best TV Comedy Award, both in 2008. In 2019, \"Gavin &amp; Stacey\" was named the 17th-greatest British sitcom in a poll by \"Radio Times\". 18.49 million people watched the Christmas Day 2019 special, the most-viewed non-sporting event in a decade and the most-watched comedy episode for 17 years, and the 2024 finale with 12.3 million TV viewers was the most watched show on Christmas Day since 2008. After one week's consolidated viewing the finale episode had become the UK's most-watched scripted show since modern records began with 19.3 million viewers.\n\"Benidorm\".\nWritten and created by Derren Litten and produced by Tiger Aspect for ITV, \"Benidorm\" (2007\u20132018) aired for 74 episodes over ten series. The series featured an ensemble cast of holidaymakers and staff at the Solana all-inclusive hotel in Benidorm, Spain over the course of a week each year.\nThe series had a large ensemble cast, which changed throughout its ten seasons and included Abigail Cruttenden,\nAdam Gillen,\nAlan David,\nAsa Elliott,\nBel Powley,\nBobby Knutt,\nCharlotte Eaton,\nCrissy Rock,\nDanny Walters,\nElsie Kelly,\nGeoffrey Hutchings,\nHannah Hobley,\nHannah Waddingham,\nHonor Kneafsey,\nHugh Sachs,\nJake Canuso,\nJanine Duvitski,\nJohn Challis,\nJohnny Vegas,\nJosh Bolt,\nJulie Graham,\nKate Fitzgerald,\nKathryn Drysdale,\nKenny Ireland,\nMichelle Butterly,\nNathan Bryon,\nNicholas Burns,\nOliver Stokes,\nPaul Bazely,\nPerry Benson,\nSelina Griffiths,\nSheila Reid,\nShelley Longworth,\nSheridan Smith, \nSherrie Hewson, \nSimon Greenall,\nSiobhan Finneran, \nSteve Edge,\nSteve Pemberton,\nTim Healy,\nTony Maudsley and many guest stars. The first series proved to be a hit for ITV, with critics describing it as \"beautifully written and performed\" and \"a gem of wry observation in withering bad taste\".\nSince 2010.\nThe censoring of repeats, especially where the watershed, the time after which adult programming is allowed to be broadcast, is being eroded by on demand viewing and OTT technology. The standard solution is to provide a warning to viewers of real-time transmissions that the programme contains language which some viewers may find offensive. 'Characters who are complicated, multi-dimensional and not always easy to like are now the norm and not the exception'\nOther recent British sitcoms include \"Brassic\" (2019\u2013present), \"Chewing Gum\" (2015\u20132017), \"Friday Night Dinner\" (2011\u20132020), \"Bad Education\" (2012\u20132014, 2022-2024), \"Cuckoo\" (2012\u20132019), \"Fleabag\" (2016\u20132019) which 'challenged audience expectations of characters', and \"Peter Kay's Car Share\" (2015\u20132018).\n\"Still Open All Hours\".\nThe sequel to \"Open All Hours\", \"Still Open All Hours\" (2013\u20132019), was created and written by Roy Clarke for the BBC. Starring David Jason (\"Open All Hours\", \"Only Fools and Horses\"), its 41 episodes retain the 20th century sitcom traditions of its predecessor. The show is supported by James Baxter and a regular supporting cast of Lynda Baron, Stephanie Cole, Maggie Ollerenshaw, Brigit Forsyth, Johnny Vegas, Kulvinder Ghir, Geoffrey Whitehead, Sally Lindsay, Tim Healy, Sue Holderness, Dean Smith, Archie Panjabi and Nina Wadia, with Baron, Cole, and Ollerenshaw reprising their original characters from \"Open All Hours\".\nDirected by Dewi Humphreys, and produced by Jason, Alex Walsh-Taylor Sarah Hitchcock, and Gareth Edwards, the series continued the theme of \"Open All Hours\" while focusing on the life of a much older Granville - still played by Jason - running his late uncle Arkwright's traditional English corner shop with his son's help.\n\"Breeders\".\nThe British-American parental black comedy television series \"Breeders\" ran from 2020 to 2023 for 40 episodes over 4 seasons. The show was created by Martin Freeman, Chris Addison and Simon Blackwell. The series follows two parents who struggle with parenthood and is partially based on Freeman's own experiences. Freeman also plays the lead role. The series premiered on 2 March 2020, on the American cable network FX, and on the British network Sky One on 12 March 2020. In July 2022, the series was renewed for a fourth and final season, which premiered on July 31, 2023.\nWriters, directors and producers.\nBarry Took.\nBarry Took came to TV comedy following his hugely successful half-hour radio sketch comedies such as \"Beyond Our Ken\" (1958 - 1964) and its successor \"Round the Horne\" 1965 - 1968 and paved the way for the format of many television sitcoms. Took, with writing partner Marty Feldman with whom he collaborated for over ten years in radio and television, created the early sitcoms \"The Army Game\" in 1958 starring Alfie Bass (\"Till Death Us Do Part\" and \"Are You Being Served?\") and Bill Fraser ( \"Hancock's Half Hour\") and later wrote its sequel \"Bootsie and Snudge\" (1960) of which 100 episodes were made, pioneering TV comedy with one of its most enduring features, 'the ill-sorted pair'.\nThe team's first BBC series was \"The Walrus and the Carpenter\" (1965), starring Warren Mitchell and Ronnie Barker. He became Head of Light Entertainment for London Weekend Television and he launched several shows, including the successful \"On the Buses\", and was instrumental in launching the team that became \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\".\nRoy Clarke.\nRoyston Clarke (born 28 January 1930), usually known as Roy Clarke, began his career \nIn the late 1960s writing thrillers for BBC Radio. Clarke is a prolific television drama creator who wrote sixteen of Britain's best known sitcoms. In 2002, he received an OBE for his contribution to British comedy. He was awarded the lifetime achievement award at the 2010 British Comedy Awards. He is also the 1996 winner of the BAFTA Dennis Potter Award, the 2010 British Comedy Awards winner, and the 1971 Writers' Guild of Great Britain\nBest Writer award. Clarke was the sole writer of \"Last of the Summer Wine\", which at its peak had an audience of over 18 million viewers and is the longest-running comedy programme in Britain and the longest-running sitcom in the world. Among his well known works are \"Keeping Up Appearances\", \"Open All Hours\" and its sequel series, \"Still Open All Hours\".\nDavid Croft.\nDavid Croft (1922\u20132011) was a screenwriter, producer and director. He produced and wrote a string of BBC sitcoms with partners Jimmy Perry and Jeremy Lloyd, including \"Dad's Army\", \"It Ain't Half Hot Mum\" and \"Hi-de-Hi!\". Like Perry, he served in tropical Asia during the Second World War. While \"Dad's Army\" was still running, Croft began to co-write \"Are You Being Served?\" with Jeremy Lloyd. He continued both writing partnerships for the rest of his career in other series including \"You Rang, M'Lord\" with Perry and \"'Allo 'Allo!\" with Lloyd. His last full series, \"Oh, Doctor Beeching!\" (1995\u20131997), was co-written with Richard Spendlove. He created a television pilot in 2007, entitled \"Here Comes The Queen\", with Jeremy Lloyd, but the show was not continued as a series. Together with Perry, Croft was presented with a British Comedy Award in 2003 for lifetime achievement, and in 1978 OBE for services to television. He also received the 1981 \"Desmond Davies Award\" from the British Academy of Film and Television Arts, for his contributions to the industry.\nJimmy Perry.\nJimmy Perry (1923\u20132016) created \"Dad's Army\" with David Croft. The song he wrote for the series, \"Who Do You Think You Are Kidding, Mr Hitler?\", won him an Ivor Novello Award. Croft and Perry wrote together for over 30 years. Along with Frank Muir and Denis Norden, and Galton and Simpson, they were among the dominant writing teams of the period. Perry could send himself up as well as others. His autobiography was to be called \"A Boy's Own Story\", but it came out in 2002 under the title \"A Stupid Boy\".\n In \"Dad's Army\", he drew on his experience as a young member of the Home Guard, on his service in India and Burma during the war for \"It Ain't Half Hot Mum\", and his time as a Butlin's holiday camp Redcoat for \"Hi-de-Hi\", for which he wrote the song \"Holiday Rock\". When he said he wanted to be a film star or a comedian, his father responded: \"You stupid boy!\" Perry used the phrase in \"Dad's Army\" and it became a catch phrase.\n Perry effectively retired after \"You Rang, M'Lord?\" finished. He was awarded an OBE in 1978. He won Lifetime Achievement Awards from the Writer's Guild (1995) and at the British Comedy Awards (2003).\nGalton and Simpson.\nRay Galton and Alan Simpson (1930\u20132018 and 1929\u20132017) wrote together for over 50 years The standard of their scripts became a touchstone for sitcom style, helping to steer Britain down a different path from the American team writing system in. Their most famous series were \"Hancock's Half Hour\" and \"Steptoe and Son\". Some of their scripts for Hancock almost repudiated a narrative structure altogether and attempted to reproduce an everyday environment with the intention of also reproducing its comedy. Both the character played by Tony Hancock in \"Hancock's Half Hour\", and Harold Steptoe, played by Harry H. Corbett, were pretentious would-be intellectuals who found themselves trapped by the squalor of their lives. The Galton and Simpson comedies were often characterised by a bleak and somewhat fatalistic tone. \"Steptoe and Son\" in particular was at times an example of black comedy, and close in tone to Social realism drama.\nChesney and Wolfe.\nChesney and Wolfe was a prolific comedy scriptwriting team of Ronald Chesney and Ronald Wolfe whose partnership contributed significantly to the genre of British sitcoms. Spanning the years from the mid-1950s to 1989, among their best shows are \"The Rag Trade\" starring Dame Barbara Windsor (\"Carry On\" films) with Dame Penelope Keith (\"The Good Life\" and \"To the Manor Born\"), who also starred again together in \"Wild, Wild Women\" with an all-star cast and Anna Karen who later starred in Chesney and Wolfe's \"On the Buses\". These were workplace shows with sexist and humorously indecent comedy that obtained very high viewer ratings but were not well received by TV critics. Their other credits include \"Meet the Wife\", an episode of \"'Allo 'Allo!\" (1989), and \"Watch This Space\" in 1980 which was less of a success. Their shows featured many of the regular actors from award-winning comedy shows and films and including among many others, DameThora Hird - a household name and a British institution, Ian Lavender (\"Dad's Army\"), Reg Varney (\"On the Buses\"), Sheila Hancock (\"Mr Digby Darling\"), Prunella Scales (\"Fawlty Towers\"), Peter Jones (actor), Their 1971 spin-off film, \"On the Buses\", the first of the three based on the TV series, was the highest British box-office earner of that year.\nJeremy Lloyd.\nJeremy Lloyd (1930\u20132014) co-wrote \"Are You Being Served?\" and \"'Allo 'Allo!\"; his sitcoms have been called \"the essence of Britishness\". \"Are You Being Served?\" was based partly on his own experiences of working in a London department store as a suit salesman. Its success gave rise a spin-off, \"Grace and Favour\", which was a collaboration with David Croft.\nDuring 1970 Lloyd was briefly married to actress, presenter and producer Joanna Lumley (\"Absolutely Fabulous\") with whom he starred in the sitcom \"It's Awfully Bad for Your Eyes, Darling\". Lloyd was appointed an OBE in 2013.\nJohn Howard Davies.\nJohn Howard Davies (1939\u20132011) joined the BBC as a production assistant in 1966, and became a television director and producer specializing in comedy. In 1978 he became the head of comedy, and in 1982 the head of light entertainment. For four decades, he was a major influence as commissioning producer on shows such as \"Fawlty Towers\" by John Cleese and Connie Booth, Galton and Simpson's \"Steptoe and Son,\" \"All Gas and Gaiters\", \"The Goodies\", and \"The Fall and Rise of Reginald Perrin\". Davies was also the producer of all four seasons of \"The Good Life\". When asked what the best formula for a sitcom is, he replied \"All the best sitcom characters are relentlessly horrible.\"\nCooke and Mortimer.\nBrian Cooke and Johnnie Mortimer were a comedy writing duo whose career began in radio with the critically acclaimed \"Round the Horne\" of 1968, and its sequel \"Stop Messing About\" created as a vehicle for Kenneth Williams of Carry On fame. Together they penned many of the 1970s popular TV sitcoms often featuring well known comedy actors such as Paul Eddington of \"The Good Life\" and \"Yes Minister\", Patrick Cargill (\"Father, Dear Father\"); Richard O'Sullivan, Yootha Joyce, and Brian Murphy of \"Man About the House \"; Peter Butterworth (Carry On), Peter Jones, Beryl Reid, Roy Kinnear, Joan Sanderson. Independently, Cooke created \"Tripper's Day\" featuring Leonard Rossiter of \"The Fall and Rise of Reginald Perrin\" and Eric Chappell's highly successful \"Rising Damp\". On his own, Mortimer wrote \"Never the Twain\" starring Donald Sinden (\"Two's Company\") and Windsor Davies (\"It Ain't Half Hot Mum\").\nComposers.\nBurt Rhodes (1923\u20132003).\nRhodes wrote the title music for \"The Good Life\". He was a successful light entertainment composer and musical director including his arrangements for comedienne Beryl Reid's 1968-67 \"Beryl Reid Says Good Evening\". He collaborated with many stars including Judy Garland, Pearl Bailey, Sammy Davis Jr., Vic Damone and Bruce Forsyth. Rhodes was often referred to as \"the musicians' musician\", counting musicians such as Ronnie Hazlehurst, Monty Norman and Phil Phillips among his friends. In 1958 he scored the theme for \"Dr No\", the first James Bond film.\nRonnie Hazlehurst (1928\u20132007).\nA prolific composer for sitcoms, comedy productions, game shows and other programmes, Hazlehurst joined the BBC in 1961, and became a staff arranger; his early works included the incidental music for \"The Likely Lads\" and \"The Liver Birds\". In 1968 he became the Light Entertainment Musical Director and composed the theme tunes of many sitcoms, including \"Are You Being Served?\", \"Some Mothers Do 'Ave 'Em\", \"Last of the Summer Wine\" (where he also wrote all the instrumental music for the show), \"I Didn't Know You Cared\", \"The Fall and Rise of Reginald Perrin\", \"To the Manor Born\", \"Yes Minister\" and \"Yes, Prime Minister\", \"Just Good Friends\" and \"Three Up, Two Down\". He also arranged the themes for \"Butterflies\", \"Sorry!\" and the first series of \"Only Fools and Horses\".\nHis theme tunes often included elements designed to fit the programmes, such as a cash till in \"Are You Being Served?\", rises and falls in \"The Fall and Rise of Reginald Perrin\" and the Big Ben chimes for \"Yes Minister\". For \"Some Mothers Do 'Ave 'Em\", Hazlehurst used Morse code to spell out the programme's title. During his career he composed the music for the opening of the BBC's coverage of the 1976 Olympics. Jon Plowman, Head of BBC Comedy, said, \"He was the composer of many of the best-loved signature tunes of the last 40 years of television - and some of his work is still heard today. He's associated with some of the best-loved shows of our lives.\"\nTony Russell (1929\u20131970).\nRussell wrote the music for \"On the Buses\" and the children's programme \"The Herbs\". He studied composition with Richard Rodney Bennett and Bill Russo. He was in Russo's London Jazz Orchestra and took over running this when Russo returned to the United States in 1965. He later became a busy composer and wrote the score of the musical \"The Matchgirls\".\nNick Ingman (born 1948).\nThe title music for \"Keeping Up Appearances\" was written by Nick Ingman, a visiting professor at the London College of Music. His collaborators include Paul McCartney, Mick Jagger, Bj\u00f6rk, and \"The X Factor\". His arrangements have accounted for fourteen No. 1 singles and five double platinum albums in the UK and he has been nominated for a Grammy three times.\nSimon Brint (1950-2011).\nBrint was closely associated with the Alternative Comedy movement and contributed music to several associated projects including the sitcoms Absolutely Fabulous and \"2point4 Children.\"\nAnne Dudley (born 1956).\nDudley composed the title and incidental music for \"Jeeves and Wooster\". She is a composer, keyboardist, conductor and pop musician, winning many awards including an Oscar for Best Original Musical or Comedy Score for the comedy film \"The Full Monty\". Dudley was the first BBC Concert Orchestra's Composer in Association in 2001, and has composed the scores for over twenty other films.\nPeter Brewis.\nBrewis has music credits for several comedy programmes including the sitcoms \"The Young Ones\" and \"Filthy, Rich and Catflap\".\nHoward Goodall (born 1958).\nThe title themes for \"The Vicar of Dibley\", \"Blackadder\", \"Red Dwarf\" and \"Mr. Bean\" are among Howard Goodall's most memorable melodies. He also presents music-based programmes on television and radio, for which he has won many awards. In 2008, he was named as a presenter and Composer-in-Residence at the British radio station Classic FM. In 2009, he was named \"Composer of the Year\" at the Classic Brit Awards.\nJonathan Whitehead (1960-2020).\nA composer for many sitcoms and other comedies, Whitehead's sitcom credits include \"Black Books\", \"Green Wing\", \"Campus\", \"Nathan Barley\" and \"Rev.\" His music for \"Green Wing\" was nominated for a BAFTA and won the RTS Award for Best Original Music. He occasionally wrote under the name \"Trellis\".\nFilm spin-offs.\nBy 2020, at least 45 British sitcoms had been adapted into over 50 feature films; the first of the three \"On the Buses\" films was the biggest hit at the British box office in 1971. However, they were not always critical successes. In a review of \"Are You Being Served?\", Michael Stailey of \"DVD Verdict\" regarded the 1977 film as \"guilty of violating almost every law of comedy and film.\" John Pym of \"The Monthly Film Bulletin\" also gave the film a negative review, stating that \"The humour consists mainly of a withering selection of patent British puns; an inflatable brassiere, some let's-insult-the-Germans jokes and a rickety thunder-box which bolts from the outside are thrown in for good measure.\" The film holds a 58% positive rating on Rotten Tomatoes; the cutoff for a positive rating is 59%. Moreover, as with the series they were based on, some films have been criticised for not meeting contemporary levels of political correctness.\nOther sitcom adaptions from the era included\n\"Bottoms Up\" (1960), based on \"Whack-O!\",\n\"Till Death Us Do Part\" (1968) and its sequel \"The Alf Garnett Saga\" (1972),\n\"Dad's Army\" (1971),\n\"On the Buses\" (1971) and its sequels,\n\"Please Sir!\" (1971),\n\"Bless This House\" (1972),\n\"Steptoe and Son\" (1972) and its sequel,\n\"Nearest and Dearest\" (1972),\n\"Father, Dear Father\" (1973),\n\"Love Thy Neighbour\" (1973),\n\"Man About the House\" (1974),\n\"The Likely Lads\" (1976),\n\"Porridge\" (1979), and\n\"George and Mildred\" (1980).\nCriticism and social issues.\nBritish sitcoms reflect changes in public opinion and culture through the times. They began at a time in which, for example, \"class and ethnic prejudices were challenged and mocked\". They heavily featured slapstick humour and offensive slurs. Series such as \"Love Thy Neighbour\" (1972\u201376), and \"Mind Your Language\" (1977\u201379, 1986), which attempted to find humour in racial or ethnic conflict and misunderstandings, have been increasingly criticised over time. Johnny Speight, the creator of \"In Sickness and In Health\", defended its depiction of the central character Alf Garnett, saying: \"If you do the character correctly, he just typifies what you hear - not only in pubs but in golf clubs around the country. To make him truthful he's got to say those things, and they are nasty things. But I feel as a writer that they should be out in the open so we can see how daft these comparisons are.\"\nThe contemporary \"It Ain't Half Hot Mum\" has also been criticised for racism, homophobia, and whitewashing its cast. The writer, Jimmy Perry, defended it saying those elements were true to life. Meanwhile, \"Whack-O!\", a 1960s series set in a private school, has been described as \"a little painful\" to watch today for its depictions of caning. Even \"Fawlty Towers\", considered one of the best sitcoms of all time, has been criticised for its cruelty.\nResearch.\nIn 2005, a group of scientists led by Dr. Helen Pilcher was commissioned by the satellite channel UKTV Gold to study 20 years of British sitcoms. Using the medical drama \"Casualty\" as a control, the team came up with a formula for measuring the success or failure of sitcoms. This formula assessed the recognisability of the main character and their delusions of grandeur, the wittiness of the script, the physical injuries the cast suffer and their differences in social statues, and the success of any plans. There was a maximum score of 1120, and \"Casualty\" scored 5.5. The top shows and their scores were \"Only Fools and Horses\" (which scored 696), \"The Office\" (678), \"Father Ted\" (564), \"Fawlty Towers\" (557), and \"Blackadder\" (374.5).\nThe very worst sitcoms of the 20 year period were:\nBritish sitcoms overseas.\nUnited States.\nBritish sitcoms are often seen on the Public Broadcasting Service (PBS), usually thanks to the effort of WGBH, and increasingly on cable television, including BBC America and Comedy Central. \"Are You Being Served?\", \"Keeping Up Appearances\" and \"As Time Goes By\" became sleeper hits when they aired on PBS, while \"Absolutely Fabulous\" enjoyed a significant following when it aired on Comedy Central and \"The Office\" won a Golden Globe award in 2004 for \"Best Television Series\u2014Musical or Comedy\", surpassing American series such as \"Sex and the City\" and \"Will &amp; Grace\".\nSeveral British sitcoms have been successfully remade for the American market. Notable examples include \"Steptoe and Son\" which became \"Sanford and Son\", \"Till Death Us Do Part\", which became \"All in the Family\", and \"The Office\" which was remade into an American series of the same name. \"Three's Company\", a remake of \"Man About the House\", had its own spinoffs: \"The Ropers\", based on \"George and Mildred\", and \"Three's a Crowd\", based on \"Robin's Nest\". Other American remakes of British sitcoms include \"What a Country!\", based on \"Mind Your Language\". More recently, shows such as \"The Inbetweeners\" was adapted into an American version, as was \"The Thick of It\" as \"Veep\". A large number of US adaptations end up being cancelled early or are not commissioned after their pilots are created. Another notable difference, which can be both positive or negative depending upon the skill of the cast and writers, is the American media culture of 20 or more episodes in a season, as opposed to the British tendency to have fewer than 10 episodes per series.\nAustralia and New Zealand.\nIn Australia, many British comedy series are aired on the ABC, which is the Australian equivalent of the BBC. British shows are also sometimes shown on the three commercial television networks in Australia, especially Seven Network during the 1970s. In New Zealand, state-run TVNZ also broadcasts many British series. The majority of British comedies now air in both countries on the subscription channels The Comedy Channel and UKTV.\nAustralian commercial television channels made their own versions of British comedies during the 1970s, often using members of the original casts. These included: \"Are You Being Served?\", \"Father, Dear Father\", \"Doctor Down Under\", \"Love Thy Neighbour in Australia\". In both countries, locally produced sitcoms have historically been heavily influenced by the structure of British sitcoms, such as in the New Zealand sitcom \"Gliding On\".\nIndia.\nIn the 1980s, India's national broadcaster Doordarshan showed \"Fawlty Towers\", \"Yes Minister\" and \"Mind Your Language\"."}
{"id": "44617", "revid": "38020123", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44617", "title": "Pete Phipps", "text": "Peter William Phipps (born 5 August 1951) is a rock drummer, singer and songwriter known for his work with Gary Glitter, the Glitter Band, and later Eurythmics, XTC and Denim. He is currently a member of both the Glitter Band and Mud.\nBiography.\nPhipps was a founder member of the Glitter Band (originally known as The Glittermen), who started as Gary Glitter's backing band, and went on to success in their own right, having six top ten singles in the UK in the mid-1970s. He was later a member of the band Random Hold, who toured with XTC in 1979, leading to him playing the majority of the drums on the XTC album \"Mummer\" (1983) after Terry Chambers left the band, and he returned for the recording of their next studio album \"The Big Express\" (1984). He also played drums for Eurythmics, joining the band for their MTV-broadcast performance at the Heaven nightclub in London, and playing live with the band into 1984. He was also a member of Lawrence's post-Felt band Denim, which has been described as \"self-consciously ironic glitter-pop revivalist project\", playing on the 1992 album \"Back in Denim\" and the 1996 album \"Denim on Ice\". Phipps was also the drummer on Liquid Gold's hits which included \"Dance Yourself Dizzy\".\nMusical biography.\nAfter learning to play drums, piano and guitar, his musical career took off at the age of 18, he has worked continuously since that time for a wide range of bands and artists. After leaving school in 1969 he joined Black Velvet, a soul/funk band \u2013 tours, recording and radio shows. A year later, he toured with the Elgins. Then in 1971, he joined CBS band Heaven and supported Jeff Beck on tour in the UK and Germany.\nIn June 1972, he began working for Gary Glitter's backing band the Glittermen and, in the same month, they made their first appearance on \"Top of the Pops\" with \"Rock and Roll Part 2\".\nThe Glittermen were renamed the Glitter Band and established a separate identity consisting of a six-member lineup Gerry Shephard (lead guitar/lead vocals), John Springate (bass/lead vocals), Pete Phipps (drums and keyboards), Tony Leonard (drums), John Rossall (trombone) Harvey Ellison (saxophone). Tours with Gary Glitter continued.\nIn December 1975, their third studio album \"Listen to the Band\", saw Phipps for the first time on lead vocals on the self-penned \"My First Mistake\". In 1977, their fourth studio album, \"Paris Match\" was recorded in France, plus an extended play (EP) featuring \"She Was Alright\" (written by Phipps) as the A-side.\nChanging direction, Phipps first joined Ex-Directory a jazz rock band where he first met Vic Martin (who would later, with Phipps, join Eurythmics); this was then followed by a short period with a London based punk rock band called the Secret. Phipps was then asked to join Random Hold, a band he had already worked with a year or two before. Random Hold consisted of David Rhodes, Bill MacCormick, David Ferguson, and Pete Phipps were described by a music journalist as \"disco orientated rock\", and by Nina Myskow in \"The Sun\" as a band to watch for as \"Their music shows talent, menace, originality and brains. A dynamic combination\". The band produced several singles in this period including \"Montgomery Clift\" and albums \"The View from Here\" (1980) and \"Burn the Buildings\" (1981). Phipps also continued to record with Glitter Band colleagues pursuing solo identities, such as with John Springate recording an album together in Springate's own Rock Star Studio and playing drums on the 1979 studio album \"Put Your Money Where Your Mouth Is\", by Gerry Shephard and Peter Oxendale.\nIn 1982, Phipps was invited by Mike Rutherford of Genesis to play on his final solo studio album \"Acting Very Strange\", and later in the same year was invited by XTC to record with them on their studio album, \"Mummer\".\nThrough 1983 and 1984 he was a member of Eurythmics. His first outing with Eurythmics was recorded at Heaven for MTV and later released as the video \"Sweet Dreams\" (1985). He toured in the US and in the UK. Also in 1984, Phipps returned to work with XTC in the studio to record the album \"The Big Express\".\nIn 1985, Phipps recorded with the Stranglers' Hugh Cornwell playing on the single \"One in a Million\". He then rejoined Gary Glitter for UK, Middle East and US tours. He also restarted Glitter Band gigs, joining with some of the other original members, and has remained part of the Glitter Band with a number of different line-ups to the present day.\nIn 1986, Phipps performed on \"Zipper\" an album written by Roger Chapman. In 1987 he toured as a replacement in Culture Club in France and Iceland. The next year, Phipps played with the Legendary Purple Helmets a Stranglers offshoot. Between 1992 and 1996, whilst remaining in the Glitter Band, Phipps joined Denim, a band formed by Lawrence. He recorded \"Back in Denim\" (1992 and \"Denim on Ice\" (1996). Through 1998 and 1999, Phipps had further shows with the Glitter Band and appearances with the King Penguins, a spin-off from the Glitter Band. \nThe year 2000 saw the founding of Santanarama, a six-piece tribute to Carlos Santana, and Glitz Blitz, a three-piece tribute to the 1970s. Early in 2001, along with shows with the Glitter Band, Santanarama and Glitz Blitz at a range of venues nationwide, Phipps made a return to playing some R&amp;B with a South East-based band Desperate Measures. Later in the year, he recorded an album of material with Alan Merrill of the Arrows which was released the following year.\nIn August 2020, he released his first solo album of original songs entitled \"Wherever You Are\". The album was recorded in Metway Studios, Brighton and produced by Mike Wilton and engineered by Jake Routham.\nPhipps currently performs worldwide as the Glitter Band playing a variety of venues up and down the UK and on the Continent, and has also been a member of Mud since 2015. He has recorded with:\nHe has also toured with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44618", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44618", "title": "Port Salut", "text": "Variety of French semi-soft cheese\nPort Salut () is a semi-soft pasteurised cow's milk cheese from Pays de la Loire, France, with a distinctive orange rind and a mild flavour. The cheese is produced in wheels approximately 23\u00a0cm (9\u00a0inches) in diameter, weighing approximately .\nThough Port Salut has a mild flavour, it sometimes has a strong smell because it is a mature cheese. The smell increases the longer the cheese is kept; this does not affect its flavour. It can be refrigerated and is best eaten within two weeks of opening.\nThe cheese was developed by Trappist monks during the 19th century at Port-du-Salut Abbey in Entrammes. The monks, many of whom had left France during the French Revolution of 1789, learned cheese-making skills to support themselves abroad, and brought those skills back upon their return after the Bourbon Restoration. The name of their society, \"Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Anonyme des Fermiers R\u00e9unis\" (S.A.F.R.), later became their registered trademark, and is still printed on the wheels of Port Salut cheese.\nIn 1873, the head of the abbey came to an agreement with a Parisian cheese-seller granting exclusive rights of distribution, and purchases of the cheese soon began to increase. The abbey sought trade protection, and eventually, sold the rights to the Bel Group in 1950. The cheese is now produced in a factory, with the characteristic smooth rind now the result of a plastic-coated wrapper. When made of wax the rind may be edible, but can detract from the flavour of the cheese.\nHandmade Port Salut cheese or \"Entrammes\" cheese is still produced by various monasteries throughout the French countryside.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44621", "revid": "21054272", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44621", "title": "Castile (historical region)", "text": "Historical region of Spain\nCastile or Castille (; ) is a territory of imprecise limits located in Spain. The \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" defines it as encompassing Old Castile and New Castile, as they were formally defined in the 1833 territorial division of Spain.\nCastile's name is generally thought to mean \"land of castles\" (\"castle\" in Spanish is \"castillo\"), in reference to the castles built in the area to consolidate the Christian Reconquest from the Moors.\nHistory.\nOriginally an eastern county of the kingdom of Le\u00f3n, in the 11th century, Castile became an independent realm with its capital at Burgos. The County of Castile, which originally included most of Burgos and parts of Vizcaya, \u00c1lava, Cantabria and La Rioja, became the leading force in the northern Christian states' 800-year Reconquista (\"reconquest\") of central and southern Spain from the Moorish rulers who had dominated most of the peninsula since the early 8th century.\nThe capture of Toledo in 1085 added New Castile to the crown's territories, and the battle of Las Navas de Tolosa (1212) heralded the Moors' loss of most of southern Spain. The kingdom of Le\u00f3n was integrated in the Crown of Castile in 1230, and the following decades saw the capture of C\u00f3rdoba (1236), Murcia (1243) and Seville (1248). By the Treaty of Alca\u00e7ovas with Portugal on March 6, 1460, the ownership of the Canary Islands was transferred to Castile.\nThe dynastic union of Castile and Aragon in 1469, when Ferdinand II of Aragon wed Isabella I of Castile, would eventually lead to the formal creation of Spain as a single entity in 1516 when their grandson Charles V assumed both thrones. See List of Spanish monarchs and Kings of Spain family tree. The Muslim Kingdom of Granada (roughly encompassing the modern day provinces of Granada, Malaga and Almeria) was conquered in 1492, formally passing to the Crown of Castile in that year.\nGeography.\nSince it lacks official recognition, Castile does not have clearly defined borders. Historically, the area consisted of the Kingdom of Castile. After the kingdom merged with its neighbours to become the Crown of Castile and later the Kingdom of Spain, when it united with the Crown of Aragon and the Kingdom of Navarre, the definition of what constituted \"Castile\" gradually began to change. Its historical capital was Burgos. In modern Spain, it is generally considered to comprise Castile and Le\u00f3n and Castile\u2013La Mancha, with Madrid as its centre. West Castile and Le\u00f3n, Albacete, Cantabria and La Rioja are sometimes included in the definition (controversial for historical, political, and cultural reasons).\nSince 1982 there have been two nominally Castilian autonomous communities in Spain, incorporating the toponym in their own official names: Castile and Leon and Castile-La Mancha. A third, the Community of Madrid is also regarded as part of Castile, by dint of its geographic enclosure within the entity and, above all, by the statements of its Statute of Autonomy, since its autonomic process originated in national interest and not in popular disaffection with Castile.\nOther territories in the former Crown of Castile are left out for different reasons. The territory of the Castilian Crown actually comprised all other autonomous communities within Spain with the exception of Aragon, Balearic Islands, Valencia and Catalonia, all belonging to the former Crown of Aragon, and Navarre, offshoot of the older Kingdom of the same name. Castile was divided between Old Castile in the north, so called because it was where the Kingdom of Castile was founded, and New Castile, called the Kingdom of Toledo in the Middle Ages. The Leonese region, part of the Crown of Castile from 1230, was from medieval times considered a region in its own right on a par with the two Castiles, and appeared on maps alongside Old Castile until the two joined as one region - Castile and Leon - in the 1980s. In 1833, Spain was further subdivided into administrative provinces.\nTwo non-administrative, nominally \"Castilian\" regions existed from 1833 to 1982: Old Castile, including Santander (autonomous community of Cantabria since 1981), Burgos, Logro\u00f1o (autonomous community of La Rioja since 1982), Palencia, Valladolid, Soria, Segovia and \u00c1vila, and New Castile consisting of Madrid (autonomous community of Madrid since 1983), Guadalajara, Cuenca, Toledo and Ciudad Real.\nLanguage.\nThe language of Castile emerged as the primary language of Spain\u2014known to many of its speakers as \"castellano\" and in English sometimes as Castilian, but generally as Spanish. See Names given to the Spanish language.\nHistorically, the Castilian Kingdom and people were considered to be the main architects of the Spanish State by a process of expansion to the South against the Moors and of marriages, wars, assimilation, and annexation of their smaller Eastern and Western neighbours. From the advent of the Bourbon Monarchy following the War of the Spanish Succession until the arrival of parliamentary democracy in 1977, the Castilian language was the only one with official status in the Spanish state.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44622", "revid": "1291272030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44622", "title": "Homeland defense", "text": "Homeland defense (HD) is the protection of a territory, sovereignty, domestic population, and critical infrastructure against external threats and aggression. (Definition will be incorporated into JP 3-26 upon its approval).\nHomeland security (HS) is a concerted national effort to prevent terrorist attacks, reduce a nation's vulnerability to terrorism, and minimize the damage and recover from attacks that do occur.\nFull definition.\n\"Homeland defense (HD) is the protection of a sovereignty, territory, domestic population, and critical defense infrastructure against external threats and aggression, or other threats as directed\nby the leader of that nation such as the president of the United States. The United States Department of Defense is partially responsible for the Homeland defense mission of the United States, and therefore leads the HD response, with other departments and agencies in support of DOD efforts.\"\nThreat strategy.\nHD strategic threat environment is based on the following conditions and profiles:\nResponses to the changes in any of the above can affect US's international environment through the application of diplomatic, economic, military, and informational means. Thus, a proactive and comprehensive approach to HD is required for US's response.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44626", "revid": "47474982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44626", "title": "Tarocchini", "text": "Tarot card games popular in northeast Italy\nTarocchini (plural for \"tarocchino\") are point trick-taking tarot card games popular in Bologna, capital city of the Emilia-Romagna region of Italy and has been confined mostly to this area. They are the diminutive form of \"tarocchi\" (plural for \"tarocco\"), referring to the reduction of the Bolognese pack from 78 to 62 cards, which probably occurred in the early 16th century.\nThe games of Tarocchini are very complex, yet the rules have changed little over the years.\nDeck description.\nTarocchini can be played with a 78-card Tarot deck (where the 2\u20135 pip cards in each suit have been removed), though normally, a special Tarot deck, the Tarocco Bolognese is used. The trump cards have a unique ordering where the second to fifth trumps are known collectively as the Moretti (Moors) and are of equal rank (the last one played is the highest, in regards to taking a trick). In the Tarocco Bolognese, these cards are depicted with four Moors, two of which are identical.\nThe Fool is not a trump, it can't beat any cards and is played as an excuse from following suit. The Magician is the lowest trump. However, both the Fool and the Magician may be used as contatori (counters or wild cards) to assist in making sequences. The \"contatori\" are very valuable, because they can be used as wild cards in multiple locations. The four highest trumps, which are unnumbered, are Angel, World, Sun, and Moon and they are collectively known as grande (big). Angel, World, Magician, and the Fool are collectively known as tarocchi.\nThe \"grande\", \"Moretti\", and \"contatori\" are not numbered in the Tarocco Bolognese.\nIn the modern game, the cards won by each side are counted in pairs, with 1 being subtracted from the total for each pair. There are also six points for winning the final trick, giving a total of 93 points.\nCommon rules.\nIn tarocchini, card points are not as important as bonus or meld points gained from combinations. Combinations can either be associative or sequential. Associative combinations or \"cricche\" (formerly as \"pariglie\") consist of three or four of a kind sets.\n \nThere are four types of sequential combinations although two of them are more like associative combinations. Each sequence needs at least three cards for 10 points and every extra card is worth 5 points. What separates the sequences from the \"cricche\" is the use of the \"contatori\". The \"contatori\" may not be used to substitute Angel or a King. For trumps, the sequence ends if the \"contatori\" are used consecutively with one exception: if the two cards replaced are trump 16 and a \"grande\". \nMultiplicative bonuses occur when three or more cricche or three or more sequences are made at one time. This doubles the points.\nVariations.\nOttocento.\nOttocento, is the most popular version. It is played by 4 players in two partnerships sitting opposite each other. The middle part of the game is very similar to the basic tarot game. It adds a round of point-counting before and after the game based on sets and runs of the cards. An unusual feature is that the partners are allowed to make certain limited signals to each other during play.\nAs usual for Tarot card games, dealing and card play are counter-clockwise. The dealer gives 15 cards to each player, in 3 rounds of five cards apiece. The dealer picks up the last two cards adding it to those in hand. The dealer has to discard two cards, which can not be \"5 point\" cards (such as kings, or the trumps worth 5 points). The discards are counted as points to the dealer's side, unless they make no tricks at all during the card play in which case the discarded cards must be surrendered to the opponents.\nAfter the first 5 cards have been dealt, if all players agree the game may \"andare a monte\". If this happens, all the cards are thrown in, and the deal passes to the next player. Eldest hand speaks first, declaring a monte if wishing to restart the game. This continues with each player until it reaches the dealer. If all have declared a monte, then the game will be restarted.\nThe game consists of three parts. Just after the hand has been dealt, all players may score their hands according to the meld points contained within. Next, normal card play occurs. Finally, the partners score any meld points that they have in their captured tricks. The scoring of meld points after card play is unique to Tarocchini and Minchiate.\nDeclarations.\nAfter the cards have been dealt, each player may declare certain combinations of hand cards to collect meld points. The player does not have to declare anything, and may optionally declare a smaller set or run than actually held. Anything that is declared must be placed face-up on the table. The decision of what to declare is an interesting strategic choice.\nGame play.\nOnce the first declaration of points is finished, normal card play ensues. Note that some information has been disclosed by the declarations, so players will have more clues than usual as to the contents of the other players' hands. As in all tarocchi games, there is the rule that a player that can't follow suit must trump if possible. If lacking trumps, then any card can be discarded. The Fool excuses the player from following suit: it is played to the trick instead of following suit, and then retrieved to its player's pile of won tricks. The Fool's player gives a low valued card to the trick's winner (only if it is an opponent) at the end of the hand. If the Fool's team failed to win any trick, the Fool is surrendered to the opponents but this is very rare. One of the most important strategies is to capture or protect the Begato as it is very useful in scoring. The last trick has a bonus of 6 points.\nDuring play, eldest is permitted to make certain signals to his or her partner. The current game allows only three signals:\nThese are some of the formerly allowed signals:\nScoring.\nOnce all tricks have been completed, the captured cards are examined for meld points. Combine these meld points with the meld points from declarations at the beginning of the hand. Next, count card points in pairs with one point subtracted from each pair. Then add the last trick bonus. After adding the meld points with the card points and last trick bonus, the first team to reach 800 wins. It is actually possible to win at the declarations if one team can reach 800 points. If both teams can do it, the team with the higher points win.\nTerziglio.\nTerziglio is for three players and the only version to include bidding. Each player is dealt 18 or 19 cards with 8 or 5 going to the stock. During bidding, players can pass, bid \"gioco\", or bid \"solo\" which is the highest bid. In \"gioco\", the declarer can exchange cards with the stock but cannot discard 5-point cards. The stock counts towards the declarer if able to win at least one trick otherwise it is surrendered to their opponents. In \"solo\", the declarer plays without exchanging with the stock which remains hidden and is awarded to the winner of the last trick. All other rules are the same as Ottocento but some players restrict signalling until the highest card of the trick's suit has been played (Kings or the Angel).\nScoring.\nEach side adds up all their points as in Ottocento. The declarer must have more points than their opponents to win the hand, a tie is counted as a loss. The winning side's points are rounded down to the nearest multiple of 50 (except if it fell short of a multiple of 50 by less than 5 points it will be rounded up). The score is then divided by 50 to arrive at the game points. If it was a \"solo\" game, the game points are doubled. Score calculation is unnecessary if one side won all the tricks; they are automatically awarded 40 game points. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44628", "revid": "50992253", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44628", "title": "Congress of Vienna", "text": "1814\u20131815 meetings to create a peace plan for Europe\nThe Congress of Vienna of 1814\u20131815 was a series of international diplomatic meetings to discuss and agree upon a possible new layout of the European political and constitutional order after the downfall of the French Emperor Napoleon Bonaparte. Participants were representatives of all European powers (other than the Ottoman Empire) and other stakeholders. The Congress was chaired by Austrian statesman Klemens von Metternich, and was held in Vienna from September 1814 to June 1815.\nThe objective of the Congress was to provide a long-term peace plan for Europe by settling critical issues arising from the French Revolutionary Wars and the Napoleonic Wars through negotiation. The goal was not simply to restore old boundaries, but to resize the main powers so they could balance each other and remain at peace, being at the same time shepherds for the smaller powers. More generally, conservative leaders like Metternich also sought to restrain or eliminate republican, liberal, and revolutionary movements which, from their point of view, had upended the constitutional order of the European ancien r\u00e9gime.\nAt the negotiation table, the position of France was weak in relation to that of Britain, Prussia, Austria, and Russia, partly due to the military strategy of its leader, Napoleon Bonaparte, over the previous two decades, and his recent defeat. In the settlement the parties did reach, France had to give up all recent conquests, while the other three main powers made major territorial gains around the world. Prussia added territory from smaller states: Swedish Pomerania, most of the Kingdom of Saxony, and the western part of the former Duchy of Warsaw. Austria gained much of northern Italy. Russia added the central and eastern parts of the Duchy of Warsaw. All agreed upon ratifying the creation of the new Kingdom of the Netherlands, which had been created just months before from the former Dutch Seven Provinces together with formerly Austrian territory, and was meant to serve as a buffer between the German Confederation and France.\nThe immediate background was Napoleonic France's defeat and surrender in May 1814, which brought an end to 23 years of nearly continuous war. Remarkably, negotiations continued unaffected despite the outbreak of fighting triggered by Napoleon's return from exile and resumption of power in France during the Hundred Days of March to July 1815. The Congress's agreement was signed nine days before Napoleon's final defeat at Waterloo on 18 June 1815.\nSome historians have criticised the outcomes of the Congress for causing the subsequent suppression of national, democratic, and liberal movements, and it has been seen as a reactionary settlement for the benefit of traditional monarchs. Others have praised the Congress for protecting Europe from large and widespread wars for almost a century.\nThe Congress format.\nThe name \"Congress of Vienna\" was not meant to suggest a formal plenary session, but rather the creation of a diplomatic organizational framework bringing together stakeholders of all flocks to enable the expression of opinions, interests and sentiments and facilitate discussion of general issues among them. The Congress format had been developed by Austrian Foreign Minister Klemens von Metternich, assisted by Friedrich von Gentz, and was the first occasion in history where, on a continental scale, national representatives and other stakeholders came together in one city at the same time to discuss and formulate the conditions and provisions of treaties. Before the Congress of Vienna the common method of diplomacy involved the exchange of notes sent back and forth among the several capitals and separate talks in different places, a cumbersome process that required much in the way of time and transportation. The format set at the Congress of Vienna would serve as inspiration for the 1856 peace conference brokered by France (the Congress of Paris) that settled the Crimean War. The Congress of Vienna settlement gave birth to the Concert of Europe, an international political doctrine that emphasized the maintaining of political boundaries, the balance of powers, and respecting spheres of influence and which guided foreign policy among the nations of Europe until the outbreak of the First World War in 1914.\nTo reach amiable consensus among the many different nations holding great interest in the settlement proceedings, informal, face-to-face deliberative sessions were held where opinions and proposed solutions could be inventoried. The policy work on which the Concert of Europe was built on came about through closed-doors dealing among the five Great Powers \u2013 Austria, Britain, Russia, Prussia and France. The first four of the five dominant peacemakers held sway simply because they brought to the table \"negotiating power\" that came of hard-won victory in the Napoleonic Wars; France enjoyed her advantageous position largely through the brilliant diplomatic maneuvering by senior statesman Talleyrand. Lesser powers, like Spain, Sweden, and Portugal, were given few opportunities to advocate their interests and only occasionally partook in the meetings held between the great powers. However, because all representatives were gathered in one city it was relatively easy to communicate, to hear and spread news and gossip, and to present points of view for both powerful and less powerful nations. Also of great importance to the parties convened in Vienna were the opportunities presented at wine and dinner functions to establish formal relationships with one another and build up diplomatic networks.\nPreliminaries.\nThe Treaty of Chaumont in 1814 had reaffirmed decisions that had been made already and that would be ratified by the more important Congress of Vienna. They included the establishment of a confederated Germany, the division of Italy into independent states, the restoration of the Bourbon kings of Spain, and the enlargement of the Netherlands to include what in 1830 became modern Belgium. The Treaty of Chaumont became the cornerstone of the European Alliance that formed the balance of power for decades.\nOther partial settlements had already occurred at the Treaty of Paris between France and the Sixth Coalition, and the Treaty of Kiel that covered issues raised regarding Scandinavia. The Treaty of Paris had determined that a \"general congress\" should be held in Vienna and that invitations would be issued to \"all the Powers engaged on either side in the present war\". The opening was scheduled for July 1814.\nParticipants.\nThe Congress functioned through formal meetings such as working groups and official diplomatic functions; however, a large portion of the Congress was conducted informally at salons, banquets, and balls.\nThe four great powers and Bourbon France.\nFour great powers had previously formed the core of the Sixth Coalition, a covenant of nations allied in the war against France. On the verge of Napoleon's defeat they had outlined their common position in the Treaty of Chaumont (March 1814), and negotiated the Treaty of Paris (1814) with the Bourbons during their restoration:\nThe lesser powers, parties to the Treaty of Paris, 1814.\nThese parties had not been part of the Chaumont agreement, but had joined the Treaty of Paris (1814):\nOther stakeholders, entertaining side program.\nVirtually every state in Europe had a delegation in Vienna \u2013 more than 200 states and princely houses were represented at the Congress. In addition, there were representatives of cities, corporations, religious organizations (for instance, abbeys) and special interest groups \u2013 e.g., a delegation representing German publishers, demanding a copyright law and freedom of the press. With them came a host of courtiers, secretaries, civil servants and ladies to enjoy the magnificent social life of the Austrian court. The Congress was noted for its lavish entertainment: according to a famous joke of an attendee, it danced a lot but did not move forward. On the other hand, the possibilities for informal gatherings created by this \"side program\" may have helped ensure the Congress's success.\nDiplomatic tactics.\nTalleyrand (France).\nInitially, the representatives of the four victorious powers hoped to exclude the French from serious participation in the negotiations, but Talleyrand skillfully managed to insert himself into \"her inner councils\" in the first weeks of negotiations. He allied himself to a Committee of Eight lesser powers (including Spain, Sweden, and Portugal) to control the negotiations. Once Talleyrand was able to use this committee to make himself a part of the inner negotiations, he then left it, once again abandoning his allies.\nThe major Allies' indecision on how to conduct their affairs without provoking a united protest from the lesser powers led to the calling of a preliminary conference on the protocol, to which Talleyrand and the Marquess of Labrador, Spain's representative, were invited on 30 September 1814.\nCongress Secretary Friedrich von Gentz reported, \"The intervention of Talleyrand and Labrador has hopelessly upset all our plans. Talleyrand protested against the procedure we have adopted and soundly [be]rated us for two hours. It was a scene I shall never forget.\" The embarrassed representatives of the Allies replied that the document concerning the protocol they had arranged actually meant nothing. \"If it means so little, why did you sign it?\" snapped Labrador.\nTalleyrand's policy, directed as much by national as personal ambitions, demanded the close but by no means amicable relationship he had with Labrador, whom Talleyrand regarded with disdain. Labrador later remarked of Talleyrand: \"that cripple, unfortunately, is going to Vienna.\" Talleyrand skirted additional articles suggested by Labrador: he had no intention of handing over the 12,000 \"afrancesados\" \u2013 Spanish fugitives, sympathetic to France, who had sworn fealty to Joseph Bonaparte, nor the bulk of the documents, paintings, pieces of fine art, and books that had been looted from the archives, palaces, churches and cathedrals of Spain.\nPolish-Saxon questions.\nThe most complex topic at the Congress was the Polish-Saxon Crisis. Russia wanted most of Poland, and Prussia wanted all of Saxony, whose king had allied with Napoleon. The tsar had wanted to become king of Poland. Austria analysed, this could make Russia too powerful - a view which was supported by Britain. The result was a deadlock, for which Talleyrand proposed a solution: admit France to the inner circle, and France would support Austria and Britain. The three nations signed a treaty on 3 January 1815, among only the three of them, agreeing to go to war against Russia and Prussia, if necessary, to prevent the Russo-Prussian plan from coming to fruition.\nWhen the Tsar heard of the treaty he agreed to a compromise that satisfied all parties on 24 October 1815. Russia received most of the Napoleonic Duchy of Warsaw as a \"Kingdom of Poland\" \u2013 called Congress Poland, with the tsar as a king ruling it independently of Russia. However, the majority of Greater Poland and Kuyavia, as well as the Che\u0142mno Land, were given to Prussia and mostly included within the newly formed Grand Duchy of Posen (Pozna\u0144), while Krak\u00f3w became a free city as a shared protectorate of Austria, Prussia and Russia. Furthermore, the tsar was forbidden from uniting his new realm with the parts of Poland that had been incorporated into Russia in the 1790s. Prussia received 60 percent of Saxony, much of which became part of the new Province of Saxony from 1816 (the now-Prussian parts of Lower Lusatia and some other areas instead became part of the Province of Brandenburg, with Prussian Upper Lusatia becoming part of the Province of Silesia by 1825); the remainder of Saxony returned to King Frederick Augustus I as his Kingdom of Saxony.\nBribery.\nIt can be learned from the diaries of the master of affairs Von Gentz that diplomatic tactics possibly included bribing. He notes that at the Congress he received \u00a322,000 through Talleyrand from Louis XVIII, while Castlereagh gave him \u00a3600, accompanied by \"\" (\"the wildest promises\"); his diary is full of such entries.\nFinal agreement.\nThe Final Act, embodying all the separate treaties, was signed on 9 June 1815 (nine days before the Battle of Waterloo). Its provisions included:\nRepresentatives of Austria, France, Portugal, Prussia, Russia, Sweden-Norway, and Britain signed the Final Act.\nSpain did not sign because of:\nSpain ended up signing the treaty in 1817. Subsequently, Ferdinand IV, the Bourbon King of Sicily, regained control of the Kingdom of Naples after Joachim Murat, the king installed by Bonaparte, supported Napoleon in the Hundred Days and started the 1815 Neapolitan War by attacking Austria.\nOther changes.\n The Congress's principal results, apart from its confirmation of France's loss of the territories annexed between 1795 and 1810, which had already been settled by the Treaty of Paris, were the enlargement of Russia (which gained most of the Duchy of Warsaw) and Prussia, which acquired the district of Pozna\u0144, Swedish Pomerania, Westphalia, and the northern Rhineland. The consolidation of Germany from the nearly 300 states of the Holy Roman Empire (dissolved in 1806) into a much less complex system of thirty-nine states (four of which were free cities) was confirmed. These states formed a loose German Confederation under the leadership of Austria.\nRepresentatives at the Congress agreed to numerous other territorial changes. By the Treaty of Kiel, Norway had been ceded by the king of Denmark-Norway to the king of Sweden. This sparked the nationalist movement which led to the establishment of the Kingdom of Norway on 17 May 1814 and the subsequent personal Union with Sweden. Austria gained Lombardy\u2013Venetia in Northern Italy, while much of the rest of North-Central Italy went to Habsburg dynasties (the Grand Duchy of Tuscany, the Duchy of Modena, and the Duchy of Parma).\nThe Papal States were restored to the Pope. The Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia was restored to its mainland possessions, and also gained control of the Republic of Genoa. In southern Italy, Napoleon's brother-in-law, Joachim Murat, was originally allowed to retain his Kingdom of Naples, but his support of Napoleon in the Hundred Days led to the restoration of the Bourbon Ferdinand IV to the throne.\nA large United Kingdom of the Netherlands was formed for the Prince of Orange, including both the old United Provinces and the formerly Austrian-ruled territories in the Southern Netherlands, which gave way to the formation of a democratic state, formally headed by a constitutional monarch. Other, less important, territorial adjustments included significant territorial gains for the German Kingdoms of Hanover (which gained East Frisia from Prussia and various other territories in Northwest Germany) and Bavaria (which gained the Rhenish Palatinate and territories in Franconia). The Duchy of Lauenburg was transferred from Hanover to Denmark, and Prussia annexed Swedish Pomerania. Switzerland was enlarged, and Swiss neutrality was established. Swiss mercenaries had played a significant role in European wars for several hundred years: the Congress intended to put a stop to these activities permanently.\nDuring the wars, Portugal had lost its town of Olivenza to Spain and moved to have it restored. Portugal was historically Britain's oldest ally, and with British support succeeded in having the re-incorporation of Olivenza decreed in of the General Treaty of the Final Act, which stated that \"The Powers, recognizing the justice of the claims of\u00a0... Portugal and the Brazils, upon the town of Olivenza, and the other territories ceded to Spain by the Treaty of Badajoz of 1801\". Portugal ratified the Final Act in 1815 but Spain would not sign, and this became the most important hold-out against the Congress of Vienna. Deciding in the end that it was better to become part of Europe than to stand alone, Spain finally accepted the Treaty on 7 May 1817; however, Olivenza and its surroundings were never returned to Portuguese control and, to the present day, this issue remains unresolved.\nThe United Kingdom received parts of the West Indies at the expense of the Netherlands and Spain and kept the former Dutch colonies of Ceylon and the Cape Colony as well as Malta and Heligoland. Under the Treaty of Paris (1814) France ceded to Britain the islands of \"Tobago and Saint Lucia, and of the Isle of France and its dependencies, especially Rodrigues and Les Seychelles\", and under the (signed in Paris on 5 November 1815), as one of the treaties signed during the Peace of Paris (1815), Britain obtained a protectorate over the United States of the Ionian Islands.\nLater criticism and praise.\nThe Congress of Vienna has been criticized by 19th-century and more recent historians and politicians for ignoring national and liberal impulses, and for imposing a stifling reaction on the Continent. It was an integral part in what became known as the Conservative Order, in which democracy and civil rights associated with the American and French Revolutions were de-emphasized.\nIn the 20th century, however, historians and politicians looking backward came to praise the Congress as well, because they saw it did prevent another widespread European war for nearly 100 years (1815\u20131914) and a significant step in the transition to a new international order in which peace was largely maintained through diplomatic dialogue. Among these is Henry Kissinger, whose 1954 doctoral dissertation, \"A World Restored,\" is a study of the Congress. Historian and jurist Mark Jarrett argues that the diplomatic congress format marked \"the true beginning of our modern era\". To his analyses the Congress organisation was deliberate conflict management and was the first genuine attempt to create an international order based upon consensus rather than conflict. \"Europe was ready,\" Jarrett states, \"to accept an unprecedented degree of international cooperation in response to the French Revolution.\" Historian Paul Schroeder argues that the old formulae for \"balance of power\" were in fact highly destabilizing and predatory, and that the Congress of Vienna instead set up rules that produced a stable and benign equilibrium. The Congress of Vienna was the first of a series of international meetings that came to be known as the Concert of Europe, which was an attempt to forge a peaceful balance of power in Europe. It served as a model for later organizations such as the League of Nations in 1919 and the United Nations in 1945.\nBefore the opening of the Paris peace conference of 1918, the British Foreign Office commissioned a history of the Congress of Vienna to serve as an example to its own delegates of how to achieve an equally successful peace. Besides, the main decisions of the Congress were made by the Four Great Powers and not all the countries of Europe could extend their rights at the Congress. The Italian peninsula became a mere \"geographical expression\" as divided into seven parts: Lombardy\u2013Venetia, Modena, Naples\u2013Sicily, Parma, Piedmont\u2013Sardinia, Tuscany, and the Papal States under the control of different powers. Poland remained partitioned between Russia, Prussia and Austria, with the largest part, the newly created Kingdom of Poland, remaining under Russian control.\nThe arrangements made by the Four Great Powers sought to ensure future disputes would be settled in a manner that would avoid the terrible wars of the previous 20 years. Although the Congress of Vienna preserved the balance of power in Europe, it could not check the spread of revolutionary movements across the continent some 30 years later.\nSome authors have suggested that the Congress of Vienna may provide a model for settling multiple interlocking conflicts in Eastern Europe that arose after the break-up of the Soviet Union.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44629", "revid": "27417341", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44629", "title": "Diphthong", "text": "Combination of two adjacent vowel sounds\nA diphthong ( ), also known as a gliding vowel or a vowel glide, is a combination of two adjacent vowel sounds within the same syllable. Technically, a diphthong is a vowel with two different targets: that is, the tongue (and/or other parts of the speech apparatus) moves during the pronunciation of the vowel. In most varieties of English, the phrase \"no highway cowboys\" ( ) has five distinct diphthongs, one in every syllable.\nDiphthongs contrast with monophthongs, where the tongue or other speech organs do not move and the syllable contains only a single vowel sound. For instance, in English, the word \"ah\" is spoken as a monophthong (), while the word \"ow\" is spoken as a diphthong in most varieties (). Where two adjacent vowel sounds occur in different syllables (e.g. in the English word \"re-elect\") the result is described as hiatus, not as a diphthong.\nDiphthongs often form when separate vowels are run together in rapid speech during a conversation. However, there are also unitary diphthongs, as in the English examples above, which are heard by listeners as single-vowel sounds (phonemes).\nThe word comes from grc \" \"\u03b4\u03af\u03c6\u03b8\u03bf\u03b3\u03b3\u03bf\u03c2\" (d\u00edphthongos)\"\u00a0'two sounds', from \" \"\u03b4\u03af\u03c2\" (d\u00eds)\"\u00a0'twice' and \" \"\u03c6\u03b8\u03cc\u03b3\u03b3\u03bf\u03c2\" (phth\u00f3ngos)\"\u00a0'sound'.\nTranscription.\nIn the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA), monophthongs are transcribed with one symbol, as in English \"sun\" , in which \u27e8\u27e9 represents a monophthong. Diphthongs are transcribed with two symbols, as in English \"high\" or \"cow\" , in which \u27e8\u27e9 and \u27e8\u27e9 represent diphthongs.\nDiphthongs may be transcribed with two vowel symbols or with a vowel symbol and a semivowel symbol. In the words above, the less prominent member of the diphthong can be represented with the symbols for the palatal approximant and the labiovelar approximant , with the symbols for the close vowels and , or the symbols for the near-close vowels and :\nSome transcriptions are broader or narrower (less precise or more precise phonetically) than others. Transcribing the English diphthongs in \"high\" and \"cow\" as \u27e8\u27e9 or \u27e8\u27e9 is a less precise or broader transcription, since these diphthongs usually end in a vowel sound that is more open than the semivowels or the close vowels . Transcribing the diphthongs as \u27e8\u27e9 is a more precise or narrower transcription, since the English diphthongs usually end in the near-close vowels .\nThe non-syllabic diacritic, the inverted breve below \u27e8\u25cc\u032f\u27e9, is placed under the less prominent part of a diphthong to show that it is part of a diphthong rather than a vowel in a separate syllable: . When there is no contrastive vowel sequence in the language, the diacritic may be omitted. Other common indications that the two sounds are not separate vowels are a superscript, \u27e8\u27e9, or a tie bar, \u27e8\u27e9 or \u27e8\u27e9. The tie bar can be useful when it is not clear which symbol represents the syllable nucleus, or when they have equal weight. Superscripts are especially used when an on- or off-glide is particularly fleeting.\nThe period \u27e8\u27e9 is the opposite of the non-syllabic diacritic: it represents a syllable break. If two vowels next to each other belong to two different syllables (hiatus), meaning that they do not form a diphthong, they can be transcribed with two vowel symbols with a period in between. Thus, \"lower\" can be transcribed \u27e8\u27e9, with a period separating the first syllable, , from the second syllable, \u27e8\u27e9.\nThe non-syllabic diacritic is used only when necessary. It is typically omitted when there is no ambiguity, as in \u27e8\u27e9. No words in English have the vowel sequences , so the non-syllabic diacritic is unnecessary.\nTypes.\nFalling and rising.\nFalling (or descending) diphthongs start with a vowel quality of higher prominence (higher pitch or volume) and end in a semivowel with less prominence, like in \"eye\", while rising (or ascending) diphthongs begin with a less prominent semivowel and end with a more prominent full vowel, similar to the in \"yard\". (Sometimes, however, the terms \"falling\" and \"rising\" are used, instead, to refer to vowel height, i.e. as synonyms of the terms \"closing\" and \"opening\". See below.) The less prominent component in the diphthong may also be transcribed as an approximant, thus in \"eye\" and in \"yard\". However, when the diphthong is analysed as a single phoneme, both elements are often transcribed with vowel symbols (, ). Semivowels and approximants are not equivalent in all treatments, and in the English and Italian languages, among others, many phoneticians do not consider rising combinations to be diphthongs, but rather sequences of approximant and vowel. There are many languages (such as Romanian) that contrast one or more rising diphthongs with similar sequences of a glide and a vowel in their phonetic inventory (see semivowel for examples).\nClosing, opening, and centering.\nIn closing diphthongs, the second element is more close than the first (e.g. ); in opening diphthongs, the second element is more open (e.g. ). Closing diphthongs tend to be falling (), and opening diphthongs are generally rising (), as open vowels are more sonorous and therefore tend to be more prominent. However, exceptions to this rule are not rare in the world's languages. In Finnish, for instance, the opening diphthongs and are true falling diphthongs, since they begin louder and with higher pitch and fall in prominence during the diphthong.\nA third, rare type of diphthong that is neither opening nor closing is height-harmonic diphthongs, with both elements at the same vowel height. These may have occurred in Old English:\nA centering diphthong is one that begins with a more peripheral vowel and ends with a more central one, such as , , and in Received Pronunciation or and in Irish. Many centering diphthongs are also opening diphthongs (, ).\nDiphthongs may contrast in how far they open or close. For example, Samoan contrasts low-to-mid with low-to-high diphthongs:\nNarrow and wide.\nNarrow diphthongs are the ones that end with a vowel which on a vowel chart is quite close to the one that begins the diphthong, for example Northern Dutch , and . Wide diphthongs are the opposite \u2013 they require a greater tongue movement, and their offsets are farther away from their starting points on the vowel chart. Examples of wide diphthongs are RP/GA English and .\nLength.\nLanguages differ in the length of diphthongs, measured in terms of morae. In languages with phonemically short and long vowels, diphthongs typically behave like long vowels, and are pronounced with a similar length. In languages with only one phonemic length for pure vowels, however, diphthongs may behave like pure vowels. For example, in Icelandic, both monophthongs and diphthongs are pronounced long before single consonants and short before most consonant clusters.\nSome languages contrast short and long diphthongs. In some languages, such as Old English, these behave like short and long vowels, occupying one and two morae, respectively. Languages that contrast three quantities in diphthongs are extremely rare, but not unheard of; Northern Sami is known to contrast long, short and \"finally stressed\" diphthongs, the last of which are distinguished by a longer second element.\nPhonology.\nIn some languages, diphthongs are single phonemes, while in others they are analyzed as sequences of two vowels, or of a vowel and a semivowel.\nSound changes.\nCertain sound changes relate to diphthongs and monophthongs. Vowel breaking or diphthongization is a vowel shift in which a monophthong becomes a diphthong. Monophthongization or smoothing is a vowel shift in which a diphthong becomes a monophthong.\nDifference from semivowels and vowel sequences.\nWhile there are a number of similarities, diphthongs are not the same phonologically as a combination of a vowel and an approximant or glide. Most importantly, diphthongs are fully contained in the syllable nucleus while a semivowel or glide is restricted to the syllable boundaries (either the onset or the coda). This often manifests itself phonetically by a greater degree of constriction, but the phonetic distinction is not always clear. The English word \"yes\", for example, consists of a palatal glide followed by a monophthong rather than a rising diphthong. In addition, the segmental elements must be different in diphthongs and so when it occurs in a language, it does not contrast with . However, it is possible for languages to contrast and .\nDiphthongs are also distinct from sequences of simple vowels. The Bunaq language of Timor, for example, distinguishes 'exit' from 'be amused', 'dance' from 'stare at', and 'choice' from 'good'.\nSome languages or dialects also articulate the component sounds of a diphthong differently than when those sounds are produced in hiatus. For example, due to English diphthong raising, many North American English speakers pronounce with closer vowels than , and, among a subset of those, the diphthong may be similarly raised as compared to .\nExamples.\nIndo-European languages.\nEnglish.\nIn words coming from Middle English, most cases of the Modern English diphthongs originate from the Middle English long monophthongs through the Great Vowel Shift, although some cases of originate from the Middle English diphthongs .\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDutch.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe dialect of Hamont (in Limburg) has five centring diphthongs and contrasts long and short forms of , , , and .\nAfrikaans.\nThe Afrikaans language has its origin in Dutch but differs in many significant ways, including the use of diphthongs in the place of several non-diphthong Dutch double vowels, or double-vowels being pronounced differently.\nExamples include:\nThe long diphthongs (or 'double vowels') are phonemically sequences of a free vowel and a non-syllabic equivalent of or : . Both and tend to be pronounced as , but they are spelled differently: the former as \u27e8ieu\u27e9, the latter as \u27e8eeu\u27e9.\nIn diminutives ending in formed to monosyllabic nouns, the vowels are realised as closing diphthongs . In the same environment, the sequences are realized as , i.e. as closing diphthongs followed by palatal nasal.\nGerman.\nStandard German.\nPhonemic diphthongs in German:\nIn the varieties of German that vocalize the in the syllable coda, other diphthongal combinations may occur. These are only phonetic diphthongs, not phonemic diphthongs, since the vocalic pronunciation alternates with consonantal pronunciations of if a vowel follows, cf. 'you hear' \u2013 'I hear'. These phonetic diphthongs may be as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^1 notes that the length contrast is not very stable before non-prevocalic and that \", following the pronouncing dictionaries (, ) judge the vowel in , , to be long, while the vowel in , , is supposed to be short. The factual basis of this presumed distinction seems very questionable.\" He goes on stating that in his own dialect, there is no length difference in these words, and that judgements on vowel length in front of non-prevocalic which is itself vocalized are problematic, in particular if precedes.\nAccording to the 'lengthless' analysis, the aforementioned 'long' diphthongs are analyzed as , , , , , , and . This makes non-prevocalic and homophonous as or . Non-prevocalic and may also merge, but the vowel chart in shows that they have somewhat different starting points.\n also states that \"laxing of the vowel is predicted to take place in shortened vowels; it does indeed seem to go hand in hand with the vowel shortening in many cases.\"\nBernese German.\nThe diphthongs of some German dialects differ from standard German diphthongs. The Bernese German diphthongs, for instance, correspond rather to the Middle High German diphthongs than to standard German diphthongs:\nApart from these phonemic diphthongs, Bernese German has numerous phonetic diphthongs due to L-vocalization in the syllable coda, for instance the following ones:\nYiddish.\nYiddish has three diphthongs:\nDiphthongs may reach a higher target position (towards ) in situations of coarticulatory phenomena or when words with such vowels are being emphasized.\nNorwegian.\nThere are five diphthongs in the Oslo dialect of Norwegian, all of them falling:\nAn additional diphthong, , occurs only in the word \"hui\" in the expression \"i hui og hast\" \"in great haste\". The number and form of diphthongs vary between dialects.\nFaroese.\nDiphthongs in Faroese are:\nIcelandic.\nDiphthongs in Icelandic are the following:\nCombinations of semivowel and a vowel are the following:\nFrench.\nIn French, , , and may be considered true diphthongs (that is, fully contained in the syllable nucleus: ). Other sequences are considered part of a glide formation process that turns a high vowel into a semivowel (and part of the syllable onset) when followed by another vowel.\nDiphthongs\nSemivowels\nQuebec French.\nIn Quebec French, long vowels are generally diphthongized in informal speech when stressed.\nCatalan.\nCatalan possesses a number of phonetic diphthongs, all of which begin (\"rising diphthongs\") or end (\"falling diphthongs\") in or .\nIn standard Eastern Catalan, rising diphthongs (that is, those starting with or ) are possible only in the following contexts:\nThere are also certain instances of \"compensatory diphthongization\" in the Majorcan dialect so that ('logs') (in addition to deleting the palatal plosive) develops a compensating palatal glide and surfaces as (and contrasts with the unpluralized ). Diphthongization compensates for the loss of the palatal stop (part of Catalan's segment loss compensation). There are other cases where diphthongization compensates for the loss of point of articulation features (property loss compensation) as in ('year') vs ('years'). The dialectal distribution of this compensatory diphthongization is almost entirely dependent on the dorsal plosive (whether it is velar or palatal) and the extent of consonant assimilation (whether or not it is extended to palatals).\nPortuguese.\nThe Portuguese diphthongs are formed by the labio-velar approximant and palatal approximant with a vowel, European Portuguese has 14 phonemic diphthongs (10 oral and 4 nasal), all of which are falling diphthongs formed by a vowel and a nonsyllabic high vowel. Brazilian Portuguese has roughly the same amount, although the European and non-European dialects have slightly different pronunciations ( is a distinctive feature of some southern and central Portuguese dialects, especially that of Lisbon). A onglide after or and before all vowels as in \"quando\" ('when') or \"guarda\" ('guard') may also form rising diphthongs and triphthongs. Additionally, in casual speech, adjacent heterosyllabic vowels may combine into diphthongs and triphthongs or even sequences of them.\nIn addition, phonetic diphthongs are formed in most Brazilian Portuguese dialects by the vocalization of in the syllable coda with words like \"sol\" ('sun') and \"sul\" ('south') as well as by yodization of vowels preceding or its allophone at syllable coda in terms like \"arroz\" ('rice'), and (or ) in terms such as \"paz mundial\" ('world peace') and \"dez anos\" ('ten years').\nSpanish.\nPhonetically, Spanish has seven falling diphthongs and eight rising diphthongs. In addition, during fast speech, sequences of vowels in hiatus become diphthongs wherein one becomes non-syllabic (unless they are the same vowel, in which case they fuse together) as in \"poeta\" ('poet'), \"almohada\" ('pillow'), \"maestro\" ('teacher') and \"l\u00ednea\" ('line'). The Spanish diphthongs are:\nItalian.\nThe existence of true diphthongs in Italian is debated; however, a list is:\nThe second table includes only 'false' diphthongs, composed of a semivowel + a vowel, not two vowels. The situation is more nuanced in the first table: a word such as 'baita' is actually pronounced ['baj.ta] and most speakers would syllabify it that way. A word such as 'voi' would instead be pronounced and syllabified as ['vo.i], yet again without a diphthong.\nIn general, unstressed in hiatus can turn into glides in more rapid speech (e.g. \"biennale\" 'biennial'; \"coalizione\" 'coalition') with the process occurring more readily in syllables further from stress.\nRomanian.\nRomanian has two true diphthongs: and . There are, however, a host of other vowel combinations (more than any other major Romance language) which are classified as vowel glides. As a result of their origin (diphthongization of mid vowels under stress), the two true diphthongs appear only in stressed syllables and make morphological alternations with the mid vowels and . To native speakers, they sound very similar to and respectively. There are no perfect minimal pairs to contrast and , and because does not appear in the final syllable of a prosodic word, there are no monosyllabic words with ; exceptions might include \"voal\" ('veil') and \"trotuar\" ('sidewalk'), though Ioana Chi\u021boran argues that these are best treated as containing glide-vowel sequences rather than diphthongs. In addition to these, the semivowels and can be combined (either before, after, or both) with most vowels, while this arguably forms additional diphthongs and triphthongs, only and can follow an obstruent-liquid cluster such as in \"broasc\u0103\" ('frog') and \"dreag\u0103\" ('to mend'), implying that and are restricted to the syllable boundary and therefore, strictly speaking, do not form diphthongs.\nIrish.\nAll Irish diphthongs are falling.\nScottish Gaelic.\nThere are 9 diphthongs in Scottish Gaelic. Group 1 occur anywhere (\"eu\" is usually before \"-m\", e.g. \"Seumas\"). Group 2 are reflexes that occur before \"-ll, -m, -nn, -bh, -dh, -gh\" and \"-mh\".\nFor more detailed explanations of Gaelic diphthongs see Scottish Gaelic orthography.\nCornish.\nThe following diphthongs are used in the Standard Written Form of Cornish. Each diphthong is given with its \"Revived Middle Cornish\" (RMC) and \"Revived Late Cornish\" (RLC) pronunciation.\nWelsh.\nWelsh is traditionally divided into Northern and Southern dialects. In the north, some diphthongs may be short or long according to regular vowel length rules but in the south they are always short (see Welsh phonology). Southern dialects tend to simplify diphthongs in speech (e.g. is reduced to ).\n\u2020 The plural ending is reduced to in the north and in the south, e.g. 'battles' is (north) or (south).\nCzech.\nThere are three diphthongs in Czech:\nThe vowel groups \"ia, ie, ii, io\", and \"iu\" in foreign words are not regarded as diphthongs, they are pronounced with between the vowels .\nSerbo-Croatian.\nmay be pronounced as a diphthong, but also as in hiatus or separated by a semivowel, . For example, in the first line of the national anthem of Croatia, \"Lijepa na\u0161a domovina\", \"ije\" is pronounced as a diphthong, but in the first line of the national anthem of Montenegro, \"Oj, svijetla majska zoro\", \"ije\" is pronounced as two syllables.\nSome Serbo-Croatian dialects also have \"uo\", as in whereas, in Standard Croatian and Serbian, these words are konj, rod, on.\nUralic languages.\nEstonian.\nAll nine vowels can appear as the first component of an Estonian diphthong, but only occur as the second component.\nThere are additional diphthongs less commonly used, such as in Euroopa (Europe), in s\u00f6andama (to dare), and in n\u00e4uguma (to mew).\nFinnish.\nAll Finnish diphthongs are falling. Notably, Finnish has true opening diphthongs (e.g. ), which are not very common crosslinguistically compared to centering diphthongs (e.g. in English). Vowel combinations across syllables may in practice be pronounced as diphthongs, when an intervening consonant has elided, as in \"n\u00e4\u00f6n\" instead of for the genitive of \"n\u00e4k\u00f6\" ('sight').\nNorthern Sami.\nThe diphthong system in Northern Sami varies considerably from one dialect to another. The Western Finnmark dialects distinguish four different qualities of opening diphthongs:\nIn terms of quantity, Northern Sami shows a three-way contrast between long, short and finally stressed diphthongs. The last are distinguished from long and short diphthongs by a markedly long and stressed second component. Diphthong quantity is not indicated in spelling. \nSemitic languages.\nMaltese.\nMaltese has seven falling diphthongs, though they may be considered VC sequences phonemically.\nSino-Tibetan languages.\nMandarin Chinese.\nRising sequences in Mandarin are usually regarded as a combination of a medial semivowel () plus a vowel, while falling sequences are regarded as one diphthong.\nCantonese.\nCantonese has eleven falling diphthongs.\nTai\u2013Kadai languages.\nThai.\nIn addition to vowel nuclei following or preceding and , Thai has three diphthongs:\nMon-Khmer languages.\nVietnamese.\nIn addition to vowel nuclei following or preceding and , Vietnamese has three diphthongs:\nKhmer.\nKhmer language has rich vocalics with an extra distinction of long and short register to the vowels and diphthongs.\nBantu languages.\nZulu.\nZulu has only monophthongs. \"Y\" and \"w\" are semi-vowels:\nAustronesian languages.\nIndonesian.\nIndonesian has four diphthongs which may be located at the beginning, middle or end of a word. They are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44631", "revid": "1315848067", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44631", "title": "History of Portugal (1415\u20131578)", "text": "The history of the Kingdom of Portugal from the Illustrious Generation of the early 15th century to the fall of the House of Aviz in the late 16th century has been named the \"Portuguese golden age\" (Portuguese: \"S\u00e9culo de Ouro\"; \"golden century\") and the \"Portuguese Renaissance\". During this period, Portugal was the first European power to begin building a colonial empire as during the Age of Exploration Portuguese sailors and explorers discovered an eastern route to India (that rounded the Cape of Good Hope) as well as several Atlantic archipelagos (like the Azores, Madeira, and Cape Verde) and colonized the African coast and Brazil. They also explored the Indian Ocean and established trading routes throughout most of southern Asia, sending the first direct European maritime trade and diplomatic missions to Ming China and to Japan, at the same time installing trading posts and the most important colony: Portuguese Macau (Only in East Asia). The Portuguese Renaissance produced a plethora of poets, historians, critics, theologians, and moralists. The by Garcia de Resende (printed 1516) is taken to mark the transition from Old Portuguese to the modern Portuguese language.\nJohn I.\nJohn I of Portugal acceded in 1390 and ruled in peace, pursuing the economic development of his realm. The only significant military action was the siege and conquest of the city of Ceuta in 1415. By this step he aimed to control navigation of the African coast. But in the broader perspective, this was the first step opening the Arab world to medieval Europe, which in fact led to the Age of Discovery with Portuguese explorers sailing across the whole world.\nContemporaneous writers describe John as a man of wit, very keen on concentrating power on himself, but at the same time with a benevolent and kind personality. His love for knowledge and culture was passed to his sons, often collectively referred to by Portuguese historians as the \"illustrious generation\" (\"\u00cdnclita Gera\u00e7\u00e3o\"): Edward, the future king, was a poet and a writer; Peter, the Duke of Coimbra, was one of the most learned princes of his time; and Prince Henry the Navigator, the duke of Viseu, invested heavily in science and the development of nautical pursuits. \nIn 1430, John's only surviving daughter, Isabella, married Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy, and enjoyed an extremely refined court culture in his lands; she was the mother of Charles the Bold.\nEdward.\nUnder king Edward, the colony at Ceuta rapidly became a drain on the Portuguese treasury, and it was realised that without the city of Tangier, possession of Ceuta was worthless. In 1437, Duarte's brothers Henry and Ferdinand persuaded him to launch an attack on the Marinid sultanate of Morocco. The expedition was not unanimously supported: Infante Peter, Duke of Coimbra, and the Infante John were both against the initiative; they preferred to avoid conflict with the king of Morocco. Their instincts proved to be justified. The resulting attack on Tangier, led by Henry, was a debacle. Failing to take the city in a series of assaults, the Portuguese siege camp was soon itself surrounded and starved into submission by a Moroccan relief army. In the resulting treaty, Henry promised to deliver Ceuta back to the Marinids in return for allowing the Portuguese army to depart unmolested. Duarte's youngest brother, Ferdinand, was handed over to the Marinids as a hostage for the final handover of the city.\nAfonso V.\nTreaty of Tordesillas.\nMeanwhile, colonization progressed in the Azores and Madeira, where sugar and wine were now produced; above all, the gold brought home from Guinea stimulated the commercial energy of the Portuguese. It had become clear that, apart from their religious and scientific aspects, these voyages of discovery were highly profitable. Under Afonso V (1443\u20131481), surnamed the African, the Gulf of Guinea was explored as far as Cape St Catherine (\"Cabo Santa Catarina\"),\n and three expeditions (1458, 1461 and 1471) were sent to Morocco; in 1471 Arzila and Tangier were captured from the Moors. Under John II (1481\u20131495) the fortress of S\u00e3o Jorge da Mina, the modern Elmina, was founded for the protection of the Guinea trade. Diogo C\u00e3o, discovered the Congo in 1482 and reached Cape Cross in 1486; Bartolomeu Dias doubled the Cape of Good Hope in 1488, thus proving that the Indian Ocean was accessible by sea.\nAfter 1492 the arrival of Christopher Columbus in the West Indies rendered desirable a delimitation of the Spanish and Portuguese spheres of exploration. This was accomplished by the Treaty of Tordesillas (June 7, 1494), which modified the delimitation authorized by Pope Alexander VI in two bulls issued on May 4, 1493. The treaty gave to Portugal all lands that might be discovered east of a straight line drawn from the Arctic Pole to the Antarctic, at a distance of 370 leagues west of Cape Verde. Spain received the lands discovered west of this line. The known means of measuring longitude were so inexact, however, that the line of demarcation could not in practice be determined (see J. de Andrade Corvo in \"Journal das Ci\u00eancias Matem\u00e1ticas,\" xxxi.147\u2013176, Lisbon, 1881), so the treaty was subject to very diverse interpretations. On its provisions were based both the Portuguese claim to Brazil and the Spanish claim to the Moluccas (see History of East Indies). The treaty was chiefly valuable to the Portuguese as a recognition of the prestige they had acquired. That prestige was enormously enhanced when, in 1497\u20131499, Vasco da Gama completed the voyage to India.\nThe tendency to secrecy and falsification of dates casts doubts about the authenticity of many primary sources. Several historians have hypothesized that John II may have known of the existence of Brazil and North America as early as 1480, thus explaining his wish in 1494 at the signing of the Treaty of Tordesillas to push the line of influence further west. Many historians suspect that the real documents would have been placed in the Library of Lisbon. Unfortunately, due to the fire following the earthquake of 1755, nearly all of the library's records were destroyed, but an extra copy available in Goa was transferred to Lisbon Tower of Tombo during the following 100 years. The Corpo Cronol\u00f3gico (Chronological Corpus), a collection of manuscripts on the Portuguese explorations and discoveries in Africa, Asia and Latin America, was inscribed on UNESCO\u2019s Memory of the World Register in 2007 in recognition of its historical value \"for acquiring knowledge of the political, diplomatic, military, economic and religious history of numerous countries at the time of the Portuguese Discoveries.\"\nAfonsine Ordinances.\nWhile the Crown was thus acquiring new possessions, its authority in Portugal was temporarily overshadowed by the growth of aristocratic privilege. After the death of Edward, further attempts to curb the power of the nobles were made by his brother, D. Pedro, duke of Coimbra, who acted as regent during the minority of Afonso V of Portugal (1439\u20131448). The head of the aristocratic opposition was the Duke of Braganza, who contrived to secure the sympathy of the king and the dismissal of the regent. The quarrel led to civil war, and on 20 May 1449, D. Pedro was defeated and killed at the Battle of Alfarrobeira. Thenceforward the grants made by John I were renewed and extended on so lavish a scale that the Braganza estates alone comprised about a third of the whole kingdom.\nAn unwise foreign policy simultaneously injured the royal prestige, for Afonso married his own niece, Joanna, daughter of Henry IV of Castile, and claimed the kingdom of Castile in her name. At the Battle of Toro, in 1476, he fought an indecisive battle that made him realize that his claims to the Castilian throne were not achievable. However, Portugal defeated Castile in the naval war (1475\u201379) of the same conflict (War of the Castilian Succession), capturing a large Castilian fleet -full of gold- in the Battle of Guinea (1478).\nIn 1479 Ferdinand and Isabella and Afonso signed the Treaty of Alc\u00e1\u00e7ovas, by which Joanna was relegated to a convent and Portugal won the hegemony in the Atlantic Ocean.\nHis successor, John II (1481\u20131495), reverted to the policy of matrimonial alliances with Castile and friendship with England. Finding, as he said, that the liberality of former kings had left the Crown \"no estates except the high roads of Portugal,\" he determined to crush the feudal nobility and seize its territories. The \"Portuguese Cortes\" held at \u00c9vora (1481) empowered judges nominated by the Crown to administer justice in all feudal domains. The nobles resisted this infringement of their rights, but their leader, Fernando II, Duke of Braganza, was beheaded for high treason in 1483; in 1484 the king stabbed to death his own brother-in-law, Diogo, Duke of Viseu; and eighty other members of the aristocracy were executed afterwards. Thus John \"the Perfect,\" as he was called, assured the supremacy of the Crown. He was succeeded in 1495 by Manuel I, who was named \"the Great\" or \"the Fortunate,\" because in his reign the sea route to India was discovered and a Portuguese Empire founded.\nImperial expansion (1481\u20131557).\nJohn II (r. 1481\u20131495) famously restored the policies of Atlantic exploration, reviving the work of his great-uncle, Henry the Navigator. The Portuguese explorations were his main priority in government, pushing south the known coast of Africa with the purpose of discovering the maritime route to India and breaking into the spice trade. Manuel I (r. 1495\u20131521) proved a worthy successor to his cousin John II, supporting Portuguese exploration of the Atlantic Ocean and the development of Portuguese commerce.\nUnder John III (r. 1521\u20131557), Portuguese possessions were extended in Asia and in the New World through the Portuguese colonization of Brazil. John III's policy of reinforcing Portugal's bases in India (such as Goa) secured Portugal's monopoly over the spice trade of cloves and nutmeg from the Maluku Islands. As a result, John III has been called the \"Grocer King\". On the eve of his death in 1557, the Portuguese empire spanned almost 1 billion acres (about 4 million square kilometers). During his reign, the Portuguese became the first Europeans to make contact with both China, under the Ming Dynasty, and Japan, during the Muromachi period (see Nanban trade). John III abandoned Muslim territories in North Africa in favor of trade with India and investment in Brazil. In Europe, he improved relations with the Baltic region and the Rhineland, hoping that this would bolster Portuguese trade.\nSebastian I.\nSebastian of Portugal was the penultimate Portuguese monarch of the House of Aviz.\nHe was the son of John Manuel, Prince of Portugal, and his wife, Joanna of Austria. Sebastian succeeded to the throne at the age of three, on the death of King John III, his paternal grandfather. Soon after his birth, his mother Joanna of Spain left her infant son to serve as Regent of Spain for her father, Emperor Charles V. After his abdication in 1556, she served in the same capacity for her brother Philip II of Spain. Joanna remained in Spain until her death in 1573, never to see her son again. Since Sebastian was still a child, the regency was handled first by his paternal grandmother, Catherine of Austria, and then by his great-uncle, Cardinal Henry of \u00c9vora. During this period Portugal continued colonial expansion in Angola, Mozambique, and Malacca, as well as the annexation of Macau in 1557.\nDuring Sebastian's short personal reign, he strengthened ties with the Holy Roman Empire, England and France through diplomatic efforts. He also restructured much of the administrative, judicial and military life in his kingdom. In 1568, Sebastian created scholarships to provide financial assistance to students who wished to study medicine or pharmacy at the University of Coimbra. In 1569, Sebastian ordered Duarte Nunes de Le\u00e3o to compile all the laws and legal documents of the kingdom in a collection of \"Leis Extravagantes\" known as \"C\u00f3digo Sebasti\u00e2nico\" (Sebastian's code).\nDuring the great plague of Lisbon in 1569, Sebastian sent for doctors from Seville to help the Portuguese doctors fight the plague. He created two hospitals in Lisbon to take care of the afflicted. In his concern for the widows and orphans of those killed by the plague, he created several \"Recolhimentos\" (shelters), known as the \"Recolhimento de Santa Marta\" (shelter of Santa Marta) and the \"Recolhimento dos Meninos\" (shelter of the children), and provided wet nurses to take care of the babies.\nSebastian created laws for the military, the \"Lei das Armas\", that would become a military organization model. In 1570 Goa was attacked by the Indian army, but the Portuguese were successful in repulsing the assault. Also in 1570, Sebastian ordered that Brazilian Indians should not be used as slaves and ordered the release of those held in captivity.\nThe \"Celeiros Comuns\" (Communal Granaries) were inaugurated in 1576 on Sebastian's orders. These were lending institutions intended to help to poor farmers when farm production decreased, giving credit, lending seeds and commodities to the needy, and allowing them to pay back with farm products when they recovered from losses.\nIn 1577 Sebastian's ordinance \"Da nova ordem do ju\u00edzo, sobre o abreviar das demandas, e execu\u00e7\u00e3o dellas\" decreased the time for handling legal actions, regulated the action of lawyers, scribes and other court officials, and created fines for delays.\nSebastian disappeared (and was presumably killed in action) in the battle of Alc\u00e1cer Quibir in 1578, after the brief reign of King Henry triggering the Portuguese succession crisis.\nDynastic crisis and union with Spain.\nFollowing the Portuguese crisis of succession, a dynastic union joined the crowns of Castile, Portugal and Aragon along with their respective colonial possessions, under the rule of the Habsburg dynasty\nThe unification of the peninsula had long been a goal of the region's monarchs with the intent of restoring the Visigothic monarchy.\nThe history of Portugal from the dynastic crisis in 1578 to the first Braganza Dynasty monarchs was a period of transition. The Portuguese Empire's spice trade was peaking at the start of this period. It continued to enjoy widespread influence after Vasco da Gama had finally reached the East by sailing around Africa in 1497\u201398.\nExplorations.\nReasons for exploration.\nPortugal's long shoreline, with its many harbours and rivers flowing westward to the Atlantic Ocean was the ideal environment to raise generations of adventurous seamen. As a seafaring people in the south-westernmost region of Europe, the Portuguese became natural leaders of exploration during the Middle Ages. Faced with the options of either accessing other European markets by sea (by exploiting its seafaring prowess) or by land (and facing the task of crossing Castile and Aragon territory) it is not surprising that goods were sent via the sea to England, Flanders, Italy and the Hanseatic league towns.\nHaving fought to achieve and to retain independence, the nation's leadership had also a desire for fresh conquests. Added to this was a long struggle to expel the Moors that was religiously sanctioned and influenced by foreign crusaders with a desire for martial fame. Making war on Islam seemed to the Portuguese both their natural destiny and their duty as Christians.\nOne important reason was the need to overcome the expensive eastern trade routes, dominated first by the republics of Venice and Genoa in the Mediterranean, and then controlled by the Ottoman Empire after the conquest of Constantinople in 1453, barring European access, and going through North Africa and the historically important combined-land-sea routes via the Red Sea. Both spice and silk were big businesses of the day, and arguably, spices which were used as medicine, drugs and preservatives was something of a necessity\u2014at least to those Europeans of better than modest means.\nThe Portuguese economy had benefited from its connections with neighbouring Muslim states. A money economy was well enough established for 15th century workers in the countryside as well as in the towns to be paid in currency. The agriculture of the countryside had diversified to the point where grain was imported from Morocco (a symptom of an economy dependent upon Portugal's), while specialised crops occupied former grain-growing areas: vineyards, olives, or the sugar factories of the Algarve, later to be reproduced in Brazil (Braudel 1985). Most of all, the Aviz dynasty that had come to power in 1385 marked the semi-eclipse of the conservative land-oriented aristocracy (See The Consolidation of the Monarchy in Portugal.) A constant exchange of cultural ideals made Portugal a centre of knowledge and technological development. Due to these connections with Islamic kingdoms, many mathematicians and experts in naval technology appeared in Portugal. The Portuguese government impelled this even further by taking full advantage of this and by creating several important research centres in Portugal, where Portuguese and foreign experts made several breakthroughs in the fields of mathematics, cartography and naval technology. Sagres and Lagos in the Algarve become famous as such places.\nPortuguese nautical science.\nThe successive expeditions and experience of the pilots led to a fairly rapid evolution of Portuguese nautical science, creating an elite of astronomers, navigators, mathematicians and cartographers, among them stood Pedro Nunes with studies on how to determine the latitudes by the stars and Jo\u00e3o de Castro.\nShips.\nUntil the 15th century, the Portuguese were limited to coastal cabotage navigation using barques and \"barinels\" (ancient cargo vessels used in the Mediterranean). These boats were small and fragile, with only one mast with a fixed quadrangular sail and did not have the capabilities to overcome the navigational difficulties associated with Southward oceanic exploration, as the strong winds, shoals and strong ocean currents easily overwhelmed their abilities. They are associated with the earliest discoveries, such as the Madeira Islands, the Azores, the Canaries, and to the early exploration of the north west African coast as far south as Arguim in the current Mauritania.\nThe ship that truly launched the first phase of the Portuguese discoveries along the African coast was the caravel, a development based on existing fishing boats. They were agile and easier to navigate, with a tonnage of 50 to 160 tons and 1 to 3 masts, with lateen triangular sails allowing luffing. The caravel benefited from a greater capacity to tack. The limited capacity for cargo and crew were their main drawbacks, but did not hinder its success. Limited crew and cargo space was acceptable, initially, because as exploratory ships, their \"cargo\" was what was in the explorer's feedback of a new territory, which only took up the space of one person. Among the famous caravels are \"Berrio\" and \"Caravela Annunciation\".\nWith the start of long oceanic sailing also large ships developed. \"Nau\" was the Portuguese archaic synonym for any large ship, primarily merchant ships. Due to the piracy that plagued the coasts, they began to be used in the navy and were provided with cannon windows, which led to the classification of \"naus\" according to the power of its artillery. They were also adapted to the increasing maritime trade: from 200 tons capacity in the 15th century to 500, they become impressive in the 16th century, having usually two decks, stern castles fore and aft, two to four masts with overlapping sails. In India travels in the sixteenth century there were also used carracks, large merchant ships with a high edge and three masts with square sails, that reached 2000 tons.\nCelestial navigation.\nIn the thirteenth century celestial navigation was already known, guided by the sun position. For celestial navigation the Portuguese, like other Europeans, used Arab navigation tools, like the astrolabe and quadrant, which they made easier and simpler. They also created the cross-staff, or \"cane of Jacob\", for measuring at sea the height of the sun and other stars. The Southern Cross become a reference upon arrival at the Southern hemisphere by Jo\u00e3o de Santar\u00e9m and Pedro Escobar in 1471, starting the celestial navigation on this constellation. But the results varied throughout the year, which required corrections.\nTo this the Portuguese used the astronomical tables (Ephemeris), precious tools for oceanic navigation, which have experienced a remarkable diffusion in the fifteenth century. These tables revolutionized navigation, allowing to calculate latitude. The tables of the Almanach Perpetuum, by astronomer Abraham Zacuto, published in Leiria in 1496, were used along with its improved astrolabe, by Vasco da Gama and Pedro \u00c1lvares Cabral.\nSailing techniques.\nBesides coastal exploration, Portuguese also made trips off in the ocean to gather meteorological and oceanographic information (in these were discovered the archipelagos of Madeira and the Azores, and Sargasso Sea). The knowledge of wind patterns and currents, the trade winds and the oceanic gyres in the Atlantic, and the determination of latitude led to the discovery of the best ocean route back from Africa: crossing the Central Atlantic to the latitude of the Azores, using the permanent favorable winds and currents that spin clockwise in the Northern Hemisphere because of atmospheric circulation and the effect of Coriolis, facilitating the way to Lisbon and thus enabling the Portuguese venturing increasingly farther from shore, the maneuver that became known as the \"volta do mar\" ().\nCartography.\nIt is thought that Jehuda Cresques, son of the Catalan cartographer Abraham Cresques have been one of the notable cartographers at the service of Prince Henry. However the oldest signed Portuguese sea chart is a Portolan made by Pedro Reinel in 1485 representing the Western Europe and parts of Africa, reflecting the explorations made by Diogo C\u00e3o. Reinel was also author of the first nautical chart known with an indication of latitudes in 1504 and the first representation of a Wind rose.\nWith his son, cartographer Jorge Reinel and Lopo Homem, they participated in the making of the atlas known as \"Lopo Homem-Rein\u00e9s Atlas\" or \"Miller Atlas\", in 1519. They were considered the best cartographers of their time, with Emperor Charles V wanting them to work for him. In 1517 King Manuel I of Portugal handed Lopo Homem a charter giving him the privilege to certify and amend all compass needles in vessels.\nIn the third phase of the former Portuguese nautical cartography, characterized by the abandonment of the influence of Ptolemy's representation of the East and more accuracy in the representation of lands and continents, stands out Fern\u00e3o Vaz Dourado (Goa ~ 1520 \u2013 ~ 1580), whose work has extraordinary quality and beauty, giving him a reputation as one of the best cartographers of the time. Many of his charts are large scale.\nHenry the Navigator.\nIt was the genius of Prince Henry the Navigator that coordinated and utilized all these tendencies towards expansion. Prince Henry placed at the disposal of his captains the vast resources of the Order of Christ, of which he was the head, and the best information and most accurate instruments and maps that could be obtained. He sought to effect a meeting with the half-fabulous Christian Empire of \"Prester John\" by way of the \"Western Nile\" (the S\u00e9n\u00e9gal River), and, in alliance with that potentate, to crush the Turks and liberate the Holy Land. The concept of an ocean route to India appears to have originated after his death. On land he again defeated the Moors, who attempted to retake Ceuta in 1418; but in an expedition to Tangier, undertaken in 1437 by King Edward (1433\u20131438), the Portuguese army was defeated, and could only escape destruction by surrendering as a hostage Prince Ferdinand, the king's youngest brother. Ferdinand, known as \"the Constant\", from the fortitude with which he endured captivity, died unransomed in 1443. By sea Prince Henry's captains continued their exploration of Africa and the Atlantic Ocean. In 1433 Cape Bojador was rounded; in 1434 the first consignment of slaves was brought to Lisbon; and slave trading soon became the most profitable branch of Portuguese commerce, until India was reached. The Senegal was reached in 1445, Cape Verde was passed in the same year, and in 1446 \u00c1lvaro Fernandes pushed on almost as far as Sierra Leone. This was probably the farthest point reached before the Navigator died in 1460. Another vector of the discoveries were the voyages westward, during which the Portuguese discovered the Sargasso Sea and possibly sighted the shores of Nova Scotia well before 1492.\nPortuguese in Asia.\nThe effort to colonize and maintain territories scattered around the entire coast of Africa and its surrounding islands, Brazil, India and Indic territories such as in Sri Lanka, Malaysia, Japan, China, Indonesia and Timor was a challenge for a population of only one million.\nCombined with constant competition from the Spanish this led to a desire for secrecy about every trade route and every colony. As a consequence, many documents that could reach other European countries were in fact fake documents with fake dates and faked facts, to mislead any other nation's possible efforts.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44633", "revid": "49063549", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44633", "title": "Ultramarine", "text": "Deep blue pigment\nUltramarine is a deep blue pigment which was originally made by grinding lapis lazuli into a powder. Its lengthy grinding and washing process makes the natural pigment quite valuable\u2014roughly ten times more expensive than the stone it comes from. Between the 14th and 15th centuries, it was as expensive as gold in Europe.\nThe name ultramarine comes from the Latin word . The word means 'beyond the sea', as the pigment was imported by Italian traders during the 14th and 15th centuries from mines in Afghanistan. Much of the expansion of ultramarine can be attributed to Venice which historically was the port of entry for lapis lazuli in Europe.\nUltramarine was the finest and most expensive blue used by Renaissance painters. It was often used for the robes of the Virgin Mary and symbolized holiness and humility. It remained an extremely expensive pigment until a synthetic ultramarine was invented in 1826.\nUltramarine is a permanent pigment when under ideal preservation conditions. Otherwise, it is susceptible to discoloration and fading.\nStructure.\nThe pigment consists primarily of a zeolite-based mineral containing small amounts of polysulfides. It occurs in nature as a proximate component of lapis lazuli containing a blue cubic mineral called lazurite. In the Colour Index International, the pigment of ultramarine is identified as P. Blue 29 77007.\nThe major component of lazurite is a complex sulfur-containing sodium-silicate (Na8\u201310Al6Si6O24S2\u20134), which makes ultramarine the most complex of all mineral pigments. Some chloride is often present in the crystal lattice as well. The blue color of the pigment is due to the S3- radical anion, which contains an unpaired electron.\nVisual properties.\nThe best samples of ultramarine are a uniform deep blue while other specimens are of paler color.\nParticle size distribution has been found to vary among samples of ultramarine from various workshops. Numerous grinding techniques used by painters have resulted in different pigment/medium ratios and particle size distributions. The grinding and purification process results in pigment with particles of various geometries. Different grades of pigment may have been used for different areas in a painting, a characteristic that is sometimes used in art authentication.\nShades and variations.\nInternational Klein Blue (IKB) a deep blue hue first mixed by the French artist Yves Klein.\nElectric.\n\"Electric ultramarine\" is the tone of ultramarine that is halfway between blue and violet on the RGB (HSV) color wheel, the expression of the HSV color space of the RGB color model.\nProduction.\nNatural production.\nLapis lazuli stone was historically mined near Sar-i-Sang in modern-day Afghanistan and traded to Mesopotamia and ancient Egypt as early as the third millennium BCE.\nA method to produce ultramarine from lapis lazuli was introduced by the 5th century for use in Buddhist cave temples. The method was described by Cennino Cennini in the 15th century. This process consisted of grinding the lapis lazuli mineral, mixing the ground material with melted wax, resins, and oils, wrapping the resulting mass in a cloth, and then kneading it in a dilute lye solution, a potassium carbonate solution prepared by combining wood ash with water. The blue lazurite particles collect at the bottom of the pot, while the colorless crystalline material and other impurities remain at the top. This process was performed at least three times, with each successive extraction generating a lower quality material. The final extraction, consisting largely of colorless material as well as a few blue particles, brings forth ultramarine ash which is prized as a glaze for its pale blue transparency. This extensive process was specific to ultramarine because the mineral from which it is derived has a combination of both blue and colorless pigments. If an artist were to simply grind and wash lapis lazuli, the resulting powder would be a greyish-blue color that lacks purity and depth of color since lapis lazuli contains a high proportion of colorless material.\nAlthough the lapis lazuli stone itself is relatively inexpensive, the lengthy process of pulverizing, sifting, and washing to produce ultramarine makes the natural pigment quite valuable and roughly ten times more expensive than the stone it comes from. The high cost of the imported raw material and the long laborious process of extraction combined has been said to make high-quality ultramarine as expensive as gold.\nSynthetic production.\nIn 1990, an estimated 20,000 tons of ultramarine were produced industrially. The raw materials used in the manufacture of synthetic ultramarine are the following:\nThe preparation is typically made in steps:\nUltramarine poor in silica is obtained by fusing a mixture of soft clay, sodium sulfate, charcoal, sodium carbonate, and sulfur. The product is at first white, but soon turns green \"green ultramarine\" when it is mixed with sulfur and heated. The sulfur burns, and a fine blue pigment is obtained. Ultramarine rich in silica is generally obtained by heating a mixture of pure clay, very fine white sand, sulfur, and charcoal in a muffle furnace. A blue product is obtained at once, but a red tinge often results. The different ultramarines\u2014green, blue, red, and violet\u2014are finely ground and washed with water.\nSynthetic ultramarine is a more vivid blue than natural ultramarine, since the particles in synthetic ultramarine are smaller and more uniform than the particles in natural ultramarine and therefore diffuse light more evenly. Its color is unaffected by light nor by contact with oil or lime as used in painting. Hydrochloric acid immediately bleaches it with liberation of hydrogen sulfide. Even a small addition of zinc oxide to the reddish varieties especially causes a considerable diminution in the intensity of the color. Modern, synthetic ultramarine blue is a non-toxic, soft pigment that does not need much mulling to disperse into a paint formulation.\nStructure and classification.\nUltramarine is the aluminosilicate zeolite with a sodalite structure. Sodalite consists of interconnected aluminosilicate cages. Some of these cages contain polysulfide (S\"x\"\"n\"\u2212) groups that are the chromophore (color centre). The negative charge on these ions is balanced by Na+ ions that also occupy these cages.\nThe chromophore is proposed to be S4- or S4.\nHistory.\nAntiquity and Middle Ages.\nThe name derives from Middle Latin , literally \"beyond the sea\" because it was imported from Asia by sea. In the past, it has also been known as \"azzurrum ultramarine\", , , , . The current terminology for ultramarine includes natural ultramarine (English), (French), (German), (Italian), and (Spanish). The first recorded use of \"ultramarine\" as a color name in English was in 1598.\nAncient Egyptians used lapis lazuli in solid form for ornamental applications in jewelry, however, there is no record of them successfully formulating lapis lazuli into paint. Archaeological evidence and early literature reveal that lapis lazuli was used as a semi-precious stone and decorative building stone from early Egyptian times. The mineral is described by the classical authors Theophrastus and Pliny. There is no evidence that lapis lazuli was used ground as a painting pigment by ancient Greeks and Romans. Like ancient Egyptians, they had access to a satisfactory blue colorant in the synthetic copper silicate pigment, Egyptian blue.\nThe first noted use of lapis lazuli as a pigment can be seen in 6th and 7th-century paintings in Zoroastrian and Buddhist cave temples in Afghanistan, near the most famous source of the mineral. Lapis lazuli has been identified in Chinese paintings from the 10th and 11th centuries, in Indian mural paintings from the 11th, 12th, and 17th centuries, and on Anglo-Saxon and Norman illuminated manuscripts from c.\u20091100. Ultramarine also appears in Islamic illuminated manuscripts from the 15th and 16th centuries throughout modern-day Afghanistan and Iran.\nRenaissance.\nVenice was central to both the manufacturing and distribution of ultramarine during the early modern period. The pigment was imported by Italian traders during the 14th and 15th centuries from mines in Afghanistan. Other European countries employed the pigment less extensively than in Italy; the pigment was not used even by wealthy painters in Spain at that time.\nDuring the Renaissance, ultramarine was the finest and most expensive blue that could be used by painters. Color infrared photogenic studies of ultramarine in 13th and 14th-century Sienese panel paintings have revealed that historically, ultramarine has been diluted with white lead pigment in an effort to use the color more sparingly given its high price. The 15th century artist Cennino Cennini wrote in his painters' handbook: \"Ultramarine blue is a glorious, lovely and absolutely perfect pigment beyond all the pigments. It would not be possible to say anything about or do anything to it which would not make it more so.\" Natural ultramarine is a difficult pigment to grind by hand, and for all except the highest quality of mineral, sheer grinding and washing produces only a pale grayish blue powder.\nThe pigment was most extensively used during the 14th through 15th centuries, as its brilliance complemented the vermilion and gold of illuminated manuscripts and Italian panel paintings. It was valued chiefly on account of its brilliancy of tone and its inertness in opposition to sunlight, oil, and slaked lime. It is, however, extremely susceptible to even minute and dilute mineral acids and acid vapors. Dilute HCl, HNO3, and H2SO4 rapidly destroy the blue color, producing hydrogen sulfide (H2S) in the process. Acetic acid attacks the pigment at a much slower rate than mineral acids.\nUltramarine was only used for frescoes when it was applied \"secco\" because frescoes' absorption rate made its use cost prohibitive. The pigment was mixed with a binding medium like egg to form a tempera and applied over dry plaster, such as in Giotto di Bondone's frescos in the Cappella degli Scrovegni or the Arena Chapel in Padua.\nEuropean artists used the pigment sparingly, reserving their highest quality blues for the robes of Mary and the Christ child, possibly in an effort to show piety, spending as a means of expressing devotion. As a result of the high price, artists sometimes economized by using a cheaper blue, azurite, for under painting. Most likely imported to Europe through Venice, the pigment was seldom seen in German art or art from countries north of Italy. Due to a shortage of azurite in the late 16th and 17th century, the price for the already-expensive ultramarine increased dramatically.\n17th and 18th centuries.\nJohannes Vermeer made extensive use of ultramarine in his paintings. The turban of the \"Girl with a Pearl Earring\" is painted with a mixture of ultramarine and lead white, with a thin glaze of pure ultramarine over it. In \"Lady Standing at a Virginal\", the young woman's dress is painted with a mixture of ultramarine and green earth, and ultramarine was used to add shadows in the flesh tones. Scientific analysis by the National Gallery in London of \"Lady Standing at a Virginal\" showed that the ultramarine in the blue seat cushion in the foreground had degraded and become paler with time; it would have been a deeper blue when originally painted.\n19th century (invention of synthetic ultramarine).\nThe beginning of the development of artificial ultramarine blue is known from Goethe. In about 1787, he observed the blue deposits on the walls of lime kilns near Palermo in Sicily. He was aware of the use of these glassy deposits as a substitute for lapis lazuli in decorative applications. He did not mention if it was suitable to grind for a pigment.\nIn 1814, Tassaert observed the spontaneous formation of a blue compound, very similar to ultramarine, if not identical with it, in a lime kiln belonging to the glass and mirror manufacturer Saint-Gobain. In 1824, this caused the to offer a prize for the artificial production of the precious color. Processes were devised by Jean Baptiste Guimet (1826) and by Christian Gmelin (1828), then professor of chemistry in T\u00fcbingen. While Guimet kept his process a secret, Gmelin published his, and became the originator of the \"artificial ultramarine\" industry.\nPermanence.\nEasel paintings and illuminated manuscripts have revealed natural ultramarine in a perfect state of preservation even though the art may be several centuries old. In general, ultramarine is a permanent pigment. Although it is a sulfur-containing compound from which sulfur is readily emitted as H2S, historically, it has been mixed with lead white with no reported occurrences of the lead pigment blackening to become lead sulfide.\nA plague known as \"ultramarine sickness\" has occasionally been observed among ultramarine oil paintings as a grayish or yellowish gray discoloration of the paint surface. This can occur with artificial ultramarine that is used industrially. The cause of this has been debated among experts, however, potential causes include atmospheric sulfur dioxide and moisture, acidity of an oil- or oleo-resinous paint medium, or slow drying of the oil during which time water may have been absorbed, creating swelling, opacity of the medium, and therefore whitening of the paint film.\nBoth natural and artificial ultramarine are stable to ammonia and caustic alkalis in ordinary conditions. Artificial ultramarine has been found to fade when in contact with lime in concrete or plaster. These observations have led experts to speculate if the natural pigment's fading may be the result of contact with the lime plaster of fresco paintings.\nSynthetic applications.\nSynthetic ultramarine, being very cheap, is used for wall painting, the printing of paper hangings, and calico. It also is used as a corrective for the yellowish tinge often present in things meant to be white, such as linen and paper. Bluing or \"laundry blue\" is a suspension of synthetic ultramarine, or the chemically different Prussian blue, that is used for this purpose when washing white clothes. It is often found in makeup such as mascaras or eye shadows.\nLarge quantities are used in the manufacture of paper, and especially for producing a kind of pale blue writing paper which was popular in Britain. During World War I, the RAF painted the outer roundels with a color made from ultramarine blue. This became BS 108(381C) aircraft blue. It was replaced in the 1960s by a new color made on phthalocyanine blue, called BS110(381C) roundel blue.\nUltramarine was a term used for a color available on Apple's iPhone 16, released in 2024.\nTerminology.\nUltramarine is a blue made from natural lapis lazuli, or its synthetic equivalent which is sometimes called \"French Ultramarine\". More generally \"ultramarine blue\" can refer to a vivid blue.\nThe term ultramarine can also refer to other pigments. Variants of the pigment such as \"ultramarine red,\" \"ultramarine green,\" and \"ultramarine violet\" all resemble ultramarine with respect to their chemistry and crystal structure.\nThe term \"ultramarine green\" indicates a dark green while barium chromate is sometimes referred to as \"ultramarine yellow\". Ultramarine pigment has also been termed \"Gmelin's Blue,\" \"Guimet's Blue,\" \"New blue,\" \"Oriental Blue,\" and \"Permanent Blue\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44634", "revid": "44199057", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44634", "title": "Tennessee Williams", "text": "American playwright (1911\u20131983)\nThomas Lanier Williams III (March 26, 1911 \u2013 February 25, 1983), known by his pen name Tennessee Williams, was an American playwright and screenwriter. Along with contemporaries Eugene O'Neill and Arthur Miller, he is considered among the three foremost playwrights of 20th-century American drama.\nAt age 33, after years of obscurity, Williams suddenly became famous with the success of \"The Glass Menagerie\" (1944) in New York City. It was the first of a string of successes, including \"A Streetcar Named Desire\" (1947), \"Cat on a Hot Tin Roof\" (1955), \"Sweet Bird of Youth\" (1959), and \"The Night of the Iguana\" (1961). With his later work, Williams attempted a new style that did not appeal as widely to audiences. His drama \"A Streetcar Named Desire\" is often numbered on short lists of the finest American plays of the 20th century alongside Eugene O'Neill's \"Long Day's Journey into Night\" and Arthur Miller's \"Death of a Salesman\".\nMuch of Williams's most acclaimed work has been adapted for the cinema. He also wrote short stories, poetry, essays, and a volume of memoirs. In 1979, four years before his death, Williams was inducted into the American Theater Hall of Fame.\nEarly life.\nThomas Lanier Williams III was born in Columbus, Mississippi, of English, Welsh, and Huguenot ancestry, the second child of Edwina Dakin (August 9, 1884 \u2013 June 1, 1980) and Cornelius Coffin \"C. C.\" Williams (1879\u20131957). His father was a traveling shoe salesman who became an alcoholic and was frequently away from home. His mother, Edwina, was the daughter of Rose O. Dakin, a music teacher, and the Reverend Walter Dakin, an Episcopal priest from Illinois who was assigned to a parish in Clarksdale, Mississippi, shortly after Williams's birth. Williams lived in his grandfather's Episcopal rectory with his family for much of his early childhood and was close to his grandparents. Among his ancestors was musician and poet Sidney Lanier.\nHe had two siblings, older sister Rose Isabel Williams (1909\u20131996) and younger brother Walter Dakin Williams (1919\u20132008). As a young child, Williams nearly died from a case of diphtheria that left him frail, short and virtually confined to his house during a year of recuperation. At least partly due to his illness, he was considered a weak child by his father, Cornelius Williams, a descendant of East Tennessee pioneers who had a violent temper and was prone to use his fists. He regarded what he thought was his son's effeminacy with disdain. Edwina, locked in an unhappy marriage, focused her attention almost entirely on her frail young son. Critics and historians agree that Williams drew from his own dysfunctional family in much of his writing and that his desire to break free from his puritan upbringing propelled him toward writing.\nWhen Williams was eight years old, his father was promoted to a job at the home office of the International Shoe Company in St. Louis. His mother's continual search for a more appropriate home, as well as his father's heavy drinking and loudly turbulent behavior, caused them to move numerous times around St. Louis. Williams attended Soldan High School, a setting he referred to in his play \"The Glass Menagerie\". Later he studied at University City High School. At age 16, Williams won third prize for an essay published in \"Smart Set\", titled \"Can a Good Wife Be a Good Sport?\" A year later, his short story \"The Vengeance of Nitocris\" was published (as by \"Thomas Lanier Williams\") in the August 1928 issue of the magazine \"Weird Tales\". These early publications did not lead to any significant recognition or appreciation of Williams's talent, and he would struggle for more than a decade to establish his writing career. Later, in 1928, Williams first visited Europe with his maternal grandfather Dakin.\nEducation.\nFrom 1929 to 1931, Williams attended the University of Missouri in Columbia, where he enrolled in journalism classes. He was bored by his classes and distracted by unrequited love for a girl. Soon he began entering his poetry, essays, stories, and plays in writing contests, hoping to earn extra income. His first submitted play was \"Beauty Is the Word\" (1930), followed by \"Hot Milk at Three in the Morning\" (1932). As recognition for \"Beauty,\" a play about rebellion against religious upbringing, he became the first freshman to receive honorable mention in a writing competition.\nAt University of Missouri, Williams joined the Alpha Tau Omega fraternity, but he did not fit in well with his fraternity brothers. After he failed a military training course in his junior year, his father pulled him out of school and put him to work at the International Shoe Company factory. Although Williams hated the monotony, the job forced him out of the gentility of his upbringing. His dislike of his new 9-to-5 routine drove Williams to write prodigiously. He set a goal of writing one story a week. Williams often worked on weekends and late into the night. His mother recalled his intensity:\nTom would go to his room with black coffee and cigarettes and I would hear the typewriter clicking away at night in the silent house. Some mornings when I walked in to wake him for work, I would find him sprawled fully dressed across the bed, too tired to remove his clothes.\nOverworked, unhappy, and lacking further success with his writing, by his 24th birthday Williams had suffered a nervous breakdown and left his job. Memories of this period and of a particular factory co-worker would contribute to the character Stanley Kowalski in \"A Streetcar Named Desire\". By the mid-1930s his mother separated from his father due to his worsening alcoholism and abusive temper. They agreed to a legal separation in 1946 but never divorced.\nIn 1936, Williams enrolled at Washington University in St. Louis where he wrote the play \"Me, Vashya\" (1937). After not winning the school's poetry prize, he decided to drop out. In the autumn of 1937, he transferred to the University of Iowa in Iowa City, where he was graduated with a B.A. in English in August 1938. He later studied at the Dramatic Workshop of The New School in New York City. Speaking of his early days as a playwright and an early collaborative play called \"Cairo, Shanghai, Bombay!\", Williams wrote, \"The laughter ... enchanted me. Then and there the theatre and I found each other for better and for worse. I know it's the only thing that saved my life.\" Around 1939, he adopted Tennessee Williams as his professional name, in acknowledgement of his Southern accent and roots.\nLiterary influences.\nWilliams's writings reference some of the poets and writers he most admired in his early years: Hart Crane, Arthur Rimbaud, Anton Chekhov, William Shakespeare, Clarence Darrow, D. H. Lawrence, Katherine Mansfield, August Strindberg, William Faulkner, Thomas Wolfe, Emily Dickinson, William Inge, James Joyce, and, according to some, Ernest Hemingway.\nCareer.\nAs Williams was struggling to gain production and an audience for his work in the late 1930s, he worked at a string of menial jobs that included a stint as caretaker on a chicken ranch in Laguna Beach, California. In 1939, with the help of his agent Audrey Wood, Williams was awarded a $1,000 grant from the Rockefeller Foundation in recognition of his play \"Battle of Angels.\" It was produced in Boston, Massachusetts in 1940 and was poorly received.\nUsing some of the Rockefeller funds, Williams moved to New Orleans in 1939 to write for the Works Progress Administration (WPA), a federally funded program of the New Deal era. Williams lived for a time in New Orleans' French Quarter, including 722 Toulouse Street, the setting of his 1977 play \"Vieux Carr\u00e9\". The building is now part of The Historic New Orleans Collection. The Rockefeller grant brought him to the attention of the Hollywood film industry and Williams received a six-month contract as a writer from the Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer film studio, earning $250 weekly.\nDuring the winter of 1944\u201345, his memory play \"The Glass Menagerie,\" developed from his 1943 short story \"Portrait of a Girl in Glass\", was produced in Chicago and garnered good reviews. It moved to New York where it became an instant hit and enjoyed a long Broadway run. Elia Kazan (who directed many of Williams's greatest successes) said of Williams: \"Everything in his life is in his plays, and everything in his plays is in his life.\" \"The Glass Menagerie\" won the award for the best play of the season, the New York Drama Critics' Circle Award.\nThe huge success of his next play, \"A Streetcar Named Desire\", cemented his reputation as a great playwright in 1947. During the late 1940s and 1950s, Williams began to travel widely with his partner Frank Merlo (1922\u20131963), often spending summers in Europe. He moved often to stimulate his writing, living in New York, New Orleans, Key West, Rome, Barcelona, and London. Williams wrote, \"Only some radical change can divert the downward course of my spirit, some startling new place or people to arrest the drift, the drag.\"\nBetween 1948 and 1959 Williams had seven of his plays produced on Broadway: \"Summer and Smoke\" (1948), \"The Rose Tattoo\" (1951), \"Camino Real\" (1953), \"Cat on a Hot Tin Roof\" (1955), \"Orpheus Descending\" (1957), \"Garden District\" (1958), and \"Sweet Bird of Youth\" (1959). By 1959, he had earned two Pulitzer Prizes, three New York Drama Critics' Circle Awards, three Donaldson Awards, and a Tony Award.\nWilliams's work reached wider audiences in the early 1950s when \"The Glass Menagerie\" and \"A Streetcar Named Desire\" were adapted into motion pictures. Later plays also adapted for the screen included \"Cat on a Hot Tin Roof, \"The Rose Tattoo\", \"Orpheus Descending\", The Night of the Iguana\", \"Sweet Bird of Youth\", and \"Summer and Smoke\".\nAfter the extraordinary successes of the 1940s and 1950s, he had more personal turmoil and theatrical failures in the 1960s and 1970s. Although he continued to write every day, the quality of his work suffered from his increasing alcohol and drug consumption, as well as occasional poor choices of collaborators. \nConsumed by depression over the loss, and in and out of treatment facilities while under the control of his mother and brother Dakin, Williams spiraled downward. His plays \"Kingdom of Earth\" (1967), \"In the Bar of a Tokyo Hotel\" (1969), \"Small Craft Warnings\" (1973), \"The Two Character Play\" (also called \"Out Cry\", 1973), \"The Red Devil Battery Sign\" (1976), \"Vieux Carr\u00e9\" (1978), \"Clothes for a Summer Hotel\" (1980), and others were all box office failures. Negative press notices wore down his spirit.\nWilliams served as the president of the jury for the 29th Cannes Film Festival in 1976.\nIn 1974, Williams received the St. Louis Literary Award from the Saint Louis University Library Associates. In 1979, four years before his death, he was inducted into the American Theater Hall of Fame.\nHis last play, \"A House Not Meant to Stand,\" was produced in Chicago in 1982. Despite largely positive reviews, it ran for only 40 performances.\nPersonal life.\nThroughout his life, Williams remained close to his sister, Rose, who was diagnosed with schizophrenia as a young woman. In 1943, as her behavior became increasingly disturbing, she was subjected to a lobotomy, requiring her to be institutionalized for the rest of her life. As soon as he was financially able, Williams moved Rose to a private institution just north of New York City, where he often visited her. He gave her a percentage interest in several of his most successful plays, the royalties from which were applied toward her care. The devastating effects of Rose's treatment may have contributed to Williams's alcoholism and his dependence on various combinations of amphetamines and barbiturates.\nAfter some early attempts at relationships with women, by the late 1930s, Williams began exploring his homosexuality. In New York City, he joined a gay social circle that included fellow writer and close friend Donald Windham (1920\u20132010) and Windham's then-boyfriend Fred Melton. In the summer of 1940, Williams initiated a relationship with Kip Kiernan (1918\u20131944), a young dancer he met in Provincetown, Massachusetts. When Kiernan left him to marry a woman, Williams was distraught. Kiernan's death four years later at age 26 was another heavy blow.\nOn a 1945 visit to Taos, New Mexico, Williams met Pancho Rodr\u00edguez y Gonz\u00e1lez, a hotel clerk of Mexican heritage. Rodr\u00edguez was prone to jealous rages and excessive drinking, and their relationship was tempestuous. In February 1946, Rodr\u00edguez left New Mexico to join Williams in his New Orleans apartment. They lived and traveled together until late 1947, when Williams ended the relationship. Rodr\u00edguez and Williams remained friends, however, and were in contact as late as the 1970s.\nWilliams spent the spring and summer of 1948 in Rome in the company of a young man named \"Rafaello\" in Williams' \"Memoirs\". He provided financial assistance to the younger man for several years afterward. Williams drew from this for his first novel, \"The Roman Spring of Mrs. Stone\".\nWhen he returned to New York City, Williams met and fell in love with Frank Merlo (1921\u20131963). An occasional actor of Sicilian ancestry, he had served in the U.S. Navy during World War II. This was the enduring romantic relationship of Williams's life, and it lasted 14 years until infidelities and drug abuse on both sides ended it. Merlo, who had become Williams's personal secretary, took on most of the details of their domestic life. He provided a period of happiness and stability, acting as a balance to the playwright's frequent bouts with depression. Williams feared that, like his sister Rose, he would fall into insanity. His years with Merlo, in an apartment in Manhattan and a modest house in Key West, Florida were Williams's happiest and most productive. Shortly after their breakup, Merlo was diagnosed with inoperable lung cancer. Williams returned to him and cared for him until his death on September 20, 1963.\nIn the years following Merlo's death, Williams descended into a period of nearly catatonic depression and increasing drug use, which resulted in several hospitalizations and commitments to mental health facilities. He submitted to injections by Dr. Max Jacobson, known popularly as Dr. Feelgood, who used increasing amounts of amphetamines to overcome Williams' depression. Jacobson combined these with prescriptions for the sedative Seconal to relieve Williams' insomnia. During this time, influenced by his brother, a Roman Catholic convert, Williams joined the Catholic Church; however, he never attributed much significance to religion in his personal life. He was never truly able to recoup his earlier success, or to entirely overcome his dependence on prescription drugs.\nAs Williams grew older, he felt increasingly alone; he feared old age and losing his sexual appeal to younger gay men. In the 1970s, when he was in his 60s, Williams had a lengthy relationship with Robert Carroll, a Vietnam War veteran and aspiring writer in his 20s. Williams had deep affection for Carroll and respect for what he saw as the younger man's talents. Along with Williams's sister Rose, Carroll was one of the two people who received a bequest in Williams's will. Williams described Carroll's behavior as a combination of \"sweetness\" and \"beastliness\". Because Carroll had a drug problem, as did Williams, friends including Maria Britneva saw the relationship as destructive. Williams wrote that Carroll played on his \"acute loneliness\" as an aging gay man. When the two men broke up in 1979, Williams called Carroll a \"twerp\", but they remained friends until Williams died four years later.\nDeath.\nOn February 25, 1983, Williams was found dead at age 71 in his suite at the Hotel Elys\u00e9e in New York City. Chief Medical Examiner of New York City Elliot M. Gross reported that Williams had choked to death from inhaling the plastic cap of the type used on bottles of nasal spray or eye solution. However, the report was corrected on August 14, 1983, to state that Williams had been using the plastic cap found in his mouth to ingest barbiturates and had actually died from a toxic level of secobarbital.\nHe wrote in his will in 1972:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, Thomas Lanier (Tennessee) Williams, being in sound mind upon this subject, and having declared this wish repeatedly to my close friends\u2014do hereby state my desire to be buried at sea. More specifically, I wish to be buried at sea at as close a possible point as the American poet Hart Crane died by choice in the sea; this would be ascrnatible [sic], this geographic point, by the various books (biographical) upon his life and death. I wish to be sewn up in a canvas sack and dropped overboard, as stated above, as close as possible to where Hart Crane was given by himself to the great mother of life which is the sea: the Caribbean, specifically, if that fits the geography of his death. Otherwise\u2014whereever fits it [sic].\nHowever, his brother Dakin Williams arranged for him to be buried at Calvary Cemetery in St. Louis, Missouri, where his mother is buried.\nAccording to \"The New York Times\", \"most of his estate was left to the University of the South in Sewanee, Tenn., with the bulk of it to remain in trust for his sister during her lifetime.\" Tennessee's sister Rose died in 1996 after many years in a mental institution in New York state; the university subsequently received about $7 million, which supports a creative writing program.\nPosthumous recognition.\nFrom February 1 to July 21, 2011, to commemorate the 100th anniversary of his birth, the Harry Ransom Center at the University of Texas at Austin, the home of Williams's archive, exhibited 250 of his personal items. The exhibit, titled \"Becoming Tennessee Williams\", included a collection of Williams manuscripts, correspondence, photographs and artwork. The Ransom Center holds the earliest and largest collections of Williams's papers, including all of his earliest manuscripts, the papers of his mother Edwina Williams, and those of his long-time agent Audrey Wood.\nIn late 2009, Williams was inducted into the Poets' Corner at the Cathedral of Saint John the Divine in New York. Performers and artists who took part in his induction included Vanessa Redgrave, playwright John Guare, Eli Wallach, Sylvia Miles, Gregory Mosher, and Ben (Griessmeyer) Berry.\nThe Tennessee Williams Theatre in Key West, Florida, is named for him. The Tennessee Williams Key West Exhibit on Truman Avenue houses rare Williams memorabilia, photographs, and pictures including his famous typewriter.\nAt the time of his death, Williams had been working on a final play, \"In Masks Outrageous and Austere\", which attempted to reconcile certain forces and facts of his own life. This was a continuing theme in his work. As of September 2007, author Gore Vidal was completing the play, and Peter Bogdanovich was slated to direct its Broadway debut. The play received its world premiere in New York City in April 2012, directed by David Schweizer and starring Shirley Knight as Babe.\nThe rectory of St. Paul's Episcopal Church in Columbus, Mississippi, where Williams's grandfather Dakin was rector at the time of Williams's birth, was moved to another location in 1993 for preservation. It was renovated in 2010 for use by the City of Columbus as the Tennessee Williams Welcome Center.\nWilliams's literary legacy is represented by the literary agency headed by Georges Borchardt.\nIn 1985, French author-composer Michel Berger wrote a song dedicated to Tennessee Williams, \"Quelque chose de Tennessee\" (Something of Tennessee), for Johnny Hallyday. It became one of the singer's more famous songs.\nSince 1986, the Tennessee Williams/New Orleans Literary Festival has been held annually in New Orleans, Louisiana, in commemoration of the playwright. The festival takes place at the end of March to coincide with Williams's birthday.\n\"The Tennessee Williams Songbook\" is a one woman show written and directed by David Kaplan, a Williams scholar and curator of Provincetown's Tennessee Williams Festival, and starring Tony Award nominated actress Alison Fraser. The show features songs taken from plays of Williams's canon, woven together with text to create a new narrative. The show premiered at the Tennessee Williams/New Orleans Literary Festival. The show was recorded on CD and distributed by Ghostlight Records.\nIn 2014 Williams was one of the inaugural honorees in the Rainbow Honor Walk, a walk of fame in San Francisco's Castro neighborhood noting LGBTQ people who have \"made significant contributions in their fields.\"\nIn 2015, The Tennessee Williams Theatre Company of New Orleans was founded by Co-Artistic Directors Nick Shackleford and Augustin J Correro. The New Orleans\u2013based non-profit theatre company is the first year-round professional theatre company that focuses exclusively on the works of Williams.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"[T]here used to be two streetcars in New Orleans. One was named \"Desire\" and the other was called \"Cemeteries\". To get where you were going, you changed from the first to the second. In [his] stories and in those plays, Tennessee validated with his genius our common ticket of transfer.\"\u2014Biographer and critic Gore Vidal in the Introduction to \"Tennessee Williams: Collected Stories\" (1985)\nSince 2016, St. Louis, Missouri has held an annual Tennessee Williams Festival, featuring a main production and related events such as literary discussions and new plays inspired by his work. In 2018 the festival produced \"A Streetcar Named Desire\".\nThe U.S. Postal Service honored Williams on a stamp issued on October 13, 1995 as part of its literary arts series.\nWilliams is honored with a star on the St. Louis Walk of Fame. He is also inducted into the Clarksdale Walk of Fame.\nOn October 17, 2019, the Mississippi Writers Trail installed a historical marker commemorating William's literary contributions during his namesake festival produced by the City of Clarksdale, Mississippi.\nWilliams is included in Mississippi's float for the 137th Rose Parade.\nWorks.\nCharacters in his plays are often seen as representations of his family members. Laura Wingfield in \"The Glass Menagerie\" is thought to be modeled on his sister Rose. Some biographers believed that the character of Blanche DuBois in \"A Streetcar Named Desire\" also is based on her and that the mental deterioration of Blanche's character is inspired by Rose's mental health struggles.\nAmanda Wingfield in \"The Glass Menagerie\" generally was taken to represent Williams's mother Edwina. Characters such as Tom Wingfield in \"The Glass Menagerie\" and Sebastian in \"Suddenly, Last Summer\" were understood to represent Williams himself. In addition, he used a lobotomy as a motif in \"Suddenly, Last Summer\".\nThe Pulitzer Prize for Drama was awarded to \"A Streetcar Named Desire\" in 1948 and to \"Cat on a Hot Tin Roof\" in 1955. These two plays later were adapted as highly successful films by noted directors Elia Kazan (\"Streetcar\"), with whom Williams developed a very close artistic relationship, and Richard Brooks (\"Cat\"). Both plays included references to elements of Williams's life such as homosexuality, mental instability, and alcoholism.\nAlthough \"The Flowering Peach\" by Clifford Odets was the preferred choice of the Pulitzer Prize jury in 1955, and \"Cat on a Hot Tin Roof\" was at first considered the weakest of the five shortlisted nominees, Joseph Pulitzer Jr., chairman of the Board, had seen \"Cat on a Hot Tin Roof\" and thought it worthy of the drama prize. The Board went along with him after considerable discussion.\nWilliams wrote \"The Parade, or Approaching the End of a Summer\" when he was 29, and worked on it sporadically throughout his life. A semi-autobiographical depiction of his 1940 romance with Kip Kiernan in Provincetown, Massachusetts, it was produced for the first time on October 1, 2006, in Provincetown by the Shakespeare on the Cape production company. This was part of the First Annual Provincetown Tennessee Williams Festival. \"Something Cloudy, Something Clear\" (1981) is also based on his memories of Provincetown in the 1940s.\nHis last play went through many drafts as he was trying to reconcile what would be the end of his life. There are many versions of it, but it is referred to as \"In Masks Outrageous and Austere\".\nOne-act plays.\nWilliams wrote more than 70 one-act plays during his lifetime. The one-acts explored many of the same themes that dominated his longer works. Williams's major collections are published by New Directions in New York City.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44635", "revid": "37635468", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44635", "title": "Grammy Awards", "text": "American award for achievements in music\nThe Grammy Awards, stylized as GRAMMY, and often referred to as the Grammys, are awards presented by The Recording Academy of the United States to recognize outstanding achievements in music. They are regarded by many as the most prestigious and significant awards in the music industry worldwide and thus the show is frequently called \"music's biggest night\". The trophy depicts a gilded gramophone, and the original idea was to call them the \"Gramophone Awards\".\nThe Grammys are the first of the Big Three networks' major music awards held annually, and are considered one of the four major annual American entertainment awards with the Academy Awards (for films), the Emmy Awards (for television), and the Tony Awards (for theater). The first Grammy Awards ceremony was held on May 4, 1959, to honor the musical accomplishments of performers for the year 1958. After the 2011 ceremony, the Recording Academy overhauled many Grammy Award categories for 2012. The 67th Annual Grammy Awards, featuring a total of 94 categories, were presented on February 2, 2025.\nAfter over fifty years being broadcast on CBS, it was announced on October 30, 2024, that the Grammys would move to ABC, Disney+ and Hulu as part of a ten-year broadcast deal between the Recording Academy and the Walt Disney Company. The 2027 broadcast will mark the first time the Grammys are streamed simultaneously on multiple Disney-owned platforms, including Hulu and Disney+, alongside ABC's traditional television airing.\nHistory.\nThe Grammys had their origin in the Hollywood Walk of Fame project in the 1950s. As recording executives on the Walk of Fame committee compiled a list of significant recording industry people who might qualify for a Walk of Fame star, they realized that many leading people in their business would not earn a star on Hollywood Boulevard. They determined to rectify this by creating awards given by their industry similar to the Oscars and the Emmys. After deciding to go forward with such awards, a question remained what to call them. One working title was the 'Eddie', to honor Thomas Edison, the inventor of the phonograph. Eventually, the name was chosen after a mail-in contest whereby approximately 300 contestants submitted the name 'Grammy', with the earliest postmark from contest winner Jay Danna of New Orleans, Louisiana, as an abbreviated reference to Emile Berliner's invention, the gramophone. Grammys were first awarded for achievements in 1958.\nThe first award ceremony was held simultaneously in two locations on May 4, 1959, the Beverly Hilton Hotel in Beverly Hills, California, and the Park Sheraton Hotel in New York City, New York, with 28 Grammys awarded. The number of awards given grew, reaching over 100, and fluctuated over the years with categories added and removed. The second Grammy Awards, also held in 1959, was the first ceremony to be televised. Still, the ceremony was not aired live until the 13th Annual Grammy Awards in 1971.\nLatin Grammy Awards.\nThe concept of a separate Grammy Awards for Latin music recorded in Spanish or Portuguese began in 1989, as it was deemed too large to fit on the regular Grammys ceremony. The Recording Academy then established the Latin Recording Academy in 1997, and the separate Latin Grammy Awards were first held in 2000. The Latin Grammys honor works recorded in Spanish or Portuguese from anywhere around the world that has been released either in Ibero-America, the Iberian Peninsula, or the United States.\nCOVID-19 impact (2021\u20132022).\nThe 63rd Annual Grammy Awards were postponed from its original January 31, 2021, date to March 14, 2021, due to the music industry impact of COVID-19 pandemic.\nThe 64th Annual Grammy Awards were also postponed from its original January 31, 2022, date to April 3, 2022, due to health and safety concerns related to the COVID-19 Delta cron hybrid variant. The ceremony was also moved from the Crypto.com Arena in Los Angeles to the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas due to the former having scheduling conflicts with sports games and concerts nearly every night through mid-April.\nGramophone trophy.\nThe gold-plated trophies, each depicting a gilded gramophone, are made and assembled by hand by Billings Artworks in Ridgway, Colorado. In 1990, the original Grammy design was reworked, changing the traditional soft lead for a stronger alloy less prone to damage, making the trophy bigger and grander. Billings developed Grammium, a zinc alloy that they trademarked. Trophies engraved with each recipient's name are not available until after the award announcements, so \"stunt\" trophies are re-used each year for the ceremony broadcast.\nBy February 2009, some 7,578 Grammy trophies had been awarded.\nCeremonies and venues.\nSince 2000, the Grammy Awards have been held annually at the Crypto.com Arena in Los Angeles, with a few exceptions. Before 1971, Grammy Award ceremonies were held in different locations on the same day. Originally New York City and Los Angeles were the host cities. Chicago joined as a host city in 1962, and Nashville became a fourth location in 1965.\nThe 1971 ceremony at the Hollywood Palladium in Los Angeles was the first to take place in one location as it was the first live telecast of the event. In 1972, the ceremony was held at Madison Square Garden's Felt Forum in New York City. In 1973, it took place at Nashville's Tennessee Theatre. From 1974 to 2003, the Grammys were held in various venues in Los Angeles and New York City, including Los Angeles' Shrine Auditorium, Crypto.com Arena and Hollywood Palladium; and New York's Madison Square Garden and Radio City Music Hall.\nIn 2000, the Crypto.com Arena (known as the Staples Center from 1999 to 2021) became the permanent home of the award ceremonies. The Grammy Museum was built across the street from the Crypto.com Arena in LA Live to preserve the history of the Grammy Awards. Embedded on the sidewalks on the museum streets are bronze disks, similar to the Hollywood Walk of Fame, to honor each year's top winners, Record of the Year, Best New Artist, Album of the Year, and Song of the Year. Since 2000, the Grammy Awards have taken place outside of Los Angeles only three times. New York City's Madison Square Garden hosted the awards in 2003 and in 2018, while the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas hosted in 2022.\nThe annual awards ceremony at the Crypto.com Arena requires the local sports teams such as the Los Angeles Kings, Los Angeles Lakers and Los Angeles Sparks to play an extended length of road games.\nCategories.\nThe \"General Field\" are four awards which are not restricted by music genre.\nTo date, three artists have won all four awards, two won all four at once: Christopher Cross (1981) and Billie Eilish (2020). Adele won the Best New Artist award in 2009 and her other three awards in 2012 and 2017. At age 18, Eilish is the youngest artist to have won all four awards.\nAs of 2024, an additional two awards were added to the \"General Field\".\nOther awards are given for performance and production in specific genres and for other contributions such as artwork and video. Special awards are also given for longer-lasting contributions to the music industry.\nBecause of the large number of award categories (94 as of 2024), and a desire to feature several performances by various artists, only awards with the most popular interest \u2013 typically about 10 to 12, including the four general field categories and one or two categories in the most popular music genres (i.e., pop, rock, country, and rap) \u2013 are presented directly at the televised award ceremony. Most other Grammy trophies are presented in a pre-telecast \"Premiere Ceremony\" in the afternoon before the Grammy Awards telecast.\n2012 category restructuring.\nOn April 6, 2011, the Recording Academy announced a significant overhaul of many Grammy Award categories for 2012. The number of categories was cut from 109 to 78. The most substantial change was eliminating the distinction between male and female soloists and between collaborations and duo/groups in various genre fields (pop, rock, rhythm and blues [R&amp;B], country, and rap). Additionally, several instrumental soloist categories were discontinued; recordings in these categories now fall under general categories for best solo performances.\nIn the rock field, the hard rock and metal album categories were combined. The Best Rock Instrumental Performance category was also eliminated.\nIn R&amp;B, the distinction between best contemporary R&amp;B album and other R&amp;B albums has been eliminated, consolidated into one Best R&amp;B Album category.\nIn rap, the categories for best rap soloist and best rap duo or group have been merged into the new Best Rap Performance category.\nThe roots category had the most eliminations. Up through 2011, there were separate categories for regional American music forms, such as Hawaiian, Native American, and Zydeco/Cajun music. A consistently low number of entries in these categories led the Recording Academy to combine these music variations into a new Best Regional Roots Music Album, including polka, which had lost its category in 2009.\nIn same-genre fields, the traditional and contemporary blues categories and the traditional and contemporary folk categories each were consolidated into one per genre due to the number of entries and the challenges in distinguishing between contemporary and traditional blues and folk songs. In the world music field, the traditional and contemporary categories also were merged.\nIn the classical field, several categories, including its main category Best Classical Album, were trimmed down from eleven to seven distinct categories plus two classically focused production prizes. Classical recordings since then became eligible for the main Album of the Year category.\nA few minor name changes were also made to better reflect the nature of the separate categories. The Recording Academy determined that the word \"gospel\" in the gospel genre field tends to connote images and sounds of traditional soul gospel to the exclusion of Contemporary Christian Music (CCM). Therefore, the field and some categories were renamed as Gospel/Contemporary Christian Music.\nSince 2012.\nSince 2012, small adjustments have been made to lists of categories and genre fields. The number of categories has risen from 78 in 2012 to 84 since 2017. In 2020, amid the George Floyd protests, several urban, rap, and Latin music categories were renamed. In 2022, the number of awards was increased from 86 to 91. Performance categories were added for the Americana and alternative music genres alongside new categories for video game score and spoken word poetry albums. A songwriter category (non-classical) and a song for social change category were also added and several categories were adjusted slightly.\nIn 2023, several key changes were announced for the 66th Annual Grammy Awards, set to take place in 2024. Three new categories were announced, bringing the total number to 94, the highest since the peak of 109 in 2010. In addition, both Producer of the Year, Non-Classical and Songwriter of the Year, Non-Classical, were moved to the General Field, the first time new categories had been added to this field since the concept of the Big Four was established. The total number of fields was consolidated from 26 to 11 to ensure that all voting members would be able to exercise their allocated ten genre votes, as some members were prevented from doing so previously due to some fields only containing one category.\nThe National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences has announced the date for the 68th Grammy Awards. The organizers also introduced two new categories: Best Traditional Country Album and Best Album Cover.\nEntry process and selection of nominees.\nMembers of the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences (NARAS), both media companies and individuals, may nominate recordings for consideration. Entries are made and submitted online. When a work is entered, review sessions are held that involve over 150 recording industry experts, to determine that the work has been entered in the correct category.\nThe resulting lists of eligible entries are then circulated to voting members, each of whom may vote to nominate in the general fields (Record of the Year, Album of the Year, Song of the Year, and Best New Artist) and in up to nine out of 30 other fields on their ballots. The five recordings that earn the most votes in each category become the nominees, while in some categories (craft and specialized categories) review committees determine the final five nominees. There may be over five nominees if a tie occurs in the nomination process.\nAlthough members of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences generally are invited to screenings or are sent DVDs of films nominated for Oscars, NARAS members do not receive nominated recordings, but instead receive access to a private online listening service.\nFinal voting.\nAfter nominees have been determined, final voting ballots are sent to NARAS voting members, who may then vote in the general field and cast ten votes in various genre categories spread to three of the eleven fields. Members are encouraged, but not required, to vote only in their fields of expertise. Ballots are tabulated secretly by the independent accounting firm Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu. After vote tabulation, winners are announced at the Grammy Awards. The recording with the most votes in a category wins, and it is possible to have a tie (in which case the two [or more] nominees who tie are considered winners). Winners are presented with a Grammy Award; those who do not win receive a medal for their nomination.\nIn both voting rounds, Academy members are required to vote solely based on quality, without consideration for sales, chart performance, personal friendships, regional preferences or company loyalty. Gifts may not be accepted. Members are urged to vote in a manner that preserves the integrity of the academy and their member community. Although registered media companies may submit entries, they have no vote.\nCertificates.\nIn many categories, certificates are presented to those ineligible for a Grammy Award but who did contribute to a winning recording. These certificates are known as Participation Certificates or Winners Certificates. Those eligible for a certificate can apply for one in the weeks after the Grammy ceremony.\nSpecial honors.\nGrammy Legend.\nA special Grammy Award of merit is occasionally awarded to recognize \"ongoing contributions and influence in the recording field\". It has come to be known as the Grammy Legend Award and the Grammy Living Legend Award at different ceremonies. As of 2018,[ [update]] fourteen solo musicians and one band have received this award.\nSalute to Industry Icons Award.\nThe Grammy Salute to Industry Icons Award honors those who have made innovative contributions to the music industry. Recipients include:\nLeading winners.\nWith 35 Grammy Awards, Beyonc\u00e9 is the artist with the most Grammy wins. U2, with 22 Grammy Awards, holds the record for most awards won by a group.\nCriticism.\nCommercialism.\nWhen Pearl Jam won a Grammy for the Best Hard Rock Performance in 1996, the band's lead singer Eddie Vedder commented on stage, \"I don't know what this means. I don't think it means anything.\" In 2008, Glen Hansard, leader of the Irish rock group the Frames, stated that the Grammys represent something outside of the real world of music \"that's fully industry based\". He said he was not particularly interested in attending that year's ceremony, even though he had been nominated for two awards. Maynard James Keenan, lead singer of progressive rock band Tool, did not attend the Grammy Awards ceremony to receive one of the band's awards, explaining that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I think the Grammys are nothing more than some gigantic promotional machine for the music industry. They cater to a low intellect and they feed the masses. They don't honor the arts or the artist for what he created. It's the music business celebrating itself. That's basically what it's all about.\nThe Grammys have also been criticized for generally awarding or nominating more commercially successful albums rather than critically successful ones. In 1991, Sin\u00e9ad O'Connor became the first musician to refuse a Grammy, boycotting the ceremony after being nominated for Record of the Year, Best Female Pop Vocal Performance, and Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Performance. O'Connor would go on to win the latter award. She said her reasoning came from the Grammys' extreme commercialism. In 2024, Rhiannon Giddens described the financial strain of attending the ceremony for middle and working class musicians. She criticized the Recording Academy for introducing a policy of charging nominees $1200 for a plus one, saying the policy \"makes it ever more obvious who is valued, and more specifically what (that would be lots of money, for the folks in the back).\" A \"Billboard\" article clarified that the new policy was a tiered system, ranging from $375 to $2000 for a ticket to attend the pre-telecast ceremony.\nReactions to nominations and awards.\nThe Grammys also have been criticized for snubbing awards to some nominated artists. The organization's awards journey states that nominees and winners are determined solely by voting members of the Recording Academy and that voting members are active creative professionals involved in the recording process, such as performers, songwriters, producers, and engineers.\nNomination review committees, composed of anonymous industry figures, were established following the 37th Grammy Awards, which attracted criticism for the slate of Album of the Year nominations. The winner, Tony Bennett's live album \"MTV Unplugged\", competed against the live classical album \"The Three Tenors in Concert 1994\", Seal's second eponymous album, and the twelfth albums from Bonnie Raitt and Eric Clapton, both longtime musical mainstays. Not nominated that year were several albums that would later be recognized as classics, including Nas's debut album \"Illmatic\", Oasis's debut album \"Definitely Maybe\", Hole's album \"Live Through This\", Jeff Buckley's \"Grace\", and the debut album from Wu-Tang Clan. The nomination review committees would be disbanded in 2021 following criticism of the lack of nominations for the Weeknd's album \"After Hours\".\nAt the 38th Annual Grammy Awards, artist Mariah Carey was nominated for six awards for her album \"Daydream\", including Album of the Year and Record of the Year for her single \"One Sweet Day\". Although critics believed Carey would be \"cleaning up\" that year, Carey ultimately lost in all her nominated categories that night, much to the shock of critics and Carey herself. In 2011, \"Los Angeles Times\" journalist Randall Roberts criticized the exclusion of Kanye West's \"My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy\" from Album of the Year nominations for the 54th Grammy Awards. He described West's album as \"the most critically acclaimed album of the year, a career-defining record\". Roberts went on to criticize the Grammy Awards for being \"mired in the past\" and out of touch with \"new media\" and trends among music listeners such as music sharing, stating:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The major nominations for the 54th annual awards clearly show that the recording academy has been working overtime to be all-inclusive, but more significantly, they also reveal a deep chasm between its goals and the listening habits of the general population...The focus is still on the old music industry model of cash-cow hits, major label investments and commercial radio...\nIn an article for \"Time\", journalist Tour\u00e9 also responded to the snub and expressed general displeasure with the awards, stating \"I don't pretend to understand the Grammys. I have never been able to discern a consistent logic around who gets nominated or who gets statues. I comprehend the particular logic of the Oscars, but not the big awards for music. My normal state of confusion around what drives Grammy decisions was exponentialized this week when, to the shock of many, Kanye's masterpiece \"My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy\" was not nominated for a Grammy for Album of the Year.\" He went on to compare understanding the Grammy Awards to Kremlinology and commented on The Recording Academy's exclusion of more \"mature\" hip hop albums as Album of the Year nominees, noting that it occasionally opts to nominate \"pop-friendly\" hip hop albums instead.\nIn a 2011 profile for \"The New York Times\" after the 53rd Grammy Awards, frontman Justin Vernon of indie band Bon Iver was asked about the Grammys and how he would react to a nomination for his group, to which he responded:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You know, I was thinking about that a couple of months ago, someone asked me that, and I was like \"I would go and I would\" \u2013 and I don't think the Bon Iver record is the kind of record that would get nominated for a Grammy \u2013 \"I would get up there and be like, 'This is for my parents, because they supported me,' because I know they would think it would be stupid of me not to go up there. But I kinda felt like going up there and being like: \"Everyone should go home, this is ridiculous. You should not be doing this. We should not be gathering in a big room and looking at each other and pretending that this is important.\" That's what I would say.\nHe reaffirmed this sentiment and commented about the Grammys, saying:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[Ninety-eight] percent of the people in that room, their art is compromised by the fact that they're thinking that, and that they're hoping to get that award. And who is that award given by? It's like they think it's literally handed down by the musical-history gods. And I don't know who the voters are. Like, I have a friend who's a voter who was like, \"I had to be a voter because I don't trust the other voters.\" And I was like, \"Me either!\" And it's just not important and people spend too much time thinking about it.\nBon Iver subsequently received four nominations in November for the 54th Grammy Awards. After winning, Vernon said in his acceptance, \"It's really hard to accept this award. There's so much talent out here [...] and there's a lot of talent that's not here tonight. It's also hard to accept because you know, when I started to make songs I did it for the inherent reward of making songs, so I'm a little bit uncomfortable up here.\"\nIn his article \"Everything Old Is Praised Again\", Jon Caramanica of \"The New York Times\" criticized Grammy voters for being \"conservative\" and disregarding more \"forward-looking\" music and wrote in response to the 54th Grammy Awards, \"for the umpteenth time, the Grammys went with familiarity over risk, bestowing album of the year honors (and several more) on an album that reinforced the values of an older generation suspicious of change.\" He cited the Grammy successes of Lauryn Hill's \"The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill\" (1998), Norah Jones' \"Come Away with Me\" (2003), and Adele's \"21\" (2011) as examples of \"the Grammys drop[ping] a boatload of awards on a young female singer-songwriter and her breakthrough album\". Of Kanye West's absence from the ceremony, Caramanica stated, \"He didn't even bother to show up for the broadcast, which was well enough because hip-hop was almost completely marginalized.\"\nIn an article for \"The Huffington Post\", music executive and author Steve Stoute criticized the Recording Academy and the Grammy Awards for having \"lost touch with contemporary popular culture\" and noted \"two key sources\" for it: \"(1) over-zealousness to produce a popular show that is at odds with its own system of voting and (2) fundamental disrespect of cultural shifts as being viable and artistic.\" Stoute accused the academy of snubbing artists with more cultural impact, citing respective losses by the critical and commercial successes in Eminem's \"The Marshall Mathers LP\" (2000) and Kanye West's \"Graduation\" (2007) in the Album of the Year category. Stoute asserted:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As an institution that celebrates artistic works of musicians, singers, songwriters, producers and technical specialists, we have come to expect that the Grammys upholds all of the values that reflect the very best in music that is born from our culture. Unfortunately, the awards show has become a series of hypocrisies and contradictions, leaving me to question why any contemporary popular artist would even participate. [...] While there is no doubt in my mind of the artistic talents of Steely Dan or Herbie Hancock, we must acknowledge the massive cultural impact of Eminem and Kanye West and how their music is shaping, influencing and defining the voice of a generation. It is this same cultural impact that acknowledged the commercial and critical success of Michael Jackson's \"Thriller\" in 1984.\nIn 2020, Canadian artist Abel Tesfaye, known by his stage name the Weeknd, was shut out from the Grammys when his fourth studio album, \"After Hours\", received no nominations at the 63rd Annual Grammy Awards. This came as a surprise to critics, fans, and Tesfaye himself, who had a successful run in 2020 with the success of both his album and the single \"Blinding Lights\". Tesfaye responded by social media calling the Grammys \"corrupt\". Speculation arose that the announcement of his then-upcoming Super Bowl performance, as well as the discrepancy of being nominated as pop music versus R&amp;B, contributed to the snubs. Harvey Mason, Jr., CEO of the Recording Academy, responded by saying:\nWe understand that The Weeknd is disappointed at not being nominated. I was surprised and can empathize with what he's feeling. His music this year was excellent, and his contributions to the music community and broader world are worthy of everyone's admiration. We were thrilled when we found out he would be performing at the upcoming Super Bowl and we would have loved to have him also perform on the Grammy stage the weekend before. Unfortunately, every year, there are fewer nominations than the number of deserving artists. But as the only peer-voted music award, we will continue to recognize and celebrate excellence in music while shining a light on the many amazing artists that make up our global community. To be clear, voting in all categories ended well before The Weeknd's performance at the Super Bowl was announced, so in no way could it have affected the nomination process. All Grammy nominees are recognized by the voting body for their excellence, and we congratulate them all.\nFormatting.\nThe Grammys' eligibility period runs from October 1 of one year until September 30 of the next year. Records released in the fourth quarter of a given year are not eligible for that year's awards (the submissions and first round ballots are underway at that time). This is despite the quarter falling during the Christmas and holiday season, when many physical albums have been traditionally released and are heavily purchased for holiday gift giving, and when Christmas music is at its natural peak.\nFans unfamiliar with the Grammys voting window perennially hold a mistaken notion that a favorite artist has then been snubbed; for example, Adele's album \"25\" was released in November 2015 and thus was ineligible for nomination for the 2015 awards, despite its massive sales, earning its Grammys (including Album of the Year) instead in 2017. Conversely, the Grammys often recognize work more than a year after it was released. Taylor Swift's \"1989\" won Album of the Year in 2016, even though the album came out in October 2014.\nAccusations of racial bias.\nThe Grammys have also been accused of a racist bias against black recording artists. In a 2017 interview Canadian artist Drake accused the awards of seeing him only as a rapper and not as a pop-music artist due to his previous work and heritage. He criticized the snubbing of \"One Dance\" for the Record of the Year award and the nomination of \"Hotline Bling\" for Best Rap Song and Best Rap/Sung Performance, despite it not being a rap song. \"The Atlantic\"'s Spencer Kornhaber accused the Grammys of \"sidelining a black visionary work in favor of a white traditionalist one\". Drake did not attend the 2017 awards ceremony where he was nominated. He had a performance in Manchester, England on February 12, 2017, the same night as the ceremony. Frank Ocean was vocal about boycotting the same Grammy Awards and did not submit his album \"Blonde\" for award consideration as a protest.\nThe Grammys were also criticized after the 59th Annual Grammy Awards when Adele's \"25\" (as mentioned above, released in late 2015) won Album of the Year over Beyonc\u00e9's album \"Lemonade\" (released in April 2016), which many music publications believed should have won the award. Steve Knopper of \"Rolling Stone\" magazine believed that she lost due to the Grammy voters being all white males and for her pro-Black performance during the Super Bowl 50 halftime show. \"USA Today\" also criticized Beyonc\u00e9's loss stating that \"Black artists have struggled to win album of the year\". They also felt \"25\" won only due to the album's record-breaking sales rather than having cultural significance and the large impact that \"Lemonade\" had in 2016. Adele also expressed that \"Lemonade\" should have won over her for Album of the Year, stating in her acceptance speech:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I can't possibly accept this award. And I'm very humbled and I'm very grateful and gracious. But my artist of my life is Beyonc\u00e9. And this album to me, the \"Lemonade\" album, is just so monumental. Beyonc\u00e9, it's so monumental. And so well thought out, and so beautiful and soul-baring and we all got to see another side to you that you don't always let us see. And we appreciate that. And all us artists here adore you. You are our light. In 2019, for the first time since Outkast won Album of the Year in 2004, rap artists won major award nominations outside the rap categories when Childish Gambino won the first Song and Record of the Year awards ever for a rap song. Hispanic and Latino Americans (the largest minority in America) are also considered to be under-represented at the Grammy Awards, and their music is prone to be shifted to the categories of the Latin Grammy Awards unless they have a mainstream following.\nIn April 2022, the late Indian singer Lata Mangeshkar was omitted from the In Memoriam segment, and the nation's domestic media criticized the Grammys and Oscars for their Western-centric view of artists receiving attention over those throughout the rest of the world.\nIssues with women.\nThe Grammys have also been criticized for their treatment of female artists specifically. Notably at the 60th Annual Grammy Awards in 2018, New Zealand singer Lorde made headlines after turning down an offer to perform at the ceremony. She suggested that she was invited to perform alongside several other artists in a tribute to Tom Petty but was refused a solo slot, despite being nominated for the Album of the Year award and stated that each male nominee was allowed a solo performance. Lorde's mother Sonja Yelich also criticized the Grammys, pointing out an article that only nine percent of the nominees at the previous six Grammy ceremonies were women. After the ceremony, several media outlets reported that the ceremony had failed women, specifically pointing to the most nominated female artist SZA who failed to win in any of her five nominated categories, and to the Best Pop Solo Performance category which included four female nominees but was won by Ed Sheeran. Neil Portnow, president of the Recording Academy, sparked controversy after stating in an interview that female artists needed to \"step up\" in order to win awards. Portnow's comments were criticized by many female musicians including Pink, Katy Perry, Vanessa Carlton, Sheryl Crow, Iggy Azalea, Halsey, and Charli XCX. They also caused the hashtag #GrammysSoMale to trend on social media.\nBefore the 61st Annual Grammy Awards in 2019, singer Ariana Grande decided not to perform or attend that year's ceremony over a disagreement about the song choices for her performance. An anonymous source told \"Variety\" that Grande felt \"insulted\" when producers refused to let the singer perform her latest single \"7 Rings\". They compromised by having her perform the song as part of a medley, but the condition that the producers choose the second song led Grande to withdraw from the show. The source said that the same stipulations were not imposed on other performers. Grande later accused Grammy producer Ken Ehrlich of lying about why she dropped out of the show. Ehrlich had said that Grande \"felt it was too late for her to pull something together\". Grande responded:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I can pull together a performance over night and you know that, Ken; it was when my creativity and self expression was stifled by you, that I decided not to attend. I hope the show is exactly what you want it to be and more.\nDespite the controversy, Grande won for Best Pop Vocal Album and in 2020 performed at the 62nd Annual Grammy Awards when nominated for five awards, including Album of the Year, but won none. Despite past controversies, female artists dominated the 63rd Annual Grammy Awards, with the big four awards being awarded entirely to women. Several women also broke records at that ceremony.\nIn May 2018, it was revealed that money intended for the Recording Academy charity MusiCares was siphoned off to pay for the cost overruns of hosting the 60th Annual Grammy Awards at New York City's Madison Square Garden. Concerning the controversies of hosting that year's Grammy Awards in New York, Dana Tomarken, the former executive vice president of the MusiCares foundation claimed wrongful termination. She alleges that she was fired for pushing back against the Academy's \"boys club\". She claimed that by having the MusiCares Person of the Year Tribute to Fleetwood Mac at Radio City Music Hall, the event had to forgo its traditional VIP dinner and silent auction. She had already been offered a deal to have the event at the Barclays Center in Brooklyn. The Barclays Center is owned by AEG, which competes directly with The Madison Square Garden Company which owns Madison Square Garden and Radio City. Irving Azoff, who then had a joint venture with the Madison Square Garden Company, told Tomarken that the event can not be held at Barclays and had to be held at Radio City. Oak View Group, which is associated with Azoff, received 300 of the highest price tickets to the MusiCares event at Radio City. Oak View Group was supposed to sell them as a package deal which also included tickets to the Grammy Awards themselves. MusiCares was promised to receive $1.5 million from those tickets according to Tomarken. Those 300 tickets were never sold and were then returned to MusiCares, which resulted in a loss.\nIn June 2019, rapper Nicki Minaj spoke up against the Grammys for allegedly blackballing her after her controversial performance of \"Roman Holiday\" at the 54th Annual Grammy Awards. Minaj claimed that producer Ken Ehrlich, who had previously accepted the performance, wanted her to cancel it last minute due to what he excused as the passing of Whitney Houston. Minaj however refused his request and performed anyway. She accused that shortly after the performance, Ehrlich had snubbed her from winning the Best New Artist category, which was awarded to Bon Iver. In October 2022, Minaj went after the Grammys again for snubbing her song \"Super Freaky Girl\" from the rap categories at the 65th Annual Grammy Awards and instead placing it in the pop categories. By way of comparison, Minaj mentioned Latto's 2021 song \"Big Energy\" being potentially considered for the rap categories, saying that if Minaj's own single is not being qualified as a rap song, neither should be Latto's. She also accused the Grammys of purposely placing her in those categories to favor other artists over her, such as Adele and Harry Styles. After Minaj's comments, Latto later responded to her in a series of tweets, leading them into a back-and-forth argument. Subsequently, Minaj's song was not nominated for any categories for the ceremony, while Latto received nominations for the Best New Artist category as well as the Best Melodic Rap Performance category for the latter song.\nRecording Academy CEO Deborah Dugan was placed on leave on January 16, 2020, after a complaint of bullying from a member of staff (according to an anonymous \"New York Times\" source), ten days before the 62nd Annual Grammy Awards. Dugan had complained internally, alleging a broken system of voting that was subject to conflicts of interest and unnecessary spending. On the nominations for the 61st Annual Grammy Awards, she stated that the voting process was an \"outrageous conflict of interest\" with several nominated artists sitting on the voting boards of their prospective categories. She claimed that \"one artist who initially ranked 18 out of 20 in the 2019 'Song of the Year' category ended up with a nomination\". She also claimed that a few artists like Ed Sheeran and Ariana Grande had the votes to be nominated for the category, but were ultimately omitted.\nIn 2020, comedy star Tiffany Haddish turned down the invitation to host the 63rd Annual Grammy Awards pre-telecast premiere ceremony when they said that she would have to pay her own way. In an exclusive interview with \"Variety\", Haddish revealed that she was told to cover the cost of hair, makeup, and wardrobe for the three-hour event, adding, \"I don't know if this might mean I might not get nominated ever again, but I think it's disrespectful\". When contacted, the Recording Academy explained that the premiere ceremony is not a CBS program and is hosted by the Academy, a not-for-profit organization, meaning that artists, hosts and performers have to perform free every year. They also noted that the issue would have no impact in Haddish's future nomination.\nIn 2022, the Grammys were criticized for nominating, and subsequently awarding, Louis C.K. a Best Comedy Album prize for his comedy special \"Sincerely Louis C.K.\" The album made light of, and included jokes about, the multiple he had admitted to years earlier. In 2023, the Grammys faced significant backlash for debuting a new award called the Dr. Dre Global Impact Award, due to the rapper's history of violence against women.\nTV broadcasts and ratings.\nBefore the first live Grammys telecast in 1971 on ABC, a series of filmed annual specials in the 1960s called \"The Best on Record\" was broadcast on NBC. The first Grammy Award telecast took place on the night of November 29, 1959, as an episode of the NBC anthology series \"NBC Sunday Showcase\", which normally was devoted to plays, original TV dramas, and variety shows. Until 1971, awards ceremonies were held in both New York and Los Angeles, with winners accepting at one of the two venues. Television producer Pierre Cossette bought the rights to broadcast the ceremony from the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences and organized the first live telecast. CBS bought the rights in 1973 after moving the ceremony to Nashville, Tennessee; the American Music Awards were created for ABC by the late Dick Clark as a result.\nThe Recording Academy announced on June 21, 2011, that it had reached a new deal with CBS to keep the awards show on the network for another 10 years. As part of the new contract, the network would also air a \"nominations concert\" special in the last week of November, where nominations would be released during a special exclusive to CBS, rather than at a traditional early-morning press conference to a multi-network press pool. This was ended after the 2016 concert due to low ratings and criticism about the announcement format, and as of the 2017 nominations, they have been revealed in a roundtable conversation with Recording Academy representatives during \"CBS Mornings\", though since 2020, it has returned to a traditional noontime Eastern press release statement and highlight of in-show award nominees on social media. In 2016, the Grammys became the first awards show to regularly air live annually in all U.S. territories, and for decades, alongside the Academy Awards, Primetime Emmy Awards and Tony Awards, the shows have aired live in over 150 countries worldwide.\nFrom 2004 to 2019, the Grammys were held on the second Sunday of February (the week after the Super Bowl), with two exceptions: if that day was February 14 (Valentine's Day), it was moved to the following day; if it was a Winter Olympics year, it was held earlier on the last Sunday of January (the week before the Super Bowl). Starting in 2020, the Academy Awards ceremony would move back to the second Sunday of February, forcing the Grammys to move back to the last Sunday of January to avoid conflict with either the Oscars or the Super Bowl. To allow enough time for preparation, the cutoff date for eligible recordings would move from September 30 to August 31. This change reduced the eligibility period for the 2020 awards to eleven months (October 1, 2018\u00a0\u2013 August 31, 2019), a month shorter than usual.\nCBS last renewed its rights to the Grammys in 2016 under a ten-year deal through 2026, making it the longest continuous broadcasting partnership between an awards presentation and a U.S. television network. On October 30, 2024, the Recording Academy announced that the Grammys would return to ABC and stream on Hulu and Disney+ beginning in 2027, under a ten-year deal. The agreement came amid cost-cutting by CBS parent company Paramount Global, which had also dropped the Academy of Country Music Awards in favor of its in-house CMT Music Awards, while picking up rights to the American Music Awards earlier in the year.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44636", "revid": "14876325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44636", "title": "Grammy Award for Song of the Year", "text": "Honor presented at the Grammy Awards\nThe Grammy Award for Song of the Year is an honor presented at the Grammy Awards, a ceremony that was established in 1958 and originally called the Gramophone Awards. The Song of the Year award is one of the four most prestigious categories at the awards (alongside Best New Artist, Record of the Year and Album of the Year), presented annually since the 1st Grammy Awards in 1959. According to the 54th Grammy Awards description guide, the award is presented: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIf a winning song contains samples or interpolations of existing material, the publisher and songwriter(s) of the original song(s) can apply for a Winners Certificate.\nSong of the Year is related to but is conceptually different from Record of the Year or Album of the Year:\nHistory and description.\nThe Song of the Year awards have been awarded since 1959. It is one of the four most prestigious Grammy Awards. Despite both the Record of the Year award and Song of the Year being awarded for a single or for one track from an album, this award goes only to the composer(s) of the song whereas the Record of the Year award goes to the performer(s) and production team for a particular recording of the song. According to the 54th Grammy Awards description guide, the award is given to the songwriter(s) of a song that \"must contain melody and lyrics and must be either a new song or a song first achieving prominence during the eligibility year. Songs containing prominent samples or interpolations are not eligible\".\nThe award has not always been restricted to new or newly prominent songs; for instance, in 1992, when the winner was Natalie Cole's cover of \"Unforgettable\" (a song that had first been recorded by Nat King Cole and achieved prominence in the 1950s), the rule was merely that the song had to have been recorded during the eligibility year and not previously nominated for the award.\nSince the late 1960s other songwriter's awards have been presented for genre-specific categories, including Grammy Award for Best Country Song (since 1965), Grammy Award for Best R&amp;B Song (since 1969), Grammy Award for Best Song Written for Visual Media (since 1988), Grammy Award for Best Rock Song (since 1992), and most recently Grammy Award for Best Rap Song (since 2004), Grammy Award for Best Gospel Song (from 2006 to 2014), Grammy Award for Best Contemporary Christian Music Song (from 2012 to 2014), Grammy Award for Best American Roots Song (since 2014), Grammy Award for Best Gospel Performance/Song (since 2015), and Grammy Award for Best Contemporary Christian Music Performance/Song (since 2015).\nThe category was expanded to include eight nominees in 2019 and 10 nominees in 2022. The number of nominees was reverted to eight starting with the 2024 ceremony.\nAs of 2023, a distinct category to honor songwriters was established: Songwriter of the Year, Non-Classical.\nAchievements.\nIn many cases, the winning songwriters were also the performers (Domenico Modugno, Henry Mancini, John Lennon &amp; Paul McCartney, Joe South, Paul Simon, Carole King, Barbra Streisand, Billy Joel, Michael McDonald, Christopher Cross, Sting, Michael Jackson &amp; Lionel Richie, Bobby McFerrin, Eric Clapton, Bruce Springsteen, Seal, Shawn Colvin, Rob Thomas, U2, Alicia Keys, Luther Vandross, John Mayer, Dixie Chicks, Amy Winehouse, Coldplay, Beyonc\u00e9, Lady Antebellum, Adele, Fun, Lorde, Sam Smith, Ed Sheeran, Bruno Mars, Childish Gambino, Billie Eilish, H.E.R., Anderson .Paak, Bonnie Raitt and Kendrick Lamar).\nDernst \"D'Mile\" Emile II is the only songwriter to win Song of the Year in two consecutive years: in 2021 (\"I Can't Breathe\") and 2022 (\"Leave the Door Open\"). Other multiple winners in this category include Henry Mancini (\"Moon River\" and \"Days of Wine and Roses\"); Johnny Mercer (\"Moon River\" and \"Days of Wine and Roses\"); James Horner (\"Somewhere Out There\" and \"My Heart Will Go On\"); Will Jennings (\"Tears in Heaven\" and \"My Heart Will Go On\"); U2 (\"Beautiful Day\" and \"Sometimes You Can't Make It on Your Own\"); Adele (\"Rolling in the Deep\" and \"Hello\"); Christopher Brody Brown (\"That's What I Like\" and \"Leave the Door Open\"); Bruno Mars (\"That's What I Like\" and \"Leave the Door Open\"); Billie Eilish (\"Bad Guy\" and \"What Was I Made For?\"); and Finneas O'Connell (\"Bad Guy\" and \"What Was I Made For?\"), winning two times each. However, songs written for Andy Williams, Roberta Flack, Barbra Streisand and Bette Midler have received this award twice.\nTaylor Swift and Jack Antonoff are the most nominated songwriters in this category with eight nominations. Bruno Mars follows with seven nominations, and Beyonc\u00e9, Paul McCartney, Lionel Richie, Billie Eilish and Finneas O\u2019 Connell have six nominations each.\nJohnny Mercer, Jimmy Webb, Bobby Russell, Burt Bacharach, Hal David, Kris Kristofferson, Michael McDonald, Michael Jackson, Elton John, Tim Rice, Brandi Carlile, Dernst Emile II, Jack Antonoff, Amy Allen and Henry Walter are the only songwriters with multiple nominations in the same year, with Antonoff achieving it in three consecutive years; while Carlile and Emile in 2022, and Allen, Antonoff and Walter in 2026 achieved it in the same ceremony.\nThe first woman to win the award was Carole King in 1972, for \"You've Got a Friend\". Adele was the first female songwriter to win the award twice, winning for \"Rolling in the Deep\" and \"Hello\". Doechii is the first female rapper to be nominated for \"Anxiety\".\nLorde is the youngest songwriter to win in the category, winning for \"Royals\" in 2014 at the age of 17; while Irving Gordon is the oldest songwriter to win the award, winning for \"Unforgettable\" in 1992 at age 77.\nChristopher Cross and Billie Eilish are the only artists to receive the Grammys for Song of the Year as well as Record of the Year, Album of the Year, and Best New Artist in a single ceremony. Adele was the first artist to win the awards for Song of the Year, Record of the Year, Album of the Year, and Best New Artist on separate occasions. Only six artists have won the Song of the Year and Best New Artist awards the same year: Christopher Cross (\"Sailing\" in 1981), Alicia Keys (\"Fallin'\" in 2002), Amy Winehouse (\"Rehab\" in 2008), Fun (\"We Are Young\" in 2013), Sam Smith (\"Stay with Me (Darkchild Version)\" in 2015) and Billie Eilish (\"Bad Guy\" in 2020); Marvin Hamlisch is the only composer to win the Song of the Year and Best New Artist awards the same year in 1975, for \"The Way We Were\".\nJohn Lennon, Paul McCartney, Lionel Richie, Diane Warren, Max Martin, Billie Eilish, H.E.R, Finneas O'Connell, Taylor Swift, and Jack Antonoff are the only songwriters to receive nominations for Song of the Year in three consecutive years, with Eilish and O\u2019Connell achieving it twice.\nThe song \"Nel blu, dipinto di blu (Volare)\", winner in 1959, written by Domenico Modugno and performed in Italian, is the only foreign-language song to win this award, although the 1967 winner \"Michelle\" penned by Lennon\u2013McCartney for The Beatles to perform, has a critical part of its lyrics in French. \u201cDespacito\u201d and \u201cDTMF\u201d are the only primarily spanish language songs to be nominated.\nThe Ernest Gold song \"Theme of Exodus\", which won in 1961, is the only instrumental song to ever receive this award. \"Lose Yourself\" by Eminem was the first rap song to be nominated while \"This is America\" by Childish Gambino and \"Not Like Us\" by Kendrick Lamar are the only ones to ever win the award. \u201cPoker Face\u201d and \u201cAbracadabra\u201d by Lady Gaga are the only dance songs to be nominated. \u201cA&amp;W\u201d by Lana Del Rey was the first alternative song to be nominated.\nThe first and only tie in this category in Grammy history took place in 1978, when both Barbra Streisand's &amp; Paul Williams' \"Evergreen (Love Theme from \"A Star Is Born\")\" and Joe Brooks' \"You Light Up My Life\" won the award.\nThe first time in Grammy history that two different songs with the same title have been nominated in this category happened with \"Hello\" written by Lionel Richie in 1985 and \"Hello\" by Adele &amp; Greg Kurstin in 2017.\nThe song with the most writers to win this award is \"That's What I Like\", which won in 2018 with eight writers. The song with the most writers nominated in this category is \"Peaches\", which had 11 co-writers nominated for the 2022 ceremony.\nThirty-two of the winning songs have also won the award for Record of the Year. 27 of the winning songs were written by solo songwriters. 9 of the winning songs also won the Academy Award for Best Original Song.\nProcess.\nFrom 1995 to 2018, members of the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences nominated their choices for song of the year. A list of the top twenty records was given to the Nominations Review Committee, a specially selected group of anonymous members, who then selected the top five records to gain a nomination in the category in a special ballot. The rest of the members then vote a winner from the five nominees. In 2018, it was announced the number of nominated tracks would be increased to eight. In 2021, it was announced that the Nomination Review Committees would be disbanded, and the final nominees for song of the year would be decided by votes from members. Starting in 2022, the number of nominees in the category increased to 10. However, the decision to expand the number of nominees in this category was made 24 hours before the nominees were announced after an early version of the nominations list had already been circulated. This allowed \"Kiss Me More\" by Doja Cat featuring SZA and \"Right on Time\" by Brandi Carlile to be nominated as they were the songs that received the most votes besides the other eight nominees. As of the 2024 ceremony, the number of nominees has been reduced back to eight.\nAn asterisk (*) indicates this recording also won Record of the Year.\nSongwriters with multiple nominations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44637", "revid": "7279", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44637", "title": "Afonso Henriques", "text": ""}
{"id": "44640", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44640", "title": "Led Zeppelin (album)", "text": "1969 studio album by Led Zeppelin\nLed Zeppelin (sometimes referred to as Led Zeppelin I) is the debut studio album by the English rock band Led Zeppelin. It was released on 13January 1969 in the United States and on 31 March 1969 in the United Kingdom by Atlantic Records.\nThe album was recorded in September and October 1968 at Olympic Studios in London, shortly after the band's formation. It contains a mix of original material worked out in the first rehearsals, and remakes and rearrangements of contemporary blues and folk songs. The sessions took place before the group had secured a recording contract and totalled 36 hours; they were paid for directly by Jimmy Page, the group's founder, leader and guitarist, and Led Zeppelin's manager Peter Grant, costing \u00a31,782 () to complete. They were produced by Page, who as a musician was joined by band members Robert Plant (lead vocals, harmonica), John Paul Jones (bass, keyboards), and John Bonham (drums). Percussionist Viram Jasani appears as a guest on one track. The tracks were mixed by Page's childhood friend Glyn Johns, and the iconic album cover showing the \"Hindenburg\" disaster was designed by George Hardie.\n\"Led Zeppelin\" showcased the group's fusion of blues and rock, and their take on the emerging hard rock sound was immediately commercially successful in both the UK and US, reaching the top 10 on album charts in both countries, as well as several others. Many of the songs were longer and not well suited to be released as singles for radio airplay; Page was reluctant to release singles, so only \"Good Times Bad Times\", backed with \"Communication Breakdown\", was released outside of the UK. However, due to exposure on album-oriented rock radio stations, and growth in popularity of the band, many of the album's songs have become classic rock radio staples.\nBackground.\nIn July 1968, the English rock band the Yardbirds disbanded after two founder members Keith Relf and Jim McCarty quit the group to form the band Renaissance, with a third, Chris Dreja, leaving to become a photographer shortly afterwards. The fourth member, guitarist Jimmy Page, was left with rights to the name and contractual obligations for a series of concerts in Scandinavia. Page asked seasoned session player and arranger John Paul Jones to join as bassist, and hoped to recruit Terry Reid as singer and Procol Harum's B. J. Wilson as drummer. Wilson was still committed to Procol Harum, and Reid declined to join but recommended Robert Plant, who met with Page at his boathouse in Pangbourne, Berkshire, in August to talk about music and work on new material.\nPage and Plant realised they had good musical chemistry together, and Plant asked friend and Band of Joy bandmate John Bonham to drum for the new group. The line-up of Page, Plant, Jones and Bonham first rehearsed on 19 August 1968 (the day before Plant's 20th birthday), shortly before a tour of Scandinavia as \"the New Yardbirds\", performing some old Yardbirds material as well as new songs such as \"Communication Breakdown\", \"I Can't Quit You Baby\", \"You Shook Me\", \"Babe I'm Gonna Leave You\" and \"How Many More Times\". After they returned to London following the tour, Page changed the band's name to Led Zeppelin, and the group entered Olympic Studios at 11 p.m. on 25 September 1968 to record their debut album.\nRecording.\nPage said that the album took only about 36 hours of studio time (over a span of a few weeks) to create (including mixing), adding that he knew this because of the amount charged on the studio bill. One of the primary reasons for the short recording time was that the material selected for the album had been well-rehearsed and pre-arranged by the band on the Scandinavian tour.\nThe band had not yet signed a deal, and there was no record company money to waste on excessive studio time. Page and Led Zeppelin's manager Peter Grant paid for the sessions themselves. The reported total studio costs were \u00a31,782. The self-funding was important because it meant they could record exactly what they wanted without record company interference.\nFor the recordings Page played a psychedelically painted Fender Telecaster \u2013 a gift from friend Jeff Beck after Page recommended him to join the Yardbirds in 1965, replacing Eric Clapton on lead guitar. Page played the Telecaster through a Supro amplifier, and used a Gibson J-200 for the album's acoustic tracks. For \"Your Time Is Gonna Come\" he used a Fender 10-string pedal steel guitar.\nProduction.\n\"Led Zeppelin\" was engineered by Glyn Johns and produced by Page and Johns (Johns is uncredited on the album cover). The two had known each other since they were teenagers in the suburb of Epsom. According to Page, most of the album was recorded live, with overdubs added later.\nPage used a \"distance makes depth\" approach to production. He used natural room ambience to enhance the reverb and recording texture on the record, demonstrating the innovations in sound recording he had learned during his session days. At the time, most music producers placed microphones directly in front of the amplifiers and drums. For \"Led Zeppelin\", Page developed the idea of placing an additional microphone some distance from the amplifier (as far as ) and then recording the balance between the two. Page became one of the first producers to record a band's \"ambient sound\": the distance of a note's time-lag from one end of the room to the other.\nOn some tracks, Plant's vocals spill onto other tracks. Page later stated that this was a natural product of Plant's powerful voice, but added the leakage \"sounds intentional\". On \"You Shook Me\", Page used the \"reverse echo\" technique. It involves hearing the echo before the main sound (instead of after it), and is achieved by turning the tape over and recording the echo on a spare track, then turning the tape back over again to get the echo preceding the signal.\nThis was one of the first albums to be released in stereo only. Prior to this, albums had been released in separate mono and stereo versions.\nComposition.\nThe songs on \"Led Zeppelin\" came from the first group rehearsals, which were then refined on the Scandinavian tour. The group were familiar with the material when they entered Olympic to start recording, a reason the album was completed quickly. Plant participated in songwriting but was not given credit because of unexpired contractual obligations to CBS Records. He was retroactively given credit on \"Good Times, Bad Times\", \"Your Time Is Gonna Come\", \"Communication Breakdown\", \"Babe I'm Gonna Leave You\", and \"How Many More Times\".\nSide one.\n\"Good Times Bad Times\" was a commercial-sounding track that was considered as the group's debut single in the UK, and released as such in the US. As well as showcasing the whole band and their new heavy style, it featured a catchy chorus and a variety of guitar overdubs. Despite being a strong track, it was seldom performed live by Led Zeppelin. One of the few occasions it was played was the Ahmet Ertegun Tribute Concert in 2007.\n\"Babe I'm Gonna Leave You\" was a re-arrangement of a song composed by Anne Bredon in the 1950s. Page had heard the song recorded by Joan Baez for her 1962 album \"Joan Baez in Concert\". It was one of the first numbers that he worked on with Plant when the two first met at Pangbourne in August 1968. Page played both the Gibson J-200 acoustic and Telecaster on the track. Plant originally sang the song in a heavier style, similar to other performances on the album, but was persuaded by Page to re-record it to allow some light and shade on the track.\n\"You Shook Me\" was a blues song with lyrics by Willie Dixon and fitted in with the British blues boom that was ongoing when the album was being recorded. Jones, Plant and Page took solos on Hammond organ, harmonica and guitar respectively. Page put backwards echo on the track, which was then a novel production device, on the call and response between the vocal and guitar towards the end. The song had been recorded by Jeff Beck for the album \"Truth\" (1968) and Beck subsequently said he was unhappy about Led Zeppelin copying his arrangement.\n\"Dazed and Confused\" was written and recorded by Jake Holmes in 1967. The original album credited Page as the sole composer; Holmes sued for copyright infringement in 2010 and an out-of-court settlement was reached the following year. The Yardbirds performed the song regularly in concert during 1968, including several radio and television sessions. Their arrangement included a section where Page played the guitar with a violin bow, an idea suggested by David McCallum Sr. whom Page had met while doing sessions. Page also used the guitar solo for one of the last Yardbirds recordings, \"Think About It\". Led Zeppelin's adaptations of \"Dazed and Confused\" used some different lyrics, while Jones and Bonham developed the arrangement to accommodate their playing styles.\nThe song was an important part of Led Zeppelin's live show throughout their early career, and became a vehicle for group improvisation, eventually stretching in length to over 30minutes. The improvisation would sometimes include parts of another song, including the group's \"The Crunge\" and \"Walter's Walk\" (released later on \"Houses of the Holy\" and \"Coda\", respectively), Joni Mitchell's \"Woodstock\" and Scott McKenzie's \"San Francisco (Be Sure to Wear Flowers in Your Hair)\". It was briefly dropped from the live set in 1975 after Page injured a finger, but was re-instated for the remainder of the tour. The last full live performance during Led Zeppelin's main career was at Earl's Court in London later that year, after which the violin bow section of the song's guitar solo was played as a standalone piece. It was revived as a complete song performance for the Ahmet Ertegun Tribute Concert in 2007.\nSide two.\n\"Your Time Is Gonna Come\" opens with Jones playing an unaccompanied organ solo, leading into the verse. Page plays acoustic and pedal steel guitar. The track has a crossfade into \"Black Mountain Side\", an acoustic instrumental based on Bert Jansch's arrangement of the traditional folk song \"Black Water Side\" and influenced by the folk playing of Jansch and John Renbourn. The song was regularly performed live as a medley with the Yardbirds solo guitar number \"White Summer\".\n\"Communication Breakdown\" was built around a Page guitar riff, and one of the first tunes the group worked on. They enjoyed playing it live, and consequently it was a regular part of their set. It was played intermittently throughout the group's career, often as an encore.\n\"I Can't Quit You Baby\" was another Willie Dixon-penned blues number. It was recorded live in the studio, and arranged in a slower and more laid-back style compared to some of the other material on the album.\n\"How Many More Times\" was the group's closing live number in their early career. The song was improvised around an old Howlin' Wolf number, \"How Many More Years\", and a Page guitar riff, which developed spontaneously into a jam session. The track includes a bolero section similar to Jeff Beck's \"Beck's Bolero\" (which was written by and featured Page), and segues into \"Rosie\" and \"The Hunter\" which were improvised during recording. Page played the guitar with the violin bow in the middle section of the track, similar to \"Dazed and Confused\".\nUnreleased material.\nTwo other songs from the Olympic sessions, \"Baby Come On Home\" and \"Sugar Mama\", were left off the album. They were released on the 2015 reissue of the retrospective album \"Coda\".\nArtwork.\n\"Led Zeppelin\"'s front cover, which was chosen by Page, is based on a black-and-white image of the German zeppelin \"Hindenburg\" photographed by Sam Shere on 6 May 1937, when the airship burst into flames while landing at Lakehurst, New Jersey. The image refers to the origin of the band's name itself: When Page, Beck and the Who's Keith Moon and John Entwistle were discussing the idea of forming a group, Moon joked, \"It would probably go over like a lead balloon\", and Entwistle reportedly replied, \"a lead zeppelin!\"\nThe back cover features a photograph of the band taken by Dreja. The entire design of the album's sleeve was coordinated by George Hardie, with whom the band would continue to collaborate for future sleeves. Hardie himself also created the front cover illustration, cropping and rendering the famous original black-and-white photograph in ink using a Rapidograph technical pen and a mezzotint technique.\nHardie recalled that he originally offered the band a design based on an old club sign in San Francisco\u00a0\u2013 a multi-sequential image of a zeppelin airship up in the clouds. Page declined but it was retained as the logo for the back cover of Led Zeppelin's first two albums and a number of early press advertisements. The first UK pressing featured the band name and the Atlantic logo in turquoise. When it was switched to the orange print later that year, the turquoise-printed sleeve became a collector's item, known to be sold for thousands of pounds.\nThe album cover gained further widespread attention when, at a February 1970 gig in Copenhagen, the band were billed as \"the Nobs\" as the result of a legal threat from aristocrat Eva von Zeppelin (a relative of the creator of the Zeppelin aircraft). Von Zeppelin, upon seeing the logo of the \"Hindenburg\" crashing in flames, threatened legal action over the concert taking place. In 2001, Greg Kot wrote in \"Rolling Stone\" that \"The cover of \"Led Zeppelin\"\u2026 shows the \"Hindenburg\" airship, in all its phallic glory, going down in flames. The image did a pretty good job of encapsulating the music inside: sex, catastrophe and things blowing up.\"\nCritical reception.\nThe album was advertised in selected music papers under the slogan \"Led Zeppelin\u00a0\u2013 the only way to fly\". It initially received poor reviews. In a stinging assessment, \"Rolling Stone\" magazine asserted that the band offered \"little that its twin, the Jeff Beck Group, didn't say as well or better three months ago\u2026 to fill the void created by the demise of Cream, they will have to find a producer, editor and some material worthy of their collective talents\", calling Page a \"limited producer\" and criticizing his writing skills. It also called Plant \"as foppish as Rod Stewart, but nowhere near so exciting\". Because of the bad press, Led Zeppelin avoided talking to them throughout their career. Eventually, their reputation as a good live band recovered by word-of-mouth.\nRock journalist Cameron Crowe noted years later: \"It was a time of 'super-groups', of furiously hyped bands who could barely cut it, and Led Zeppelin initially found themselves fighting upstream to prove their authenticity.\" \nHowever, press reaction to the album was not entirely negative. In Britain the album received a glowing review in \"Melody Maker\". Chris Welch wrote, in a review titled \"Jimmy Page triumphs\u00a0\u2013 Led Zeppelin is a gas!\": \"Their material does not rely on obvious blues riffs, although when they do play them, they avoid the emaciated feebleness of most so-called British blues bands\". In \"Oz\", Felix Dennis regarded it as one of those rare albums that \"defies immediate classification or description, simply because it's so obviously a turning point in rock music that only time proves capable of shifting it into eventual perspective\". In comparing the record to their follow-up \"Led Zeppelin II\", Robert Christgau wrote in \"The Village Voice\" that the debut was \"subtler and more ambitious musically\", and not as good, \"because subtlety defeated the effect. Musicianship, in other words, was really incidental to such music, but the music did have real strength and validity: a combination of showmanship and overwhelming physical force.\"\nThe album was a commercial success. It was initially released in the US on 13 January 1969 to capitalise on the band's first North American concert tour. Before that, Atlantic Records had distributed a few hundred advance white label copies to key radio stations and reviewers. A positive reaction to its contents, coupled with a good reaction to the band's opening concerts, resulted in the album generating 50,000 advance orders. The album reached number 10 on the \"Billboard\" chart. The album earned its US gold certification in July 1969.\nLegacy.\nThe album's success and influence is widely acknowledged, even by publications that were initially sceptical. In 2006, Mikal Gilmore commented in \"Rolling Stone\" on the originality of the music, and Zeppelin's heavy style, contrasting them with Cream, Jimi Hendrix, the MC5 and the Stooges, and noting that they had mass appeal. \"Led Zeppelin\" was cited by Stephen Thomas Erlewine as \"a significant turning point in the evolution of hard rock and heavy metal\". According to arts and culture scholar Michael Fallon, it \"announced the emergence of a loud and raw new musical genre\" in metal. Greg Moffitt for the BBC said that the band was \"a product of the 60s, but their often bombastic style signposted a new decade and ... a new breed of rock bands\". Sheldon Pearce from \"Consequence of Sound\" regarded it as Zeppelin's \"ode to rock's progressive metamorphosis\" and \"the first hard rock domino\" for their future accomplishments: \"Its orchestration delves adventurously through hard rock and heavy metal with bluesy undertones that often cause the chords to weep poignantly as if struck with malice\".\nThe album was described as a \"brilliant if heavy-handed blues-rock offensive\" by popular music scholar Ronald Zalkind. Martin Popoff argued that while the album may not have been the first heavy metal record, it did feature what was likely to be the first metal song \u2013 \"Communication Breakdown\"\u00a0\u2013 \"with its no-nonsense machine gun between the numbers riff\". In 2003, VH1 named \"Led Zeppelin\" the 44th-greatest album of all time. The same year, the album was ranked 29th on \"Rolling Stone\"'s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time (their highest-charting album on the list); an accompanying blurb read: \"Heavy metal still lives in its shadow,\" maintaining the rating in a 2012 revised list, and ranked 101st in a 2020 revised list. In 2004, the album was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame. Aerosmith's Joe Perry observed that Jimmy Page \"was an incredible producer and he wrote all these great songs. When he was cutting the first Zeppelin album, he knew what he wanted. His vision was so much more global than Jeff [Beck] and Eric [Clapton's]. Playing guitar was just one part of the puzzle\u2026 I have to have the first four Led Zeppelin albums on me at all times.\"\n2014 reissue.\nAlong with the group's next two albums\u00a0\u2013 \"Led Zeppelin II\" and \"Led Zeppelin III\"\u00a0\u2013 the album was remastered and reissued in June 2014. The reissue comes in six formats: a standard CD edition, a deluxe two-CD edition, a standard LP version, a deluxe three-LP version, a super deluxe two-CD-plus-three-LP version with a hardback book, and as high-resolution, 24-bit/96k digital downloads. The deluxe and super-deluxe editions feature bonus material from a concert at the Olympia in Paris, recorded in October 1969, previously available only in bootleg forms. The reissue was released with an inverted black and white version of the original album's artwork as its bonus disc's cover.\nThe reissue was met with widespread critical acclaim. At Metacritic, which assigns a normalised rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications, the album received an average score of 97, based on 10 reviews. \"Q\" deemed it an improvement over previous remasters of the album and credited Page's contribution to the remaster for revealing more detail. Erlewine found the bonus disc \"particularly exciting\" in his review for AllMusic, writing that \"it's not tight but that's its appeal, as it shows how the band was a vital, living beast, playing differently on-stage than they did in the studio.\" According to \"Paste\" magazine's Ryan Reed, \"for years, Zep-heads have tolerated the murky fidelity of the '90s remasters\" until the reissue, which \"finally punches and shimmers instead of fizzling in fuzz\". He was critical of the bonus disc, however, believing it \"remains inessential\u2014the very definition of 'for completists only.'... [It] demonstrates Zeppelin at their most bloated, sloppily fumbling through rhythmic cues and extending tracks to their breaking point\".\nPersonnel.\nTaken from the sleeve notes, except where noted otherwise.\nLed Zeppelin\nAdditional musician\nProduction\nCharts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44641", "revid": "316840", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44641", "title": "Ferdinand II of Le\u00f3n", "text": "King of Le\u00f3n and Galicia from 1157 to 1188\nFerdinand II (c. 1137 \u2013 22 January 1188), was a member of the Castilian cadet branch of the House of Ivrea and King of Le\u00f3n and Galicia from 1157 until his death.\nLife.\nFamily.\nBorn in Toledo, Castile, Ferdinand was the third but second surviving son of King Alfonso VII of Le\u00f3n and Castile and Berenguela of Barcelona. His paternal grandparents were Count Raymond of Burgundy and Queen Urraca of Le\u00f3n and his maternal grandparents were Ramon Berenguer III, Count of Barcelona, and Douce I, Countess of Provence. He had seven full-siblings, of whom only three survived infancy: the later King Sancho III of Castile, Constance (wife of King Louis VII of France) and Sancha (wife of King Sancho VI of Navarre), and two half-siblings from his father's second marriage with Richeza of Poland, of whom only survive Sancha (wife of King Alfonso II of Aragon).\nChildhood and early years.\nFerdinand's education was entrusted to a Galician magnate, Count Fernando P\u00e9rez de Traba, member of the same lineage as the former knights of his grandmother, Queen Urraca, and of the tutors and defenders of his father, King Alfonso VII. Soon he was initiated into the tasks of government. From 1151 he is associated with the throne by his father, along with his older brother Infante Sancho, so in documents from Le\u00f3n and Galicia his confirmation with the title of King, or \"King of Galicia\", is common. He was surrounded from the beginning by the Leonese and Galician magnates, such as the Counts Ponce de Minerva, Ramiro Froilaz, Pedro Alfonso and the aforementioned Fernando P\u00e9rez de Traba.\nIn a council begun in Valladolid in the year 1155, were agreed the terms of the division of the domains of the still-living King Alfonso VII. There the Kingdoms of Le\u00f3n and Galicia were assigned under Ferdinand's sovereignty, excluding Tierra de Campos, Sahag\u00fan and Asturias de Santillana. Ferdinand earned the reputation of a good knight and hard fighter, but did not display political talent or organising ability.\nBeginning of reign and first marriage with Urraca of Portugal.\nIn 1157 his father, King Alfonso VII died, and according of his will and the previous dispositions of the council of Valladolid of 1155, his second son inherited the Kingdoms of Le\u00f3n and Galicia under the name of Ferdinand II; during the early months of his reign, the new monarch had to resolve his disputes with the powerful local nobles and an invasion by his brother Sancho III of Castile. In 1158 Ferdinand II signed the Treaty of Sahag\u00fan with his brother Sancho III, under which they agreed to jointly wage war against the Muslims, to divide up the conquered territories, the provision that in case one of the two brothers died without issue, the survivor would inherit the domains of the deceased brother, and the partition of the Kingdom of Portugal. The death of his brother Sancho III in the same year and the succession of his infant son Alfonso VIII, annulled the clauses of the Treaty of Sahag\u00fan.\nDuring the minority of age of his nephew Alfonso VIII, in the Kingdom of Castile began the dispute between the Houses of Lara and Castro to exercise the regency on behalf of the child king. Taking advantage of the anarchic state in which the kingdom of his late brother was found, Ferdinand II invaded Castile at the head of an army, and demanded, in order to restore order, that the Lara surrender him to his nephew Alfonso VIII, whose education he wished to take charge of.\nIn March 1160 Fernando Rodr\u00edguez de Castro, commanding the forces of the House of Castro, defeated the Lara supporters in the Battle of Lobregal, in which his father-in-law Count Osorio Mart\u00ednez lost his life, and Nu\u00f1o P\u00e9rez de Lara was captured. That same year, Ferdinand II was cured of a serious illness supposedly through the intercession of Saints Martin of Tours and Eufemia of Orense. In 1162 Fernando Rodr\u00edguez de Castro was appointed \"Majordomo mayor\" of Ferdinand II, a position he held twice: firstly from 15 August 1162 until his dismissal on 6 September 1164 and secondly from 19 October 1165 until 15 May 1166.\nThe boundary troubles with Castile restarted in 1164: he then met at Soria with the Lara family, who represented Alfonso VIII, and a truce was established, allowing him to move against the Muslim Almohads who still held much of southern Spain, and to capture the cities of Alc\u00e1ntara and Alburquerque. In the same year, Ferdinand II defeated King Afonso I of Portugal, who, in 1163, had occupied Salamanca in retaliation for the repopulation of the area ordered by the King of Le\u00f3n.\nIn May/June 1165 Ferdinand II married with Infanta Urraca of Portugal, daughter of King Afonso I, as a gesture of reconciliation and alliance between the Kingdoms of Le\u00f3n and Portugal. At that time, he restored and repopulated the cities of Ledesma and Ciudad Rodrigo, and this caused the inhabitants of Salamanca who, apparently, had bought the city of Ledesma, took up arms against the king and the magistrates of Ledesma; when Ferdinand II learned of it, he marched with his army against the rebels and forced them to return to their city.\nThe war against the Kingdom of Castile (1162\u20131166).\nIn 1162, Ferdinand II conquered the city of Toledo, snatching it from the Castilians, and subsequently naming Fernando Rodr\u00edguez de Castro as Governor of the city. The city of Toledo remained in the power of the Kingdom of Le\u00f3n until 1166, when it was recovered by the Castilians. On 27 September 1162, Ferdinand II signed an agreement, known as the Treaty of \u00c1greda, with Alfonso II of Aragon.\nIn 1164 Fernando Rodr\u00edguez de Castro entered the Kingdom of Castile for the second time with an army and defeated Count Manrique P\u00e9rez de Lara at the Battle of Huete, fought in June or July of that year. Four years later he was appointed Mayor of Le\u00f3n, being his duty to control and be in command of the existing fortresses in the city, until the year 1182, when he left the office.\nFerdinand II and the members of the House of Lara met in Soria and agreed that, to defend the city of Toledo from the Saracens, they would hand over to the Knights Templar the city of Ucl\u00e9s, located in the current Province of Cuenca, and which would later become the headquarters of the Order of Santiago. The King of Le\u00f3n, fearful that the members of the House of Lara would break the agreed peace, allied himself with King Sancho VI of Navarre to intimidate them and, in this way, be able to direct his troops against the Almohads, from whom he snatched the cities of Alc\u00e1ntara and Albuquerque.\nConquest of Badajoz and war with the Kingdom of Portugal.\nDespite Ferdinand II's marriage to Infanta Urraca of Portugal, the disputes with the Lusitan kingdom continued. Between 1166 and 1168 King Afonso I of Portugal seized cities belonging to the Leonese kingdom. Ferdinand II then repopulated Ciudad Rodrigo, and the Portuguese monarch, suspecting that his son-in-law was fortifying it with the purpose of attacking him in the future, sent an army commanded by his son and heir, Infante Sancho of Portugal, against that city. The King of Le\u00f3n came to the aid of the besieged Ciudad Rodrigo and, in a meeting he had with the Portuguese troops, put them to flight, capturing many prisoners. Afonso I then invaded Galicia, occupying Tui and the territory of Xinzo de Limia (former fiefs of his mother), and in 1169 attacked the city of C\u00e1ceres. However, as his troops were also besieging the city of Badajoz, which was in the power of the Saracens, Ferdinand II was able to push the Portuguese out of Galicia and to rush to Badajoz. When Afonso I saw the Leonese arrive he tried to flee, but he was disabled by a broken leg caused by a fall from his horse, and made prisoner at one of the city's gates. Afonso I was obliged to surrender as his ransom almost all the conquests he had made in Galicia in the previous year. In the peace signed at Pontevedra the following year, Ferdinand II got back twenty-five castles, and the cities of C\u00e1ceres, Badajoz, Trujillo, Santa Cruz de la Sierra and Mont\u00e1nchez, previously lost by Le\u00f3n. When in the same years the Almohads laid siege to the Portuguese city of Santar\u00e9m, Ferdinand II came to help his father-in-law, and helped to free the city from the menace.\nAt the beginning of the summer of 1169, Geraldo Geraldes \"Sem Pavor\" (\"without fear\"), of the kingdom of Portugal, took the city of Badajoz after a long siege, but the governor of the city took refuge in the Alcazaba of Badajoz, and the siege had to continue. Seeing the opportunity presented to him to add the main city of the region to his dominions at the expense of his Christian and Muslim enemies, Afonso I of Portugal an army to Badajoz in order to replace Gerardo \"Sem Pavor\" as conductor of the siege.\nThe city of Trujillo became the head of the domains assembled by Fernando Rodr\u00edguez de Castro. This provoked the opposition of Ferdinand II, who argued that Badajoz belonged to him. The King of Le\u00f3n then headed south at the head of an army, at the request of the Almohad caliph Abu Yaqub Yusuf, who had already sent a contingent of 5,000 knights to help his besieged governor. Fernando Rodr\u00edguez de Castro, as the monarch's \"Majordomo\", was one of the Leonese leaders of the expedition. The Portuguese who besieged the Alcazaba of Badajoz, were then besieged by the Leonese, fighting broke out in the streets of the city. While trying to escape, Afonso I of Portugal was captured by the men of Ferdinand II, after breaking his leg. At the same time, Leonese monarch captured Gerardo \"Sem Pavor\". After the capture of the city and the Alcazaba of Badajoz by the Leonese, the latter left the city in the hands of their Muslim allies. Gerardo \"Sem Pavor\" had to surrender several of the towns he had conquered to the Kingdom of Le\u00f3n, in exchange for his freedom. Ferdinand II kept the city of C\u00e1ceres, but the towns of Trujillo, Mont\u00e1nchez, Santa Cruz de la Sierra and Monfrag\u00fce became the property of Fernando Rodr\u00edguez de Castro. After this donation, Fernando Rodr\u00edguez de Castro became the lord of a semi-independent principality located between the Tagus and Guadiana rivers, whose headquarters were in the city of Trujillo. Alfonso VIII realized the strategic importance of the fortresses granted to the Castilian, with a view to a future repopulation, since the fortresses were in the area that according to the Treaty of Sahag\u00fan of 1158 belonged to the area of influence of the Kingdom of Castile. Defeated by Afonso I of Portugal, the Muslims attacked the Kingdom of Le\u00f3n in 1173, trying to seize Ciudad Rodrigo; but Ferdinand II, who had knowledge of his purposes, entrenched himself in the city of Salamanca with the troops he was able to gather in Le\u00f3n, in Zamora, in various places in Galicia and in other parts of the kingdom, at the same time giving order to the rest of his army to meet him asap. The Muslims were defeated and only those who fled could keep their freedom.\nIn 1170, Ferdinand II created the military-religious Order of Santiago de Compostela, with the task to protect the city of C\u00e1ceres. Like the Order of Alc\u00e1ntara, it initially began as a knightly confraternity and took the name \"Santiago\" (St. James) after St. James the apostle, with the purpose to protect the pilgrims who visited the tomb of the Apostle Santiago.\nSecond marriage with Teresa Fern\u00e1ndez de Traba.\nIn 1175, Pope Alexander III annulled the marriage of Ferdinand II and Urraca of Portugal because they were related in the prohibited third degree of consanguinity as being second cousins (their grandmothers, Queen Urraca of Le\u00f3n and Countess Teresa of Portugal were half-sisters), despite the fact that the Queen gave birth a son and heir, Infante Alfonso, in 1171. The gold of Castile and England countered the one that Leon offered to Rome to obtain the Papal dispensation for the marriage, since its validity supposed de facto the alliance of Portugal and Le\u00f3n, which did not interest neither Castile nor to England, who had family ties to each other after Alfonso VIII was married to Eleanor, daughter of King Henry II of England.\nAfter August 1177 and certainly before 7 October 1178, Ferdinand II married with Teresa Fern\u00e1ndez de Traba, the illegitimate daughter of Count Fernando P\u00e9rez de Traba (the king's former tutor) and Countess Teresa of Portugal, and widow of Count Nu\u00f1o P\u00e9rez de Lara; with this marriage, the king cemented his alliance with the powerful Houses of Lara and Traba \u2014although just like his first marriage, Ferdinand II was also closely related with his new wife in not only a prohibited degree of consanguinity but also of affinity (they were not only 1st cousins once removed but also Teresa Fern\u00e1ndez de Traba was aunt of Urraca of Portugal), apparently there wasn't any questioning or impediment for this new wedding of the Leonese monarch.\nWar with the Kingdom of Castile and conference of Tordesillas (1178\u20131180).\nIn 1178 Ferdinand II invaded the Kingdom of Castile. He seized the municipalities of Castrojeriz and Due\u00f1as (both formerly lands of Teresa Fern\u00e1ndez de Traba's first husband) before Alfonso VIII could have put these fortresses on alert, while the Castilian sovereign allied himself with Afonso I of Portugal, who sent his son, Infante Sancho, to fight against the King of Le\u00f3n.\nIn 1180 the Kings of Le\u00f3n and Castile met in the town of Tordesillas, where they agreed to put an end to their differences, sealing a peace agreement. On 6 February of that year, Ferdinand II's second wife Teresa Fern\u00e1ndez de Traba died giving birth to their second son, who died at the same time as his mother and was buried together with her in the Royal Pantheon of the Kings of San Isidoro of Le\u00f3n.\nOrdination of the territory.\nFerdinand II granted \"cartas forales\" to numerous cities and towns; in 1164, to Padr\u00f3n and Ribadavia; in 1168, to Noia; in 1169 to Castro Caldelas and to the city of Pontevedra; in 1170 to Tui and in 1177 to Lugo. It also favored numerous monasteries, such as those of Sobrado, Mel\u00f3n, Armenteira, Moraime and San Mart\u00edn de Xubia. It also benefited the Santiago de Compostela Cathedral, granting a life pension to Master Mateo. During his reign the Order of Santiago was founded and Pope Alexander III granted the grace of the Jacobean jubilee holy year (\"Bula Regis Aeterni\", 1181). This privilege granted to the Santiago de Compostela Cathedral favored the heyday of pilgrimages, while promoting the economic, cultural and artistic development of the territories crossed by the Camino de Santiago.\nLast years \u2013 third marriage with Urraca L\u00f3pez de Haro.\nIn 1184, after a series of failed attempts, the Almohad caliph Abu Yaqub Yusuf invaded Portugal with an army recruited in Northern Africa and, in May, besieged Afonso I in Santar\u00e9m; the Portuguese were helped by the arrival of the armies sent by the archbishop of Santiago de Compostela, in June, and by Ferdinand II in July.\nIn May 1187 Ferdinand II married with Urraca L\u00f3pez de Haro, daughter of Lope D\u00edaz I de Haro, Lord of Biscay, and widow of Nu\u00f1o Men\u00e9ndez, Lord of Ce\u00f3n and Ria\u00f1o, who had been his mistress from at least May 1180. On occasion of the wedding, the king granted his new wife the Lordships of Aguilar and Monteagudo. The new queen, who was aware that the end of her husband's life was approaching, wanted to elevate her only surviving son, Infante Sancho, to the throne of Le\u00f3n, in detriment of the Infante Alfonso, Ferdinand II's first-born son. To achieve her purpose, Urraca L\u00f3pez de Haro maintained that the birth of Infante Alfonso was illegitimate, since the marriage of his parents had been annulled due to the existing blood ties between both spouses. Ferdinand II then banished Infante Alfonso, which was a triumph for his stepmother, who made an effort to ensure that her son inherited the throne upon the death of his father.\nDeath and burial.\nFerdinand II died at Benavente on 22 January 1188 aged 51, while returning from a pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela, and was succeeded to the throne by his eldest son, Alfonso IX of Le\u00f3n. The \"Primera Cr\u00f3nica General\" describes the death of the King of Le\u00f3n as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And this King Ferdinand of Le\u00f3n, son of the Emperor and brother of King Sancho de Castile, finished already with good progress in the XXI year of his reign in his kingdom, near the town of Benavente: and they buried him in the church of Sant Yague de Gallizia [Basilica of San Isidoro], near his grandfather Count Raymund who lies and, near the Empress Berengaria his mother...This was made by the heir of Leon Infante Alfonso, son of King Ferdinand and Queen Urraca, daughter of King Afonso of Portugal.\nContravening his wishes to be buried at Santiago de Compostela Cathedral, Ferdinand II was buried somewhere, possibly in the Royal Pantheon of the Kings of San Isidoro of Le\u00f3n, since his widow, Queen Urraca, did not want to transfer the mortal remains to Santiago of Compostela, since its Archbishop, Pedro Su\u00e1rez de Deza, was a supporter of King Alfonso IX.\nLater, his remains were transferred by order of his son Alfonso IX to Santiago de Compostela Cathedral, in which Ferdinand II had stated that he wanted to be buried, since there where buried his mother Queen Berengaria of Barcelona and his grandfather Count Raymond of Burgundy, and, therefore, in a document granted in the city of Benavente on 26 July 1180, confirmed to Santiago de Compostela Cathedral the donations that the sovereign had granted him previously, and that concerned the chaplaincy and the royal tombs of the cathedral, also ordering in said document that no one can build any castle in that territory.\nThe transfer of the remains of Ferdinand II is mentioned in a diploma granted in Zamora by Alfonso IX dated 4 May 1188, which certifies that the royal remains were transferred to Santiago de Compostela Cathedral by order of his son, who wished to fulfill the last wishes of his father, and buried next to the remains of the Apostle Santiago with royal honors, while confirming in said document the privileges and exemptions granted to the cathedral by the soul of his deceased father, and his own.\nThe tomb of Ferdinand II is located in the Chapel of the Relics of Santiago de Compostela Cathedral, where the Royal Pantheon is located. On a smooth stone sepulcher is placed the recumbent statue that represents the late king, who appears dressed in a tunic and mantle, his forehead girded with a royal crown, and his head is represented with curly hair and a beard, with the right arm of the sovereign raised and placed at the height of his head, while his left hand rests on his chest. The recumbent statue representing Ferdinand II has been dated to the first half of the 13th century. It was carried out after the death of the king, who died in 1188, which has led to the conclusion that it should have been commissioned by the king's heir, Alfonso IX of Le\u00f3n.\nIssue.\nFerdinand II and his first wife, Urraca of Portugal, had one son:\nFerdinand II and his second wife, Teresa Fern\u00e1ndez de Traba, had two sons:\nFerdinand II and his third wife, Urraca L\u00f3pez de Haro, had three sons:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44642", "revid": "38581601", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44642", "title": "Strom Thurmond", "text": "American politician (1902\u20132003)\nJames Strom Thurmond Sr. (; December 5, 1902 \u2013 June 26, 2003) was an American politician who represented South Carolina in the United States Senate from 1954 to 2003. Before his 47 years as a senator, he served as the 103rd governor of South Carolina from 1947 to 1951. Thurmond was officially a member of the Democratic Party in the Senate until 1964, when he joined the Republican Party. He had earlier run for president in 1948 as the Dixiecrat candidate in opposition to Democratic president Harry S. Truman, receiving over a million votes and winning four states.\nA staunch opponent of civil rights legislation in the 1950s and 1960s, Thurmond completed the longest single-person Senate filibuster, at 24 hours and 18 minutes in length, in opposition to the Civil Rights Act of 1957. In the 1960s, Thurmond voted against both the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965. Despite his support for Jim Crow laws, Thurmond denied the accusation that he was a racist by insisting he was a supporter of states' rights and an opponent of excessive federal authority. Thurmond switched parties ahead of the 1964 United States presidential election, saying that the Democratic Party no longer represented people like him, and endorsed Republican nominee Barry Goldwater, who also opposed the Civil Rights Act. By the 1970s, Thurmond started to moderate his stance on race, but continued to defend his prior support for segregation based on states' rights and Southern society at the time. With Thurmond's party switch, he became the first Republican U.S. Senator from South Carolina since John J. Patterson left office in 1879.\nAs a Republican, Thurmond served three times as President pro tempore of the United States Senate, and chaired the Senate Judiciary Committee from 1981 to 1987 and the Senate Armed Services Committee from 1995 to 1999. He retired in 2003 as the only member of either chamber of Congress to reach the age of 100 while still in office and the oldest-serving senator; he died less than six months later. His 47 years as a senator, a record at the time, is the fourth-longest in U.S. history behind Robert Byrd, Daniel Inouye, and Patrick Leahy. Thurmond was also, at 14 years, the longest-serving Dean of the United States Senate.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life and education (1902\u20131933).\nJames Strom Thurmond was born on December 5, 1902, in Edgefield, South Carolina. He was the second of six children born to John William Thurmond (1862\u20131934) and Eleanor Gertrude Strom (1870\u20131958). Thurmond's father was a lawyer and politician who served as a county supervisor and representative to the South Carolina General Assembly. In 1902, Thurmond's father unsuccessfully contested the election for United States Congress. Strom's mother came from a well-known Edgefield family. She was a deeply religious woman, known for delivering prayers.\nThurmond learned to ride ponies, horses, and bulls from an early age. When Thurmond was four, his family moved into a larger home, where they owned about of land. His parents were frequently visited by politicians and lawyers. At six years old, he had an encounter with Benjamin Tillman, a senator from South Carolina. Thurmond remembered the handshake with Tillman as his first political skill.\nThurmond attended Clemson Agricultural College of South Carolina (now Clemson University), where he studied horticulture. At Clemson, he served as the president of the Calhoun Literary Society, where he debated and learned parliamentary procedure. He was deeply influenced by his English professor\u2014David Wistar Daniel, namesake of D. W. Daniel High School. Thurmond graduated from Clemson in 1923 with a Bachelor of Science degree.\nAfter his graduation, Thurmond worked as a farmer, teacher, and athletic coach.\nIn 1925, Thurmond fathered a child born to Carrie Butler, an African-American teenager who worked as his family's housekeeper. In 2003, the Thurmond family confirmed that Thurmond fathered a mixed-race daughter named Essie Mae with Butler. While her paternity was long hidden, he helped support her and paid for her college education.\nIn 1929, Thurmond was appointed as Edgefield County's superintendent of education. While serving as superintendent of education, he began studying to become a lawyer by reading law under his father's guidance.\nEarly career (1933\u20131947).\nSouth Carolina Senate (1933\u20131938).\nIn 1930, Thurmond was admitted to the South Carolina bar. He was appointed as the Edgefield Town and County attorney, serving from 1930 to 1938. Thurmond supported Franklin D. Roosevelt in the 1932 presidential election. Thurmond favored Roosevelt's argument that the federal government could be used to assist citizens in the daily plights brought on by the Great Depression. Thurmond raised money for Roosevelt and, following his victory, traveled to Washington to attend Roosevelt's inauguration.\nIn 1933, Thurmond began his own political career by being elected to the South Carolina Senate. He served there until 1938, when he was elected as a state circuit judge. During his days as a circuit judge, after Sue Logue participated in planning the murder of Davis Timmerman, Thurmond convinced her to surrender to authorities.\nWorld War II.\nIn 1942, at age 39, after the U.S. formally entered World War II, Judge Thurmond resigned from the bench to serve in the U.S. Army, rising to lieutenant colonel. In the Battle of Normandy (June 6\u00a0\u2013 August 25, 1944), he landed in a glider attached to the 82nd Airborne Division. For his military service, Thurmond received 18 decorations, medals and awards, including the Legion of Merit with Oak Leaf Cluster, Bronze Star with Valor device, Purple Heart, World War II Victory Medal, European\u2013African\u2013Middle Eastern Campaign Medal, Belgium's Order of the Crown and France's Croix de Guerre.\nDuring 1954\u201355, Thurmond was president of the Reserve Officers Association. He retired from the U.S. Army Reserve with the rank of major general.\nGovernor of South Carolina (1947\u20131951).\nRunning as a Democrat in what was virtually a one-party state, since most African Americans (who then favored the Republican Party) were still disenfranchised by state discriminatory laws and practices, Thurmond was elected governor of South Carolina in 1946. He had promised to make state government more transparent and accountable by weakening the power of a group of politicians from Barnwell, whom Thurmond dubbed the Barnwell Ring, led by House Speaker Solomon Blatt.\nMany voters considered Thurmond a progressive for much of his term, in large part due to his influence in gaining the arrest of the perpetrators of the lynching of Willie Earle. Though none of the men were found guilty by an all-white jury, in a case where the defense called no witnesses, Thurmond was congratulated by the NAACP and the ACLU for his efforts to bring the murderers to justice.\nIn 1949, Thurmond oversaw the opening of Camp Croft State Park. In November he was unanimously elected Chairman of the Southern Governors Conference and was considered to be a states' rights nominee.\nVarious reforms were also carried out in areas such as education, agriculture, working conditions, and social welfare during Thurmond's time as governor.\n1948 presidential campaign.\nIn the 1948 presidential election, Thurmond ran for president as a third party candidate for the States' Rights Democratic Party, which was formed by White southern Democrats who split from the national party over the threat of federal intervention in state affairs regarding racial segregation and Jim Crow laws and practices.\nThurmond's supporters took control of the Democratic Party in the Deep South. Incumbent President Harry S. Truman was not included on the presidential ballot in Alabama because that state's Supreme Court ruled void any requirement for party electors to vote for the national nominee. Thurmond stated that Truman, Thomas Dewey and Henry A. Wallace would lead the U.S. to totalitarianism. Thurmond called civil rights initiatives dangerous to the American constitution and making the country susceptible to communism in the event of their enactment, challenging Truman to a debate on the issue. Thurmond carried four states and received 39 electoral votes, but was unable to stop Truman's re-election.\nDuring the campaign, Thurmond said the following in a speech met with loud cheers by his assembled supporters: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I wanna tell you, ladies and gentlemen, that there's not enough troops in the army to force the Southern people to break down segregation and admit the Nigra race into our theaters, into our swimming pools, into our homes, and into our churches.\n1950 U.S. Senate campaign in South Carolina.\nAccording to term limits in the state constitution, Thurmond was barred from seeking a second consecutive term as governor in 1950, so he mounted a Democratic primary challenge against first-term U.S. senator Olin Johnston. On May 1, Thurmond's Senate campaign headquarters opened in Columbia, South Carolina with Ernest Craig serving as campaign leader and George McNabb in charge of public relations; both men were on leave from their state positions in the governor's office.\nIn the one-party state of the time, the Democratic primary was the only competitive contest. Both candidates denounced President Truman during the campaign. Johnston defeated Thurmond 186,180 votes to 158,904 votes (54% to 46%) in what would be Thurmond's first and only state electoral defeat.\nIn 1952, Thurmond endorsed Republican Dwight Eisenhower for the presidency, rather than the Democratic nominee Adlai Stevenson. Stevenson still narrowly carried South Carolina, traditionally Democratic, in the general election.\nUnited States Senator.\n1950s.\nThe incumbent U.S. senator from South Carolina, Burnet R. Maybank, was unopposed for re-election in 1954, but he died two months before election day. The state Democratic Party selected Edgar A. Brown to replace Maybank without conducting a primary election.\nThurmond organized a write-in campaign for the vacant Senate seat. He pledged that if he won, he would resign in 1956 to force a primary election. Easily winning the 1954 election, he was the first person to be elected to the U.S. Senate as a write-in candidate. In January 1955, Thurmond expressed his view that federal encroachment on states' rights was among the biggest threats to American life and violated the Constitution. In July, Thurmond supported the Republican Eisenhower Administration's bill for an expanded military reserve law over the alternate plan proposed by fellow Democratic Senator Richard Russell.\nThurmond co-wrote the first version of the Southern Manifesto, stating disagreement with the 1954 U.S. Supreme Court ruling in \"Brown v. Board of Education\" that declared that segregated public schools were unconstitutional and ordered them integrated. In early 1956, Thurmond resigned from the Senate, keeping the promise he had made two years earlier. He won the primary as well as the general election unopposed. Thereafter, he returned to the Senate in November 1956.\nIn 1957, the Eisenhower administration introduced an amended version of the Civil Rights Bill, imposing expansion of federal supervision of integration in Southern states. In an unsuccessful attempt to prevent the bill's passage, Thurmond filibustered the bill, speaking for a total of 24 hours and 18 minutes, the longest recorded filibuster speech by a lone senator. Other Southern senators, who had agreed as part of a compromise not to filibuster this bill, were upset with Thurmond because they thought his defiance made them look incompetent to their constituents. Despite his efforts, the Congress passed the Civil Rights Act of 1957 on August 29. During his filibuster, Thurmond relied on the book \"The Case for the South\", written by W. D. Workman Jr.; Thurmond had known the author for fifteen years. Workman had covered both Thurmond's tenure as South Carolina governor and his presidential campaign, in addition to having served in the military unit which Thurmond had organized in Columbia. He had turned down an offer by Thurmond to serve as his Washington, DC office press secretary.\nThurmond sent a copy of \"The Case for the South\" to each of his Senate colleagues and then-vice president Richard Nixon. The book was described in 2013 by Loyola history professor and author Elizabeth Shermer as \"a compendium of segregationist arguments that hit all the high points of regional apologia\".\nIn January 1959, the Senate held a debate over changing the rules to curb filibusters. Thurmond expressed the view that the Senate should return to the rule prior to 1917, when there were no regulations on the time for debate.\n1960s.\nIn February 1960, Thurmond requested a quorum call that would produce at least half the membership of the Senate, the call being seen as one of the delay tactics employed by Southerners during the meeting. 51 senators assembled, allowing the Senate to adjourn in spite of Thurmond's calls for another quorum call. Thurmond afterward denied his responsibility in convening the Saturday session, attributing it to Democrat Lyndon B. Johnson. He said that those insistent on passing a civil rights bill should be around during discussions on the matter. In the 1960 United States presidential election, Thurmond refused to back the Democratic nominee, his Senate colleague John F. Kennedy, due to the latter's support for civil rights. In the 1960 South Carolina Senate race, Thurmond ran unopposed in the general election; no Republican candidate was on the ballot. As of 2022, 1960 remains the last time a Democrat won South Carolina's Class 2 Senate seat. In the presidential election, Thurmond received 14 electoral votes for vice president (as Harry Byrd Sr.'s running mate). Though both Byrd and Thurmond had long since moved on from the States Rights' Democratic Party, they were the decided protest ticket of several Southern delegates and unpledged electors, who refused to give their support to Kennedy.\nThurmond predicted the 87th Congress would begin with a move to remove him from the Senate Democratic Caucus. This did not happen, and an aide for Senator Joseph S. Clark Jr. said there was never an intention to pursue recourse against Thurmond, though in his opinion Thurmond should no longer be a member of the party.\nIn August 1961, Thurmond formally requested the Senate Armed Services Committee to vote on whether to vote for \"a conspiracy to muzzle military anti-Communist drives.\" The appearance prompted the cancellation of another public appearance in Fort Jackson, as Thurmond favored marking his proposal with his presence, and his request for a $75,000 committee study was slated for consideration. In November, Thurmond said that President Kennedy had lost support in the South due to the formation of the National Relations Boards, what he called Kennedy's softness on communism, and an increase in military men being muzzled for speaking out against communism.\nIn May 1962, Thurmond was part of a group of Senate orators headed by John C. Stennis who expressed opposition to the Kennedy administration's literacy test bill, arguing that the measure was in violation of states' rights as defined by the Constitution. The bill was an effort to reduce the use of discriminatory and subjective literacy tests in the South; ostensibly used to establish voters' competency, in practice they were used against African-American voters and preventing their registration. After the Supreme Court ruled state composed prayer in public schools was unconstitutional, Thurmond urged Congress to take steps to prevent the Court from making similar decisions. In September 1962, Thurmond called for an invasion of Cuba. In February 1963, Thurmond stated that \"the brush curtain around Cuba is a formidable Soviet strategic military base\" and estimated between 30,000 and 40,000 Cuban troops were under the leadership of a Soviet general. Hours after the statement was made public, a Pentagon official disputed his claims as being \"at wide variance with carefully evaluated data collected by U.S. intelligence\" and called for Thurmond to release his proof to the Defense Department. During Paul Nitze's nomination hearing for Secretary of the Navy, Thurmond was noted for asking \"rapid fire questions\" on military action and focusing on Nitze's participation as a moderator in the 1958 National Council of Churches conference. Along with Arizona Senator Barry Goldwater, Thurmond delayed the Nitze nomination. In spite of Thurmond voting against him, the nomination was approved.\nThe day after the Nitze vote, President Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas. Thurmond expressed the view that a conspiracy would be found by investigators to have been responsible for JFK's death. Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson ascended to the presidency. He began campaigning to secure passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965, which angered white segregationists. These laws ended segregation and committed the federal government to enforce voting rights of citizens by the supervision of elections in states in which the pattern of voting showed black people had been disenfranchised. During the signing ceremony for the Civil Rights Act, President Johnson nominated LeRoy Collins as the first Director of the Community Relations Service. Subsequently, Thurmond reminded Collins of his past support for segregation and implied that he was a traitor to the South, Thurmond having particular disdain for an address by Collins the previous winter in which he charged Southern leaders with being harsh and intemperate. Thurmond also suggested that Collins had sought to fault southern leaders for President Kennedy's assassination. Thurmond was the only senator to vote against Collins' nomination being sent to the Senate, and later one of eight senators to vote against his nomination in the chamber.\nParty switch.\nOn September 16, 1964, Thurmond confirmed he was leaving the Democratic Party to work on the presidential campaign of Barry Goldwater, charging the Democrats with having \"abandoned the people\" and having repudiated the U.S. Constitution. During the campaign, Thurmond told reporters that he believed Barry Goldwater could carry South Carolina and other southern states. Though Goldwater lost in a landslide, he won South Carolina with 59% of the vote compared to President Johnson's 41%. Senate Republicans were lukewarm to Thurmond due to their \"super minority\" of only 32 seats in the Senate prior to Thurmond's switch, and voted for committee assignments granting Thurmond the ability \"to keep at least some of the seniority power he had gained as a Democrat.\" Following the election, Johnson continued to push through Civil Rights legislation, most notably the Voting Rights Act in 1965, which committed the federal government to enforce voting rights of citizens by the supervision of elections in states with noted record of voter suppression and disenfranchisement. Thurmond explained his opposition to the Voting Rights Act as being opposed to its authorization of the federal government to determine the processes behind how statewide elections are conducted and insisted he was not against black voter turnout. During floor debate on the bill, Thurmond espoused that the VRA would lead to \"despotism and tyranny.\" With the Voting Rights Act passing into law by a slightly larger margin than the Civil Rights Act, Thurmond's opposition to civil rights had proven as ineffective as a Republican as it had been as a Democrat.\nIn 1965, L. Mendel Rivers became chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, commentator Wayne King crediting Thurmond's involvement with Rivers as giving Rivers' district \"an even dozen military installations that are said to account for one\u2010third to one\u2010half of the jobs in the area.\" In his 1966 re-election campaign, the new Republican senator faced no opposition in the primary, and competed against Bradley Morrah Jr. in the general election campaign. Morrah avoided direct charges against Thurmond's record and generally spoke of his own ambitions in the event he was elected, later referring to Thurmond's time in the Senate as being ineffective. Thurmond won election with 62.2 percent of the vote (271,297 votes) to Morrah's 37.8 percent (164,955 votes). In 1966, former governor Ernest \"Fritz\" Hollings won South Carolina's other Senate seat in a special election. He and Thurmond served together for just over 36 years, making them the longest-serving Senate duo in American history.\nAt the start of the 89th United States Congress, Thurmond was appointed to the Senate Judiciary subcommittee on Constitutional Rights. In March, Thurmond won unanimous approval to have Clark's remarks removed from the record following an argument the senators had after Clark mentioned that Charleston, South Carolina would be included in the Pentagon's list of twenty-five American cities that would get priority in their antimissile protection and attributed this to House Armed Services Committee Chairman Rivers' influence. In June 1967, Johnson nominated Thurgood Marshall to be the first African-American Justice on the Supreme Court, Thurmond joined Sam Ervin, Spessard Holland, and James Eastland in calling Marshall a \"Constitutional iconoclast\" in Senate debate. Thurmond questioned Marshall for an hour \"on fine points of constitutional law and history\", and accused Marshall of having evaded questions on his legal principles during committee hearings. Marshall was still confirmed by the Senate at the end of that month. Later that year, Thurmond attributed the 1967 USS \"Forrestal\" fire to being precipitated by communists, and warned against enacting any of the three proposed Panama Canal treaties on the grounds that they would lead to Communist control of the waterway if enacted.\nIn 1968, Chief Justice Earl Warren decided to retire, and Johnson subsequently nominated Abe Fortas to succeed him. On the third day of hearings, Thurmond questioned Fortas over \"Mallory v. United States\" (1957), a case taking place before Fortas's tenure, but for which he was nonetheless held responsible by Thurmond. Thurmond asked Fortas if the Supreme Court decision in the \"Mallory v. United States\" case was an encouragement of individuals to commit serious crimes such as rape and if he believed in \"that kind of justice\", an inquiry that shocked even the usually stoic Fortas. Thurmond displayed sex magazines, which he called \"obscene, foul, putrid, filthy and repulsive\", to validate his charges that Supreme Court rulings overturning obscenity convictions had led to a large wave of hardcore pornography material. Thurmond stated that Fortas had backed overturning 23 of the 26 lower court obscenity decisions. Thurmond also arranged for the screening of explicit films that Fortas had purportedly legalized to be played before reporters and his own Senate colleagues. In September, Vice President Hubert Humphrey spoke of a deal made between Thurmond and Nixon over Thurmond's opposition to the Fortas nomination. Both Nixon and Thurmond denied Humphrey's claims, Thurmond saying that he had never discussed the nomination with Nixon while conceding the latter had unsuccessfully tried to sway him from opposing Fortas.\nIn the lead-up to the 1968 United States Presidential election, Thurmond stated that President Johnson could be defeated in a re-election bid by a Republican challenger since the candidate was likely to be less obnoxious than the president. Thurmond was an early supporter of a second presidential campaign by Nixon, his backing coming from the latter's position on the Vietnam War, Thurmond promising Nixon that he would not give in to the \"depredations of the Reagan forces.\" During the general election campaign, Nixon's running mate Spiro Agnew stated that he did not believe Thurmond was a racist when asked his opinion on the matter, and Thurmond participated in a two-day tour of Georgia during October where he warned that American Independent Party candidate George Wallace would split the vote and give the election to Democratic nominee Hubert Humphrey by having the Democratic-majority House of Representatives select him in the event none of the candidates received enough electoral votes to win the presidency outright. Thurmond also predicted that Nixon would carry Virginia, South Carolina, North Carolina, Florida, Texas and Tennessee. Nixon carried each of these states with the exception of Texas.\nThurmond decried the Supreme Court opinion in \"Alexander v. Holmes County Board of Education\" (1969), which ordered the immediate desegregation of schools in the American South. This had followed continued Southern resistance for more than a decade to desegregation following the 1954 U.S. Supreme Court ruling in \"Brown v. Board of Education\" that segregation of public schools was unconstitutional. Thurmond praised President Nixon and his \"Southern Strategy\" of delaying desegregation, saying Nixon \"stood with the South in this case\". In 1969, Thurmond opined that \"The New York Times\" \"had a conflict of interest in its attacks on Otto F. Otepka's appointment to the Subversive Activities Control Board.\" and called for Associate Justice William O. Douglas to resign over what he considered political activities, a request which Douglas ignored. In the latter part of the year, President Nixon nominated Clement Haynsworth for associate justice. This came after the White House consulted with Thurmond throughout all of July, as Thurmond had become impressed with Haynsworth following their close collaboration. Thurmond wrote to Haynsworth that he had worked harder on his nomination than any other that had occurred since his Senate career began. The Haynsworth nomination was rejected in the Senate. Years later, at a 1977 hearing, Thurmond told Haynsworth, \"It's a pity you are not on the Supreme Court today. Several senators who voted against you have told me they would vote for you if they had it to do again.\"\nIn 1969, \"Time\" ran a story accusing Thurmond of receiving \"an extraordinarily high payment for land\". Thurmond responded to the claim by calling the tale a liberal smear intended to damage his political influence, later calling the magazine \"anti-South\". and a few days later, Thurmond named executive director of the South Carolina Democratic Party Donald L. Fowler as the individual who had spread the story, a charge that Fowler denied.\n1970s.\nIn 1970, African-Americans constituted about 30 percent of South Carolina's population. After the Voting Rights Act of 1965, African Americans were legally protected in exercising their constitutional rights to register and vote in South Carolina. Thurmond appointed Thomas Moss, an African American, to his Senate staff in 1971. It has been described as the first such appointment by a member of the South Carolina congressional delegation (it was incorrectly reported by many sources as the first senatorial appointment of an African American, but Mississippi Senator Pat Harrison had hired clerk-librarian Jesse Nichols in 1937). In 1983, Thurmond supported legislation to make the birthday of Martin Luther King Jr. a federal holiday. In South Carolina, the honor was diluted; until 2000 the state offered employees the option to celebrate this holiday or substitute one of three Confederate holidays instead. Despite this, Thurmond never explicitly renounced his earlier views on racial segregation.\nIn January 1970, Thurmond asserted that he would work \"to reverse the unreasonable and impractical decisions of the Supreme Court\", as well as assist with the appointment of \"sound judges\" and uphold the Nixon administration's position for resumption of tax\u2010exempt status among all private schools. In a 1970 speech, Thurmond called on Japan to increase defense spending and take a larger role in resisting communism in Asia. Thurmond also defended the Vietnam policy of the Nixon administration, saying that the president was making the best of the situation that he had inherited from Kennedy and Johnson while admitting he personally favored a total victory in the war. On April 11, 1971, Thurmond called for the exoneration of William Calley following his conviction of participating in the My Lai massacre, stating that the \"victims at Mylai were casualties to the brutality of war\" and Calley had acted off of order. Calley's petition for habeas corpus was granted three years later, in addition to his immediate release from house arrest. In January 1975, Thurmond and William Scott toured South Vietnam, Thurmond receiving a medal from President of South Vietnam Nguy\u1ec5n V\u0103n Thi\u1ec7u. The award was seen as part of an attempt by South Vietnam to court American congressional votes in its favor.\nIn February 1971, Senate Republicans voted unanimously to bestow Thurmond full seniority, the vote being seen as \"little more than a gesture since committee assignments are the major item settled by seniority and Senator Thurmond has his.\" In June, Thurmond advocated against lifting the trade embargo on the People's Republic of China, stating that its communist regime had engaged in a propaganda effort to weaken support for the embargo. Nevertheless, days later, President Nixon ordered an end to the embargo.\nOn February 4, 1972, Thurmond sent a secret memo to William Timmons (in his capacity as an aide to Richard Nixon) and United States Attorney General John N. Mitchell, with an attached file from the Senate Internal Security Subcommittee, urging that British musician John Lennon (then living in New York City) be deported from the United States as an undesirable alien, due to Lennon's political views and activism. The document claimed Lennon's influence on young people could affect Nixon's chances of re-election, and suggested that terminating Lennon's visa might be \"a strategy counter-measure\". Thurmond's memo and attachment, received by the White House on February 7, 1972, initiated the Nixon administration's persecution of John Lennon that threatened the former Beatle with deportation for nearly five years from 1972 to 1976. The documents were discovered in the FBI files after a Freedom of Information Act search by Professor Jon Wiener, and published in Weiner's book \"Gimme Some Truth: The John Lennon FBI Files\" (2000). They are discussed in the documentary film, \"The U.S. vs. John Lennon\" (2006).\nIn July 1973, Thurmond was one of ten Republican senators in a group headed by Carl T. Curtis invited to the White House to reaffirm their support for President Nixon in light of recent scandals and criticism of the president within his own party. In October, after President Nixon ordered the firing of independent special prosecutor Archibald Cox, Democrat Birch Bayh charged Thurmond with \"browbeating\" Cox during Senate Judiciary Committee hearings on the firing. Thurmond replied that Bayh was \"below a snake\" in the event that he had intended to impugn his motives. Thurmond was noted for joining Edward J. Gurney in questioning Cox \"at length in an attempt to show that he was biased against\" Nixon and his administration, as Thurmond asked Cox if eleven members of his staff had worked for Presidents Kennedy and Johnson. In May 1974, Thurmond, along with William L. Scott and James B. Allen agreed with Senator Carl T. Curtis on the equation of resignation with mob rule and the group declined defending Nixon's conduct. Thurmond opined that Nixon was \"the only President we have\" and questioned why Congress would want to weaken his hand in negotiating with other countries. In August, \"Newsweek\" published a list by the White House including Thurmond as one of thirty-six senators that the administration believed would support President Nixon in the event of his impeachment and being brought to trial by the Senate. Nixon resigned on August 9 in light of near-certain impeachment.\nThroughout the 1970s, Thurmond took several actions against the Soviet Union. In June 1974, Senator Henry M. Jackson informed Chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee John C. Stennis that he had arranged for Thurmond to cosponsor an amendment revising the present export control system and restricting trade with the Soviet Union while granting the Defense Secretary power to veto any export that might \"significantly increase the military capability\" of either the Soviet Union or other Communist countries. In June 1975, as the Senate weighed a reduction in a $25 billion weapons procurement measure and to delete research funds to improve the accuracy and power of intercontinental ballistic missiles and warheads, Thurmond and Harry F. Byrd Jr. warned that the Soviet Union was attempting an increase on its missile accuracy and advocated for the United States to follow suit with its own missiles. Later that month, Thurmond and Jesse Helms wrote to President Ford requesting he meet with Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn ahead of a speech on June 30 during an AFL\u2013CIO dinner. The White House responded that Ford was too busy to meet with Solzhenitsyn, while later sources indicate Ford declined the meeting at the counsel of his advisors. In December 1979, Thurmond was one of ten senators on the Senate Armed Services Committee to sign a report urging President Carter to delay the vote on a proposed treaty between the US and Soviet Union to limit nuclear arms.\nIn the 1976 Republican primary, President Ford faced a challenge from former California Governor Ronald Reagan, who selected Richard Schweiker as his running mate. Though Thurmond backed Reagan's candidacy, he, along with North Carolina Senator Jesse Helms, led efforts to oust Schweiker from the ticket. During the subsequent general election, Thurmond appeared in a campaign commercial for incumbent U.S. President Gerald Ford in his race against Thurmond's fellow Southerner, former Georgia Governor Jimmy Carter. In the commercial, Thurmond said Ford (who was born in Nebraska and spent most of his life in Michigan) \"sound[ed] more like a Southerner than Jimmy Carter\". After President-elect Carter nominated Theodore C. Sorensen as his choice to become Director of the Central Intelligence Agency, Thurmond expressed reservations and fellow Senator Jake Garn said he believed Thurmond would not vote for the nomination. Sorensen withdrew from consideration days later, before a vote could be had.\nIn 1974, Thurmond and Democrat John L. McClellan wrote a resolution to continue American sovereignty by the Panama Canal and zone. Thurmond stated that the rhetoric delivered by Secretary of State Henry Kissinger suggested that the \"Canal Zone is already Panamanian territory and the only question involved is the transfer of jurisdiction.\" In the late 1970s, Thurmond advocated for forging a new relationship with Panama but against the U.S. giving up sovereignty to the Canal Zone. Thurmond doubted Panama's ability to govern alone: \"There is no way that a Panamanian government could be objective about the administration of an enterprise so large in comparison to the rest of the national enterprise, public and private.\" In late August 1977, \"The New York Times\" wrote \"President Carter can be grateful that the opposition to his compromise Panama treaty is now being led by Senator Strom Thurmond of South Carolina and Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina.\" Speaking on the Panama Canal neutrality treaty, Thurmond said it was \"the big giveaway of the century.\" The treaty was ratified by the Senate on March 16, 1978.\nIn his general election campaign, Thurmond faced Charles Ravenel, a local banker and former gubernatorial candidate. Ravenel charged Thurmond with not standing up for South Carolina's educational needs and having been behind the lack of funding. Thurmond responded to the charges by stating that he thought the state had made advancements in its education system. Thurmond and Ravenel made a joint appearance in April, where Thurmond discussed his position on a variety of issues. The higher amount of African-Americans voting in elections was taken into account by the Ravenel campaign, which sought to gain this group of voters by reviving interest in older statements by Thurmond. In his courting of black voters, Thurmond was noted to have not undergone \"any ideological transformation\" but instead devoted himself to making personal contact with members of the minority group. Thurmond's influence in national politics allowed him to have correspondence with staffers from the Nixon administration which gave him \"a unique advantage in announcing federal grants and bird-dogging federal projects of particular interest to black voters.\" By May 1978, Thurmond held a 30-point lead over Ravenel among double digits of undecided voters. Thurmond won a sixth term with 351,733 votes to Ravenel's 281,119. The race would later be assessed as the last serious challenge to Thurmond during his career.\nIn March 1979, after the Carter administration made an appeal to Congress for new powers to aid with the enforcement of federal laws as it pertains to housing discrimination, Thurmond refused to back the administration as he charged it with \"injecting itself in every facet of people's lives\" and said housing disputes should be settled in court. In July, as the Senate weighed voting on the nomination of Assistant Attorney General Patricia M. Wald to the United States Court of Appeals in Washington, Thurmond joined Paul Laxalt and Alan Simpson in recording their opposition. Later that month, Thurmond asked Attorney General nominee Benjamin R. Civiletti if President Carter had made him give a pledge of loyalty or an assurance of complete independence. In September, the Senate Judiciary Committee approved 30 of President Carter's nominees, the closest vote being waged against Abner J. Mikva, who the president had nominated for the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia. Thurmond was one of the five Republicans to vote against Mikva. In November, President Carter nominated Jos\u00e9 A. Cabranes to fill a vacancy on the United States District Court for the District of Connecticut. Thurmond submitted a series of written questions to Cabranes, whose answers were credited with clarifying his views on issues. Cabranes was confirmed for the position.\nThurmond demonstrated several instances of bipartisanship with Democrats and President Carter. In May 1977, Thurmond made a joint appearance with President Carter in the Rose Garden in a show of unified support for proposed foreign intelligence surveillance legislation. Thurmond stated he had become convinced the legislation was needed from his service on the Armed Services Committee, the Judiciary Committee and the Intelligence Committee the previous year and lauded the bill for concurrently protecting the rights of Americans, as a warrant would have to be obtained from a judge in order to fulfill any inquiries. In July 1979, after the Carter administration unveiled a proposed governing charter for the FBI, Thurmond stated his support for its enactment, his backing being seen by \"The New York Times\" as an indication that the governing charter would face little conservative opposition. In September, the Senate approved Bailey Brown as Judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit. The nomination was one of the few votes in which Thurmond and Ted Kennedy joined forces in confirming. In October, President Carter signed the Federal Magistrate Act of 1979, an expansion of the jurisdiction of American magistrates in regards to civil and criminal cases. Carter noted Thurmond as one of the members of Congress who had shown leadership on the measure, without whose efforts it would have never passed.\n1980s.\nIn December 1979, Thurmond endorsed the presidential campaign of former Governor of Texas John Connally. In an election cycle that also featured Reagan, Thurmond chose to back Connally because he believed the latter's wide government experience would benefit the U.S. in both domestic and foreign matters. \"The Washington Post\" noted Thurmond seeming \"to cast himself for a role of regional leadership in the Connally campaign similar to the one he played in 1968\" for the Nixon campaign. After Connally lost the South Carolina primary to Reagan, he thanked Thurmond and his wife for doing more to support his campaign in the state than anyone else. In August 1980, Thurmond gave a \"tense cross examination\" of President Carter's brother, Billy Carter, who had come under scrutiny for his relationship with Libya and receiving funds from the country. The Billy Carter controversy also was favored by Democrats wishing to replace Carter as the party's nominee in the general election. Thurmond questioned Carter over his prior refusal to disclose the amount of funds he had received from public appearances after the 1976 Presidential election, and stated his skepticism with some of the points made.\nAfter Republicans won a majority in the 1980 Senate election, Thurmond pledged that he would seek a death penalty law, and stated his conviction that \"the death penalty is a deterrent to crime\" in an interview the following year. Following the presidential election, Thurmond and North Carolina senator Jesse Helms sponsored a Senate amendment to a Department of Justice appropriations bill denying the department the power to participate in busing, due to objections over federal involvement, but, although passed by Congress, was vetoed by a lame duck Carter. In December 1980, Thurmond met with President-elect Reagan and recommended former South Carolina governor James B. Edwards for United States Secretary of Energy in the incoming administration. Reagan later named Edwards Energy Secretary, and the latter served in that position for over a year. In January 1981, after the Justice Department revealed it was carrying out a suit against Charleston County for school officials declining to propose a desegregation method for its public schools, Thurmond theorized the Justice Department's decision may have been due to South Carolina not supporting President Carter in the general election, and stated his intent to have the incoming Reagan administration to look into the facts of the case before proceeding.\nThurmond became president pro tempore of the United States Senate in 1981, and was part of the U.S. delegation to the funeral of Egyptian President Anwar Sadat, Thurmond being accompanied by Sadat's pen pal Sam Brown. At the beginning of Reagan's term, Thurmond as the new chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee and the new president were seen as obstacles to any gun laws passing in the Senate. Thurmond publicly stated his belief that any measures introduced would be defeated in his committee. After the March assassination attempt on President Reagan, Thurmond stated his support for legislation imposing a ban on the gun components on a seven-point anti-crime program. He indicated his backing would only be in favor of passing measures to restrict criminals accessing guns and his announcement was seen as possibly indicating a change in the debate of regulations relating to firearms in the U.S. Thurmond also announced plans to hold hearings on the seven-point proposal intended to address the questions surrounding the Reagan assassination attempt.\nThurmond and Helms urged President Reagan to curb textile imports, with Thurmond saying later that year that the first four months of 1981 had seen a 16 percent increase in textile imports \"over a similar period in 1980.\" President Reagan pledged in a letter to Thurmond to help South Carolina textile mills against their foreign competitors. President Reagan stated his support for tightening control of textile imports, and the following year, vetoed H.R. 1562. Thurmond responded to the decision by stating that Reagan had heeded bad advice and added that the veto would produce \"more layoffs, more plant shutdowns and more long-term economic damage to an industry that is crucial to this nation.\" In late 1981, Thurmond presided over the hearings of Sandra Day O'Connor, who President Reagan had nominated for associate justice. Thurmond granted Alabama Senator Jeremiah Denton an hour of questioning of O'Connor, twice the time allotted for other members of the chamber. Thurmond stated that O'Connor was \"one of the choice nominees\" for the Supreme Court that he had seen in all of his Senate career, and she was confirmed by the Senate. Also in 1981, Thurmond was one of the leaders in opposition to extending the Voting Rights Act, and said parts of the law were discriminatory toward states' rights as well as too strict toward communities that had adhered to it in the past.\nThurmond was a supporter of the foreign policy of the Reagan administration. In April 1981, Thurmond stated that the U.S. could move some of its West Germany soldiers to the East German and Czechoslovak borders in an attempt to improve both morale and combat readiness. In October 1983, Thurmond announced his support for the United States invasion of Grenada, saying American efforts with other countries were \"providing an opportunity for Grenadan citizens to regain control over their lives\" and the U.S. would be forced to watch centuries of progress crumble if the country was unwilling to make sacrifices. Thurmond voted against the Senate resolution declaring that American troops in Grenada would be \"withdrawn no more than 60 days later unless Congress authorized their continued presence there\". President Reagan sent Thurmond a letter containing a report in line with the War Powers Resolution. Thurmond said the \"ruling junta in Grenada\" was directly threatening American lives.\nIn December 1984, as the United States and Israel moved to negotiate a free-trade pact where tariffs between the two countries would eventually be wiped out following the Reagan administration receiving congressional approval to negotiate such an agreement, Thurmond wrote a letter to United States trade representative Bill Brock calling on Brock to \"reformulate\" the negotiating position of the US as the senator had been informed by his aides that the American position in the negotiation was \"more generous\" than the one specified to Congress. Brock replied to Thurmond weeks later, asserting that he had \"every intention\" of fulfilling his commitment to Congress \"to take account of the import sensitivity of specific products\" in the agreement and that Israel had acknowledged the irregularity of export subsidy programs \"with the concept of a free-trade area.\"\nIn 1984, as the Senate voted on a bill granting federal prosecution to weapon-carrying career robbers and giving 15 years of incarceration to those convicted, Thurmond and Democratic Senator Ted Kennedy sponsored an amendment limiting the bill to third-time federal offenders, which passed 77 to 12.\nIn the 1984 presidential election, Thurmond was cited along with Carroll Campbell and South Carolina Republican Party Director Warren Tompkins by Republicans as the forces binding the Reagan-Bush ticket to South Carolina's electoral votes. Thurmond attended President Reagan's October 15 re-election campaign speech in the Allied Health Building on the Greenville Technical College campus in Greenville, South Carolina.\nRunning for a fifth full term in 1984, Thurmond faced his first primary challenge in 20 years, from retired CIA agent Robert Cunningham, and won the Republican nomination on June 12, 1984. The previous year, at a fundraising dinner for Thurmond's re-election campaign in Columbia, South Carolina, President Reagan delivered an address both praising Thurmond and noting the similarities in his views and that of the administration. Cunningham charged Thurmond with being a follower who no one could validate the seriousness of as a candidate since he had not been challenged in eighteen years, furthering that the South Carolina Republican Party had been involved with the decline in his opposition. Cunningham said that Thurmond had a \"bad track record\" and noted his past comments on race, saying that he would not be crushed like Thurmond's past opponents and was getting much encouragement in his bid to unseat him. Thurmond addressed the issue of age during the primary, the 81-year-old senator stating that he exercised each day for an hour and a half and that he was in the same shape as a person in their 30s or 40s. Cunningham received less than 6% of the primary vote. Thurmond then defeated Melvin Purvis III in the general election, the latter receiving half of the votes cast for Thurmond. Purvis, noted to have few differences in ideology with Thurmond, cited the latter's age as reason to retire him from the Senate.\nThurmond's support of Reagan's judicial nominees continued into the president's second term. In 1986, Daniel Anthony Manion, President Reagan's choice for the U.S. Court of Appeals in Chicago, answered a question by Thurmond, who cited Manion as \"entitled to have a vote by the Senate\", and predicted there were enough votes to confirm him. In 1987, after President Reagan nominated Robert Bork as Associate Justice on the Supreme Court, the \"Los Angeles Times\" noted Thurmond as \"one of Bork's key supporters on the Judiciary Committee.\" Following Bork's nomination being rejected by the Senate, Thurmond stated that President Reagan's next nominee should be a person not \"as controversial\" and should be someone from the South.\nIn June 1985, Thurmond introduced legislation providing stiffer federal penalties for individuals and financial institutions engaged in laundering money earned from activities of illegality. The bill was supported by the Reagan administration in its efforts to expose the financial activities of criminals and was hailed by Thurmond as \"an important step in our continuing war on organized crime and those financial institutions and individuals which hide the ill-gotten assets of law-breakers, especially drug traffickers.\"\nIn September 1985, Thurmond was one of eight members of a delegation that met with General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union Mikhail Gorbachev. In March 1986, after American warplanes took action against Libyan land, Thurmond stated the U.S. \"has the right and the duty to protect and defend itself when attacked, as it was today, without provocation.\" He opposed statements by the Libyan government that the attacks on U.S. ships occurred in international waters and named Muammar Gaddafi as the individual who had orchestrated the acts of aggression toward the U.S. Thurmond was a supporter of the Nicaragua rebels, saying that support for the group on the part of the United States was central to furthering America's view \"in freedom and in protecting ourselves against Soviet totalitarianism.\" In August 1988, Senator Robert Byrd presented the White House with a modified version of the Democratic proposal on Contra aid. Thurmond responded to the plan by calling it unsatisfactory. A month later, after some members of the Senate gave support to a law that would impose American participation in an international treaty outlawing genocide, Thurmond stated his intent to add a death penalty amendment in the event the bill reached the Senate floor and Democrats charged Thurmond with using parliamentary devices and Senate traditions to prevent a vote. Thurmond dropped the death penalty amendment when Democrats agreed to proceed with the confirmation of Republican judges.\nIn September 1986, Thurmond sponsored a drug law package that included a provision imposing the death penalty for some drug offenses and federal crimes of \"treason, espionage and killing American hostages in a terrorist attack\". A week later, as the Senate opened debate on proposals aimed at ending both the supply of dangerous drugs as well as their demand, Thurmond offered changes to criminal law in the form of amendments that would include imposing the death penalty for drug traffickers guilty of murder and an expansion of the proposal that would add the death penalty for other federal crimes, such as espionage and hostage taking. President Reagan signed the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986 on October 27, 1986, noting Thurmond as one of the \"real champions in the battle to get this legislation through Congress\".\nIn November 1987, Thurmond introduced legislation that if enacted would require \"alcoholic beverages to carry health warning labels similar to those on cigarettes\", saying the legislation would be effective if it prevented anyone from drinking while being in a compromising position of health. The following year, Thurmond sponsored legislation designed to impose \"five rotating warning labels on alcoholic beverages cautioning pregnant women not to drink, warning that alcohol is addictive and can increase the risks of hypertension, liver disease and cancer, that it impairs a person's ability to drive a car or operate machinery, and that alcohol consumption can be hazardous in combination with some drugs.\"\nOn February 23, 1988, Thurmond endorsed fellow senator Bob Dole in the Republican presidential primary, acknowledging his previous intent to remain neutral during the nominating process. The Thurmond endorsement served to change the Dole campaign's initial plans of skipping the South Carolina primary, where Vice President Bush defeated Dole. The Bush campaign subsequently won other Southern states and the nomination, leading Michael Oreskes to reflect that Dole \"was hurt by an endorsement that led him astray.\" Following the 1988 Presidential election, George H. W. Bush nominated John Tower for United States Secretary of Defense. After Tower's nomination was rejected by the Senate, Thurmond asked, \"What does it say when the leader of the free world can't get a Cabinet member confirmed?\"\nIn July 1989, when the Senate Judiciary Committee approved a bill by Democrat Dennis DeConcini that imposed a ban of three years on sales of several domestic assault weapons, it rejected an amendment by Thurmond that would have substituted the DeConcini bill with the Bush administration's anti-crime package, which did not include a ban on rifles produced in the United States. Failure to implement the Thurmond amendment was seen as \"a preliminary test of Senate support for extending President Bush's ban on foreign-made assault weapons to domestic makes\" and a loss for the National Rifle Association of America which had previously protested banning domestic assault weapons. In August, after the Senate Judiciary Committee voted evenly on the nomination of William C. Lucas for Assist Attorney General for Civil Rights and thereby terminated the nomination that required a majority to proceed to the entirety of the chamber, Thurmond noted the different forms of segregation in the North and South and added that \"black people didn't have the chance in either place that they should have had. Now's the chance to give them a chance.\" Chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee Joe Biden refuted Thurmond's argument by mentioning that Senate critics of Lucas were civil rights supporters who had a problem with his lack of qualifications. In September, Thurmond was one of nine Republican senators appointed by Senate Republican leader Robert Dole to negotiate a dispute with Democrats over financing of President Bush's anti-drug plan.\n1990s and 2000s.\nThurmond launched his campaign for an eighth term on February 12, 1990, citing that he had never before felt \"a stronger obligation to continue my work for the future of our state and our nation.\" Thurmond, then age 87, billed himself as having the health of a man in his fifties. The South Carolina Democratic Party faced difficulty recruiting a candidate which they believed had a chance of defeating Thurmond. In the general election, Thurmond defeated retired intelligence officer Bob Cunningham, who had been his Republican primary opponent in 1984. (Cunningham had switched parties in 1990.)\nIn early 1990, Thurmond sponsored a crime bill concurrent with another measure of the same intent, his version receiving the support of President Bush. Thurmond charged the Democratic proposal with aiding criminals and furthering the loss of rights on the part of victims. In June, the bill was nearly doomed following a procedural vote that forced Senate leaders to work toward modifying its provisions. Thurmond proposed that his fellow senators accept portions of the bill that the Senate had already passed including provisions expanding the number of federal crimes for which the death penalty could apply from 23 to 30 and restrictions on the number of appeals a condemned inmate may file in Federal courts, and the ban on the sale and manufacture of nine types of semiautomatic weapons. In 1992, the Senate voted on an anti-crime bill, Thurmond predicting that it would not pass due to what he considered its lack of strength: \"This weak bill expands the rights of criminals. It is a fraud. It is a sham.\" He stated that President Bush had told him in advance of his intent to veto the bill if it passed.\nAfter President Bush nominated Clarence Thomas for Associate Justice, Thomas visited Thurmond and stated that he had been fortunate as a result of the Civil Rights Movement assisting him in getting out of poverty, a departure from his previous position of African-Americans achieving success through hard work and individual initiative. \"The New York Times\" observed, \"Judge Thomas's remarks in Mr. Thurmond's office were not in response to reporters' specific questions and were clearly intended to rebut critics, including some by members of civil rights organizations, who say he should not be confirmed because of his vociferous opposition to affirmative action and racial quotas in hiring.\" In September, as Thomas appeared before the Senate Judiciary Committee, Thurmond interrupted a line of questioning by Howard Metzenbaum to defend Thomas against a complaint that Thomas had answered questions about cases except for abortion. Thurmond voted for Thomas's confirmation, and the latter was confirmed by the Senate in October 1991.\nThurmond became the head of the Armed Services Committee following the 1994 Republican Revolution, in which the Republican Party gained eight seats in the Senate and gained a majority in both chambers. According to Thurmond, he had survived \"a little power play\" orchestrated by fellow Republicans to continue serving as Chairman. In December, after President Clinton's announcement that he would seek a $25 billion increase in defense spending over the following six years, Thurmond called it a correct move but one which validated claims that the president had hastily cut the Pentagon budget. In late 1995, Thurmond joined a bipartisan coalition of politicians in supporting a petition intending \"to loosen the rules governing the prescription drug methylphenidate\". The drug is commonly known by the brand name Ritalin.\nIn his 1996 re-election campaign, Thurmond received primary opposition from Harold G. Worley and Charlie Thompson, and the question of age appeared again, given that he was 93 years old at the time. Thurmond remarked that the issue was the only one expressed by members of the press, even as polls showed \"that the vast majority of South Carolinians believe it is far past time for him to retire.\" Worley stated that the issue of age should be dealt with in the primary as opposed to the general election, encouraging Thurmond to be dropped as the seat's continuous nominee. In the general election, Thurmond received 53.4 percent of the vote to the 44 percent of Democrat Elliott Springs Close.\nOn December 5, 1996, Thurmond became the oldest serving member of the U.S. Senate, and on May 25, 1997, the longest-serving member (41 years and 10 months), casting his 15,000th vote in September 1998. In the following month, when astronaut and fellow Senator John Glenn was to embark on the \"Discovery\" at age 77, Thurmond, who was his senior by 19 years, reportedly sent him a message saying; \"I want to go too.\" On October 17, 1998, President Bill Clinton signed the Strom Thurmond National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1999 into law, an authorization of \"appropriations for military activities of the Department of Defense, military construction, and defense activities of the Department of Energy.\" Clinton stated that the bill being named after Thurmond was a \"well-deserved and appropriate tribute\" due to his thirty-six years in the U.S. Army Reserve and his primary focus in the Senate being on U.S. national defense.\nIn February 1999, Thurmond introduced legislation barring health messages on wine bottles, the measure intended to reverse what he called \"erroneous and irresponsible\" action of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms. The legislation transferred authority over labeling to the Department of Health and Human Services from the Treasury Department and increased taxes on wine. On May 26, 1999, the Senate voted on an amendment to a spending bill exonerating Husband E. Kimmel and Walter C. Short of charges of failing to anticipate the attack on Pearl Harbor that led to American involvement in World War II. Thurmond was noted as one of five Senate members to have been a World War II veteran and back the measure and called Kimmel and Short \"the last victims\" of Pearl Harbor. In January 2001, Thurmond endorsed his son Strom Thurmond Jr. for federal prosecutor in South Carolina in a recommendation to the Senate.\nIn March, Thurmond voted for an amendment to the campaign finance reform bill of John McCain and Russ Feingold. Thurmond had initially opposed the measure and changed his vote at the last minute.\nThurmond's 100th birthday was celebrated on December 5, 2002. Some remarks made by Mississippi Senator Trent Lott during the event were considered racially insensitive: \"I want to say this about my state: When Strom Thurmond ran for president, we [Mississippi] voted for him. We're proud of it. And if the rest of the country had followed our lead, we wouldn't have had all these problems over all these years, either.\" Fifteen days later, on December 20, Lott resigned as the Senate Republican leader effective on January 3, 2003, the beginning of the next congressional session. Thurmond left the Senate in January 2003 as the United States' longest-serving senator, a record later surpassed by Senator Robert Byrd. Thurmond was succeeded by then-Representative and fellow Republican Lindsey Graham.\nHealth.\nToward the end of Thurmond's Senate career, critics suggested his mental abilities had declined. His supporters argued that, while he lacked physical stamina due to his age, mentally he remained aware and attentive, and maintained a very active work schedule, showing up for every floor vote. He stepped down as Chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee at the beginning of 1999, as he had pledged to do in late 1997. Retrospectively, a Senate aide stated that \"for his last ten years, Thurmond didn't know if he was on foot or on horseback\", while a 2020 \"New Yorker\" article stated that he was \"widely known\" by the end of his career to be \"non compos mentis\".\nIn August 1999, Thurmond underwent surgery for an enlarged prostate. In September, he was admitted to the Walter Reed Army Medical Center for tests. In October 2000, Thurmond collapsed while lunching with a staff member and an acquaintance at a restaurant in Alexandria, Virginia, and was admitted to Walter Reed; his spokeswoman Genevieve Erny stated that the collapse was found to have been unrelated to previous illnesses. On the morning of October 2, 2001, Thurmond was admitted to Walter Reed after fainting at his Senate desk. He was accompanied in the ambulance by fellow Republican and retired heart transplant surgeon Bill Frist.\nPersonal life.\nThurmond was married twice and fathered five children.\nFirst daughter with Carrie Butler.\nSix months after Thurmond's death in 2003, Essie Mae Washington-Williams (1925\u20132013) publicly revealed she was his daughter. She was born on October 12, 1925, to Carrie \"Tunch\" Butler (1909 or 1910\u00a0\u2013 1948), who had worked for Thurmond's parents and was 15 or 16 years old when she gave birth.\nEssie Mae Washington was raised by her maternal aunt and uncle, and was not told that Thurmond was her father until she was in high school, when she met him for the first time. She later married, took on the last name Washington-Williams, had a family, and retired as a Los Angeles Unified School District elementary school teacher with a master's degree. Though the Thurmond family never publicly acknowledged Washington-Williams as his daughter while he was alive, he helped pay her way through a historically black college in South Carolina and continued to give her financial support well into her adult life. Washington-Williams said she did not reveal she was Thurmond's daughter during his lifetime because it \"wasn't to the advantage of either one of us\". She kept silent out of respect for her father and denied the two had agreed she would not reveal her connection to him.\nAfter Washington-Williams came forward, the Thurmond family attorney acknowledged her parentage. Her name has been added to those of his other children on a monument to Thurmond installed at the statehouse grounds. Many close friends, staff members, and South Carolina residents had long suspected that Washington-Williams was Thurmond's daughter, as they had noted his interest in her. As a young woman, she was granted a degree of access to Thurmond more typical of a family member than a member of the public.\nWashington-Williams later said she intended to join the Daughters of the American Revolution, and did apply to join the United Daughters of the Confederacy, as she was eligible through her Thurmond ancestry. Thurmond was a member of the Sons of Confederate Veterans, a similar group for men. Her UDC application was not approved while she was alive.\nWashington-Williams died on February 4, 2013, in Columbia, South Carolina, at age 87.\nFirst marriage.\nThurmond was 44 when he married his first wife, Jean Crouch (1926\u20131960), in the South Carolina Governor's mansion on November 7, 1947. In April 1947, when Crouch was a senior at Winthrop College, Thurmond was a judge in a beauty contest in which she was selected as Miss South Carolina. In June, upon her graduation, Thurmond hired her as his personal secretary. On September 13, 1947, Thurmond proposed marriage by calling Crouch to his office to take a dictated letter. The letter was to her, and contained his proposal of marriage. Crouch died of a brain tumor in 1960 at age 33; they had no children.\nSecond marriage.\nThurmond married his second wife, Nancy Janice Moore, on December 22, 1968. He was 66 years old and she was 22. She had won Miss South Carolina in 1965. Two years later, he hired her to work in his Senate office. Although Nancy did not particularly enjoy politics, she nevertheless became a popular figure on Capitol Hill. At age 68 in 1971, Thurmond fathered the first of four children with Nancy, who was then 25. Thurmond and Nancy's children are: Nancy Moore Thurmond (1971\u20131993), a beauty pageant contestant who was killed by a drunk driver; James Strom Thurmond Jr. (b. 1972), a former U.S. Attorney for the District of South Carolina and Solicitor for the 2nd Judicial District of South Carolina, Juliana Whitmer (b. 1974), and Paul Reynolds Thurmond (b. 1976), a former South Carolina State Senator.\nThurmond's children remained in South Carolina with relatives, and Nancy commuted back and forth to Washington. Thurmond and Nancy separated in March 1991, after Nancy claimed that they no longer had a real marriage, stating \"At this point in my life I would like to be able to pursue several career options and some measure of independence.\" She returned to South Carolina, where their children were living. Although Nancy casually dated other men during the early stages of the separation, neither she nor her husband considered divorce, and they reportedly remained close. It was alleged that she spoke with her husband several times each day, and he stayed at her house several times each month, whenever he returned to South Carolina. They continued attending events together. They were also reported as estranged in 1996, when Nancy was facing trial for drunk driving. In 2001, they were still reported to be estranged when Nancy refused an offer to succeed Thurmond in the U.S. Senate.\nSexual misconduct allegations.\nAccording to NBC News in 2017, it was widely acknowledged around Congress that Thurmond inappropriately touched women throughout his career. Thurmond's colleague, Senator Patty Murray, stated in 1996 that Thurmond, who was 91 years old at the time of the incident, tried to fondle her breast in an elevator. According to \"The New York Times\", Thurmond had been known for fondling women in Senate elevators, and did not realize Murray was a fellow senator. The alleged incident prompted a statement from Thurmond's office, saying that he had not engaged in any inappropriate behavior, and that he was showing gentlemanly courtesy by assisting Murray into the elevator. Female Senate staffers from the late 1980s and early 1990s recalled that Thurmond was on an informal list of male senators who were known for harassing women regularly, such as while alone in elevators.\nPolitical reporter Cokie Roberts said in 2017 that Thurmond kissed her on the mouth, while she was live on the air at a political convention. Roberts stated that Thurmond \"was in a category of his own\" when it came to politicians and sexual harassment.\nDeath.\nThurmond died from complications of old age in his sleep at 9:45\u00a0p.m. on June 26, 2003, at a hospital in his hometown of Edgefield, South Carolina. He was 100 years old. After lying in state in the rotunda of the South Carolina State House in Columbia, his body was carried on a caisson to the First Baptist Church for services, at which then-Senator Joe Biden of Delaware delivered a eulogy, and later to the family burial plot in Willowbrook Cemetery in Edgefield, where he is interred.\nLegacy.\nDiane Norman of the \"Spartanburg Herald-Journal\" called Thurmond \"a political icon depicted in life-size statues in Columbia and Edgefield and whose name graces seven public buildings, a shopping mall, a high school, a National Guard armory, a lake, a dam and an interstate highway.\" Former \"Slate\" senior writer Timothy Noah wrote that Thurmond's most significant political contribution was his backing of segregation and myths had been construed on the part of his contemporaries to explain his continued wielding of national influence. South Carolina Representative Joe Wilson referred to Thurmond as South Carolina's greatest statesman in the 20th century.\n\"Time\" writes that Thurmond's party switch \"marked the beginning of the GOP's appeal to white, Southern conservatives, and helped turn a former blue state red.\" It has been argued that Thurmond's backing of Nixon in the 1968 election served as the basis for the Southern strategy, with former Thurmond aide Lee Atwater admitting that the race served as the \"blueprint for everything\" he did in subsequent elections. Thurmond adviser Harry Dent said\nHe played the key and strategic role in pioneering and paving the way for that change. Presidential politics have been changed by Strom Thurmond and what he did more than by anybody in this country in these recent years.\nIn 1997, future Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell called Thurmond \"somebody I have heard about, observed and admired all of my life.\"\nCultural and political image.\nThurmond's 1948 presidential campaign positions were racist, and he has been called \"one of the most notorious segregationists in history\". In 1968, \"The New York Times\" described Thurmond as \"a South Carolina maverick with a highly developed taste for lost causes\". \"The Oklahoman\" wrote that he would anger Senate Majority Leader Lyndon Johnson because he could not be controlled and the key to Thurmond's longevity was his prioritizing of his constituents' concerns being addressed.\nBy the 1970s, Thurmond had helped establish scholarships for black students at four South Carolina colleges and his influence in federal bureaucracy gave him an advantage in \"announcing federal grants and bird-dogging federal projects of particular interest to black voters.\"\nThurmond received black support in his 1978 re-election and African Americans were noted to \"praise their onetime nemesis as a driving force behind the influx of more federal dollars to the state's minority neighborhoods.\" Jim Naughton of \"The Washington Post\" found Thurmond to have \"transformed his own image from radical to pragmatist, from The Whitest Man in America to Uncle Strom, Our Friend in Washington.\"\nNevertheless, Thurmond's racially charged language during the earlier part of his career left him with a mixed reputation among African Americans, receiving only 20% of their vote in his last election in 1996. NAACP Chairman Julian Bond said Thurmond's sole legacy was of \"durability and opposition to civil rights\" and called Thurmond \"a relic of America's shameful past, who had long overstayed his welcome.\" In 2003, political scientist Willie Leggett stated, \"Thurmond is not going to be a hero for black people because he never became a proponent of black rights.\"\nIn 1980, Bill Peterson remarked that the 77-year-old Thurmond \"still has that rare peculiar magic few politicians ever achieve\" with young autograph seekers and admirers. Peterson stressed, however, that Thurmond's popularity was \"being put to a severe test\" in his efforts to help John Connally win the South Carolina primary.\nBy the time of his last campaign in 1996, Thurmond faced increased focus to his age and calls for his retirement. Thurmond opened his final campaign in a speech at the University of South Carolina-Aiken, proclaiming that he would not give up on \"our mission to right the 40-year wrongs of liberalism\" and that South Carolinians knew he did not like \"unfinished business.\" As the 107th United States Congress began, the Democrats and Republicans were split evenly with Vice President Dick Cheney as the tie-breaking vote, and Thurmond's attendance was seen as crucial for maintaining a Republican majority given that his retirement or death would allow Democratic governor Jim Hodges to appoint a Democrat to his seat. Thurmond spokeswoman Genevieve Erny commented, \"It's unfortunate that the media continue to portray him as in failing health, especially because the only reason the media is interested is a 50-50 split, and the repercussions that could have.\" In a 2001 interview, colleague Fritz Hollings said that Thurmond was no longer \"mentally keen\" nor did he \"have a home, and someone has said the best nursing home is the U.S. Senate.\"\nIra Shapiro of \"The Gazette\" cited Thurmond by the end of his tenure as \"a joke and an embarrassment; virtually unable to speak or hear, he had to be carried into committee meetings.\"\nAfter his retirement, Thurmond's early career and those of slave owner John C. Calhoun and Benjamin Tillman were cited as political symbols of South Carolina's historical racism and denial of basic civil rights to minority groups.\nIn 2011, Public Policy Polling found Thurmond to be the most popular politician in South Carolina, with higher favorability ratings than current lawmakers Lindsey Graham, Nikki Haley, Jim DeMint, and Mark Sanford.\nNotes and references.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nhttps:// at Find a Grave"}
{"id": "44645", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44645", "title": "Michif", "text": "Mixed language of the M\u00e9tis people\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nMichif (also Mitchif, Mechif, Michif-Cree, M\u00e9tif, M\u00e9tchif, French Cree) is one of the languages of the M\u00e9tis people of Canada and the United States, who are the descendants of First Nations (mainly Cree, Nakota, and Ojibwe) and fur trade workers of white ancestry (mainly French). The fathers of the Metis Nation were also known as voyageurs, the expert canoeists whose main occupation involved traveling long distances and trading with First Nations. This occupation also required forging relationships and common language with Indigenous contacts. The voyageurs and Indigenous women began intermarrying as early as the 1780s and 1790s, combining predominantly Catholic French culture with First Nations culture. Michif emerged in the early 19th century as a mixed language and adopted a consistent character between about 1820 and 1840.\nThe geographical distribution of Metis communities has resulted in the formation of multiple dialects of Metis languages, as well as multiple names for said dialects (Rosen 2008, 613). Michif is the most common title of this language. One form of Michif combines Cree and M\u00e9tis French (Rhodes 1977, Bakker 1997:85), a variety of Canadian French, with some additional borrowing from English and indigenous languages of the Americas such as Ojibwe and Assiniboine. It is widely accepted that the Algonquian language family contributed both Cree and Ojibwe, while the settlers introduced French, and to a lesser degree English (Barkwell, Dorion, and Pr\u00e9fontaine 1999; Bakker 1997; Rosen 2008; Gillon &amp; Rosen 2016; Teillet 2019.) Peter Bakker contributed a foundational work to the study of Michif, but Metis scholars have argued that his research poorly understood their language and culture, and should therefore be examined critically, especially as it relates to phonology and syntax (Barkwell, Dorian, and Pr\u00e9fontaine 1999, 1-5). In general, Michif noun phrase phonology, lexicon, morphology, and syntax are derived from M\u00e9tis French, while verb phrase phonology, lexicon, morphology, and syntax are from a southern variety of Plains Cree (a western dialect of Cree). Articles and adjectives are also of M\u00e9tis French origin but demonstratives are from Plains Cree.\nThe Michif language is unusual among mixed languages, in that rather than forming a simplified grammar, it developed by incorporating complex elements of the chief languages from which it was born. French-origin noun phrases retain lexical gender and adjective agreement; Cree-origin verbs retain much of their polysynthetic structure. This suggests that instead of haltingly using words from another's tongue, the people who gradually came to speak Michif were fully fluent in both French and Cree.\nThe Michif language was first brought to scholarly attention in 1976 by John Crawford at the University of North Dakota. Much of the subsequent research on Michif was also related to UND, including four more pieces by Crawford, plus work by Evans, Rhodes, and Weaver.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"Michif\" is from a variant pronunciation of the French word . Some M\u00e9tis people prefer this word (\"Michif\") to describe their nationality when speaking English and use it for anything related to M\u00e9tis people, including any languages they happen to speak. According to the Gabriel Dumont Institute (GDI), the word \"Michif\", when used for a language, is used to describe at least three distinct types of speech. Northern Michif (in Saskatchewan) is essentially a variety of Cree with a small number of French loanwords. Michif French is a variety of Canadian French with some Cree loanwords and syntax (word order). \"Michif\" used without any qualification can also describe the mixed language which borrows heavily from both Cree and French. According to theories of self-determination and self-identification, the GDI refers to all of these speech varieties as \"Michif\" because many M\u00e9tis community members use the term that way, even though these varieties are widely different in their linguistic details. The remainder of this article deals primarily with the mixed language that has many features from both French and Cree.\nHistory.\nLanguage genesis: A case of contact.\nJean Teillet, an academic, lawyer and member of the Metis Nation, describes how the M\u00e9tis identity formed in her book \"The North-West is our Mother: The Story of Louis Riel's People, The M\u00e9tis Nation\". She specifies that the men who married Indigenous women and \"went free\" with their families into the Prairies occupied a unique social position and culture. Voyageur culture was oriented around oral story telling, songs, and often featured dramatic performances and passionate tales of heroism to be shared in canoes or around campfires. While the term had been used to refer to fur traders and travelers of the North-West, voyageur would come to describe the canoeists navigating The Voyageur Highway, which spanned from the Great Lakes, through Rupertsland, to the modern North-West Territories. Intermarriages between these voyageurs and Indigenous women began as early as the 1780s and 90s. Thus, The Voyageur Highway supported the birth of a nation by connecting people who would develop the rich Metis culture and language. The brotherhood of the voyageurs consisted of mainly Catholic French Canadians, and likely a few contributions from men of Scottish and English backgrounds. Language was a powerful tool for these men, their joyful songs allowed them to coordinate the speed of their paddle strokes, measure time, and most importantly connect with and motivate each other in harsh conditions. The women responsible for the genesis of the Metis Nation were young members of the Indigenous bands the voyageurs traded. The formation of these new relations and families necessitated communication, and in this case generated a new mixed language: Michif. \nIn languages of mixed ethnicities, the language of the mother usually provides the grammatical system, while the language of the father provides the lexicon. The reasons are as follows: children tend to know their mother's language better; in the case of the M\u00e9tis, the men were often immigrants, whereas the women were native to the region. If the bilingual children need to use either of their parents' languages to converse with outsiders, it is most likely to be the language of their mothers. Thus, the model of language-mixing predicts that Michif should have a Cree grammatical system and French lexicon. Michif, however, has Cree verb phrases and French noun phrases. The explanation for this unusual distribution of Cree and French elements in Michif lies in the polysynthetic nature of Cree morphology. In Cree, verbs can be very complex with up to twenty morphemes, incorporated nouns and unclear boundaries between morphemes. In other words, in Cree verbs it is very difficult to separate grammar from lexicon. As a result, in Michif the grammatical and bound elements are almost all Cree, and the lexical and free elements are almost all French; verbs are almost totally Cree, because the verb consists of grammatical and bound elements. Seen in this way, it can be argued that Michif is fundamentally Cree, but with heavy French borrowing (somewhat like Maltese, a mixed Arabic-Italian language classified as fundamentally Arabic). The M\u00e9tis in addition have their own variety of French with Cree borrowings \u2013 M\u00e9tis French.\nLanguage genesis from Michif people.\nThe genesis of the Michif peoples and language has been passed through generations. The story of the creation of the Michif people and their language was told to Elder Brousse Flammand (currently the president of the Michif kaa-piikishkwaychik, or Michif Speakers Association) by his grandparents (born 1876 and 1886). The information he gives is also told by other Michif speakers, who agree that the language was given to the Michif peoples by the Creator/God. He states that the genesis of the Michif person/nation is synonymous with the genesis of the Michif language. Both the language and the nation are creations of the Creator/God\u2014and are symbiotic to each other.\nThe creation of a specific language for Metis people allowed for a collective identity, where Michif speakers could take action together to protect traditional territories and homelands, and share a collective history.\nUsage.\nIn 2021, the number of Michif speakers in Canada was reported to be 1,845. However, the number of fluent Michif speakers is estimated at fewer than 1,000. It was probably double or triple this number at the close of the 19th century, but never much higher. Currently, Michif is spoken in scattered M\u00e9tis communities in the Canadian prairie provinces of Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and Alberta, and in North Dakota in the U.S.. There are about 50 speakers in Alberta, all over age 60. There are some 230 speakers of Michif in the United States (down from 390 at the 1990 census), most of whom live in North Dakota, particularly in the Turtle Mountain Indian Reservation. There are around 300 Michif speakers in the Northwest Territories, northern Canada.\nLoss of language.\nIn 2011, Statistics Canada reported 640 Michif speakers located mainly in Saskatchewan (40.6%), Manitoba (26.6%), and Alberta (11.7%). In the cross-reference provided by Statistics Canada, it is shown that of these 640 speakers, only 30 are below 24 years of age. Furthermore, only 85 people declared Michif to be their main home language (45 their sole language); and of these, 65 were 50 or older. Unfortunately, these numbers do not reflect the actual number of speakers of the mixed variety of Michif in Canada, since the statistical survey did not differentiate between regional differences, including Michif Cree, Michif French, or mixed Michif.\nIn 2021, the number of Michif speakers in Canada was reported to be 1,845. However, the number of fluent Michif speakers is estimated at fewer than 1,000. It was probably double or triple this number at the close of the 19th century, but never much higher. Currently, Michif is spoken in scattered M\u00e9tis communities in the Canadian prairie provinces of Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and Alberta, and in North Dakota in the U.S.. There are about 50 speakers in Alberta, all over age 60. There are some 230 speakers of Michif in the United States (down from 390 at the 1990 census), most of whom live in North Dakota, particularly in the Turtle Mountain Indian Reservation. There are around 300 Michif speakers in the Northwest Territories, northern Canada.\nIn Metis communities, there has been a clear shift towards the European languages. Today, all Michif speakers are also fluent (if not dominant) in English, and Metis adult and youth speak English (or French and English) as their first language(s). The reason why Michif has so few speakers and is in need of active revitalization efforts is a direct result of colonization. Judy Iseke, an Albertan Metis scholar, argues that \"language shift towards English and other colonial languages in Indigenous communities was not a 'natural' process but rather was a shift towards the decline of Indigenous languages, propelled by colonial schooling designed to 'civilize' Indigenous children and turn them into citizens conforming to 'white' standards.\"\nLanguage revitalization.\nRevitalizing the Michif language is important to M\u00e9tis people. Language is regarded as culturally significant and holds more value than just the attributes studied by linguists. Elder Brousse Flammand writes \"Language is central to nationhood\" and that \"A government cannot legislate this identity and nationhood; the government can only recognize what is already in existence.\" Michif was (and is) central to the independent culture and nationhood of the M\u00e9tis people. The M\u00e9tis community is working toward language revitalization to keep this connection to their independent culture and nationhood.\nM\u00e9tis cultural centres such as the Michif Cultural and M\u00e9tis Resource Institute in St. Albert, Alberta, the M\u00e9tis Culture and Heritage Resource Centre in Winnipeg, and the Gabriel Dumont Institute of Native Studies and Applied Research are attempting to revive the language through public outreach. Additionally, The Louis Riel Institute (LRI), which is the education department of the Manitoba Metis Federation in Winnipeg, is an adult learning center committed to the development of community based educational programs directed to adults and the whole family. The Institute has released DVD beginner lessons for both Michif and Michif French, which are also available online.\nAs of 2013, the \"Northern Journal\" reports that \"Aboriginal language and culture is becoming increasingly visible\" in Alberta, as Alberta's Northland School Division, \"serving mostly First Nations and M\u00e9tis students in the northern part of the province\" has expanded its community partnerships and culture camps.\nPhonology.\nMichif as recorded starting in the 1970s combined two separate phonological systems: one for French origin elements, and one for Cree origin elements (Rhodes 1977, 1986). For instance, , , and exist only in French words, whereas preaspirated stops such as and exist only in Cree words. In this variety of Michif, the French elements were pronounced in ways that have distinctively Canadian French values for the vowels, while the Cree elements have distinctively Cree values for vowels. Nonetheless, there is some Cree influence on French words in the stress system (Rosen 2006). But by the year 2000 there were Michif speakers who had collapsed the two systems into a single system (Rosen 2007).\nVowels.\nMichif has eleven oral vowels and four nasalized vowels.\nNasalized vowels.\nThe following four vowels are nasalized in Michif:\nSchwa-deletion.\nA schwa /\u0259/ appearing between two consonants in French-origin words is dropped in Michif. Examples of this process are listed in the table below.\nElision in Michif.\nRosen (2007) states that since all French-derived vowel-initial nouns in Michif have been lexicalized as consonant-initial, the French rule of elision, which deletes certain vowels (particularly schwa) before vowel-initial words, for ex., 'the friend' but 'the friend'), cannot apply in Michif. Curiously, she admits that elision is potentially still active since vowel-initial English loanwords allow elision, as in 'a bowl of oatmeal'. Papen (2014) has countered that elision is, in fact, just as active in French-derived words as is liaison. For example, he examines Noun + di + Noun constructions (as in vs. 'month of January' vs. 'month of October') and finds that 100% of (from French schwa) are deleted before French-derived vowel-initial nouns. However, elision does not occur before Cree vowel-initial nouns. This strongly suggests that French phonological rules, such as liaison and elision still function in Michif, but that they apply only to French-derived words and not to Cree-derived ones, implying that Michif phonology is at least partially stratified, contrary to what Rosen (2007) proposes.\nLiaison consonants.\nIn French, a liaison is used to bridge the gap between word-final and word-initial vowel sounds. Whether liaison still exists in Michif is a much discussed theoretical issue. Scholars such as Bakker (1997), Rhodes (1986), and Rosen (2007) have suggested that liaison no longer exists in Michif and that all words that etymologically began with a vowel in French now begin with a consonant, the latter resulting from a variety of sources, including a liaison consonant. Their arguments are based on the fact that the expected liaison consonant (for example, ) will not show up and instead, the consonant will be , as in 'a bear' The above authors cite over a dozen words with an unexpected initial consonant. Papen (2003, 2014) has countered this argument by showing that, statistically, the vast majority of so-called initial consonants in Michif reflect the expected liaison consonant and that only about 13% of so-called initial consonants are unexpected. Moreover, Papen points out that one of the so-called initial consonant is , which in nearly all cases, represents the elided definite article (from ), in which case it cannot be a liaison consonant, since liaison consonants may not have grammatical or semantic meaning. Thus in a sequence such as the meaning is not simply 'tree' but 'the tree', where initial has the meaning of 'the', and is initial only in a phonetic sense, but not in a phonological one, since it represents a distinct morpheme from , and thus must be considered phonologically vowel-initial.\nPalatalization.\nThe voiced alveolar stop in French-origin words is palatalized to in Michif, as in Acadian French. This may occur word-initially or word-internally before front vowels.\nOrthography.\nMichif lacks a unified spelling standard. Aside from local language differences, lack of a uniform spelling system can be attributed to Michif's history as an oral language. Generally, Michif-speaking communities spell words as they are pronounced in regional dialects, creating much variation in spelling. Some systems are phonetic, with each letter having only one sound (often based on English standards), while other are etymological, with French-derived words spelled by French standards, and Cree-derived words spelled using the \"Standard Roman Orthography\" system.\nIn 2004, Robert Papen proposed a new system that was mostly phonetic.\nThe government of Manitoba published a translation of its annual report on \"The Path to Reconciliation Act\" in Michif in June 2017. Its choice of spelling system can be seen in this extract:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHere, as in Papen's system, different vowel qualities are marked by writing the character doubled (\"a\" vs. \"aa\") instead of using diacritical marks as usual for Cree. For consistency, this system is also extended to the French-derived words so that French ('whites') becomes but ('the indigenous') becomes .\nSyntax.\nContrary to Bakker's split phonology hypothesis, later analysis did not find evidence to support divergent phonological rules (Poplack 1993, Rosen 2006, 2007, Gillon and Rosen 2016). Instead, recent research has argued that syntax may be of issue in the mixing of Cree and French, meaning that the semantics of Cree and French may be at odds with each other in terms of the mass/count distinction in both languages (Gillon and Rosen 2016). The behaviour of nouns from Indo-European languages distinguishes between mass and count, whereas Algonquian is argued not to make this distinction. Evidence suggests that the syntactic makeup of Michif aligns with the features of whichever language contributed the noun, where Michif nouns descending from Algonquian follow Algonquian conventions, and those descending from Europe follow Indo-European conventions (Gillon and Rosen 2016).\nNoun phrase.\nNouns are almost always accompanied by a French-origin determiner or a possessive.\nCree-origin demonstratives can be added to noun phrases, in which case the Cree gender (animate or inanimate) is that of the corresponding Cree noun.\nAdjectives are French-origin (Cree has no adjectives), and as in French they are either pre- or postnominal. Prenominal adjectives agree in gender (like French), however, postnominal adjectives do not agree in gender (unlike French).\nVerb phrase.\nThe verb phrase is that of Plains Cree-origin with little reduction (there are no dubitative or preterit verb forms).\nWord order.\nMichif word order is basically that of Cree (relatively free). However, the more French-origin elements are used, the closer the syntax seems to conform to norms of spoken French.\nVocabulary.\nA comparison of some common words in English, French, Michif, and Cree:\nLexicon.\nNouns: 83\u201394% French-origin; others are mostly Cree-origin, Ojibwe-origin, or English-originVerbs: 88\u201399% Cree-originQuestion words: Cree-originPersonal pronouns: CreePostpositions: Cree-originPrepositions: French-originConjunctions: 55% Cree-origin; 40% French-originNumerals: French-originDemonstratives: Cree-origin\nSample text.\nThe Lord's Prayer in English, French, and Michif:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44646", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44646", "title": "M\u00e9tis in Canada", "text": ""}
{"id": "44648", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44648", "title": "List of national parks of Germany", "text": "The following are the 16 national parks of Germany, sorted from North to South:\nGermany also has 14 biosphere reserves, as well as 98 nature parks. Including the national protected areas, about 25% of Germany's area is national parks or nature parks.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44649", "revid": "6326132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44649", "title": "National parks of New Zealand", "text": " \nThe national parks of New Zealand are protected natural areas administered by the Department of Conservation (DOC). The first national parks established in the country were all focused on mountain scenery. Since the 1980s the focus has been on developing a more diverse representation of New Zealand landscapes. The parks are all culturally significant and many also contain historic features. Tongariro National Park is one of the World Heritage Sites that are of both cultural and natural significance, while four of the South Island national parks form Te Wahipounamu, another World Heritage Site. There are currently 13 national parks; a 14th, Te Urewera National Park, was disestablished in 2014.\nThe national parks are administered by the Department of Conservation \"for the benefit, use, and enjoyment of the public\". They are popular tourist destinations, with three-tenths of overseas tourists visiting at least one national park during their stay in New Zealand.\nLegislation.\nThe National Parks Act of 1980 was established in order to codify the purpose, governance and selection of national parks. It begins by establishing the definition of a national park:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is hereby declared that the provisions of this Act shall have effect for the purpose of preserving in perpetuity as national parks, for their intrinsic worth and for the benefit, use, and\nenjoyment of the public, areas of New Zealand that contain scenery of such distinctive quality, ecological systems, or natural features so beautiful, unique, or scientifically important that their preservation is in the national interest.\u2014\u200a\nThe National Parks Act goes on to state that the public will have freedom of entry and access to the parks, though this is subject to restrictions to ensure the preservation of native plants and animals and the welfare of the parks in general. Access to specially protected areas (550\u00a0km2) constituted under the act is by permit only.\nUnder the Act, national parks are to be maintained in their natural state as far as possible to retain their value as soil, water and forest conservation areas. Native plants and animals are to be preserved and introduced plants and animals removed if their presence interferes with the natural wildlife. Development in wilderness areas established under the act is restricted to foot tracks and huts used for wild animal control or scientific research.\nServices available for public use.\nThe National Parks Act allows the Department of Conservation to provide hostels, huts, camping grounds, ski tows and similar facilities, parking areas, roading and tracks within the parks. In addition to these, the department also provides some accommodation, transport and other services at entry points to the parks, but these are also offered by other government agencies, voluntary organisations and private firms. More comprehensive services within the parks, such as guided walks and skiing tutorials, are privately provided with concessions from the department.\n2018 Supreme Court decision.\nIn 2018, the Auckland iwi Ng\u0101i Tai ki T\u0101maki won a case in the Supreme Court, allowing them to apply to the Department of Conservation for exclusive rights for concessions to run commercial operations on Motutapu and Rangitoto islands. The court decision was based on giving effect to principles within the Treaty of Waitangi and recognition that although the islands are administered by the Department of Conservation, Ng\u0101i Tai ki T\u0101maki has traditional ownership (\"mana whenua\"). This decision had implications for the Department of Conservation management plans for the conservation estate, including the National Parks, and led to a pause in the review of the management plans for Aoraki / Mount Cook National Park and Westland Tai Poutini National Park.\nList of national parks.\nThis table lists the current and former national parks in alphabetical order.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0Green shading and asterisk\u00a0\u2013 Parks which form part of a UNESCO designated World Heritage Site\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProposed national parks.\nThe area centred on Waipoua Forest, north of Dargaville, has been proposed as a possible Kauri National Park. The area contains most of New Zealand's remaining kauri, including the largest known kauri, T\u0101ne Mahuta. These stands of kauri are also valuable as havens for endangered species including the North Island brown kiwi. This proposal is currently being investigated by the Department of Conservation.\nIn response to a DoC proposal to upgrade the protection of Great Barrier Island (Aotea), Forest and Bird launched a campaign in 2014 to designate it as a National Park.\nIn 2020, the New Zealand National Party announced that they would create two new national parks if elected at the general election, namely Coromandel National Park and Catlins National Park.\nMining concerns.\nIn 2010 the New Zealand Government proposed removing some national park and conservation areas from Schedule 4 protection of the Crown Minerals Act which prohibits mining in those areas. In July the government abandoned the proposal after receiving a large number of submissions, most of which opposed mining.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44651", "revid": "12028", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44651", "title": "M\u00e9tis (people)", "text": ""}
{"id": "44652", "revid": "49032930", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44652", "title": "Lazurite", "text": "Alumino-silicate mineral whose blue colour is due to a sulfide species and not copper\nLazurite, old name \"Azure spar\" is a tectosilicate mineral with sulfate, sulfur and chloride with formula . It is a feldspathoid and a member of the sodalite group. Lazurite crystallizes in the isometric system although well\u2010formed crystals are rare. It is usually massive and forms the bulk of the gemstone lapis lazuli.\nMineral.\nLazurite is a deep\u2010blue to greenish\u2010blue. The colour is due to the presence of S3- anions. It has a Mohs hardness of 5.0 to 5.5 and a specific gravity of 2.4. It is translucent with a refractive index of 1.50. It is fusible at 3.5 on Wolfgang Franz von Kobell's fusibility scale, and soluble in HCl. It commonly contains or is associated with grains of pyrite.\nLazurite is a product of contact metamorphism of limestone and is typically associated with calcite, pyrite, diopside, humite, forsterite, hauyne and muscovite.\nOther blue minerals, such as the carbonate mineral, azurite, and the phosphate mineral, lazulite, may be confused with lazurite, but are easily distinguished with careful examination. At one time, lazurite was a synonym for azurite.\nLazurite was first described in 1890 for an occurrence in the Sar-e-Sang District, Koksha Valley, Badakhshan Province, Afghanistan. It has been mined for more than 6,000 years in the lapis lazuli district of Badakhshan. It has been used as a pigment in painting and cloth dyeing since at least the 6th or 7th century. It is also mined at Lake Baikal in Siberia; Mount Vesuvius; Burma; Canada; and the United States. The name is from the Persian for blue.\nThe most important mineral component of lapis lazuli is lazurite. (25% to 40%)\nRedefinition.\nMost lapis lazuli gets its blue color from Hauyne and almost none contain \"true lazurite\". This was changed in 2021, as lazurite was redefined so that it is enough for a quarter (instead of half) of the cages to contain sulfide.\nStructure.\nLazurite and hauyne seem to have the same structure and both are sulfate-dominant minerals. Lazurite is a pigment (opalescent) and has a bright blue streak (especially as a component of the semiprecious stone lapis lazuli). Many hauynes have a white or pale blue streak and are translucent. The difference might be a consequence of the redox state (sulfate to sulfide ratio)."}
